{"id": "2369", "revid": "50592553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2369", "title": "Aston Martin", "text": "British automotive company\nAston Martin Lagonda Global Holdings PLC () is a British manufacturer of luxury sports cars and grand tourers. Its predecessor was founded in 1913 by Lionel Martin and Robert Bamford. Headed from 1947 by David Brown, it became associated with expensive grand touring cars in the 1950s and 1960s, and with the fictional character James Bond following his use of a DB5 model in the 1964 film \"Goldfinger\". Their grand tourers and sports cars are regarded as a British cultural icon.\nAston Martin has held a royal warrant as purveyor of motorcars to Charles III (as Prince of Wales and later as King) since 1982, and has over 160 car dealerships in 53 countries, making it a global automobile brand. The company is traded on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 250 Index. In 2003 it received the Queen's Award for Enterprise for outstanding contribution to international trade. The company has survived seven bankruptcies throughout its history.\nThe headquarters and main production of its sports cars and grand tourers are in a facility in Gaydon, Warwickshire, England, on the former site of RAF Gaydon, adjacent to the Jaguar Land Rover Gaydon Centre. The old facility in Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, is the present home of the Aston Martin Works classic car department, which focuses on heritage sales, service, spares and restoration operations. The factory in St Athan, Wales, features three converted 'super-hangars' from MOD St Athan, and serves as the production site of Aston Martin's SUV, the DBX.\nAston Martin has been involved in motorsport at various points in its history, mainly in sports car racing, and also in Formula One. The Aston Martin brand is increasingly being used, mostly through licensing, on other products including a submarine, real estate development, and aircraft.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nAston Martin was founded in 1913 by Lionel Martin and Robert Bamford. The two had joined forces as Bamford &amp; Martin the previous year to sell cars made by Singer from premises in Callow Street, London where they also serviced GWK and Calthorpe vehicles. Martin raced specials at Aston Hill near Aston Clinton, and the pair decided to make their own vehicles. The first car to be named \"Aston Martin\" was created by Martin by fitting a four-cylinder Coventry-Simplex engine to the chassis of a 1908 Isotta Fraschini.\nThey acquired premises at Henniker Mews in Kensington and produced their first car in March 1915. Production could not start because of the outbreak of the First World War, when Martin joined the Admiralty and Bamford joined the Army Service Corps.\n1918\u20131939: Interwar years.\nAfter the war they found new premises at Abingdon Road, Kensington and designed a new car. Bamford left in 1920 and Bamford &amp; Martin was revitalised with funding from Louis Zborowski. In 1922, Bamford &amp; Martin produced cars to compete in the French Grand Prix, which went on to set world speed and endurance records at Brooklands. Three works Team Cars with 16-valve twin cam engines were built for racing and record-breaking: chassis number 1914, later developed as the Green Pea; chassis number 1915, the Razor Blade record car; and chassis number 1916, later developed as the Halford Special.\nApproximately 55 cars were built for sale in two configurations; long chassis and short chassis. Bamford &amp; Martin went bankrupt in 1924 and was bought by Dorothea, Lady Charnwood, who put her son John Benson on the board. Bamford &amp; Martin got into financial difficulty again in 1925 and Martin was forced to sell the company (Bamford had already left it in 1920).\nLater that year, Bill Renwick, Augustus (Bert) Bertelli and investors including Lady Charnwood took control of the business. They renamed it Aston Martin Motors and moved it to the former Whitehead Aircraft Limited Hanworth works in Feltham. Renwick and Bertelli had been in partnership some years and had developed an overhead-cam four-cylinder engine using Renwick's patented combustion chamber design, which they had tested in an Enfield-Allday chassis. The only \"Renwick and Bertelli\" motor car made, it was known as \"Buzzbox\" and still survives.\nThe pair had planned to sell their engine to motor manufacturers, but having heard that Aston Martin was no longer in production realised they could capitalise on its reputation to jump-start the production of a completely new car.\nBetween 1926 and 1937 Bertelli was both technical director and designer of all new Aston Martins, since known as \"Bertelli cars\". They included the 1\u00bd-litre \"T-type\", \"International\", \"Le Mans\", \"MKII\" and its racing derivative, the \"Ulster\", and the 2-litre 15/98 and its racing derivative, the \"Speed Model\". Most were open two-seater sports cars bodied by Bert Bertelli's brother , with a small number of long-chassis four-seater tourers, dropheads and saloons also produced.\nBertelli was a competent driver keen to race his cars, one of few owner/manufacturer/drivers. The \"LM\" team cars were very successful in national and international motor racing including at Le Mans.\nFinancial problems reappeared in 1932. Aston Martin was rescued for a year by Lance Prideaux Brune before passing it on to Sir Arthur Sutherland. In 1936, Aston Martin decided to concentrate on road cars, producing just 700 until World War II halted work. Production shifted to aircraft components during the war.\n1947\u20131972: David Brown.\nIn 1947, old-established (1860) privately owned Huddersfield gear and machine tools manufacturer David Brown Limited bought Aston Martin, putting it under control of its Tractor Group. David Brown became Aston Martin's latest saviour. He also acquired Lagonda, without its factory, for its 2.6-litre W. O. Bentley-designed engine. Lagonda moved operations to Newport Pagnell and shared engines, resources and workshops. Aston Martin began to build the classic \"DB\" series of cars.\nIn April 1950, they announced planned production of their Le Mans prototype to be called the DB2, followed by the DB2/4 in 1953, the DB2/4 MkII in 1955, the DB Mark III in 1957 and the Italian-styled 3.7\u00a0L DB4 in 1958.\nWhile these models helped Aston Martin establish a good racing pedigree, the DB4 stood out and yielded the famous DB5 in 1963. Aston stayed true to its grand touring style with the DB6 (1965\u201370), and DBS (1967\u20131972).\nThe six-cylinder engines of these cars from 1954 up to 1965 were designed by Tadek Marek.\n1972\u20131975: William Willson.\nAston Martin was often financially troubled. In 1972, David Brown paid off all its debts, said to be \u00a35\u00a0million or more, and handed it for \u00a3101 to Company Developments, a Birmingham-based investment bank consortium chaired by accountant William Willson. More detail on this period may be read at Willson's biography. The worldwide recession, lack of working capital and the difficulties of developing an engine to meet California's exhaust emission requirements \u2013 it stopped the company's US sales \u2013 again pulled Aston Martin into receivership at the end of 1974. The company had employed 460 workers when the manufacturing plant closed.\n1975\u20131981: Sprague and Curtis.\nThe receiver sold the business in April 1975 for \u00a31.05\u00a0million to North American businessman Peter Sprague of National Semiconductor, Toronto hotelier George Minden, and Jeremy Turner, a London businessman, who insisted to reporters that Aston Martin remained a British controlled business. Sprague later claimed he had fallen in love with the factory, not the cars, the workforce's craftsmanship dedication and intelligence. At this point, he and Minden had brought in investor Alan Curtis, a British office property developer, together with George Flather, a retired Sheffield steel magnate.\nSix months later, in September 1975, the factory \u2013 shut down the previous December \u2013 re-opened under its new owner as Aston Martin Lagonda Limited with 100 employees, and planned to lift staff to 250 by the end of 1975. In January 1976, AML revealed that it now held orders for 150 cars for the US, 100 for other markets and another 80 from a Japanese importing agency. At the Geneva Motor Show, Fred Hartley, managing director and sales director for 13 years before that, announced he had resigned over \"differences in marketing policy\".\nThe new owners pushed Aston Martin into modernising its line, introducing the V8 Vantage in 1977, the convertible Volante in 1978, and the one-off Bulldog styled by William Towns in 1980. Towns also styled the futuristic new Lagonda saloon, based on the V8 model.\nCurtis, who had a 42% stake in Aston Martin, also brought about a change in direction from the usual customers who were Aston Martin fans, to successful young married businessmen. Prices had been increased by 25%. There was speculation that AML was about to buy Italian automobile manufacturer Lamborghini. At the end of the 1970s, there was widespread debate about running MG into the Aston Martin consortium. 85 Conservative MPs formed themselves into a pressure group to get British Leyland to release their grip and hand it over. CH Industrials plc (car components) bought a 10% share in AML. But in July 1980, blaming a recession, AML cut back their workforce of 450 by more than 20%, making those people redundant.\n1981\u20131987: Victor Gauntlett.\nIn January 1981, there having been no satisfactory revival partners, Alan Curtis and Peter Sprague announced they had never intended to maintain a long-term financial stake in Aston Martin Lagonda and it was to be sold to Pace Petroleum's Victor Gauntlett. Sprague and Curtis pointed out that under their ownership AML finances had improved to where an offer for MG might have been feasible.\nGauntlett bought a 12.5% stake in Aston Martin for \u00a3500,000 via Pace Petroleum in 1980, with Tim Hearley of CH Industrials taking a similar share. Pace and CHI took over as joint 50/50 owners at the beginning of 1981, with Gauntlett as executive chairman. Gauntlett also led the sales team, and after some development and publicity when the Lagonda became the world's fastest four-seater production car, was able to sell the car in Oman, Kuwait, and Qatar. In 1982, Aston Martin was granted a Royal Warrant of Appointment by the Prince of Wales.\nUnderstanding that it would take some time to develop new Aston Martin products, they created an engineering service subsidiary to develop automotive products for other companies. It was decided to use a trade name of Salmons &amp; Son, their in-house coachbuilder, Tickford, which Aston Martin had bought in 1955. Tickford's name had been long associated with expensive high-quality carriages and cars along with their folding roofs. New products included a Tickford Austin Metro, a Tickford Ford Capri and even Tickford train interiors, particularly on the Jaguar XJS. Pace continued sponsoring racing events, and now sponsored all Aston Martin Owners Club events, taking a Tickford-engined Nimrod Group C car owned by AMOC President Viscount Downe, which came third in the Manufacturers Championship in both 1982 and 1983. It also finished seventh in the 1982 24 Hours of Le Mans race. However, sales of production cars were now at an all-time low of 30 cars produced in 1982.\nAs trading became tighter in the petroleum market, and Aston Martin was requiring more time and money, Gauntlett agreed to sell Hays/Pace to the Kuwait Investment Office in September 1983. As Aston Martin required greater investment, he also agreed to sell his share holding to American importer and Greek shipping tycoon Peter Livanos, who invested via his joint venture with Nick and John Papanicolaou, ALL Inc. Gauntlett remained chairman of AML, 55% of the stake was owned by ALL, with Tickford a 50/50 venture between ALL and CHI. The uneasy relationship was ended when ALL exercised options to buy a larger share in AML; CHI's residual shares were exchanged for CHI's complete ownership of Tickford, which retained the development of existing Aston Martin projects. In 1984, Papanicolaou's Titan shipping business was in trouble so Livanos's father George bought out the Papanicolaou's shares in ALL, while Gauntlett again became a shareholder with a 25% holding in AML. The deal valued Aston Martin/AML at \u00a32\u00a0million, the year it built its 10,000th car.\nAlthough as a result Aston Martin had to make 60 members of the workforce redundant, Gauntlett bought a stake in Italian styling house Zagato, and resurrected its collaboration with Aston Martin. In 1986, Gauntlett negotiated the return of the fictional British secret agent James Bond to Aston Martin. Cubby Broccoli had chosen to recast the character using actor Timothy Dalton, in an attempt to re-root the Bond-brand back to a more Sean Connery-like feel. Gauntlett supplied his personal pre-production Vantage for use in the filming of \"The Living Daylights\", and sold a Volante to Broccoli for use at his home in America. Gauntlett turned down the role of a KGB colonel in the film, however: \"I would have loved to have done it but really could not afford the time.\"\n1987\u20132007: Ford Motor Company.\nAs Aston Martin needed funds to survive in the long term, Ford bought a 75% stake in the company in 1987, and bought the rest later. In May of that year, Victor Gauntlett and Prince Michael of Kent were staying at the home of Contessa Maggi, the wife of the founder of the original Mille Miglia, while watching the revival event. Another house guest was Walter Hayes, vice-president of Ford of Europe. Despite problems over the previous acquisition of AC Cars, Hayes saw the potential of the brand and the discussion resulted in Ford taking a share holding in September 1987. In 1988, having produced some 5,000 cars in 20 years, a revived economy and successful sales of limited edition Vantage, and 52 Volante Zagato coup\u00e9s at \u00a386,000 each; Aston Martin finally retired the ancient V8 and introduced the Virage range.\nAlthough Gauntlett was contractually to stay as chairman for two years, his racing interests took the company back into sports car racing in 1989 with limited European success. However, with engine rule changes for the 1990 season and the launch of the new Volante model, Ford provided the limited supply of Cosworth engines to the Jaguar cars racing team. As the entry-level DB7 would require a large engineering input, Ford agreed to take full control of Aston Martin, and Gauntlett handed over Aston Martin's chairmanship to Hayes in 1991. In 1992, the high-performance variant of the Virage called the Vantage was announced, and the following year Aston Martin renewed the DB range by announcing the DB7.\nBy 1993, Ford had fully acquired the company after having built a stake in 1987. Ford placed Aston Martin in the Premier Automotive Group, invested in new manufacturing and ramped up production. In 1994, Ford opened a new factory at Banbury Road in Bloxham to manufacture the DB7. In 1995, Aston Martin produced a record 700 cars. Until the Ford era, cars had been produced by hand coachbuilding craft methods, such as the English wheel. During the mid-1990s, the Special Projects Group, a secretive unit with Works Service at Newport Pagnell, created an array of special coach-built vehicles for the Brunei royal family. In 1998, the 2,000th DB7 was built, and in 2002, the 6,000th, exceeding production of all of the previous DB series models. The DB7 range was revamped by the addition of more powerful V12 Vantage models in 1999, and in 2001, Aston Martin introduced the V12-engined flagship model called the Vanquish which succeeded the aging Virage (now called the V8 Coup\u00e9).\nAt the North American International Auto Show in Detroit, Michigan in 2003, Aston Martin introduced the V8 Vantage concept car. Expected to have few changes before its introduction in 2005, the Vantage brought back the classic V8 engine to allow Aston Martin to compete in a larger market. 2003 also saw the opening of the Gaydon factory, the first purpose-built factory in Aston Martin's history. The facility is situated on a site of a former RAF V Bomber airbase, with an front building for offices, meeting rooms and customer reception, and a production building. Also introduced in 2003 was the DB9 coup\u00e9, which replaced the ten-year-old DB7. A convertible version of the DB9, the DB9 Volante, was introduced at the 2004 Detroit auto show.\nIn October 2004, Aston Martin set up the dedicated Aston Martin Engine Plant (AMEP) within the Ford Germany plant in Niehl, Cologne. With the capacity to produce up to 5,000 engines a year by 100 specially trained personnel, like traditional Aston Martin engine production from Newport Pagnell, assembly of each unit was entrusted to a single technician from a pool of 30, with V8 and V12 variants assembled in under 20 hours. By bringing engine production back to within Aston Martin, the promise was that Aston Martin would be able to produce small runs of higher performance variants' engines. This expanded engine capacity allowed the entry-level V8 Vantage sports car to enter production at the Gaydon factory in 2006, joining the DB9 and DB9 Volante.\nIn December 2003, Aston Martin announced it would return to motor racing in 2005. A new division was created, called Aston Martin Racing, which became responsible, together with Prodrive, for the design, development, and management of the DBR9 program. The DBR9 competes in the GT class in sports car races, including the world-famous 24 Hours of Le Mans.\nIn 2006, an internal audit led Ford to consider divesting itself of parts of its Premier Automotive Group. After suggestions of selling Jaguar Cars, Land Rover, or Volvo Cars were weighed, Ford announced in August 2006 it had engaged UBS AG to sell all or part of Aston Martin at auction.\n2007\u20132018: Private limited company.\nOn 12 March 2007, a consortium led by Prodrive chairman David Richards purchased Aston Martin for \u00a3475\u00a0million (US$848\u00a0million). The group included American investment banker John Sinders and two Kuwaiti companies namely Investment Dar and Adeem Investment. Prodrive had no financial involvement in the deal. Ford kept a stake in Aston Martin valued at \u00a340\u00a0million (US$70\u00a0million).\nTo demonstrate the V8 Vantage's durability across hazardous terrain and promote the car in China, the first east\u2013west crossing of the Asian Highway was undertaken between June and August 2007. A pair of Britons drove from Tokyo to Istanbul before joining the European motorway network for another to London. The promotion was so successful Aston Martin opened dealerships in Shanghai and Beijing within three months.\nOn 19 July 2007, the Newport Pagnell plant rolled out the last of nearly 13,000 cars made there since 1955, a Vanquish S. The Tickford Street facility was converted and became the home of the Aston Martin Works classic car department which focuses on heritage sales, service, spares and restoration operations. UK production was subsequently concentrated on the facility in Gaydon on the former RAF V Bomber airbase. In March 2008, Aston Martin announced a partnership with Magna Steyr to outsource manufacture of over 2,000 cars annually to Graz, Austria, reassuringly stating: \"The continuing growth and success of Aston Martin is based upon Gaydon as the focal point and heart of the business, with the design and engineering of all Aston Martin products continuing to be carried out there.\"\nMore dealers in Europe and the new pair in China brought the total to 120 in 28 countries. On 1 September 2008, Aston Martin announced the revival of the Lagonda marque, proposing a concept car to be shown in 2009 to coincide with the brand's 100th anniversary. The first production cars were slated for production in 2012. In December 2008, Aston Martin announced it would cut its workforce from 1,850 to 1,250 due to the economic recession.\nThe first four-door Rapide grand tourers rolled out of the Magna Steyr factory in Graz, Austria, in 2010. The contract manufacturer provides dedicated facilities to ensure compliance with the exacting standards of Aston Martin and other marques, including Mercedes-Benz. Then CEO of the company, Ulrich Bez had publicly speculated about outsourcing all of Aston Martin's operations with the exception of marketing. In September 2011, it was announced that production of the Rapide would be returned to Gaydon in the second half of 2012, restoring all of the company's automobile manufacture there.\nItalian private equity fund Investindustrial signed a deal on 6 December 2012 to buy a 37.5% stake in Aston Martin, investing \u00a3150\u00a0million as a capital increase. This was confirmed by Aston Martin in a press release on 7 December 2012. David Richards left Aston Martin in 2013, returning to concentrate on Prodrive.\nIn April 2013, it was reported that Bez would be leaving his role as the chief executive officer to take up a more ambassadorial position. On 2 September 2014, Aston Martin announced it had appointed the Nissan executive Andy Palmer as the new CEO with Bez retaining a position as non-executive chairman. As sales had been declining from 2015, Aston Martin sought new customers (particularly wealthy female buyers) with introducing concept cars like the DBX SUV along with track focused cars like the Vulcan. According to Palmer, the troubles started when sales of the DB9 failed to generate sufficient fund to develop next-generation models which led to a downward spiral of declining sales and profitability.\nPalmer outlined that the company plans to develop two new platforms, add a crossover, refresh its supercar lineup and leverage its technology alliance with Daimler as part of its six-year plan to make the 100-year-old British brand consistently profitable. He stated, \"In the first century we went bankrupt seven times. The second century is about making sure that is not the case.\" In preparation for its next-generation of sports cars, the company invested \u00a320\u00a0million ($33.4\u00a0million) to expand its manufacturing plant in Gaydon. The expansion at the Gaydon plant includes a new chassis and pilot build facility, as well as an extension of the parts and logistics storage area, and new offices. In total, Aston Martin will add approximately to the plant.\nIn 2014, Aston Martin suffered a pre-tax loss of \u00a372\u00a0million, almost triple of the amount of 2013 selling 3,500 cars during the year, well below the 7,300 cars sold in 2007 and 4,200 sold in 2013 respectively. In March 2014, Aston Martin issued \"payment in kind\" notes of US$165\u00a0million, at 10.25% interest, in addition to the \u00a3304\u00a0million of senior secured notes at 9.25% issued in 2011. Aston Martin also had to secure an additional investment of \u00a3200\u00a0million from its shareholders to fund development of new models. It was reported that Aston Martin's pre-tax losses for 2016 increased by 27% to \u00a3162.8\u00a0million, the sixth year it continued to suffer a loss.\nIn February 2016, the company selected a site in St Athan, South Wales for its new factory. The Welsh facility was unanimously chosen by Aston's board despite fierce competition from other locations as far afield as the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, as well as other sites in the UK believed to be Bridgend, Birmingham, and Coventry. The facility featured three existing 'super-hangars' of MOD St Athan. Construction work of converting the hangars commenced in April 2017. Aston Martin returned to profit in 2017 after selling over 5,000 cars. The company made a pre-tax profit of \u00a387\u00a0million compared with a \u00a3163\u00a0million loss in 2016. 2017 also marked the return of production of the Newport Pagnell facility ten years after it originally ceased.\n2013\u2013present: Partnership with Mercedes-Benz Group.\nIn December 2013, Aston Martin signed a deal with Mercedes-Benz Group (at the time known as Daimler) to supply the next generation of Aston Martin cars with Mercedes-AMG engines. Mercedes-AMG also was to supply Aston Martin with electrical systems. This technical partnership was intended to support Aston Martin's launch of a new generation of models that would incorporate new technology and engines. In exchange, Mercedes will get as much as 5% equity in Aston Martin and a non-voting seat on its board. The first model to sport the Mercedes-Benz technology was the DB11, announced at the 86th Geneva Motor Show in March 2016. It featured Mercedes-Benz electronics for the entertainment, navigation and other systems. It was also the first model to use Mercedes-AMG V8 engines. In October 2020, Mercedes confirmed it will increase its holding \"in stages\" from 5% to 20%. In return, Aston Martin will have access to Mercedes-Benz hybrid and electric drivetrain technologies for its future models.\n2018\u2013present: Listed on the London Stock Exchange.\nAfter \"completing a turnaround for the once perennially loss-making company that could now be valued at up to 5\u00a0billion pounds ($6.4\u00a0billion),\" and now reporting a full-year pre-tax profit of \u00a387\u00a0million (compared with a \u00a3163\u00a0million loss in 2016) Aston Martin in August 2018 announced plans to float the company at the London Stock Exchange as Aston Martin Lagonda Global Holdings plc. The company was the subject of an initial public offering on the London Stock Exchange on 3 October 2018. In the same year, Aston Martin opened a new vehicle dynamics test and development centre at Silverstone's Stowe Circuit alongside a new HQ in London. In June 2019, the company opened its new factory in St Athan for the production of its first-ever SUV the DBX. The factory was finally completed and officially opened on 6 December 2019. When full production begins in the second quarter of 2020, around 600 people will be employed at the factory, rising to 750 when peak production is reached.\nOn 31 January 2020 it was announced that Canadian billionaire and investor Lawrence Stroll was leading a consortium, Yew Tree Overseas Limited, who will pay \u00a3182\u00a0million in return for 16.7% stake in the company. The re-structuring includes a \u00a3318\u00a0million cash infusion through a new rights issue, generating a total of \u00a3500\u00a0million for the company. Stroll will also be named as chairman, replacing Penny Hughes. Swiss pharmaceutical magnate Ernesto Bertarelli and Mercedes-AMG Petronas F1 team principal and CEO Toto Wolff have also joined the consortium, acquiring 3.4% and 4.8% stakes, respectively. In March 2020, Stroll increased his stake in the company to 25%.\nOn 26 May 2020, Aston Martin announced that Andy Palmer had stepped down as CEO. Tobias Moers of Mercedes-AMG will succeed him starting 1 August, with Keith Stanton as interim chief operating officer. In June 2020, the company announced that it cut out 500 jobs as a result of the poor sales, an outcome of the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. In March 2021, executive chairman Lawrence Stroll stated that the company plans on building electric vehicles by 2025. In May 2022, Aston Martin named 76-year-old Amedeo Felisa as the new chief executive officer, replacing Tobias Moers. Roberto Fedeli was also announced as the new chief technical officer.\nIn late 2020, Aston Martin was involved in a controversy in which it was accused of using a report to spread disputed information about electric vehicles in the wake of the UK's declaration to end the sale of combustion engine vehicles by 2030, with some in the media dubbing the controversy as \"Astongate\". In November 2020, a communications agency called Clarendon Communications published a report comparing the environmental impact of various powertrain options for cars. After the report received coverage from \"The Sunday Times\" and other publications, it emerged that the company had been set up in February that year and was registered under the name of Rebecca Stephens \u2013 the wife of James Stephens, who is the government affairs director of Aston Martin Lagonda. Citing a study by Polestar, the report stated that electric vehicles would need to be driven before they would have lower overall CO2 emissions than a petrol car. This statement was disputed by electric vehicle researcher Auke Hoekstra, who argued that the report underestimated the emissions from combustion engine vehicles and did not consider the emissions from creating petrol. According to him, a typical EV would need to drive 16,000\u201318,000 miles (25,700\u201330,000\u00a0km) to offset the emissions from manufacture. Bosch and a number of other companies were also involved with the report.\nIn July 2022, Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund (PIF) will take a stake in the company through a \u00a378\u00a0million equity placing as well as a \u00a3575\u00a0million separate rights issue, giving it two board seats in the company. After the rights issue, the Saudi fund will have a 16.7% stake in Aston Martin, behind the 18.3% holding by Stroll's Yew Tree consortium while the Mercedes-Benz Group will own 9.7%. In September 2022, Chinese automaker Geely acquired a 7.6% stake in the company. In December 2022, Stroll and the Yew Tree consortium increased their stake in the company to 28.29%. In May 2023, Geely increased its stake to 17%, becoming the third-largest shareholder after the Yew Tree consortium and the Saudi Arabia Public Investment Fund.\nIn June 2023, Aston Martin signed an agreement with Lucid Motors after selecting it to help supply electric motors, powertrains, and battery systems for its upcoming range of fully electric cars. In return, Aston Martin will make cash payments and issue a 3.7percent stake in its company to Lucid, worth $232million in total. In September 2023, the Yew Tree consortium increased their stake by 3.27% to 26.23%. In October 2023, Aston Martin announced that it would compete in the FIA World Endurance Championship and IMSA SportsCar Championship in 2025. In April 2024, the company said it would push back production of its first electric vehicle to 2027. In March 2024, Aston Martin announced Adrian Hallmark as its new CEO beginning 1 October 2024, replacing Amedeo Felisa.\nIn September 2024, Aston Martin issued a profit warning, saying it had been hit by a fall in demand in China. In November 2024, Aston Martin issued another warning following a minor delay in the deliveries of their Valiant model. In response, they said they would issue new shares and debt totalling \u00a3210 million. In February 2025, CEO Adrian Hallmark announced the company would again push back production of its first electric vehicle to 2030. On 31 March 2025, the Yew Tree Consortium is set to inject an additional \u00a352.5 million into the marque by purchasing 75 million shares at 70 pence per share, increasing its stake to 33%. The company will also sell shares in the Formula One racing team that it sponsors. In total, the two transactions will raise \u00a3125 million.\nSales at auction.\nIn August 2017, a 1956 Aston Martin DBR1/1 sold at a Sotheby's auction at the Pebble Beach, California Concours d'Elegance for US$22,550,000, which made it the most expensive British car ever sold at an auction, according to Sotheby's. The car had previously been driven by Carroll Shelby and Stirling Moss.\nIn 2015 a 1962 Aston Martin DB4 GT Zagato for US$14,300,000 in New York, and a 1963 Aston Martin DP215 for US$21,455,000 in August 2018.\nModels.\nPre-war cars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPost-war cars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCurrent models.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUpcoming models.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBrand expansion.\nSince 2015, Aston Martin has sought to increase its appeal to women as a luxury lifestyle brand. A female advisory panel was established to adapt the design of the cars to the taste of women. In September 2016, a 37-foot-long Aston Martin speedboat was unveiled called the Aston Martin AM37 powerboat. In May 2018, Aston Martin launched a submersible called Project Neptune in partnership with submarine building company Triton Submarines. Aston Martin has collaborated with the luxury clothing company Hackett London to deliver items of clothing. In November 2017, Aston Martin unveiled a special limited edition bicycle after collaborating with bicycle manufacturer Storck.\nAston Martin and global property developer G&amp;G Business Developments constructed a 66-storey luxury condominium tower called Aston Martin Residences at 300 Biscayne Boulevard Way in Miami, Florida, which opened in 2024.\nIn July 2018, Aston Martin unveiled the Volante Vision Concept, a luxury concept aircraft with vertical take-off and landing capabilities. Also in July, a Lego version of James Bond's DB5 car was put on sale, and an Aston Martin-branded watch was released in collaboration with TAG Heuer.\nIn October 2018, Aston Martin announced it was opening a design and brand studio in Shanghai.\nMotorsport.\nAston Martin is currently associated with two different racing organisations. The Aston Martin Formula One team which competes in the Formula One Championship and Aston Martin Racing which currently competes in the FIA World Endurance Championship. Both racing organisations use the Aston Martin brand, but are not directly owned by Aston Martin. The Aston Martin Formula One team is owned by major Aston Martin shareholder Lawrence Stroll and operated by his company AMR GP, while Aston Martin Racing is operated by racing company Prodrive as part of an agreement with Aston Martin.\nFormula One.\nAston Martin participated as a Formula One constructor in and entering six races over the two years but failing to score any points. In January 2020, it was announced that the Racing Point F1 Team is due to be rebranded as Aston Martin for the 2021 season, as a result of a funding investment led by Racing Point owner Lawrence Stroll. As part of the rebrand, the team switched their racing colour of BWT pink to a modern iteration of Aston Martin's British racing green. The Aston Martin AMR21 was unveiled in March 2021 and became Aston Martin's first Formula One car after a 61-year absence from the sport.\nRacing cars (post-war).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAston Martin-powered racing cars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSponsorships.\nAston Martin sponsors 2. Bundesliga club 1860 Munich.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "2371", "revid": "40843939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2371", "title": "Albert Pike", "text": "American author, Freemason, and soldier (1809\u20131891)\nAlbert Pike (December 29, 1809\u00a0\u2013 April 2, 1891) was an American author, poet, orator, editor, lawyer, jurist and Confederate States Army general who served as an associate justice of the Arkansas Supreme Court in exile from 1864 to 1865. He had previously served as a senior officer of the Confederate States Army, commanding the District of Indian Territory in the Trans-Mississippi Theater. A prominent member of the Freemasons, Pike served as the Sovereign Grand Commander of the Supreme Council, Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction from 1859 to 1891.\nEarly life and education.\nAlbert Pike was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on December 29, 1809, the son of Benjamin and Sarah (Andrews) Pike. He grew up in Byfield and Newburyport, Massachusetts. His colonial ancestors had settled in the area in 1635, and included John Pike (1613\u20131688/1689), the founder of Woodbridge, New Jersey.\nHe attended school in Newburyport and Framingham until he was 15. In August 1825, he passed entrance exams at Harvard University, though when the college requested payment of tuition fees for the first two years, he chose not to attend. He began a program of self-education, later teaching school in Gloucester, North Bedford, Fairhaven and Newburyport.\nPike was an imposing figure; tall and with hair that reached his shoulders and a long beard. In 1831, he left Massachusetts to travel west, first stopping in Nashville, Tennessee.\nHe later moved to St. Louis, Missouri, where he joined a hunting and trading expedition to Taos, New Mexico. En route his horse broke and ran, forcing Pike to walk the remaining to Taos. After this, he joined a trapping expedition to the Llano Estacado in New Mexico and Texas. Trapping was minimal and, after traveling about , half of it on foot, he finally arrived at Fort Smith, Arkansas.\nCareer.\nSettling in Arkansas in 1833, Pike taught in a school and wrote a series of articles for the Little Rock \"Arkansas Advocate\" under the pen name of \"Casca.\" The articles were sufficiently well received for him to be asked to join the newspaper's staff. Under Pike's administration, the \"Advocate\" promoted the viewpoint of the Whig Party in a politically volatile and divided Arkansas in December 1832. After marrying Mary Ann Hamilton in 1834, he purchased the newspaper.\nHe was the first reporter for the Arkansas Supreme Court. He wrote a book (published anonymously), titled \"The Arkansas Form Book\", which was a guidebook for lawyers. Pike began to study law and was admitted to the bar in 1837, selling the \"Advocate\" the same year. (At least one source indicates that Pike read Kent and Blackstone and was admitted to the bar in 1834 by Superior Court judge Thomas J. Lacy, after a perfunctory examination.)\nHe proved to be a highly effective lawyer, representing clients in courts at every level. This continued after he received permission in 1849 to practice before the United States Supreme Court.\nHe also made several contacts among the Native American tribes in the area. He specialized in claims on behalf of Native Americans against the federal government. In 1852, he represented the Creek Nation before the Supreme Court in a claim regarding ceded tribal land. In 1854 he advocated for the Choctaw and Chickasaw, although compensation later awarded to the tribes in 1856 and 1857 was insufficient. These relationships were to influence the course of his Civil War service.\nPike also began a campaign of newspaper essays urging support for the construction of a transcontinental railroad to extend from New Orleans to the Pacific coast. He moved to New Orleans in 1853 and prepared to pass the state bar in furtherance of his campaign. He ultimately secured a charter from the Louisiana State Legislature for a project, following which he returned to Little Rock in 1857.\nHe joined the anti-Catholic Know Nothing Party at its founding; in the summer of 1854, he helped introduce the party in Arkansas. He attended the national convention in 1856, but walked out when it failed to adopt a pro-slavery platform.\nAs part of the Committee of the Citizens of Little Rock and Pulaski County in 1858, Pike joined 11 other men in signing a circular that encouraged the people of Arkansas to expel free Blacks from Arkansas. It said that the \"evil is the existence among us of a class of free colored persons\".\nAdditionally, Pike wrote on several legal subjects. He also continued writing poetry, a hobby he had begun in his youth in Massachusetts. His poems were highly regarded in his day, but are now mostly forgotten. Several volumes of his works were privately published posthumously by his daughter. In 1859, he received an honorary Master of Arts degree from Harvard.\nPoetry.\nAs a young man of letters, Pike wrote poetry, and he continued to do so for the rest of his life. At 23, he published his first poem, \"Hymns to the Gods.\" Later work was printed in literary journals such as \"Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine\" and local newspapers. His first collection of poetry, \"Prose Sketches and Poems Written in the Western Country\", was published in 1834. He later gathered many of his poems and republished them in \"Hymns to the Gods and Other Poems\" (1872). After his death these were published again in \"Gen. Albert Pike's Poems\" (1900) and \"Lyrics and Love Songs\" (1916).\nThe authorship of \"The Old Canoe\" was attributed to Pike. He was suggested as author because about the time of its publication, when it was going the rounds of the press, probably without any credit, a doggerel called \"The Old Canoe\" was composed about Pike by one of his political foes. The subject was a canoe in which he left Columbia, Tennessee, when a young man practicing law in that place. Pike told Senator Edward W. Carmack that he was not the author of \"The Old Canoe,\" and could not imagine how he ever got the credit for it. The rightful author was Emily Rebecca Page.\nFreemasonry.\nPike first joined the fraternal Independent Order of Odd Fellows in 1840. He next joined a Masonic Lodge, where he became extremely active in the affairs of the organization. In 1859 he was elected Sovereign Grand Commander of the Scottish Rite's Southern Jurisdiction. He remained Sovereign Grand Commander for the rest of his life, devoting a large amount of his time to developing the rituals of the order.\nHe published a book called \"Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry\" in 1871, the first of several editions. This helped the Order grow during the nineteenth century. He also researched and wrote the seminal treatise \"Indo-Aryan Deities and Worship as Contained in the Rig-Veda\". In the United States, Pike is still considered an eminent and influential Freemason, primarily in the Scottish Rite Southern Jurisdiction.\nPike was also the Provincial Grand Master of the Royal Order of Scotland from 1877 to 1891.\nMilitary service.\nMexican\u2013American War.\nWhen the Mexican\u2013American War started, Pike joined the Arkansas Mounted Infantry Regiment and was commissioned as a company commander with the rank of captain in June 1846. With his regiment, he fought in the Battle of Buena Vista. Pike was discharged in June 1847. He and his commander, Colonel John Selden Roane, had several differences of opinion. This situation led finally to an \"inconclusive\" duel between Pike and Roane on July 29, 1847, near Fort Smith, Arkansas. Although several shots were fired in the duel, nobody was injured, and the two were persuaded by their seconds to discontinue it.\nAfter the war, Pike returned to the practice of law, moving to New Orleans for a time beginning in 1853. He wrote another book, \"Maxims of the Roman Law and Some of the Ancient French Law, as Expounded and Applied in Doctrine and Jurisprudence\". Although unpublished, this book increased his reputation among his associates in law. He returned to Arkansas in 1857, gaining some amount of prominence in the legal field.\nAt the Southern Commercial Convention of 1854, Pike said the South should remain in the Union and seek equality with the North, but if the South \"were forced into an inferior status, she would be better out of the Union than in it.\" His stand was that state's rights superseded national law and he supported the idea of a Southern secession. This stand is made clear in his pamphlet of 1861, \"State or Province, Bond or Free?\"\nAmerican Civil War.\nIn 1861, Pike penned the lyrics to \"Dixie to Arms!\" At the beginning of the war, Pike was appointed as Confederate envoy to Native American nations. In this capacity he negotiated several treaties, one of the most important being with Cherokee chief John Ross, which was concluded in 1861. At the time, Ross agreed to support the Confederacy, which promised the tribes a Native American state if it won the war. Ross later changed his mind and left Indian Territory, but the succeeding Cherokee government maintained the alliance.\nPike was commissioned as a brigadier general in the Confederate States Army on November 22, 1861, and given a command in the Indian Territory. With Brig. Gen. Ben McCulloch, Pike trained three Confederate regiments of Indian cavalry, most of whom belonged to the \"civilized tribes\", whose loyalty to the Confederacy was variable. Although initially victorious at the Battle of Pea Ridge (Elkhorn Tavern) in March 1862, Pike's unit was defeated later in a counterattack, after falling into disarray. When Pike was ordered in May 1862 to send troops to Arkansas, he resigned in protest. As in the previous war, Pike came into conflict with his superior officers, at one time drafting a letter to Jefferson Davis complaining about his direct superior.\nAfter Pea Ridge, it was alleged that Pike's Native American troops had scalped soldiers in the field. The single incident of scalping was, however, done by a Native American acting on his own. According to official records submitted to the Headquarters Department of Indian territory, Pike \"regarded [the incident] with horror\" and was personally \"angry and disgusted.\" He also filed a report in which he said it caused him the \"utmost pain and regret.\"\nMaj. Gen. Thomas C. Hindman charged Pike with mishandling of money and material, ordering his arrest. The incident arose when Hindman, who had declared martial law in Arkansas, ordered Pike to turn over weapons and Native American Indian treaty funds. Pike thought the action was illegal and refused. Both these charges were later found to be considerably lacking in evidence; nevertheless Pike, facing arrest, escaped into the hills of Arkansas, submitting his resignation from the Confederate States Army on July 12, 1862. He was arrested on November 3 on charges of insubordination and treason, and held briefly in Warren, Texas. His resignation was accepted on November 11, and he was allowed to return to Arkansas.\nAs Union troops advanced toward the state capital in September 1863, the State Supreme Court retreated to Washington, Arkansas, which was made the new Confederate state capital. Associate Justice Hulbert F. Fairchild resigned because the new location was too far from his family, and Pike was appointed as his replacement.\nIn the wake of the war, Pike moved to New York City, then for a short time to Canada. On June 24, 1865, Pike applied to President Andrew Johnson for a pardon, disowning his earlier interpretation of the U.S. Constitution. He said he now planned \"to pursue the arts of peace, to practice my profession, to live among my books, and to labour to benefit my fellows and my race by other than political courses\". President Johnson pardoned him on April 23, 1866.\nLater life and death.\nDuring the Arkansas political conflict known as the Brooks-Baxter War, Pike was one of the lawyers to speak on behalf of Elisha Baxter.\nPike died on April 2, 1891, at the Scottish Rite Temple of the Supreme Council in Washington DC, at the age of 81, and was buried at Oak Hill Cemetery, despite the fact that he had left instructions for his body to be cremated. In 1944, his remains were moved to the House of the Temple, headquarters of the Southern Jurisdiction of the Scottish Rite. The House of the Temple contains numerous memorials and artifacts related to Pike, including his personal library.\nLegacy.\nA memorial to Pike was erected in 1901 in the Judiciary Square neighborhood of Washington, D.C. The statue portrayed him as a private citizen and Freemason. He was the only former Confederate military officer with an outdoor statue in Washington, D.C. In 1992, the D.C. Council petitioned the federal government to remove it. In 2017, protesters circled the monument after a Unite the Right rally, calling for it to be torn down, a sentiment echoed by the D.C. Council. In July 2019, Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton introduced a bill to remove the statue but still preserve its history. On June 19, 2020, protestors tore down the statue and set it ablaze, in connection with the George Floyd protests because of Pike's association with the Confederacy and of his alleged association with the Ku Klux Klan. The statue was restored and reinstalled in Judiciary Square in October 2025 following an executive order by President Donald Trump.\nThe Albert Pike Memorial Temple is an historic Masonic lodge in Little Rock, Arkansas; the structure is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nAlbert Pike Highway was an auto trail that extended more than from Hot Springs, Arkansas, to Colorado Springs, Colorado, crossing the Ozark Mountains and passing through Fort Smith, Muskogee, Tulsa, Dodge City, La Junta and Pueblo.\nIncidents and concerns.\nMasonic baptism.\nIn 1865, Pike publicly performed a ceremony of Masonic baptism in New York City. The ceremony was greeted with skepticism by many American Masons including Albert Mackey, but was based on older European Masonic baptism ceremonies that began in the 1820s. However, some, like the \"New York Times\", reacted positively to the ceremony describing it as \"interesting\" and \"novel.\" In the ritual, six children were baptized by Pike with water and consecrated oil.\nRacism.\nIn the aftermath of the Civil War, as former Confederates found themselves barred from the ballot box, Pike remained deeply opposed to black suffrage, insisting that \"the white race, and that race alone, shall govern this country. It is the only one that is fit to govern, and it is the only one that shall.\"\nRegarding membership in the Freemasons, Pike is quoted as saying in 1875 that \"Prince Hall Lodge was as regular a Lodge as any Lodge created by competent authority. It had a perfect right to establish other Lodges and make itself a Mother Lodge. I am not inclined to meddle in the matter. I took my obligations from white men, not from negroes. When I have to accept negroes as brothers or leave masonry, I shall leave it. Better let the thing drift.\"\nHis attitudes towards African-Americans may have changed towards the end of his life. A 1945 letter written by Willard W. Allen, the Sovereign Grand Commander of the United Supreme Council, S.J. Prince Hall Affiliation noted that \"what practically all Masonic scholars know very well, viz., that in the closing years of General Pike's Masonic career, he became a very staunch friend of Negro Masonry.\" Pike had become a personal friend of Thornton A. Jackson, Supreme Grand Commander of the United Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction, Prince Hall Affiliation and even gifted to Thornton his complete set of rituals for Prince Hall Scottish Rite Masonry to use.\nInvolvement with the Ku Klux Klan.\nPike first wrote about the Ku Klux Klan less than three years after the Klan's founding, in an April 16, 1868 editorial in the \"Memphis Daily Appeal.\" In the editorial, Pike indicated that his main problems lay not with its aims, but with its methods and leadership. Later in this editorial, he proposed \"one great Order of Southern Brotherhood\", a secret society which would have been a larger and more centrally organized version of the Klan: \"If it were in our power, if it could be effected, we would unite every white man in the South, who is opposed to negro suffrage, into one great Order of Southern Brotherhood, with an organization complete, active, vigorous, in which a few should execute the concentrated will of all, and whose very existence should be concealed from all but its members.\"\nIn 1905's \"Ku Klux Klan: Its Origin, Growth and Disbandment\", the author Walter L. Fleming, lists Pike as the Klan's \"chief judicial officer\". Susan Lawrence Davis, whose father was a founding member of the Klan in Alabama, writes in her sympathetic account titled \"Authentic History: Ku Klux Klan, 1865\u20131877\", published in 1924, that Pike was personally chosen by Nathan Bedford Forrest to serve as the Klan's \"Chief Judicial Officer\" and to head the Klan in Arkansas as \"Grand Dragon of that Realm.\" In 1939's \"Invisible Empire: The Story of the Ku Klux Klan, 1866\u20131871\", Stanley Horn, who served as president of the Tennessee Historical Society, also reports that Forrest appointed Pike to lead the Klan in Arkansas and credits him with a surge of local Klan activity in April 1868. Horn says that a pro-Klan poem, \"Death's Brigade\", is attributed to Pike, although \"of course, he did not have the bravado to claim that honor publicly at that time.\" Southern Agrarian poet John Gould Fletcher, who grew up in Little Rock in a house that Pike built, likewise believed that Pike wrote the poem.\nWhen the Ku Klux Klan was revived in 1915, there even existed an Albert Pike Klan, a local chapter of the organization based in Illinois.\nIn 1971, Allen W. Trelease published \"White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction\", and claimed that the office that Pike allegedly held in the KKK was not mentioned in \"The Prescript\", the Klan constitution. However, the office of Grand Dragon, which Davis claims Pike once held, is explicitly mentioned in the 1867 Klan constitution. At the same time, Trelease noted that \"Pike may well have affiliated with the Klan.\" As evidence, Trelease notes that Pike \"was intrigued by secret societies and rituals\" and \"sympathized with the Klan's stated objectives.\"\nA 1997 biography of Pike by Walter Lee Brown asserts that Pike was not a member of the Klan and Brown found \"no contemporary, nor no reliable late evidence that Pike ever joined the Klan.\" Brown claims the work of Fleming, Davis and Horn are \"unreliable histories\", but offers no further evidence other than citing Trelease, which, in Brown's interpretation \"casts doubt on Pike's membership.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "2372", "revid": "50600040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2372", "title": "ALF Tales", "text": "American animated series\nALF Tales is a 30-minute Saturday morning animated series that aired on NBC from September 10, 1988, to December 9, 1989. The show is a spin-off of \"\" that featured characters from that series playing various characters from fairy tales. The fairy tale parody was usually altered for comedic effect in a manner akin to Jay Ward's \"Fractured Fairy Tales\".\nPlot.\nThe episodes were performed in the style of a resident theater company or ensemble cast where Gordon \"ALF\" Shumway and Rhonda would take the leading male and female roles, Larson Petty and Sloop take on villain roles, and the other characters were cast according to their characteristics.\nMany stories spoof a film genre, such as the \"Cinderella\" episode which is presented like an Elvis Presley film. Some episodes featured a \"fourth wall\" effect where Gordon is backstage preparing for the episode and Rob Cowan would appear drawn as a TV executive (who introduced himself as \"Roger Cowan, network executive\") who tries to brief Gordon on how to improve the episode. For instance, Cowan once told Gordon who was readying for a medieval themed episode that \"less than 2% of our audience lives in the Dark Ages\".\nHome media.\nThe first seven episodes were released on DVD on May 30, 2006, in Region 1 from Lionsgate Home Entertainment in a single-disc release entitled \"ALF and The Beanstalk and Other Classic Fairy Tales\".\nThe complete series was remastered and subsequently released on October 17, 2023, by Shout! Factory in the DVD box set \"ALF: The Complete Series (Deluxe Edition)\". The box set release also included the original 1986\u201390 sitcom, ' and '.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2376", "revid": "50151310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2376", "title": "Abdul Rashid Dostum", "text": "Afghan politician and military officer (born 1954)\nAbdul Rashid Dostum (born 25 March 1954) is an Afghan exiled politician, former military officer and warlord. He is the founder and leader of the Junbish-e Milli political party, and was a senior army officer in the military of the former Afghan communist government during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, initially part of the Afghan Commando Forces. In 2001, Dostum became a key indigenous ally to the U.S. Special Forces and the CIA during the campaign to topple the Taliban government. He is one of the most powerful warlords since the beginning of the Afghan conflict, infamous for being an opportunist and siding with winners during Afghanistan's several civil wars. Dostum was also referred to as a kingmaker due to his significant role in Afghan politics.\nAn ethnic Uzbek from a peasant family in Jawzjan province, Dostum joined the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) as a teenager before enlisting in the Afghan Army and training as a paratrooper, serving in his native region around Sheberghan. Following the outbreak of the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, Dostum commanded a KHAD paramilitary unit and eventually gained a reputation for defeating mujahideen commanders in northern Afghanistan and even persuading some to defect to the communist cause. As a result, the communist government gained effective control over the country's north. He achieved several promotions in the army and was honored as a \"Hero of Afghanistan\" by President Mohammed Najibullah in 1988. By this time he was commanding up to 45,000 troops in the region under his responsibility.\nService.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Dostum played a central role in the collapse of Najibullah's government by \"defecting\" to the mujahideen; the division-sized loyal forces he commanded in the north became an independent paramilitary of his newly founded party called Junbish-e Milli. He allied with Ahmad Shah Massoud and together they captured Kabul, before another civil war loomed. Initially supporting the new government of Burhanuddin Rabbani, he switched sides in 1994 by allying with Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, but he backed Rabbani again by 1996. During this time he remained in control of the country's north which functioned as a relatively stable proto-state, but remained a loose partner of Massoud in the Northern Alliance. A year later, Mazar-i-Sharif was overrun by his former aide Abdul Malik Pahlawan, resulting in a battle in which he regained control. In 1998, the city was overrun by the Taliban and Dostum fled the country until returning to Afghanistan in 2001, joining the Northern Alliance forces after the US invasion and leading his loyal faction in the Fall of Mazar-i-Sharif.\nAfter the fall of the Taliban-led government, he joined interim president Hamid Karzai's administration as Deputy Defense Minister and later served as chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff of the Afghan Army, a role often viewed as ceremonial. His militia feuded with forces loyal to general Atta Muhammad Nur. Dostum was a candidate in the 2004 elections, and was an ally of victorious Karzai in the 2009 elections. From 2011, he was part of the leadership council of the National Front of Afghanistan along with Ahmad Zia Massoud and Mohammad Mohaqiq. He served as Vice President of Afghanistan in Ashraf Ghani's administration from 2014 to 2020. In 2020, he was promoted to the rank of marshal after a political agreement between Ghani and former Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. On 11 August 2021 during the Taliban's nationwide offensive, Dostum fled across Hairatan to Uzbekistan. In 2021 he pledged allegiance to the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan, and formed the \"Supreme Council of National Resistance of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan\" in opposition to the new Taliban government. Dostum now resides in exile in Turkey, and on 15 September 2024 urged groups opposed to Taliban rule to form a government-in-exile.\nDostum is a controversial figure in Afghanistan. He is seen as a capable and fierce military leader and remains wildly popular among the Uzbek community in the country. Many of his supporters call him \"Pasha\" (\u067e\u0627\u0634\u0627), an honorable Uzbek/Turkic term. However, he has also been widely accused of committing atrocities and war crimes, most notoriously the suffocation of up to 1,000 Taliban fighters in the Dasht-i-Leili massacre, and he was widely feared among the populace. In 2018, the International Criminal Court (ICC) was reported to be considering launching an inquiry into whether Dostum had engaged in war crimes in Afghanistan.\nEarly life.\nDostum was born in 1954 in Khwaja Du Koh near Sheberghan in Jowzjan province, Afghanistan. Coming from an impoverished ethnic Uzbek family, he received a very basic traditional education as he was forced to drop out of school at a young age. From there, he took up work in the village's major gas fields.\nCareer.\nDostum began working in 1970 in a state-owned gas refinery in Sheberghan. He began participating in union politics when the republican government led by Daoud Khan started to arm the staff of the workers in the oil and gas refineries. The reason for this was to create \"groups for the Defense of the Revolution\". As a result of the new communist ideas entering Afghanistan in the 1970s, Dostum enlisted in the Afghan Army in 1976. He received his basic military training in Jalalabad and his squadron was deployed in the rural areas around Sheberghan, under the auspices of the Ministry of National Security. According to photographic evidence, Dostum additionally received airborne training and still chooses to wear two first-class \"Master Paratrooper\" Afghan jump wings.\nAs a Parcham faction member of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), he was exiled after the purge of Parcham by the party's Khalqist faction leaders, living in Peshawar, Pakistan for a while. After the Soviet invasion (Operation Storm-333) and installation of Babrak Karmal as head of state, Dostum returned to Afghanistan, where he started commanding a local pro-government militia in his native Jawzjan Province.\nSoviet\u2013Afghan War.\nBy the mid-1980s, he commanded a force of around 20,000 paramilitaries and controlled the northern provinces of Afghanistan. While the unit recruited throughout Jowzjan and had a relatively broad base, many of its early troops and commanders came from Dostum's home village. He left the army after the purge of Parchamites, but returned after the Soviet occupation began.\nDuring the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, Dostum was commanding a paramilitary battalion to fight and route mujahideen forces; he had been appointed an officer due to prior military experience. This eventually became a regiment and later became incorporated into the defense forces as the 53rd Infantry Division. Dostum and his new division reported directly to President Mohammad Najibullah. Later on, he became the commander of the military unit 374 in Jowzjan. He defended the Soviet-backed Afghan government against the mujahideen forces throughout the 1980s. While he was only a regional commander, he had largely raised his forces by himself. The Jowzjani militia Dostum controlled was one of the few in the country that was able to be deployed outside its own region. They were deployed in Kandahar in 1988 when Soviet forces were withdrawing from Afghanistan.\nDue to his efforts in the army, Dostum was awarded the title \"Hero of the Republic of Afghanistan\" by President Najibullah.\nCivil war and northern Afghanistan autonomous state.\nDostum's men would become an important force in the fall of Kabul in 1992, with Dostum deciding to defect from Najibullah and allying himself with opposition commanders Ahmad Shah Massoud and Sayed Jafar Naderi, the head of the Isma'ili community, and together they captured the capital city. With the help of fellow defectors Mohammad Nabi Azimi and Abdul Wakil, his forces entered Kabul by air in the afternoon of 14 April. He and Massoud fought in a coalition against Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. Massoud and Dostum's forces joined to defend Kabul against Hekmatyar. Some 4,000\u20135,000 of his troops, units of his Sheberghan-based 53rd Division and Balkh-based Guards Division, garrisoning Bala Hissar fort, Maranjan Hill and Khwaja Rawash Airport, where they stopped Najibullah from entering to flee.\nDostum then left Kabul for his northern stronghold Mazar-i-Sharif, where he ruled, in effect, an independent region (or 'proto-state'), often referred as the Northern Autonomous Zone. He printed his own Afghan currency, ran a small airline named Balkh Air, and formed relations with countries like Uzbekistan effectively creating his own proto-state with an army of up to 40,000 men, and with tanks supplied by Uzbekistan and Russia. While the rest of the country was in chaos, his region remained prosperous and functional, and it won him the support from people of all ethnic groups. Many people fled to his territory to escape the violence and fundamentalism imposed by the Taliban later on. In 1994, Dostum allied himself with Gulbuddin Hekmatyar against the government of Burhanuddin Rabbani and Ahmad Shah Massoud, but in 1995 sided with the government again.\nTaliban era.\nFollowing the rise of the Taliban and their capture of Kabul, Dostum aligned himself with the Northern Alliance (United Front) against the Taliban. The Northern Alliance was assembled in late 1996 by Dostum, Massoud and Karim Khalili against the Taliban. At this point, he is said to have had a force of some 50,000 men supported by both aircraft and tanks.\nMuch like other Northern Alliance leaders, Dostum also faced infighting within his group and was later forced to surrender his power to General Abdul Malik Pahlawan. Malik entered into secret negotiations with the Taliban, who promised to respect his authority over much of northern Afghanistan, in exchange for the apprehension of Ismail Khan, one of their enemies. Accordingly, on 25 May 1997, Malik arrested Khan, handed him over and let the Taliban enter Mazar-e-Sharif, giving them control over most of northern Afghanistan. Because of this, Dostum was forced to flee to Turkey. However, Malik soon realized that the Taliban were not sincere with their promises as he saw his men being disarmed. He then rejoined the Northern Alliance and turned against his erstwhile allies, driving them from Mazar-e-Sharif. In October 1997, Dostum returned from exile and retook charge. After Dostum briefly regained control of Mazar-e-Sharif, the Taliban returned in 1998, and he again fled to Turkey.\nOperation Enduring Freedom.\nDostum returned to Afghanistan in May 2001 to open up a new front before the U.S.-led campaign against the Taliban joined him, along with Commander Massoud, Ismail Khan and Mohammad Mohaqiq. On 17 October 2001, the CIA's eight-man Team Alpha, including Johnny Micheal Spann landed in the Dar-e-Suf to link up with Dostum. Three days later, the 12 members of Operational Detachment Alpha (ODA) 595 landed to join forces with Dostum and Team Alpha. Dostum, the Tajik commander Atta Muhammad Nur and their American allies defeated Taliban forces and recaptured Mazar-i-Sharif on 10 November 2001.\nOn 24 November 2001, 15,000 Taliban soldiers were due to surrender after the Siege of Kunduz to American and Northern Alliance forces. Instead, 400 Al-Qaeda prisoners arrived just outside Mazar-i-Sharif. After they surrendered to Dostum, they were transferred to the 19th century garrison fortress, Qala-i-Jangi. The next day, while being questioned by CIA officers Spann and David Tyson, they used concealed weapons to revolt, triggering what became the Battle of Qala-i-Jangi against the guards. The uprising was finally brought under control after six days.\nDasht-i-Leili massacre.\nDostum has been accused by Western journalists of responsibility for the suffocating or otherwise killing of Taliban prisoners in December 2001, with the number of victims estimated as 2,000. In 2009, Dostum denied the accusations and US President Obama ordered an investigation into the massacre, which as of August 2025, never took place.\nKarzai administration.\nIn the aftermath of Taliban's removal from northern Afghanistan, forces loyal to Dostum frequently clashed with Tajik forces loyal to Atta Muhammad Nur. Atta's men kidnapped and killed a number of Dostum's men, and constantly agitated to gain control of Mazar-e-Sharif. Through the political mediations of the Karzai administration, the International Security Assistance Force (ISA) and the United Nations, the Dostum-Atta feud gradually declined, leading to their alignment in a new political party.\nDostum served as deputy defense minister the early period of the Karzai administration. On 20 May 2003, Dostum narrowly escaped an assassination attempt. He was often residing outside Afghanistan, mainly in Turkey. In February 2008, he was suspended after the apparent kidnapping and torture of a political rival.\nTime in Turkey.\nSome media reports in 2008 stated earlier that Dostum was \"seeking political asylum\" in Turkey while others said he was exiled. One Turkish media outlet said Dostum was visiting after flying there with then Turkey's Foreign Minister Ali Babacan during a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).\nOn 16 August 2009, Dostum was asked to return from exile to Afghanistan to support President Hamid Karzai in his bid for re-election. He later flew by helicopter to his northern stronghold of Sheberghan, where he was greeted by thousands of his supporters in the local stadium. He subsequently made overtures to the United States, promising he could \"destroy the Taliban and al Qaeda\" if supported by the U.S., saying that \"the U.S. needs strong friends like Dostum.\"\nGhani administration.\nOn 7 October 2013, the day after filing his nomination for the 2014 general elections as running mate of Ashraf Ghani, Dostum issued a press statement that some news media were willing to welcome as \"apologies\": \"Many mistakes were made during the civil war (...) It is time we apologize to the Afghan people who were sacrificed due to our negative policies (...) I apologize to the people who suffered from the violence and civil war (...)\".\nDostum was directly chosen as First Vice President of Afghanistan in the April\u2013June 2014 Afghan presidential election, next to Ashraf Ghani as president and Sarwar Danish as second vice president.\nIn July 2016, Human Rights Watch accused Abdul Rashid Dostum's National Islamic Movement of Afghanistan of killing, abusing and looting civilians in the northern Faryab Province during June. Militia forces loyal to Dostum stated that the civilians they targeted \u2013 at least 13 killed and 32 wounded \u2013 were supporters of the Taliban.\nIn November 2016, at a buzkashi match, he punched his political rival Ahmad Ischi, and then his bodyguards beat Ischi. In 2017, he was accused of having Ischi kidnapped in that incident and raped with a gun on camera during a five-day detention, claims that Dostum denies but that nevertheless forced him into exile in Turkey.\nOn 26 July 2018, he narrowly escaped a suicide bombing by ISIL-KP as he returned to Afghanistan at Kabul airport. Just after Dostum's convoy departed the airport, an attacker armed with a suicide vest bombed a crowd of several hundred people celebrating his return at the entrance to the airport. The attack killed 14 and injured 50, including civilians and armed security.\nOn 30 March 2019, Dostum again escaped an expected assassination attempt while traveling from Mazar-e-Sharif to Jawzjan Province, though two of his bodyguards were killed. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, the second in eight months.\nOn 11 August 2021 during the Taliban's nationwide offensive, Dostum, along with Atta Muhammad Nur, led the government's defence of the city of Mazar-i-Sharif. Three days later, they fled across Hairatan to Uzbekistan. Atta Nur claimed that they were forced to flee due to a \"conspiracy\". Both men later pled allegiance to the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan, the remaining remnants of the collapsed Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. Dostum, Atta, Yunus Qanuni, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf and some other political figures formed the \"Supreme Council of National Resistance of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan\" in opposition to the new Taliban government in October 2021. Dostum now resides in exile in Turkey, and on 15 September 2024 urged groups opposed to Taliban rule to form a government-in-exile.\nPolitical and social views.\nDostum is considered to be liberal and somewhat leftist. Being ethnic Uzbek, he has worked on the battlefield with leaders from all other major ethnic groups, Hazaras, Tajiks and Pashtuns. When Dostum was ruling his northern Afghanistan proto-state before the Taliban took over in 1998, women were able to go about unveiled, girls were allowed to go to school and study at the University of Balkh, cinemas showed Indian films, music played on television, and Russian vodka and German beer were openly available: activities which were all banned by the Taliban.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We will not submit to a government where there is no whisky and no music.\u2014\u200a\nHe viewed the ISAF forces attempt to crush the Taliban as ineffective and has gone on record saying in 2007 that he could mop up the Taliban \"in six months\" if allowed to raise a 10,000 strong army of Afghan veterans. As of 2007, senior Afghan government officials did not trust Dostum as they were concerned that he might be secretly rearming his forces.\nPersonal life.\nDostum is more than tall and has been described as \"beefy\". He generally prefers to wear a Soviet-style camouflage military uniform, previously having worn KLMK, having a trademark bushy moustache.\nDostum was married to a woman named Khadija. According to Brian Glyn Williams, Khadija had an accidental death in the 1990s which broke Dostum as he \"really loved his wife\". Dostum eventually remarried after Khadija's death.\nHe named one of his sons Mustafa Kamal, after the founder of the modern Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk. Dostum has spent a considerable amount of time in Turkey, and some of his family reside there.\nDostum is known to drink alcohol, a rarity in Afghanistan, and apparently a fan of Russian vodka. He reportedly suffered from diabetes. In 2014 when he became vice president, Dostum reportedly gave up drinking for healthy meals and morning jogs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2377", "revid": "50252583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2377", "title": "Andhra Pradesh", "text": "State in southeastern India\nAndhra Pradesh is a state on the east coast of southern India. It is the seventh-largest state and the tenth-most populous in the country. Telugu, one of the classical languages of India, is the most widely spoken language in the state, as well as its official language. Amaravati is the state capital, while the largest city is Visakhapatnam. Andhra Pradesh shares borders with Odisha to the northeast, Chhattisgarh to the north, Karnataka to the southwest, Tamil Nadu to the south, Telangana to northwest and the Bay of Bengal to the east. It has the longest coastline in India (aerial distance between extreme ends) at about .\nArchaeological evidence indicates that Andhra Pradesh has been continuously inhabited for over 247,000 years, from early archaic hominins to Neolithic settlements. The earliest reference to the Andhras appears in the Aitareya Brahmana (c.\u2009800 BCE) of the Rigveda. Around 300 BCE, the Andhras living in the Godavari and Krishna river deltas were renowned for their formidable military strength\u2014second only to the Maurya Empire in the subcontinent. The first major Andhra polity was the Satavahana dynasty (2nd century BCE\u20132nd century CE) which ruled over the entire Deccan Plateau and even distant areas of western and central India. They established trade relations with the Roman Empire, and their capital, Dhanyakataka, was the most prosperous city in India during the 2nd century CE. Subsequent major dynasties included the Vishnukundinas, Eastern Chalukyas, Kakatiyas, Vijayanagara Empire, and Qutb Shahis, followed by British rule. After gained independence, Andhra State was carved out of Madras State in 1953. In 1956, it merged with Telangana, comprising the Telugu-speaking regions of the former Hyderabad State, to form Andhra Pradesh. It reverted to its earlier form in 2014, when the new state of Telangana was bifurcated from it.\nThe Eastern Ghats separate the coastal plains from the peneplains. Major rivers include the Krishna, Godavari, Tungabhadra and Penna. Andhra Pradesh holds about one-third of India's limestone reserves and significant deposits of baryte and granite. Agriculture and related activities employ 62.17% of the population, with rice being the staple crop. The state contributes 30% to India's fish production and accounts for 35% of the country's seafood exports. The Sriharikota Range, located on Sriharikota island in Tirupati district, serves as India's primary satellite launch centre.\nAndhra is the birthplace of the Amaravati school of art, an ancient Indian art style that influenced South Indian, Sri Lankan, and Southeast Asian art. It is also home to Kuchipudi, one of India's classical dance forms, and has produced several renowned Carnatic music composers. The state features prominent pilgrimage centres and natural attractions, including the Venkateswara temple in Tirumala and the Araku Valley. Notable products with geographical indication (GI) registration include Tirupati Laddu, Banganapalle mangoes, Kondapalli toys, Dharmavaram sarees, and Pootharekulu.\nEtymology.\nAndhras were mentioned in Aitareya Brahmana of the Rigveda (c.\u2009800\u2013500 BCE) as descendants of the sage Vishvamitra. Andhras were referred to as non-Aryans living on the fringes of Aryan settlements. The Satavahanas, the earliest kings who ruled this region were mentioned by the names \"Andhra\", \"Andhrara-jateeya\", and \"Andhrabhrtya\" in the Puranic literature. \"Andhra\" is both a tribal and a territorial name. The region inhabited by Andhras was called Andhradesa.\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nExcavated stone tools from Hanumanthunipadu in Prakasam district were dated to be 2.47 lakh (247,000) years old (Middle Paleolithic). This finding means that these tools were developed by archaic hominins (pre-humans) as such tools were thought to be used by modern man migrating out of Africa about 2.10 lakh (210,000) years ago. In the absence of fossil evidence, it became a riddle to understand what happened to them. The discovery of petroglyphs, pictographs, and dolmens in Chakrala Bodu, near Boyalapalli village in the Yerragondapalem mandal area of Prakasam district indicates the presence of Neolithic-age human settlements in the region.\nEarly and medieval history.\nMegasthenes reported in his \"Indica\" (c.\u2009310 BCE) that Andhras were living in the Godavari and Krishna river deltas and were famous for their military strength which was second only to Mauryans in all of India. Archaeological evidence from places such as Bhattiprolu, Amaravathi, and Dharanikota suggests that the Andhra region was part of the Mauryan empire. After the death of Emperor Ashoka, Mauryan rule weakened around 200\u00a0BCE and was replaced by several smaller kingdoms in the Andhra region. One of the earliest examples of the Brahmi script, from Bhattiprolu was used on an urn containing the relics of Buddha. This is considered as the rosetta stone for decipherment of Tamil Brahmi. Kadamba script, derived from Bhattiprolu Brahmi later led to the evolution of Telugu and Kannada scripts.\nThe Satavahana dynasty dominated the Deccan Plateau from the 1st century BCE to the 3rd century CE. It had trade relations with the Roman Empire. The Satavahanas made Dhanyakataka-Amaravathi their capital. According to historian Stanley Wolpert, it might have been the most prosperous city in India in 2nd century CE. Nagarjuna, the philosopher of Mahayana, lived in this region. Mahayana spread to China, Japan, and Korea. It became the largest Buddhist denomination in the world. Amaravati School of Art is regarded as one of the three major styles of ancient Indian art and had a great influence on art in South India, Sri Lanka, and Southeast Asia. The Andhra Ikshvakus, with their capital at Vijayapuri, succeeded the Satavahanas in the Krishna River valley in the latter half of the 2nd century CE. The Salankayanas were an ancient dynasty that ruled the Andhra region between Godavari and Krishna rivers with their capital at Vengi (modern Pedavegi) around 300 CE. Telugu Cholas ruled present-day Kadapa region from the six to the thirteenth centuries intermittently. Kallamalla \"sasanam\" (law), engraved in 575\u00a0CE during the rule of Dhanamjaya, is the earliest completely Telugu inscription.\nThe Vishnukundinas was the first dynasty in the fifth and sixth centuries to hold sway over South India. Undavalli Caves is an example of Indian rock-cut architecture of that time. The Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi, whose dynasty lasted for around five hundred years from the 7th century until 1130\u00a0CE, eventually merged with the Chola dynasty. They continued to rule under the protection of the Chola dynasty until 1189\u00a0CE. At the request of King Rajaraja Narendra, Nannaya, considered the first Telugu poet, took up the translation of the Mahabharata into Telugu in 1025 CE.\nKakatiyas ruled this region and Telangana for nearly two hundred years between the 12th and 14th centuries. They were defeated by the Delhi Sultanate. Bahamani sultanate took over when Delhi sultanate became weak. Around the same time, Musunuris and Reddi Kingdom ruled parts of this region in the early 14th century. Reddy kings constructed Kondaveedu Fort and Kondapalli Fort. Gajpathis ruled parts of this region, before the entire region became part of the Vijayanagara Empire during the reign of Krishnadevaraya. Pemmasani Nayaks controlled parts of Andhra Pradesh and had large mercenary armies that were the vanguard of the empire in the 16th century. Several tanks and anicuts were built. Some of these include the Cumbum tank, Mopad tank, and Koregal anicut, Vallabhapur anicut across the Tungabhadra River. The empire's patronage enabled fine arts and literature to reach new heights in Kannada, Telugu, Tamil, and Sanskrit, while Carnatic music evolved into its current form. The Lepakshi group of monuments built during this period have mural paintings of the Vijayanagara kings, Dravidian art, and inscriptions. These are put on the tentative list of the UNESCO World Heritage committee.\nModern history.\nFollowing the defeat of the Vijayanagara Empire, the Qutb Shahi dynasty held sway over most of present-day general Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Later, this region came under the rule of the Mughal Empire. Chin Qilich Khan who was initially appointed as viceroy of Deccan by the Mughal in 1713, established himself as a semi-independent ruler as Nizam of Hyderabad. In 1765, British Lord Robert Clive obtained from the Mughal emperor Shah Alam II a grant of four circars to the British East India Company, that was formalised in 1778 treaty with Nizam Ali, the 5th Nizam of Hyderabad state with addition of another circar. Later, four territories were ceded to the British by Nizam Ali in 1800, which eventually became the Rayalaseema region. Meanwhile, in the present day North Andhra, Raja Viziaram Raz (Vijayaram Raj) established a sovereign kingdom and acquired neighbouring estates with the support of British. Later it fell out with the British and as a result, was attacked and defeated in the battle of Padmanabham in 1794. It was annexed as a tributary estate like other principalities and remained so until it acceded to the Indian Union in 1949. Following the annexation of Carnatic sultanate in 1801, the last major piece of the present day Andhra Pradesh came under British East India Company rule as part of Madras Presidency. After the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the region became part of British crown till India became independent in 1947.\nAnicut at Dowleswaram built in 1850 by Arthur Cotton and several others at Vijayawada, Nellore, Sangam, Sunkesula, and Polampalli are examples of irrigation facilities built during the British raj, that irrigated lacs of acres across coastal districts. Buckingham Canal built during 1806\u20131878, running parallel to the Coramandal coast from Kakinada to Marakkanam in Tamil Nadu served as a major water transportation route for goods till the 1960s. Telegraph service initiated in 1850 served for over 160 years till it was stopped on 15 July 2013 citing poor patronage due to advances in mobile communications and short message service. Charles Philip Brown did pioneering work in transforming Telugu to the print era and introduced Vemana poems to English readers. Kandukuri Veeresalingam is considered the father of the Telugu renaissance movement, as he encouraged the education of women and lower caste people. He fought against Brahmin marriage customs such as child marriage, the bride price system, and the prohibition of widow remarriage.\nTo gain an independent state based on linguistic identity and to protect the interests of the Telugu-speaking people of Madras State, Potti Sreeramulu fasted to death in 1952. The Telugu-speaking area of Andhra State was carved out of Madras state on 1 October 1953, with Kurnool as its capital city. On the basis of the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1956, the States reorganisation act created Andhra Pradesh by merging the neighbouring Telugu-speaking areas of the Hyderabad State with Hyderabad as the capital on 1 November 1956. Hyderabad grew rapidly partly through investments flowing in from agrarian change and 'green revolution' in coastal Andhra.\nIn the unified state, Indian National Congress (INC) enjoyed a monopoly in ruling the state till 1983. After that Telugu Desam Party (TDP) led by N. T. Rama Rao (NTR) came to power and became another major party to rule the state. Nagarjuna Sagar Dam commissioned in 1967, Srisailam hydro electric project commissioned in 1982 are few examples of irrigation and electricity projects. The increased presence of women, Dalits, and tribals in the social and political spheres of the state, driven by social movements, led to a rise in violence against these groups. Securing access to resources like land remains an unachieved objective in the effort to expand their economic opportunities in the state. When the union cabinet decided to consider the formation of Telangana state in 2009 heeding to the demand of relaunched Telangana movement, Samaikyandhra Movement opposing it took shape and the state went through a turmoil. Finally, the Andhra Pradesh reorganisation act bill was passed by the parliament of India for the formation of the Telangana state, despite opposition by the state legislature. The new state of Telangana came into existence on 2 June 2014 after approval from the president of India, with the residual state continuing as Andhra Pradesh.\nTDP formed the first government of the residual state with Chandrababu Naidu as chief minister. In 2017, the government of Andhra Pradesh began operating from its new greenfield capital, Amaravati, for which 33,000 acres were acquired from farmers through an innovative land pooling scheme. In the 2019 elections, Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, leader of the YSR Congress Party, became the chief minister by winning 151 out of 175 seats. He introduced the 'village and ward volunteers' system, and reorganised the state with 26 districts. Introduction of English as the medium of instruction was done in almost all the state schools. The move to three capitals with Amaravati getting reduced to being the legislative capital, Vizag as the executive capital and Kurnool as the judicial capital was stuck down by the High Court. His government appealed to the Supreme Court.\nGeography.\nAndhra Pradesh is the seventh-largest state with an area of . Politically, the state shares borders with Orissa to the northeast, Chhattisgarh to the north, Karnataka to the southwest, Tamil Nadu to the south, Telangana to northwest and the Bay of Bengal to the east. Yanam district, an enclave of Puducherry, is in the state bordering Kakinada district. It has a coastline of around , which makes it the second-longest coastline in the nation.\nThe Eastern Ghats are a major dividing line separating coastal plains and peneplains in the state's geography. These are discontinuous, and individual sections have local names. The ghats become more pronounced towards the south and extreme north of the coast. Some of these consist of the Horsley Hills, the Seshachala Hills, the Nallamala Hills, and the Papi Hills. Arma Konda, located in Visakhapatnam district, is the highest peak in the state. Peneplains, part of Rayalaseema, slope towards the east. The Eastern Coastal Plains comprise the area of coastal districts up to the Eastern ghats as their border along the Bay of Bengal, with variable width. These are, for the most part, delta regions formed by the Krishna, Godavari, and Penna rivers. The state has five different soil types with the majority soil types being red lateritic and black soil types. Most of the coastal plains are put to intensive agricultural use. The Kadapa basin, formed by two arching branches of the Eastern ghats, is a mineral-rich area.\nThe valleys include Araku Valley, which is rich in biodiversity and Gandikota gorge. Gandikota gorge is a canyon formed between the Erramala range of hills, through which the Penna (Pennar) river flows. Borra Caves, created millions of years ago by water activity and the country's second-longest cave system, the Belum Caves are in the state. The state has several beaches in its coastal districts, such as Rushikonda, Mypadu, Suryalanka.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe total forest cover of the state is , amounting to 18.28% of the total area. The Eastern ghats region is home to dense tropical forests, while the vegetation becomes sparse as the ghats give way to the peneplains, where shrub vegetation is more common. The vegetation found in the state is largely of dry deciduous types, with a mixture of teak, and genera of \"Terminalia\", \"Dalbergia\", \"Pterocarpus\", etc. The state possesses some rare and endemic plants like \"Cycas beddomei\", \"Pterocarpus santalinus\", \"Terminalia pallida\", \"Syzygium alternifolium\", \"Shorea tumburgia\" etc.\nThe state has 3 national parks and 13 wildlife sanctuaries as of 2019[ [update]]. The diversity of fauna includes tigers, leopards, cheetals, sambars, sea turtles, and several birds and reptiles. The estuaries of the Godavari and Krishna rivers support rich mangrove forests with fishing cats and otters as keystone species. Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary is an example of mangrove forests and salt-tolerant forest ecosystems near the sea. The area of these forests is , accounting for about 9% of the local forest area of the state. Other sanctuaries include Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve, Kolleru Bird Sanctuary, and Nelapattu Bird Sanctuary. Neem (Azadirachta indica) is the state tree, jasmine is the state flower, rose ringed parakeet is the state bird, and blackbuck is the state mammal.\nMineral resources.\nThe state, with its varied geological formations, contains a variety of industrial minerals and building stones. Major minerals found in significant quantities in the state include beach sand, bauxite, limestone, granite, and diamonds. Minor minerals include barytes, calcite, and mica. The largest reserves of uranium are in Tummalapalli village of YSR district. The state also has reserves of oil and natural gas.\nClimate.\nThe climate varies considerably, depending on the geographical region. Summers last from March to June. In the coastal plain, the summer temperatures are generally higher than in the rest of the state, with temperatures exceeding . The minimum temperature during summer is about in the far southwest. July to September is the season for tropical rains from the southwest monsoon. The winter season is from October to February. Low-pressure systems and tropical cyclones form in the Bay of Bengal along with the northeast monsoon during October to December, bringing rains to the southern and coastal regions of the state. The range of winter temperatures is generally except in the northeast where it could fall below . Lambasingi in Alluri Sitharama Raju district is nicknamed the \"Kashmir of Andhra Pradesh\" as its temperature ranges from . The normal rainfall for the state is .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBased on the 2011 Census of India, the population of Andhra Pradesh is 49,577,103, with a density of . The rural population accounts for 70.53%, while the urban population accounts for 29.47%. The state has 17.08% scheduled caste (SC) and 5.53% scheduled tribe (ST) population. Children in the age group of 0\u20136 years number 5,222,384, constituting 10.6% of the total population. The state has a sex ratio of 997 females per 1000 males, higher than the national average of 926 per 1000. The literacy rate in the state stands at 67.35%. Erstwhile West Godavari district has the highest literacy rate of 74.32%, and erstwhile Vizianagaram district has the lowest with 58.89%.\nHuman Development Index (HDI) of the state for the year 2022 is 0.673. As of 2023[ [update]], there are 39,984,868 voters including 3,924 third-gender voters. Kurnool district has the maximum number of voters at 1,942,233, while Alluri Sitharama Raju district has the minimum at 729,085.\nTelugu is the first official language, and Urdu is the second official language of the state. Telugu is the mother tongue of nearly 90% of the population. Tamil, Kannada, and Odia are spoken in the border areas. Lambadi and several other languages are spoken by the scheduled tribes of the state. 19% of the population aged 12+ years can read and understand English, as per the Indian readership survey for Q4 2019.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2011 census, the major religious groups in the state are Hindus (90.89%), Muslims (7.30%), and Christians (1.38%). Some of the popular Hindu religious pilgrim destinations include Tirumala Venkateswara temple at Tirupati, Mallikarjuna temple at Srisailam, Kanaka Durga Temple at Vijayawada, and Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha temple at Simhachalam. Buddhist sites at Amaravati and Nagarjuna Konda are also popular.\nSub categorisaton.\nFor the state of Andhra Pradesh, there are 59 entries in the SC category, 34 entries in the ST category, and 104 entries in Other Backward Classes (OBC) category. Komati, Brahmin, Kamma, Kapu, Raju, Reddy, and Velama communities constitute the forward castes.\nCulture.\nAndhra Pradesh has 32 museums featuring a varied collection of ancient sculptures, paintings, idols, weapons, cutlery, inscriptions, and religious artefacts. The Amaravathi archaeological museum has a display of art traditions of Amaravathi and images of Buddha. Bapu museum in Vijayawada has historical galleries, stone cut writings, coins, swords, body armour, shields, arms, and ornamentation. \"Telugu Samskruthika Niketanam\" in Visakhapatnam displays historical artefacts of the pre-independence era. The Archaeological Survey of India identified 135 centrally protected monuments in the state of Andhra Pradesh. These include the reconstructed monuments at Anupu and Nagarjunakonda. The state has 17 geographical indication (GI) registrations in the categories of agriculture, handicrafts, foodstuffs, and textiles as per the \"Geographical indications of goods (Registration and protection) act, 1999\".\nClothing.\nThe men's traditional wear consists of \"Panche\", a long, white rectangular piece of non-stitched cloth often bordered in brightly coloured stripes. Women traditionally wear a \"sari\", a garment that consists of a drape varying from in length and in breadth that is typically wrapped around the waist, with one end draped over the shoulder, baring the midriff, as according to Indian philosophy, the navel is considered as the source of life and creativity. Women wear colourful silk saris on special occasions such as marriages. The traditional wear of young girls is a half-saree with blouse. The shift to wearing western clothing of pant and shirt has become common for boys and men, while women also wear \"salwar kameez\" in addition to saris. Dharmavaram textiles, Machilipatnam, and Srikalahasti Kalamkari handicrafts are few examples in clothes category with GI status.\nCuisine.\nAndhra meals are combinations of spicy, tangy, and sweet flavours. The use of chillies, tamarind, and \"gongura\" (leaves of roselle) is common in Andhra food. Curry leaves are used copiously in most preparations of curries and chutneys. Various types of \"Pappu\" are made using lentils in combination with tomatoes, spinach, gongura, ridge gourd, etc. Apart from curries, \"pulusu\", a stew made using tamarind juice in combination with vegetables, seafood, chicken, mutton, etc., is popular. \"Pachchadi\", a paste usually made with a combination of groundnuts, fried vegetables, and chillies, is a must in a meal. Pickles made using mangoes, gooseberries, lemons, etc. are enjoyed in combination with \"Pappu\". Buttermilk and yoghurt mixed with rice eaten towards the end of the meal soothe the body, especially after eating spicy food items earlier.\nA tamarind-rich dish popularly known as \"Pulihora\" is made with a thick sauce of tamarind, chillies, salt and asafoetida. It is tempered with mustard, curry leaves, peanuts and mixed with rice. It is offered even to the gods and then served as a \"prasadam\" (divine offering) in the temples to the devotees. Popular vegetarian curries include \"Dondakaya koora\" (ivy gourd cooked with coconut and green chilli) and \"Guttivankaya koora\"(stuffed brinjal curry). \"Thalakaya koora\" (lamb head gravy), \"Royyala koora\" (prawns cooked in tamarind), and \"Natukodi koora\" (freehold chicken curry with chillies) are popular non-vegetarian dishes across Guntur and surrounding regions. \"Yeta mamsam kobbari\" biryani (mutton cooked with coconut), \"Seema kodi\" (Rayalaseema-style chicken), \"Chennuru dum biryani\", and \"Gongura mamsam\" (mutton cooked in sorrel gravy) are popular non-vegetarian dishes in Rayalaseema. Among fish preparations, \"Pulasa pulusu\", thick aromatic and tangy gravy made from a single fish of the Godavari Pulasa variety is most desired in Konaseema. \"Ariselu\", \"Burelu\", \"Laddu\", and \"Pootharekulu\" are some of the sweets made for special festivals and occasions. \"Pootharekulu\", a preparation of sugar and rice flour and \"Taandri\", a mango-flavoured sun-dried fruit jelly are popular sweets originating from Athreyapuram in Konaseema. Kakinada \"Khaaja\" layered flour deep fried and dipped in sugar is another popular sweetmeat. \"Bandar laddu\", \"Tirupati Laddu\" are some of the food products with GI status.\nLiterature.\nNannayya, Tikkana, and Yerrapragada form the trinity who translated the Sanskrit epic \"Mahabharata\" into Telugu during 11\u201314 centuries. Nannayya wrote the first treatise on Telugu grammar, called \"Andhra Shabda Chintamani\" in Sanskrit. Pothana translated \"Bhagavatam\" into Telugu. Vemana was an Indian philosopher who wrote Telugu poems using simple language and native idioms on a variety of subjects including yoga, wisdom, and morality. Potuluri Veerabrahmendhra swami, a clairvoyant and social reformer of 17th century, wrote Kalagnanam, a book of predictions.\nTelugu literature after Kandukuri Veeresalingam is termed \"Adhunika Telugu Sahityam\" (modern Telugu literature). He was the author of the first Telugu social novel \"Rajasekhara Charitram\", published in 1880. The use of colloquial idiom rather than \"grandhik\" (classical) in literature, championed by Gurajada Apparao and Gidugu Ramamurthy Panthulu led to increased literacy. Various forms of literature such as poetry, novel, short story were vibrant as indicated by the responses to national and international developments in various spheres of human life. The modern Telugu poetry, which began around 1900 developed into three forms \u2013 \"Bhava kavitvam\" (lyrical poetry), \"Abhyudaya kavitvam\" (progressive poetry), and new experimental poetry, including \"Viplava kavitvam\" (revolutionary poetry). Gurajada Apparao, Rayaprolu Subbarao, Gurram Jashuva, Viswanatha Satyanarayana, Devulapalli Krishnasastri, and Sri Sri were some of the modern Telugu poets. Palagummi Padmaraju's short story \"Galivaana\" won second prize in World Short Story competition in 1952. Rachakonda Viswanadha Sastry initiated a new trend by focussing on the downtrodden in his novel Raju-Mahishi. Women writers such as Malati Chandur and Ranganayakamma dominated novels in the 1950s and 1960s. However, in the late 1970s, Yandamuri Veerendranath started writing popular novels with a focus on sex, suspense and violence, which were serialised in magazines. Viswanatha Satyanarayana was conferred the first Jnanpith Award for Telugu literature in 1970. Telugu film song as literature took shape in the 1930s. Some of the famous lyric writers include Samudrala Senior, Arudra, Athreya, Daasarathi, and C. Narayana Reddy.\nArchitecture.\nTraditional temple architecture is influenced by Dravidian and Vijayanagara styles. In Dravidian architecture for which Tirumala temple is an example, the temples consisted of porches or \"mantapas\" preceding the door leading to the sanctum, gate-pyramids or \"gopurams\" in quadrangular enclosures that surround the temple, and \"pillared halls\" used for many purposes. Besides these, the temple usually has a tank called the \"Kalyani\" or \"pushkarni\". The gopuram is a monumental tower, usually ornate at the entrance of the temple forms a prominent feature. They are topped by the \"kalasam\", a bulbous stone finial. \"Vimanam\" are similar structures built over the \"garbhagriha\" or inner sanctum of the temple but are usually smaller than the gopurams. In the Vijayanagar style for which Lepakshi Veerabhadra temple is an example, the main temple is laid out in three parts, these are: The assembly hall known as the \"mukha\" mantapa; \"arda\" mantapa or \"antarala\" (ante chamber); and the \"garbhagriha\" or the sanctum sanctorum. Sri Venkateswara institute of traditional sculpture and architecture, run by Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams offers diploma courses. Civic architecture which mainly featured courtyard structure to support joint family system and simple round houses is giving way to modern apartments.\nArts.\nKondapalli Toys, the soft limestone idol carvings of Durgi and Etikoppaka lacquered wooden toys are few handicrafts with GI status. Kuchipudi, the cultural dance recognised as the official dance form of the state of Andhra Pradesh, originated in the village of Kuchipudi in Krishna district. Several renowned composers of Carnatic music like Annamacharya, Kshetrayya, Tyagaraja, and Bhadrachala Ramadas hailed from the state. \"Sannai\" and \"Dolu\" are common musical instruments of marriages, household, and temple functions in the state. \"Harikathaa Kalakshepam (or Harikatha)\" involves the narration of a story, intermingled with various songs relating to the story. \"Burra katha\" is an oral storytelling technique in which the topic is either a Hindu mythological story or a contemporary social issue. \"Drama\" is an Indian theatre art form that is still popular. Gurajada Apparao wrote the play Kanyasulkam in spoken dialect for the first time. It was first presented in 1892. It is considered the greatest play in the Telugu language.\nThe Telugu film industry (known as \"Tollywood\") is primarily based in Hyderabad, though several films are shot in Vizag, Tirupati, Rajamahendravaram. About 300 films are produced annually, C. Pullaiah is cited as the father of the Telugu cinema. Film producer D. Ramanaidu holds a Guinness record for the most films produced by a person. Music composers and playback singers of the state include Ghantasala, S. P. Balasubrahmanyam, P. Susheela, S. Janaki, and P. B. Sreenivas. \"Naatu Naatu\" from the film \"RRR\" became the first song from an Asian film to win the Academy Award for Best Original Song in 2023. Efforts are on to make Vizag as the hub of film industry by offering incentives.\nFestivals.\n\"Sankranti\" is the major harvest festival celebrated across the state. It is celebrated for four days in the second week of January. The first day of the Telugu new year \"Ugadi\" which occurs during March/April is also a special festival with the preparation and sharing of pickles (\"pachhadi\") made from raw mangoes, neem flowers, pepper powder, jaggery and tamarind. Tasting this pickle which is a mix of different tastes teaches the importance of taking positive/negative life experiences in one's stride. Celebrations end with the recitation of the coming year's astrological predictions called \"Panchanga sravanam\". Vijaya Dasami known commonly as Dussera and Deepavali, the festival of lights are other major Hindu festivals. Shivaratri is celebrated at Kotappakonda, with people from nearby villages preparing 80\u2013100\u00a0ft height frames called \"prabhalu\" and taking it in a procession to the shine. Eid is celebrated with special prayers. \"Rottela Panduga\" is celebrated at Bara Shaheed Dargah in Nellore with participation across religious lines. Christians celebrate their religious festivals Good Friday, Easter and Christmas with processions and prayers.\nGovernment and administration.\nThere are a total of 175 assembly constituencies in the state legislative assembly. The legislative council is the upper house with 58 members. In the Indian parliament, the state has 25 seats in the \"Lok Sabha\" and 11 seats in the \"Rajya Sabha\". In accordance with the Constitution of India, the governor is a state's \"de jure\" head and appoints the chief minister who has the \"de facto\" executive authority.\nReddy, Kamma and Kapu communities cornered a share of 66% of seats in the 2019 election results. In the 2024 assembly elections, Reddy, Kamma and Kapu communities among the forward classes got more allocation than OBC in the unreserved category by major political parties or alliances. TDP-led National Democratic Alliance with Janasena Party and Bharatiya Janata Party emerged victorious defeating the incumbent YSRCP led by Jagan Mohan Reddy. It won 164 seats, while YSRCP got 11, a big drop from 151 it held. N. Chandrababu Naidu became the chief minister of the state for the fourth time. According to an opinion by Ayesha Minhaz in The Hindu daily, several factors including the prevailing anti-incumbency against the previous government and the alliance's promise of \"Welfare with wealth generation\" contributed to the success of TDP-led alliance.\nAndhra Pradesh police are structured in district, subdivision, circle, and police station hierarchy. In 2022, crimes against women and children saw a rise of 43.66% with a case count of 25,503 cases in Andhra Pradesh as per the National crime records bureau (NCRB) data. The state stood fifth in the country with 2,341 cybercrime cases. Andhra Pradesh High Court at Amaravati is headed by Chief justice with 37 judges. District judiciary is organised in a three-tier system with district courts at the top, civil (senior) and assistant sessions courts in the middle and civil (junior) and judicial first-class magistrate courts at the lower level. Apart from these, there are special courts such as family, CBI, ACB, Land reforms appellate tribunals, and industrial tribunals.\nAndhra Pradesh comprises two regions, namely Coastal Andhra and Rayalaseema from a historical perspective. The northern part of Coastal Andhra is sometimes mentioned separately as North Andhra, to raise voice against underdevelopment. The state is further divided into 26 districts. These districts are made up of 76 revenue divisions, 679 mandals and 13,324 village panchayats as part of the administrative organisation.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAndhra Pradesh is divided into 26 districts for administrative purposes. These districts are further grouped into 77 revenue divisions and subdivided into 685 mandals. Each district is administered by a District Collector, who oversees land revenue administration, law and order, elections, and developmental activities. Revenue divisions are headed by Revenue Divisional Officers (RDOs), who may be Sub-Collectors (IAS officers) or Deputy Collectors. Mandals, the key sub-district units, consist of multiple villages and are managed by Mandal Revenue Officers (MROs), serving as the primary link between the district administration and village-level governance.\nLocal government.\nLocal government in Andhra Pradesh functions through a three-tier Panchayati Raj system in rural areas and urban local bodies in towns and cities. Rural governance includes Gram Panchayats, Mandal Parishads, and Zilla Parishads, while urban areas are managed by Nagar Panchayats, Municipalities and Municipal Corporations. These bodies are responsible for local administration, development works, and delivery of basic services.\nThere are 17 municipal corporations, 77 municipalities, and 29 Nagar Panchayats for urban governance in Andhra Pradesh. Rural governance is managed by 13,234 Gram Panchayats at the village level, 676 Mandal Parishads at the mandal level, and 26 Zilla Parishads at the district level. Each of these bodies has elected councils and members.\nCities and towns.\nThere are 123 urban local bodies, comprising 17 municipal corporations, 79 municipalities, and 27 nagar panchayats, in the state. The urban population is 14.9 million (1.49 crores) as per the 2011 census. There are two cities with more than one million inhabitants, namely Visakhapatnam and Vijayawada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGovernment revenue and expenditure.\nFor 2021\u201322, total receipts of the Andhra Pradesh government were (), inclusive of () of loans. States' tax revenue was (). The top three sources of tax revenue are statedcrores goods and services tax (GST) (\u20b923,809 crore), sales tax/value added tax (VAT) (\u20b920,808 crores), and state excise (\u20b914,703 crores). The government earned a revenue of \u20b97,345 crore from 2.574 million transactions for registration services. Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada, Guntur, and Tirupati are the top contributors to the revenue.\nThe government's total expenditure was \u20b91,91,594 crore, which includes debt repayment of \u20b913,920 crore. The fiscal deficit was 2.1% of the GSDP. Outstanding debt was \u20b93.89 lakh crore, an increase of almost \u20b940,000 crore compared to the previous year. This accounts for 32.4 per cent of the GSDP, which is more than the usual limit of 25% as per the Fiscal Responsibility Budget Management Actthe and Budget Management ActActstated crores. The outstanding guarantee estimate was \u20b91,38,875 crore, of which power sector accounts for \u20b938,473 crore equal to 12% of GDP. Out of the audited total expenditure of \u20b91,77,674 crore of the state in 2021\u201322, social services accounted for 42.65% and capital expenditure 9.21%. When compared to 2020\u201321, the capital expenditure decreased by 14 per cent. Of the total expenditure, major components of the social services breakdown are as follows. The social welfare category accounted for 16%, education, sport, arts and culture had a share of 15% and health and family welfare had a share of 6.3%. Comptroller and Auditor general in its 2023 report warned that the trend of increasing levels of revenue expenditure coupled with a low level of capital spend will adversely impact infrastructure development, development, aggregate demand, employment generation, and revenue generation in the long run.\nEconomy.\nGross state domestic product (GSDP/GDP) at current prices for the year 2022\u201323 is estimated at () (advanced estimates). The share of agriculture's contribution to the GSDP is at 36.19%, while industry is at 23.36%, and services are at 40.45%. The state posted a record growth of 7.02% at constant prices (2011\u201312) against the country's growth of 7%. GDP per capita is estimated at . The sectoral growth rates at constant 2011\u201312 prices were for agriculture at 4.54%; industry at 5.66 and services at 10.05%. Poverty rate is reduced to 4.2% in 2023 from 11.77% in 2015\u201316 as per \"Niti Ayog\" report. The methodology, based on the global multidimensional poverty index uses 10 indicators, covering three areas health, education, and standard of living and additionally maternal health and bank accounts. Unemployment rate of people with graduation in Andhra Pradesh is estimated at 24% as per periodic labour force survey of July 2022 to June 2023, the third highest in the country. The number for the whole of India is at 13.4%.\nAccording to the \"Economic Survey of India 2024\u201325\", Andhra Pradesh was identified as the \"leading performer\" in the agriculture and allied sectors (excluding forestry and logging), recording a Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 8.80%. It was followed by Madhya Pradesh with 6.30% and Tamil Nadu with 4.80%. Andhra Pradesh also ranked 10th in Gross State Value Added (GSVA) in the services sector.\nAgriculture.\nThe agricultural economy comprises agriculture, livestock, poultry farming, and fisheries. Four important rivers in India, the Godavari, Krishna, Penna, and Tungabhadra, flow through the state and provide irrigation. The population engaged in agriculture and related activities as per 2020\u201321 fiscal data is 62.17%. Rice is the state's major food crop and staple food. Besides rice, farmers grow jowar, bajra, maize, many varieties of pulses, sugarcane, cotton, tobacco, fruits, and vegetables. The state contributed to 30% of fish production of India and it had a share of 35% in total sea food exports of India in 2022\u201323. The state has three agricultural export zones: the undivided Chittoor district for mango pulp and vegetables, the undivided Krishna district for mangoes, and the undivided Guntur district for chillies. Banaganapalle mangoes produced in the state were accorded GI status in 2017.\n\"Rythu Seva Kendras\" (RSK) or farmer facilitation centres are initiated by the government in 2020 to serve as a hassle-free, one-stop solution for the requirements of farmers from seed-to-sale. Banking services through banking correspondent are also integrated. As of 2023,[ [update]] 10,778 RSKs are functioning. AP land titling act 2023 was brought in to change from presumptive land ownership system based on possession, registration or inheritance documents to conclusive land ownership system, with government standing as surety for the ownership. Lands in 6000 villages were surveyed with drones and land title certificates were issued to owners, with georeferencing of their land parcels. The benefits of the act include a reduction in land disputes and easier acquisition of lands for public requirements. The newly formed TDP led NDA alliance government decided to repeal the act citing the scope for misuse of authority and deviation from the centre's draft bill.\nThe Commission on Inclusive and Sustainable Agricultural Development of Andhra Pradesh, chaired by Prof. R. Radhakrishna, estimated the number of tenant farmers at 24.25 lakh in 2014. This consists of 6.29 lakh landless tenants and the rest owning some land. Out of 60.73 lakh hectares under cultivation, 27.15 lakh hectares or 44% was cultivated by tenants. Departmental estimates for 2021 put the number of tenant farmers at about 16 lakh. To identify and serve the needs of tenants, the Crop Cultivator Rights Act (CCRA) of 2019 was brought out. Only 26% of tenants obtained the CCRA or loan eligibility cards as per 2022 data.\nIndustries.\nAs per the annual survey of industries 2019\u201320, the number of factories was 12,582 with 681,224 employees. The top four employment providers are food products (25.48%), non-metallic minerals (11.26%), textiles (9.35%), and pharmaceuticals (8.68%). Gross value added (GVA) contributed by the industrial sector is (), of which food products (18.95%), pharmaceuticals (17.01%), and non-metallic minerals (16.25%) are the top three contributors. From a district perspective, the top three districts were Visakhapatnam, Tirupati and undivided Krishna.\nAndhra Pradesh hosts over 50 notified SEZs, spanning sectors like IT/ITES, pharmaceuticals, multi-product, biotechnology, and textiles, with a focus on export-oriented growth. Key operational examples include: Visakhapatnam Special Economic Zone, Sri City, Andhra Pradesh Special Economic Zone and several others. \nThe defence administered Hindustan Shipyard Limited built the first ship in India in 1948. The state has 36 big auto players, such as Ashok Leyland, Hero Motors, Isuzu Motors India, and Kia Motors, The mining sector contributed () in revenue to the state during 2021\u201322. Nearly 225 million barrels of crude oil was produced from Ravva block, in the shallow offshore area of the Krishna Godavari basin during 1994\u20132011. The state accounted for 0.6% of had and codensate production, and 2.9% of natural gas production of India in 2020\u201321.\nAs of 2023,[ [update]] there are 190 science and technology organisations in Andhra Pradesh, including 12 central labs and research institutions. Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC), known as Sriharikota range (SHAR), on the barrier island of Sriharikota in Tirupati district, is the primary satellite launching station operated by the Indian Space Research Organisation.\nServices.\nTrade, hotels &amp; restaurants registered the highest growth rate of 16.64%, while public administration, the lowest growth rate of 4.24% for the year 2022\u201323 at constant 2011\u201312 prices among the services category. The state is ranked third in domestic tourist footfalls for the year 2021, with 93.2 million domestic tourists, which amounts to 13.8% of all domestic tourists in India. A major share of the tourists visit temples in Tirupati, Vijayawada, and Srisailam. The value of information technology exports from the state in 2021\u201322 was (), which is 0.14% of the IT exports from India. Exports have remained below 0.2% in the past five years.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nAs of 2023,[ [update]] the state has a total major road network of . This comprises of national highways, of state highways, and of major district roads. In the category of national highways, NH 16, with a highway network of around in the state, is a part of the Golden Quadrilateral project. Vehicles on the register consist of 1.828 million transport vehicles and 13.7 million non-transport vehicles. In the transport category, goods carriages constitute 53.61%, auto rickshaws 36.21%, and stage carriages 1.14% constitute the top 3 categories. In the non-transport category, motorcycles constitute 89.5%, four-wheelers 7.29%, and cabs 5.96% occupy the top 3 ranks. The state government-owned Andhra Pradesh state road transport organisation is the public bus transport provider. It is split into 129 depots across four zones. It has a fleet strength of 11,098 buses and a staff count of 49,544. It operates 1.11 billion kilometres and serves 3.68 million passengers daily as per the socio-economic survey of 2023. As of 2023,[ [update]]\nRailways.\nRenigunta was the first among major stations to appear on the railway map of Andhra Pradesh when Madras railway connected it to Madras in 1862. Rajahmundry-Vijag and Viajayawad-Kovvur sections were opened in 1893. Vijayawada-Madras section was started in 1899. It was extended to Howrah in 1900. As of 2022,[ [update]] The state has a total broad-gauge railway route of with rail density at 24.36\u00a0km per 1000\u00a0square kilometres. The railway network in Andhra Pradesh is under the South Central railway, East Coast railway, and South Western railway zones. During 2014\u20132022, 350\u00a0km of new lines were constructed at a rate of 44\u00a0km per year in Andhra Pradesh under the South Central railway division. The rate of construction was only 2\u00a0km per year in the preceding five years. The Nadikudi\u2013Srikalahasti line of 308.70\u00a0km sanctioned at a budget of () in 2011\u201312 as a joint project of the centre and state is progressing slowly, with only phase one of 46\u00a0km between New Piduguralla station and Savalyapuram completed in 2021\u201322. There are three A1 and 23 A-category railway stations in the state, as per the assessment in 2017. Visakhapatnam was declared the cleanest railway station in the country, as per the assessment in 2018. The railway station in Shimiliguda is the second broad gauge railway station at high altitude in the country next to Qazigund in Jammu and Kashmir. A new railway zone South Coast railway (SCoR), with headquarters in Visakhapatnam, was announced in 2019, but is yet to be implemented.\nAirports.\nTirupati Airport was established in 1976. Visakhapatnam became a part of civil aviation in 1981. Daily flights to Vijayawada were started in 2003. Apart from these three which are international airports, the state has three domestic airports, namely Rajahmundry, Kadapa, and Kurnool. A privately owned airport for emergency flights and chartered flights is at Puttaparthi. Bhogapuram international airport is being constructed with a budget of \u20b94,750 crore on an area of 2,300 acres near Visakhapatnam. It is expected to be completed by 2025. Andhra Pradesh saw a 60% increase in domestic air passenger traffic, with 24.74 lakh visitors at its five airports during the 2021\u201322 fiscal year (up to January 2022), compared to 15.48 lakh in the same period the previous fiscal year.\nSea ports.\nThe state has one major port at Visakhapatnam under the administrative control of the central government and 15 notified ports, including three captive ports, under the control of the state government. Visakhapatnam port was the earliest port to be commissioned in 1933. Gangavaram port is a deep seaport that can accommodate ocean liners up to 200,000\u2013250,000 DWT. Cargo of 189.21 million tonnes was handled by Gangavaram, Kakinada deepwater, Krishnapatnam, Ravva, Kakinada anchorage, and Visakhapatnam during 2023\u201334, with a growth of 7.9% over the previous year. New sea ports are under construction at Ramayapatnam, Machilipatnam, Mulapeta, and Kakinada.\nCommunication.\nAs per socio-economic survey released in January 2023, Andhra Pradesh has post offices. Bharat sanchar nigam limited (BSNL) operates telephone exchanges with 20.6 million landline connections and also has 5.4 million wireless subscribers. Airtel, Jio, Vodaphone Idea, and BSNL provide mobile services in the state. As of 2023,[ [update]] the number of mobile phone users reached 82 million, while the number of internet subscribers reached 67.1 million in Andhra Pradesh. Mobile network services are available in 15,322 out of 17,328 villages. 5G network connectivity is provided by 16,714 base transfer stations. Several providers including state government owned Andhra Pradesh state fibre net limited operate wireline services supporting internet connectivity, telephony, and Internet Protocol television.&lt;ref name=\"trai-54/2024\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The AP statewide area network connects 2,164 offices of state administration at 668 locations down to the level of mandal headquarters. The network supports both data and video communications. BSNL and the National Knowledge Network multi-purposeCricket link district headquarters with state headquarters with a bandwidth of 34 Mbit/s. Mandal headquarters are connected with a bandwidth of 8 Mbit/s.\nWater.\nThe state has 40 major and medium rivers and 40,000 minor irrigation sources. Godavari, Krishna, and Penna are major rivers. The total cultivable area is 19.904 million acres. Major, medium, and minor irrigation projects irrigate 10.172 million acres or 51.1% as of 2015[ [update]]. Several water projects in the state are facing issues. The Polavaram Project is a multi purpose terminal reservoir project located 42\u00a0km upstream of Davaleswaram barrage. It is a national project as per the AP Reorganisation Act of 2014. It has a reservoir capacity of 194.6 TMC and is expected to utilise 322.73 TMC of water in a year. The under-construction project suffered setbacks with damage to its diaphragm wall during the 2022 floods. The Veligonda Project, taken up to serve needs of Prakasam, Nellore, and Madala districts is progressing slowly. The Annamayya project, washed away in the 2021 floods, is set to be redesigned for 787 crores. Following the bifurcation, disputes with Telangana regarding the allocation of Krishna and Godavari waters continue to dog the state.\nPower.\nThermal, hydel and renewable power plants supply power to the state. The installed capacity share of the state in the public sector generating stations was 7,245 MW. The private sector installed capacity was 9,370 MW, which includes an independent power producer capacity of 1,961 MW. The total installed capacity was 16,615 MW. Peak power demand for the state in 2021\u201322 was 12,032 MW and per capita consumption was 1,285 kilowatt hours. The energy consumed was 68,972 million units. Energy consumption increased from 54,555 MU in 2018\u201319 to 69,113 MU in 2023\u201324, at a growth rate of 4.8% which is among the lowest in the country. The per capita electricity consumption of AP. Increased by only 123 kWh in the same period when there was an increase of 146 kWh at the national level. The reasons were because of steep tariff increases and re-imposing power cuts as there was a delay in commissioning of the Polavaram hydro-electric power project (960 MW), Sri Damodaram Sanjeevaiah thermal power station (Krishnapatnam) stage-II unit-3 (800 MW) and Dr. Narla Tata Rao thermal power station stage-V unit-8 (800 MW) stations.\nHealthcare.\nThe health infrastructure consists of 13 district hospitals, 28 sub-district hospitals, and urban and rural health centres as of 2019\u201320. Doorstep healthcare support services are provided through Accredited social health activist(ASHA) workers as of July 2019. The 108 service provides fast emergency management services by shifting patients to a nearby healthcare facility. The 104 service provides health care services at the doorstep of villages through mobile medical units that visit at least once a month. All the poor families are covered by the free state health insurance scheme up to a limit of . The scheme serves 42.5 million people. The services are provided in government and private hospitals under the network. During 2014\u20132018, though the nominal mean claim amount of beneficiaries went up significantly, it decreased after accounting for inflation. Mortality rates have significantly decreased, which indicates better outcomes are being achieved at a lower cost. Out of 2,700 private hospitals registered under the state health insurance scheme, 540 (20%) are speciality hospitals. The number of patients treated under the state health insurance scheme increased from 1.2 million in 2022\u201323 to 1.39 million in 2023\u201324. whereas the budget remained constant at \u20b93,350 crore. The National family health survey-5 conducted in 2019\u201321 data provided an insight into the economic and health status of households. Housing, electricity, clean fuel, access to toilets, mobile phone usage, and bank account access were available for more than 85% of households. Piped water facilities were available for only 22% of households. The state health insurance scheme, the employee health scheme, the \"Rashtriya swasthya bima yojana\", the Employees' state insurance scheme, and the Central government health scheme covered 70% of households with at least one member covered.\nBanking.\nAs of 2023,[ [update]] there are 33 private sector banks, 12 public sector banks, three rural banks, three small finance banks, three payment banks, one cooperative bank, and one state financial corporation operating in the state. The total number of branches is 7,881. As of \u00a02022,[ [update]] Banks have deposits amounting to () and extended credit amounting to (), with credit deposit ratio of 144% against Reserve Bank of India norm of 60%. Primary sector advances amounted to 60.13% of total bank credit. Till March 2011, the microfinance industry flourished in united Andhra Pradesh with a share of 65% of pan India gross loans. Due to state regulation enacted in 2010, the loan portfolio shrank to 0.8% in Andhra Pradesh as of 31 March 2023. With the court deciding against state regulation, the industry is likely to pick up again.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary school education is imparted by government and private schools, regulated by the school education department of the state. The government decided to stop financial aid to aided schools with history dating to 1870s, forcing them to handover the schools with the aided staff to government or become private in 2021. As per Unified district information system for education plus (UDISE+) report of 2021\u201322, there were a total of students enrolled in schools. Performance of rural students on reading, arithmetic skills in grades 1\u20138 declined during 2018\u20132022 partly attributed to Covid outbreak. As an example, for the reading assessment in Class VIII students, it nosedived 67% in 2022 from over 78% in 2018. However, the student enrolment at government schools improved from 63.2% to 71%. In the March 2024 secondary school certificate (SSC) exam 616,615 students appeared in the regular stream. Parvathipuram-Manyam district achieved the highest pass percentage of 96.37 among districts. The overall pass percentage was 86.69%, an increase of 14.43% over the previous year, with 100% in 2,803 schools. \nIn intermediate (higher secondary) examinations held in March 2024, 393,757 students appeared. The pass percentage was 78%, which is an increase of 7% over the previous year.\nThe state initiated education reforms in 2020 by creating six types of schools: satellite foundation schools (pre-primary), foundational schools (pre-primary \u2013 class II), foundational school plus (pre-primary \u2013 class V), pre-high school (class III \u2013 class VII/VIII), high school (class III \u2013 class X), and high school plus (class III \u2013 class XII). The transition to English-medium education in all government schools was started in the academic year 2020\u20132021. It is expected to reach completion by 2024\u201325. Affiliation of 1,000 government schools to the Central Board of Secondary Education in 2022\u201323 was done as an initial step. The state government went ahead with the English medium based on the parents survey despite protests and court cases. The state initiative is being funded in part by a loan from the World Bank to the tune of $250 million over 2021\u20132026 through the \"Supporting Andhra's learning transformation\" project to improve the learning outcomes of children up to class II level.\nAs of 2023,[ [update]] there are 169 government-aided degree colleges and 55 private-aided degree colleges in the state. National assessment and accreditation council grades were awarded to 66 government colleges and 48 private-aided colleges. There are 85 government-aided and 175 private polytechnic colleges with a sanctioned strength of 75,906 students. In the category of technical education, there are 685 institutions offering diploma, undergraduate, and postgraduate Visakhapatnamthe courses, with an intake of 299,608. The AP state council of higher education organises various entrance tests for different streams and conducts counselling for admissions. The AP state skill development corporation is set up to support skill development and placement for the educated. As of 2021,[ [update]] there are a total of 36 universities: three central universities, 23 state public universities, six state private universities, and four deemed universities. Andhra University is the oldest of the universities in the state, established in 1926. The government established Rajiv Gandhi university of knowledge technologies in 2008 to cater to the education needs of the rural youth of the state. NTR University of health sciences oversees medical education in 348 affiliated colleges spanning the entire range from traditional medicine to modern medicine. The public universities, including the legacy universities such as Andhra, Sri Venkateswara, and Nagarjuna, are suffering from a severe fund crunch and staff shortage, managing with only 20% of sanctioned full-time staff. KL University bagged the 50th rank, while Andhra university bagged the 76th rank in the overall category of India rankings for 2023 as per the national institute ranking framework of the union ministry of education in which 2,478 institutions, including 242 institutions from the state, participated. The gross enrolment ratio (GER) in higher education for the age group 18\u201323 for the state was at 35.2% for the year 2019\u201320, which comparing favourably with the GER for all of India at 27.1%. With a female GER of 35.3 and a male GER of 38.2, the Gender Parity Index was 0.84. The corresponding ratio for India was 1.01.\nThere were 510 industrial training institutes (ITI) in 2020\u201321 in Andhra Pradesh, with 82 under government management and 417 under private management. The total available seats in 2021 were 93,280, out of which 48.90% were filled. In 2020, 10,053 students completed ITI. The state has 2,510 public libraries, including four regional libraries and 13 district central libraries under government management. Saraswata Niketanam at Vetapalem in Bapatla district, one of the oldest libraries established under private management in 1918, is losing its attraction as the Internet spreads. The government is planning to develop digital libraries at the village panchayat level.\nMedia.\nThe total number of registered newspapers and periodicals in the state for the years 2020\u201321 was 5,798. There were 1,645 dailies, 817 weeklies, 2,431 monthlies, and 623 fortnightlies. Telugu dailies number 787 with a circulation of 9,911,005, while English dailies account for 103 with a circulation of 1,646,453. \"Eenadu\", \"Sakshi\", and \"Andhra Jyothi\" are the top three Telugu daily newspapers in terms of circulation in India and are also the top three Telugu news sites. BBC Telugu news was launched on 2 October 2017. Several privately owned news media outlets are considered biased towards specific political parties in the state.\nThere were 23 news channels, 10 general entertainment channels, two health channels, six religious channels, two other channels, and two cable distribution channels, for a total of 45 channels empanelled by the Andhra Pradesh information and public relations department. As of 2019,[ [update]] Akashvani previously known as All India Radio, operates 3 MW, 17 FM transmitters from 14 locations in the state. It reaches 99% of the area and 99.5% of the population. Akashvani's FM coverage alone reaches 36% of the area and 45% of the population. Five private operators run 13 FM stations, with Red FM operating from five locations.\nSports.\nTraditional games played during childhood include \"Dagudu Mootalu\" (Hide and seek), \"Tokkudu Billa\", \"Yedu Penkulata\", \"Vamanaguntalu\", \"Chadarangam\" (Chess), \"Puli Joodam\", \"Ashta Chamma\", \"Vaikuntapali\" (Snakes and ladders), \"Nalugu Stambalata\", and \"Nalugu ralla aata\". \"Karra samu\" (stick fight) is a traditional martial art form of the state. It is a form of self-defence to prevent thefts and robbery in villages. It is a discipline in the national sports, though it is not recognised for the sports quota category of reservations in Andhra Pradesh.\nSports Authority of Andhra Pradesh is the governing body that looks after the infrastructure development, coaching, and administration of sports promotion schemes. Sports authority of India (SAI) operates three SAI Training centres in Andhra Pradesh as of 2022[ [update]]. Dr. YSR Sports School, Putlampalli, Kadapa district was selected for upgradation as \"Khelo\" India centre of excellence in 2021. Andhra Cricket Visakhapatnam District Association cricket Association (ACA-VDCA) stadium in Visakhapatnam is known for hosting international cricket matches.\nPullela Gopichand is a former Indian badminton player. He won the All England Open Badminton Championships in 2001, becoming the second Indian to win after Prakash Padukone. P. V. Sindhu is one of India's most successful athletes, having won medals in major tournaments like the Olympics and the BWF circuit, including a gold at the 2019 World Championships. She is the first Indian to become a badminton world champion and only the second to win two consecutive Olympic medals. Karnam Malleswari is the first female Indian to win an Olympic medal. She won bronze medal in 69\u00a0kg weightlifting event at 2000 Olympics games. Srikanth Kidambi, a badminton player, is the first Indian to reach the world championships final in 2021 in the men's singles and win a silver medal. The state secured 16 medals at the 36th national games held in 2022. It was ranked 21st in the competition. The state sportpersons won 11 medals in Tennis, Archery, Badminton, Athletics, Chess and Cricket disciplines in the 19th Asian games held in China in 2022. The state was ranked at 13th spot in the sixth edition of Khelo India youth games-2023, by winning 27 medals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2379", "revid": "153314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2379", "title": "Asymmetrical relationship", "text": ""}
{"id": "2380", "revid": "734812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2380", "title": "Accelerated Graphics Port", "text": "Expansion bus standard\nAccelerated Graphics Port (AGP) is an obsolete parallel expansion card standard, designed by Intel independently of the PCI-SIG for attaching a video card to a computer system to assist in the acceleration of 3D computer graphics. It was originally designed as a generally compatible successor to PCI-type connections for video cards. The AGP bus was separate from the PCI bus, so that the graphics card as the top consumer of bandwidth in a computer system would not have to compete for bandwidth with other devices, while the overall throughput of the system was greatly increased by the addition of another data bus. The separation also allowed for improvements that broke compatibility with the myriad of existing PCI cards and AGP was not required to be a lowest common denominator standard. The introduction of more efficient queued transactions on top of PCI made it possible for the graphics card to use system memory directly in many circumstances where regular PCI cards required local copies of the data. Since 2004, AGP and PCI were progressively phased out in favor of PCI Express (PCIe). By mid-2008, PCI Express cards dominated the market and only a few AGP models were available, with GPU manufacturers and add-in board partners eventually dropping support for the interface relatively quickly in favor of PCI Express. The analogue of AGP in ISA bus systems was the VESA Local Bus.\nAdvantages over PCI.\nAGP is a superset of the PCI standard, designed to overcome PCI's limitations in serving the requirements of the era's high-performance graphics cards.\nThe primary advantage of AGP is that it doesn't share the PCI bus, providing a dedicated, point-to-point pathway between the expansion slot(s) and the motherboard chipset. The direct connection also allows backward-incompatible changes such as a lower signal voltage, which in turn allows a higher clock speed.\nThe second major change is the use of split transactions, wherein the address and data phases (request and response phases) are separated. More than one transaction can be in-flight. This allows READ transactions to perform equally well to WRITE transactions, which is hard to achieve with just strictly serial transaction processing where the bus must remain idle (in a wait state) while waiting for the read data access to finish (on the other hand, with or without queues, a \"fire and forget\" write transaction can be complete when it is received and before the actual memory write completes). With AGP's queued transactions, the bandwidth realized can be close to the theoretical maximum bandwidth. AGP has a high priority queue and a low priority queue to allow for fine-grained optimization. This great improvement in memory read performance makes it practical for an AGP card to read textures directly from system RAM, while a PCI graphics card must copy it from system RAM to the card's video memory. System memory is made available using the graphics address remapping table (GART), which apportions main memory as needed for texture storage. The maximum amount of system memory available to AGP is defined as the \"AGP aperture\". Thus a trade-off could be realized in which the newly gained bandwidth could be exchanged for a lower parts count (graphics cards with little or no onboard memory).\nThird, AGP allows (mandatory only in AGP 3.0) \"sideband addressing\", meaning that the address and data buses are separated, so the address phase does not use the main address/data (AD) lines at all. This is done by adding an extra 8-bit \"SideBand Address\" bus, over which the graphics controller can issue new AGP requests while other AGP data is flowing over the main 32 address/data (AD) lines. This results in improved overall AGP data throughput.\nFinally, PCI bus handshaking is simplified. Unlike PCI bus transactions, whose length is negotiated on a cycle-by-cycle basis using the FRAME# and STOP# signals, AGP transfers are always a multiple of 8\u00a0bytes long, with the total length included in the request. Further, rather than using the IRDY# and TRDY# signals for each word, data is transferred in blocks of 4\u00a0clock cycles (32\u00a0words at AGP 8\u00d7 speed), and pauses are allowed only between blocks.\nHistory.\nThe AGP slot first appeared on x86-compatible system boards based on Socket 7 Intel P5 Pentium and Slot 1 P6 Pentium II processors. Intel introduced AGP support with the i440LX Slot 1 chipset on August 26, 1997, and a flood of products followed from all the major system board vendors. AGP was developed by Intel independently of the PCI Special Interest Group, which neither reviewed nor endorsed it.\nThe first Socket 7 chipsets to support AGP were the VIA Apollo VP3, SiS 5591/5592, and the ALI Aladdin V. Intel never released an AGP-equipped Socket 7 chipset. FIC demonstrated the first Socket 7 AGP system board in November 1997 as the \"FIC PA-2012\" based on the VIA Apollo VP3 chipset, followed very quickly by the \"EPoX P55-VP3\" also based on the VIA VP3 chipset which was first to market.\nEarly video chipsets featuring AGP support included the Rendition V\u00e9rit\u00e9 V2200, 3dfx Voodoo Banshee, Nvidia RIVA 128, 3Dlabs PERMEDIA 2, Intel i740, ATI Rage series, Matrox Millennium II, and S3 ViRGE GX/2. Some early AGP boards used graphics processors built around PCI and were simply bridged to AGP. This resulted in the cards benefiting little from the new bus, with the only improvement used being the 66\u00a0MHz bus clock, with its resulting doubled bandwidth over PCI, and bus exclusivity. Intel's i740 was explicitly designed to exploit the new AGP feature set; in fact it was designed to texture only from AGP memory, making PCI versions of the board difficult to implement (local board RAM had to emulate AGP memory), though this was eventually accomplished much later in the form of AGP-to-PCI bridges.\nMicrosoft first introduced AGP support into Windows via the USB Supplement patch for OSR2 of Windows 95 in 1997, also known as OSR2.1. The first Windows NT-based operating system to receive AGP support was Windows NT 4.0 with Service Pack 3, also in 1997. Linux support for AGP-enhanced fast data transfers was first added in 1999 with the implementation of the AGPgart kernel module.\nLater use.\nWith the increasing adoption of PCIe, graphics cards manufacturers continued to produce AGP cards as the standard became obsolete. As GPUs began to be designed to connect to PCIe, an additional PCIe-to-AGP bridge-chip was required to create an AGP-compatible graphics card. The inclusion of a bridge, and the need for a separate AGP card design, incurred additional board costs.\nThe GeForce 6600 and ATI Radeon X800 XL, released during 2004\u20132005, were the first bridged cards. In 2009 AGP cards from Nvidia had a ceiling of the GeForce 7 series. In 2011 DirectX 10-capable AGP cards from AMD vendors (Club 3D, HIS, Sapphire, Jaton, Visiontek, Diamond, etc.) included the Radeon HD 2400, 3450, 3650, 3850, 4350, 4650, and 4670. The HD 5000 AGP series mentioned in the AMD Catalyst software was never available. There were many problems with the AMD Catalyst 11.2 - 11.6 AGP hotfix drivers under Windows 7 with the HD 4000 series AGP video cards; use of 10.12 or 11.1 AGP hotfix drivers is a possible workaround. Several of the vendors listed above make available past versions of the AGP drivers.\nBy 2010, no new motherboard chipsets supported AGP and few new motherboards had AGP slots, however some continued to be produced with older AGP-supporting chipsets.\nIn 2016, Windows 10 version 1607 dropped support for AGP. Possible future removal of support for AGP from open-source Linux kernel drivers was considered in 2020.\nVersions.\nIntel released \"AGP specification 1.0\" in 1997. It specified 3.3\u00a0V signals and 1\u00d7 and 2\u00d7 speeds. Specification 2.0 documented 1.5\u00a0V signaling, which could be used at 1\u00d7, 2\u00d7 and the additional 4\u00d7 speed and 3.0 added 0.8\u00a0V signaling, which could be operated at 4\u00d7 and 8\u00d7 speeds. (1\u00d7 and 2\u00d7 speeds are physically possible, but were not specified.)\nThere are various physical interfaces (connectors); see the Compatibility section.\nOfficial extensions.\nAGP Pro.\nAn official extension for cards that required more electrical power, with a longer slot with additional pins for that purpose. AGP Pro cards were usually workstation-class cards used to accelerate professional computer-aided design applications employed in the fields of architecture, machining, engineering, simulations, and similar fields.\n64-bit AGP.\nA 64-bit channel was once proposed as an optional standard for AGP 3.0 in draft documents, but it was dropped in the final version of the standard.\nThe standard allows 64-bit transfer for AGP8\u00d7 reads, writes, and fast writes; 32-bit transfer for PCI operations.\nUnofficial variations.\nA number of non-standard variations of the AGP interface have been produced by manufacturers.\nCompatibility.\nAGP cards are backward and forward compatible within limits. 1.5 V-only keyed cards will not go into 3.3 V slots and vice versa, though \"Universal\" cards exist which will fit into either type of slot. There are also unkeyed \"Universal\" slots that will accept either type of card. When an AGP Universal card is plugged-into an AGP Universal slot, only the 1.5 V portion of the card is used. Some cards, like Nvidia's GeForce 6 series (except the 6200) or ATI's Radeon X800 series, only have keys for 1.5 V to prevent them from being installed in older mainboards without 1.5 V support. Some of the last modern cards with 3.3 V support were:\nSome cards incorrectly have dual notches, and some motherboards incorrectly have fully open slots, allowing a card to be plugged into a slot that does not support the correct signaling voltage, which may damage card or motherboard. Some incorrectly designed older 3.3 V cards have the 1.5 V key.\nAGP Pro cards will not fit into standard slots, but standard AGP cards will work in a Pro slot. Motherboards equipped with a Universal AGP Pro slot will accept a 1.5 V or 3.3 V card in either the AGP Pro or standard AGP configuration, a Universal AGP card, or a Universal AGP Pro card.\nThere are some proprietary systems incompatible with standard AGP; for example, Apple Power Macintosh computers with the Apple Display Connector (ADC) have an extra connector which delivers power to the attached display. Some cards designed to work with a specific CPU architecture (e.g., PC, Apple) may not work with others due to firmware issues.\nMark Allen of Playtools.com has made the following comments regarding practical AGP compatibility for AGP 3.0 and AGP 2.0: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0nobody makes AGP 3.0 cards, and nobody makes AGP 3.0 motherboards. At least not any manufacturers I can find. Every single video card I could find which claimed to be an AGP 3.0 card was actually a universal 1.5V AGP 3.0 card. And every motherboard which claimed to be an AGP 3.0 motherboard turned out to be a universal 1.5V AGP 3.0 motherboard. It makes sense, if you think about it, because if anyone actually shipped a consumer-oriented product which supported only 0.8 volts, they would end up with lots of confused customers and a support nightmare. In the consumer market, you'd have to be crazy to ship a 0.8 volt only product.\nPower consumption.\nActual power supplied by an AGP slot depends upon the card used. The maximum current drawn from the various rails is given in the specifications for the various versions. For example, if maximum current is drawn from all supplies and all voltages are at their specified upper limits, an AGP\u00a03.0 slot can supply up to 48.25\u00a0watts; this figure can be used to specify a power supply conservatively, but in practice a card is unlikely ever to draw more than 40\u00a0W from the slot, with many using less. AGP Pro provides additional power up to 110\u00a0W. Many AGP cards had additional power connectors to supply them with more power than the slot could provide.\nProtocol.\nAn AGP bus is a superset of a 66\u00a0MHz conventional PCI bus and, immediately after reset, follows the same protocol. The card must act as a PCI target, and optionally may act as a PCI master. (AGP 2.0 added a \"fast writes\" extension which allows PCI writes from the motherboard to the card to transfer data at higher speed.)\nAfter the card is initialized using PCI transactions, AGP transactions are permitted. For these, the card is always the AGP master and the motherboard is always the AGP target. The card queues multiple requests which correspond to the PCI address phase, and the motherboard schedules the corresponding data phases later. An important part of initialization is telling the card the maximum number of outstanding AGP requests which may be queued at a given time.\nAGP requests are similar to PCI memory read and write requests, but use a different encoding on command lines C/BE[3:0] and are always 8-byte aligned; their starting address and length are always multiples of 8 bytes (64 bits). The three low-order bits of the address are used instead to communicate the length of the request.\nWhenever the PCI GNT# signal is asserted, granting the bus to the card, three additional status bits ST[2:0] indicate the type of transfer to be performed next. If the bits are codice_1, a previously queued AGP transaction's data is to be transferred; if the three bits are codice_2, the card may begin a PCI transaction or (if sideband addressing is not in use) queue a request in-band using PIPE#.\nAGP command codes.\nLike PCI, each AGP transaction begins with an address phase, communicating an address and 4-bit command code. The possible commands are different from PCI, however:\n Read 8\u00d7(AD[2:0]+1) = 8, 16, 24, ..., 64 bytes. The least significant bit p is 0 for low-priority, 1 for high.\n Write 8\u00d7(AD[2:0]+1) = 8\u201364 bytes.\n Read 32\u00d7(AD[2:0]+1) = 32, 64, 96, ..., 256 bytes. This is the same as a read request, but the length is multiplied by four.\n Force previously written data to memory, for synchronization. This acts as a low-priority read, taking a queue slot and returning 8 bytes of random data to indicate completion. The address and length supplied with this command are ignored.\n This acts as a memory fence, requiring that all earlier AGP requests complete before any following requests. Ordinarily, for increased performance, AGP uses a very weak consistency model, and allows a later write to pass an earlier read. (E.g. after sending \"write 1, write 2, read, write 3, write 4\" requests, all to the same address, the read may return any value from 2 to 4. Only returning 1 is forbidden, as writes must complete before following reads.) This operation does not require any queue slots.\n When making a request to an address above 232, this is used to indicate that a second address cycle will follow with additional address bits. This operates like a regular PCI dual address cycle; it is accompanied by the low-order 32 bits of the address (and the length), and the following cycle includes the high 32 address bits and the desired command. The two cycles make one request, and take only one slot in the request queue. This request code is not used with side-band addressing.\nAGP 3.0 dropped high-priority requests and the long read commands, as they were little used. It also mandated side-band addressing, thus dropping the dual address cycle, leaving only four request types: low-priority read (0000), low-priority write (0100), flush (1010) and fence (1100).\nIn-band AGP requests using PIPE#.\nTo queue a request in-band, the card must request the bus using the standard PCI REQ# signal, and receive GNT# plus bus status ST[2:0] equal to codice_2. Then, instead of asserting FRAME# to begin a PCI transaction, the card asserts the PIPE# signal while driving the AGP command, address, and length on the C/BE[3:0], AD[31:3] and AD[2:0] lines, respectively. (If the address is 64 bits, a dual address cycle similar to PCI is used.) For every cycle that PIPE# is asserted, the card sends another request without waiting for acknowledgement from the motherboard, up to the configured maximum queue depth. The last cycle is marked by deasserting REQ#, and PIPE# is deasserted on the following idle cycle.\nSide-band AGP requests using SBA[7:0].\nIf side-band addressing is supported and configured, the PIPE# signal is not used. (And the signal is re-used for another purpose in the AGP 3.0 protocol, which requires side-band addressing.) Instead, requests are broken into 16-bit pieces which are sent as two bytes across the SBA bus. There is no need for the card to ask permission from the motherboard; a new request may be sent at any time as long as the number of outstanding requests is within the configured maximum queue depth. The possible values are:\n Queue a request with the given low-order address bits A[14:3] and length 8\u00d7(L[2:0]+1). The command and high-order bits are as previously specified. Any number of requests may be queued by sending only this pattern, as long as the command and higher address bits remain the same.\n Use command C[3:0] and address bits A[23:15] for future requests. (Bit R is reserved.) This does not queue a request, but sets values that will be used in all future queued requests.\n Use address bits A[35:24] for future requests.\n Use address bits A[47:36] for future requests.\n \"Reserved, do not use.\"\n Synchronization pattern used when starting the SBA bus after an idle period.68163\n No operation; no request. At AGP 1\u00d7 speed, this may be sent as a single byte and a following 16-bit side-band request started one cycle later. At AGP 2\u00d7 and higher speeds, all side-band requests, including this NOP, are 16 bits long.\nSideband address bytes are sent at the same rate as data transfers, up to 8\u00d7 the 66\u00a0MHz basic bus clock. Sideband addressing has the advantage that it mostly eliminates the need for turnaround cycles on the AD bus between transfers, in the usual case when read operations greatly outnumber writes.\nAGP responses.\nWhile asserting GNT#, the motherboard may instead indicate via the ST bits that a data phase for a queued request will be performed next. There are four queues: two priorities (low- and high-priority) for each of reads and writes, and each is processed in order. Obviously, the motherboard will attempt to complete high-priority requests first, but there is no limit on the number of low-priority responses which may be delivered while the high-priority request is processed.\nFor each cycle when the GNT# is asserted and the status bits have the value codice_13, a read response of the indicated priority is scheduled to be returned. At the next available opportunity (typically the next clock cycle), the motherboard will assert TRDY# (target ready) and begin transferring the response to the oldest request in the indicated read queue. (Other PCI bus signals like FRAME#, DEVSEL# and IRDY# remain deasserted.) Up to four clock cycles worth of data (16 bytes at AGP 1\u00d7 or 128 bytes at AGP 8\u00d7) are transferred without waiting for acknowledgement from the card. If the response is longer than that, both the card and motherboard must indicate their ability to continue on the third cycle by asserting IRDY# (initiator ready) and TRDY#, respectively. If either one does not, wait states will be inserted until two cycles after they both do. (The value of IRDY# and TRDY# at other times is irrelevant and they are usually deasserted.)\nThe C/BE# byte enable lines may be ignored during read responses, but are held asserted (all bytes valid) by the motherboard.\nThe card may also assert the RBF# (read buffer full) signal to indicate that it is temporarily unable to receive more low-priority read responses. The motherboard will refrain from scheduling any more low-priority read responses. The card must still be able to receive the end of the current response, and the first four-cycle block of the following one if scheduled, plus any high-priority responses it has requested.\nFor each cycle when GNT# is asserted and the status bits have the value codice_14, write data is scheduled to be sent across the bus. At the next available opportunity (typically the next clock cycle), the card will assert IRDY# (initiator ready) and begin transferring the data portion of the oldest request in the indicated write queue. If the data is longer than four clock cycles, the motherboard will indicate its ability to continue by asserting TRDY# on the third cycle. Unlike reads, there is no provision for the card to delay the write; if it didn't have the data ready to send, it shouldn't have queued the request.\nThe C/BE# lines \"are\" used with write data, and may be used by the card to select which bytes should be written to memory.\nThe multiplier in AGP 2\u00d7, 4\u00d7 and 8\u00d7 indicates the number of data transfers across the bus during each 66\u00a0MHz clock cycle. Such transfers use source synchronous clocking with a \"strobe\" signal (AD_STB[0], AD_STB[1], and SB_STB) generated by the data source. AGP 4\u00d7 adds complementary strobe signals.\nBecause AGP transactions may be as short as two transfers, at AGP 4\u00d7 and 8\u00d7 speeds it is possible for a request to complete in the middle of a clock cycle. In such a case, the cycle is padded with dummy data transfers (with the C/BE# byte enable lines held deasserted).\nConnector pinout.\nThe AGP connector contains almost all PCI signals, plus several additions. The connector has 66 contacts on each side, although 4 are removed for each keying notch. Pin\u00a01 is closest to the I/O bracket, and the B and A sides are as in the table, looking down at the motherboard connector.\nContacts are spaced at 1\u00a0mm intervals, however they are arranged in two staggered vertical rows so that there is 2\u00a0mm space between pins in each row. Odd-numbered A-side contacts, and even-numbered B-side contacts are in the lower row (1.0 to 3.5\u00a0mm from the card edge). The others are in the upper row (3.7 to 6.0\u00a0mm from the card edge).\nPCI signals omitted are:\nSignals added are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2381", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2381", "title": "Andreas Aagesen", "text": "Danish jurist (1826\u20131879)\nAndreas Aagesen (5 August 1826 \u2013 26 October 1879) was a Danish jurist.\nBiography.\nAagesen was educated for the law at Christianshavn and Copenhagen, and interrupted his studies in 1848 to take part in the First Schleswig War, in which he served as the leader of a reserve battalion.\nIn 1855 Aagesen became a professor of jurisprudence at the University of Copenhagen. In 1870 he was appointed a member of the commission for drawing up a maritime and commercial code, and the navigation law of 1882 is mainly his work. In 1879 he was elected a member of the Landsting (one of two chambers of the Danish Parliament, the Rigsdagen); but it is as a teacher at the university that he won his reputation. Aagesen was Carl Christian Hall's successor as lecturer on Roman law at the university, and in this department his research was epoch-making.\nBibliography.\nAmong his numerous juridical works may be mentioned:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2382", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2382", "title": "Aalen", "text": "Town in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany\nAalen (; Swabian: \"Oole\" ()) is a town located in the eastern part of the German state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, about east of Stuttgart and north of Ulm. It is the seat of the Ostalbkreis district and is its largest town. It is also the largest town in the Ostw\u00fcrttemberg region. Since 1956, Aalen has had the status of Gro\u00dfe Kreisstadt (major district town). It is noted for its many half-timbered houses constructed from the 16th century through the 18th century.\nWith an area of 146.63\u00a0km2, Aalen is ranked 7th in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg and 2nd within the Government Region of Stuttgart, after Stuttgart. With a population of about 66,000, Aalen is the 15th most-populated settlement in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeography.\nSituation.\nAalen is situated on the upper reaches of the river Kocher, at the foot of the Swabian Jura which lies to the south and south-east, and close to the hilly landscapes of the Ellwangen Hills to the north and the \"Welland\" to the north-west.\nThe west of Aalen's territory is on the foreland of the eastern Swabian Jura, and the north and north-west is on the Swabian-Franconian Forest, both being part of the Swabian Keuper-Lias Plains. The south-west is part of the Albuch, the east is part of the H\u00e4rtsfeld, these two both being parts of the Swabian Jura.\nThe Kocher enters the town's territory from Oberkochen to the south, crosses the district of Unterkochen, then enters the town centre, where the \"Aal\" flows into it. The \"Aal\" is a small river located only within the town's territory. Next, the Kocher crosses the district of Wasseralfingen, then leaves the town for H\u00fcttlingen. Rivers originating near Aalen are the Rems (near Essingen, west of Aalen) and the Jagst (near Unterschneidheim, east of Aalen), both being tributaries of the Neckar, just like the Kocher.\nThe elevation in the centre of the market square is relative to Normalh\u00f6hennull. The territory's lowest point is at the Lein river near Rodamsd\u00f6rfle, the highest point is the Gr\u00fcnberg's peak near Unterkochen at .\nGeology.\nAalen's territory ranges over all lithostratigraphic groups of the South German Jurassic: Aalen's south and the \"Flexner\" massif are on top of the White Jurassic, the town centre is on the Brown Jurassic, and a part of Wasseralfingen is on the Black Jurassic. As a result, the town advertises itself as a \"Geologist's Mecca\".\nMost parts of the territory are on the \"Opalinuston-Formation\" (Opalinum Clay Formation) of the Aalenian subdivision of the Jurassic Period, which is named after Aalen. On the \"Sandberg\", the \"Schnaitberg\" and the \"Schradenberg\" hills, all in the west of Aalen, the \"Eisensandstein\" (Iron Sandstone) formation emerges to the surface. On the other hills of the city, sands \"(Goldsh\u00f6fer Sande)\", gravel and residual rubble prevail.\nThe historic centre of Aalen and the other areas in the Kocher valley are founded completely on holocenic floodplain loam \"(Auelehm)\" and riverbed gravel that have filled in the valley.\nMost parts of Dewangen and Fachsenfeld are founded on formations of \"Jurensismergel\" (Jurensis Marl), \"Posidonienschiefer\" (cf. Posidonia Shale), \"Amaltheenton\" (Amalthean Clay), \"Numismalismergel\" (Numismalis Marl) and \"Obtususton\" (Obtusus Clay, named after Asteroceras obtusum ammonites) moving from south to north, all belonging to the Jurassic and being rich in fossils. They are at last followed by the \"Trossingen Formation\" already belonging to the Late Triassic.\nUntil 1939 iron ore was mined on the \"Braunenberg\" hill. (see Tiefer Stollen section).\nExtent of the borough.\nThe maximum extent of the town's territory amounts to in a north\u2013south dimension and in an east\u2013west dimension. The area is , which includes 42.2% agriculturally used area and 37.7% of forest. 11.5% are built up or vacant, 6.4% is used by traffic infrastructure. Sporting and recreation grounds and parks comprise 1% , other areas 1.1% .\nBoroughs.\nAalen's territory consists of the town centre \"(Kernstadt)\" and the municipalities\nmerged from between 1938 (Unterrombach) and 1975 (Wasseralfingen, see mergings section).\nThe municipalities merged in the course of the latest municipal reform of the 1970s are also called \"Stadtbezirke\" (quarters or districts), and are \"Ortschaften\" (\"settlements\") in terms of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg's \"Gemeindeordnung\" (municipal code), which means, each of them has its own council elected by its respective residents \"(Ortschaftsrat)\" and is presided by a spokesperson \"(Ortsvorsteher)\".\nThe town centre itself and the merged former municipalities consist of numerous villages \"(Teilorte)\", mostly separated by open ground from each other and having their own independent and long-standing history. Some however have been created as planned communities, which were given proper names, but no well-defined borders.\nList of villages:\nSpatial planning.\nAalen forms a \"Mittelzentrum\" (\"medium-level centre\") within the Ostw\u00fcrttemberg region. Its designated catchment area includes the following municipalities of the central and eastern Ostalbkreis district: Abtsgm\u00fcnd, Bopfingen, Essingen, H\u00fcttlingen, Kirchheim am Ries, Lauchheim, Neresheim, Oberkochen, Riesb\u00fcrg and Westhausen, and is interwoven with the catchment area of N\u00f6rdlingen, situated in Bavaria, east of Aalen.\nClimate.\nAs Aalen's territory sprawls on escarpments of the Swabian Jura, on the Albuch and the H\u00e4rtsfeld landscapes, and its elevation has a range of , the climate varies from district to district.\nThe weather station the following data originate from is located between the town centre and Wasseralfingen at about and has been in operation since 1991.\nThe sunshine duration is about 1800 hours per year, which averages 4.93 hours per day. So Aalen is above the German average of 1550 hours per year. However, with 167 days of precipitation, Aalen's region also ranks above the German average of 138. The annual rainfall is , about the average within Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nThe annual mean temperature is . Here Aalen ranks above the German average of and the Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg average of .\nHistory.\nCivic history.\nFirst settlements.\nNumerous remains of early civilization have been found in the area. Tools made of flint and traces of Mesolithic human settlement dated between the 8th and 5th millennium BC were found on several sites on the margins of the Kocher and Jagst valleys. On the \"Schlo\u00dfbaufeld\" plateau (appr. ), situated behind \"Kocherburg\" castle near Unterkochen, a hill-top settlement was found, with the core being dated to the Bronze Age. In the \"Appenwang\" forest near Wasseralfingen, in Goldsh\u00f6fe, and in Ebnat, tumuli of the Hallstatt culture were found. In Aalen and Wasseralfingen, gold and silver coins left by the Celts were found. The Celts were responsible for the fortifications in the Schlo\u00dfbaufeld settlement consisting of sectional embankments and a stone wall. Also, Near Heisenberg (Wasseralfingen), a Celtic nemeton has been identified; however, it is no longer readily apparent.\nRoman era.\nAfter abandoning the Alb Limes (a \"limes\" generally following the ridgeline of the Swabian Jura) around 150 AD, Aalen's territory became part of the Roman Empire, in direct vicinity of the then newly erected Rhaetian Limes. The Romans erected a castrum to house the cavalry unit \"Ala II Flavia milliaria\"; its remains are known today as \"Kastell Aalen\" (\"Aalen Roman fort\"). The site is west of today's town centre at the bottom of the \"Schillerh\u00f6he\" hill. With about 1,000 horsemen and nearly as many grooms, it was the largest fort of auxiliaries along the Rhaetian Limes. There were Civilian settlements adjacent along the south and the east. Around 260 AD, the Romans gave up the fort as they withdrew their presence in unoccupied Germania back to the Rhine and Danube rivers, and the Alamanni took over the region. Based on 3rd- and 4th-century coins found, the civilian settlement continued to exist for the time being. However, there is no evidence of continued civilization between the Roman era and the Middle Ages.\nFoundation.\nBased on discovery of alamannic graves, archaeologists have established the 7th century as the origination of Aalen. In the northern and western walls of St. John's church, which is located directly adjacent to the eastern gate of the Roman fort, Roman stones were incorporated. The building that exists today probably dates to the 9th century.\nThe first mention of Aalen was in 839, when emperor Louis the Pious reportedly permitted the Fulda monastery to exchange land with the Hammerstadt village, then known as \"Hamarstat\".\nAalen itself was first mentioned in an inventory list of Ellwangen Abbey, dated ca. 1136, as the village \"Alon\", along with a lower nobleman named Conrad of Aalen. This nobleman probably had his ancestral castle at a site south of today's town centre and was subject first to Ellwangen abbey, later to the House of Hohenstaufen, and eventually to the House of Oettingen. 1426 was the last time a member of that house was mentioned in connection with Aalen.\nDocuments, from the Middle Ages, indicate that the town of Aalen was founded by the Hohenstaufen some time between 1241 and 1246, but at a different location than the earlier village, which was supposedly destroyed in 1388 during the war between the Alliance of Swabian Cities and the Dukes of Bavaria.\nLater, it is documented that the counts of Oettingen ruled the town in 1340. They are reported to have pawned the town to Count Eberhard II and subsequently to the House of W\u00fcrttemberg in 1358 or 1359 in exchange for an amount of money.\nImperial City.\nDuring the war against W\u00fcrttemberg, Emperor Charles IV took the town without a fight after a siege. On 3 December 1360, he declared Aalen an Imperial City, that is, a city or town responsible only to the emperor, a status that made it a quasi-sovereign city-state and that it kept until 1803. In 1377, Aalen joined the Alliance of Swabian Cities, and in 1385, the term \"civitas\" appears in the town's seal for the first time. In 1398, Aalen was granted the right to hold markets, and in 1401 Aalen obtained proper jurisdiction.\nThe oldest artistic representation of Aalen was made in 1528. It was made as the basis of a lawsuit between the town and the Counts of Oettingen at the Reichskammergericht in Speyer. It shows Aalen surrounded by walls, towers, and double moats. The layout of the moats, which had an embankment built between them, is recognizable by the present streets named \"N\u00f6rdlicher, \u00d6stlicher, S\u00fcdlicher\" and \"Westlicher Stadtgraben\" (Northern, Eastern, Southern and Western Moat respectively). The wall was about tall, 1518 single paces () long and enclosed an area of . During its early years, the town had two town gates: The \"Upper\" or \"Ellwangen Gate\" in the east, and St. Martin's gate in the south; however due to frequent floods, St. Martin's gate was bricked up in the 14th century and replaced by the \"Lower\" or \"Gm\u00fcnd Gate\" built in the west before 1400. Later, several minor side gates were added. The central street market took place on the \"Wettegasse\" (today called \"Marktplatz\", \"market square\") and the \"Reichsst\u00e4dter Stra\u00dfe\". So the market district stretched from one gate to the other, however in Aalen it was not straight, but with a 90-degree curve between southern (St. Martin's) gate and eastern (Ellwangen) gate.\nAround 1500, the civic graveyard was relocated from the town church to St. John's Church, and in 1514, the \"Vierundzwanziger\" (\"Group of 24\") was the first assembly constituted by the citizens.\nReformation.\nDelegated by W\u00fcrttemberg's Duke Louis III, on 28 June 1575, nearly 30 years after Martin Luther's death, Jakob Andreae, professor and chancellor of the University of T\u00fcbingen, arrived in Aalen. The sermon he gave the following day convinced the mayor, the council, and the citizens to adopt the Reformation in the town. Andreae stayed in Aalen for four weeks to help with the change. This brought along enormous changes, as the council forbade the Roman Catholic priests to celebrate masses and give sermons. However, after victories of the imperial armies at the beginning of the Thirty Years' War, the Prince-Provostry of Ellwangen, which still held the right of patronage in Aalen, were able to temporarily bring Catholicism back to Aalen; however after the military successes of the Protestant Union, Protestant church practices were instituted again.\nFire of 1634.\nOn the night of 5 September 1634, two ensigns of the army of Bernard of Saxe-Weimar who were fighting with the Swedes and retreating after the Battle of N\u00f6rdlingen set fire to two powder carriages, to prevent the war material to fall into Croatian hands and to prevent their advance. The result was a conflagration, that some say destroyed portions of the town. There are differing stories regarding this fire. According to 17th-century accounts, the church and all the buildings, except of the \"Schw\u00f6rturm\" tower, were casualties of the fire, and only nine families survived. 19th century research by Hermann Bauer, Lutheran pastor and local historian, discovered that the 17th-century account is exaggerated, but he does agree that the town church and buildings in a \"rather large\" semicircle around it were destroyed. The fire also destroyed the town archive housed in an addition to the church, with all of its documents. After the fire, soldiers of both armies went through the town looting. It took nearly 100 years for the town to reach its population of 2,000.\nFrench troops marched through Aalen in 1688 during the Nine Years' War; however, unlike other places, they left without leaving severe damages. The French came through again in 1702 during the War of the Spanish Succession and in 1741 during the War of the Austrian Succession, the latter also caused imperial troops to move through in 1743.\nThe town church's tower collapsed in 1765, presumably because proper building techniques were not utilized during the reconstruction after the fire of 1634. The collapsing tower struck two children of the tower watchman who died of their injuries, and destroyed the nave, leaving only the altar cross intact. The remaining walls had to be knocked down due to the damage. Reconstruction began the same year, creating the building that exists today.\nOn 22 November 1749, the so-called \"Aalen protocol\" regulating the cohabitation of Lutherans and Roman Catholics in the jointly ruled territory of Oberkochen was signed in Aalen by the Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg and the Prince-Provostry of Ellwangen. Aalen had been chosen because of its neutral status as a Free Imperial City.\nNapoleonic era and end of the Imperial City of Aalen.\nDuring the War of the First Coalition (1796), Aalen was looted. The War of the Second Coalition concluded in 1801 with the signing of the Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville, which led to the German Mediatisation of 1803 that assigned most Imperial Cities to the neighbouring principalities. Aalen was assigned to the Electorate of W\u00fcrttemberg, which later became the Kingdom of W\u00fcrttemberg, and became seat of the District (\"Oberamt\") of Aalen. During the War of the Third Coalition, on 6 October 1805, Napoleon Bonaparte arrived in Aalen, with an army of 40,000. This event, along with Bavarian and Austrian troops moving in some days later, caused miseries that according to the town clerk \"no feather could describe\".\nIn 1811, the municipality of Unterrombach was formed out of some villages previously belonging to Aalen, some to the Barons of W\u00f6llwarth, and the eastern villages were assigned to the municipality of Unterkochen.\nIn the age of the Napoleonic wars, the town walls were no longer of use, and in the 18th century, with the maintenance of walls, gates and towers becoming more neglected Finally, due to the fact that the funds were lacking, starting in 1800, most towers were demolished, the other buildings followed soon.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nBefore the Industrial Revolution, Aalen's economy was shaped by its rural setting. Many citizens were pursuing farming besides their craft, such as tanning. In the mid 19th century, there were twelve tanneries in Aalen, due to the proximity of Ulm, an important sales market. Other crafts that added to the economy were weaving mills, which produced linen and woolen goods, and baking of sweet pastry and gingerbread.\nIn Aalen, industrialisation was a slow process. The first major increase was in the 1840s, when three factories for nails and some other factories emerged. It was the link with the railway network, by the opening of the Rems Railway from Cannstatt to Wasseralfingen in 1861, that brought more industry to Aalen, along with the royal steel mill (later \"Schw\u00e4bische H\u00fcttenwerke\") in Wasseralfingen. The Rems Railway's extension to N\u00f6rdlingen in 1863, the opening of the Brenz Railway in 1864 and of the Upper Jagst Railway in 1866 turned Aalen into a railway hub. Furthermore, between 1901 and its shutdown in 1972, the H\u00e4rtsfeld Railway connected Aalen with Dillingen an der Donau via Neresheim. Part of becoming a rail hub entailed more jobs based on the rail industry. These included, a maintenance facility, a roundhouse, an administrative office, two track maintenance shops, and a freight station with an industrial branch line. This helped shape Aalen into what today's historians call a \"railwayman's town\". Starting in 1866, the utilities in town all began to be upgraded. Starting with the Aalen gasworks which were opened and gas lighting was introduced. Then in 1870, a modern water supply system was started and in 1912 the mains electricity. Finally, in 1935, the first electrically powered streetlights were installed.\nTo fight housing shortage during and immediately after World War I, the town set up barracks settlement areas at the \"Schlauch\" and \"Alter Turnplatz\" grounds. In spite of the industry being crippled by the Great Depression of 1929, the public baths at the Hirschbach creek where modernized, extended and re-opened in 1931.\nNazi era.\nIn the federal election of 1932, the Nazi Party performed below average in Aalen with 25.8% of votes compared to 33.1% on the national level, thus finishing second to the Centre Party which had 26.6% (11.9% nationwide) of the votes, and ahead of the Social Democratic Party of Germany with 19.8% (20.4%). However, the March 1933 federal elections showed that the sentiment had changed as the Nazi Party received 34.1% (still below German average 43.9% nationwide), but by far the leading vote-getter in Aalen, followed by the Centre party at 26.6% (11.3% nationwide) and the Social Democrats 18.6% (18.3% nationwide).\nThe democratically elected mayor Friedrich Schwarz remained in office until the Nazis removed him from office, in 1934, and replaced him by chairman of the Nazi Party town council head and brewery owner Karl Barth. Karl Barth was a provisional mayor until the more permanent solution of Karl Sch\u00fcbel. In August 1934, the Nazi consumer fair Braune Messe (\"brown fair\") was held in Aalen.\nDuring Nazi rule in Germany, there were many military offices constructed in Aalen, starting with, in 1936, a military district riding and driving school for Wehrkreis V. The Nazis also built an army replenishment office \"(Heeresverpflegungsamt)\", a branch arsenal office \"(Heeresnebenzeugamt)\" and a branch army ammunitions institute \"(Heeresnebenmunitionsanstalt)\".\nStarting in 1935, mergers of neighbouring towns began. In 1938, the Oberamt was transformed into the Landkreis of Aalen and the municipality of Unterrombach was disbanded. Its territory was mostly added to Aalen, with the exception of Hammerstadt, which was added to the municipality of Dewangen. Forst, Rauental and Vogelsang were added to Essingen (in 1952 the entire former municipality of Unterrombach was merged into Aalen, with the exception of Forst, which is part of Essingen until present).\nIn September 1944, the \"Wiesendorf\" concentration camp, a subcamp of Natzweiler-Struthof, was constructed nearby. It was designated for between 200 and 300 prisoners who were utilized for forced labor in industrial businesses nearby. Until the camp's dissolution in February 1945, 60 prisoners died. Between 1946 and 1957, the camp buildings were torn down; however, its foundations are still in place in house \"Moltkestra\u00dfe 44/46\". Also, there were several other labour camps which existed where prisoners of war along with women and men from occupied countries occupied by Germany were pooled. The prisoners at these other camps had to work for the arms industry in major businesses like \"Schw\u00e4bische H\u00fcttenwerke\" and the \"Alfing Ke\u00dfler\" machine factory.\nIn the civic hospital, the deaconesses on duty were gradually replaced by National Socialist People's Welfare nurses. Nazi eugenics led to compulsory sterilization of some 200 persons there.\nFortunately, Aalen avoided most of the combat activity during World War II. It was only during the last weeks of the war that Aalen became a target of air warfare, which led to the destruction and severe damage of parts of the town, the train station, and other railway installations. A series of air attacks lasting for more than three weeks reached its peak on 17 April 1945, when United States Army Air Forces planes bombed the branch arsenal office and the train station. During this raid, 59 people were killed, more than half of them buried by debris, and more than 500 lost their homes. Also, 33\u00a0residential buildings, 12\u00a0other buildings and 2\u00a0bridges were destroyed, and 163\u00a0buildings, including 2\u00a0churches, were damaged. Five days later, the Nazi rulers of Aalen were unseated by the US forces.\nPost-war era.\nAalen became part of the State of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, upon its creation in 1952. Then, with the Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg territorial reform of 1973, the District of Aalen was merged into the Ostalbkreis district. Subsequently, Aalen became seat of that district, and in 1975, the town's borough attained its present size (see below).\nThe population of Aalen exceeded the limit of 20,000, which was the requirement for to gain the status of Gro\u00dfe Kreisstadt (\"major district town\") in 1946. On 1 August 1947, Aalen was declared \"Unmittelbare Kreisstadt\" (\"immediate district town\"), and with the creation of the Gemeindeordnung (municipal code) of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg on 1 April 1956, it was declared \"Gro\u00dfe Kreisstadt\".\nReligions.\nOn 31 December 2008, 51.1\u00a0percent of Aalen were members of the Catholic Church, 23.9\u00a0percent were members of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church. About 25\u00a0percent belong to other or no religious community or gave no information. The district of Waldhausen was the district with the highest percentage of Roman Catholic inhabitants at 75.6\u00a0percent, and the central district was the one with the highest percentage of Evangelical-Lutheran inhabitants at 25.6\u00a0percent, as well as those claiming no religious preference at 32.5\u00a0percent.\nProtestantism.\nAalen's population originally was subject to the jus patronatus of Ellwangen Abbey, and thus subject to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Augsburg.\nWith the assistance of the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg, in 1575, the reformation was implemented in Aalen. Subsequently, Aalen has been a predominantly Protestant town for centuries, with the exception of the years from 1628 until 1632 (see reformation section). Being an Imperial City, Aalen could govern its clerical matters on its own, so Clerics, organists and choir masters were direct subjects to the council, which thus exerted bishop-like power. There was even a proper hymn book for Aalen. After the transition to W\u00fcrttemberg, in 1803, Aalen became seat of a deanery, with the dean church being the Town Church (with the building constructed from 1765 to 1767 and existing until present). Georg Pf\u00e4fflin was dean in Aalen (1952\u20131967). He carried out the parish service with great commitment, built community centers and renovated churches. When he said goodbye to Aalen, the newspaper Schw\u00e4bische Post paid tribute to him: \"A distinguished personality in intellectual life is leaving Aalen\".\nAnother notable church in Aalen is St. John's Church, located on the cemetery and refurbished in 1561.\nAs Aalen's population grew in the 20th century, more parishes were founded: St. Mark's parish with its church building of 1967 and St. Martin's parish with its church of 1974. In the borough of Unterrombach, Aalen had implemented the reformation as well, but the community remained a chapel-of-ease of Aalen. A proper church, the Christ Church, was erected in 1912 and a proper parish was established in 1947. In Fachsenfeld, the ruling family of Woellwarth resp. of Leinroden implemented the reformation. A parish church was built in 1591, however with an influx of Catholics in the 18th century, a Catholic majority was established. The other districts of present-day Aalen remained mostly catholic after the reformation, however Wasseralfingen established a Lutheran parish in 1891 and a church, St. Magdalene's Church, in 1893. In Unterkochen, after World War II, a parish was established and a church was built in 1960. All four parishes belong to the deanery of Aalen within the Evangelical-Lutheran Church in W\u00fcrttemberg. Furthermore, in Aalen there are Old Pietistic communities.\nCatholicism.\nThe few Catholics of today's central district were covered by the parish of Unterkochen until the 19th century, a situation which continued for some years even after completion of St. Mary's Church in 1868, which was constructed by Georg Morlok. However, in 1872 Aalen got its proper parish again, and in 1913, a second Catholic church, Salvator's Church, was completed, and in 1969 the Holy Cross Church was also finished. In 1963, a second parish was set up, and in 1972 it got a new Church, the new St. Mary's Church, which has been erected in place of the old St. Mary's church, which had been torn down in 1968. Another church of the second parish was St. Augustine's Church, which was completed in 1970. Finally, in 1976 and 1988, St. Elizabeth's Church and St. Thomas' Church were completed. Furthermore, in 1963, the St. Michael pastoral care office was built.\nHofherrnweiler has its own Catholic church, St. Boniface's, since 1904. The villages of Dewangen, Ebnat, Hofen, Waldhausen and Wasseralfingen had remained Catholic after reformation, so old parishes and churches persist there. The \"Assumption of Mary\" Church in Dewangen has an early Gothic tower and a newly built nave (1875). Mary's Immaculate Conception Church in Ebnat was constructed in 1723; however the church was first mentioned in 1298.\nHofen's Saint George's Church is a fortified church, whose current nave was built between 1762 and 1775. Alongside the church, the Late Gothic St. Odile's Chapel is standing, whose entrance has the year 1462 engraved upon it. Foundations of prior buildings have been dated to the 11th and 13th century.\nSt. Mary's Church of Unterkochen was first mentioned in 1248, and has served the Catholics of Aalen for a long time. Waldhausen's parish church of St. Nicholas was built between 1699 and 1716. Wasseralfingen at first was a chapel of ease for Hofen, but has since had its own chapel, St. Stephen, built. It was presumably built in 1353 and remodeled in 1832. In 1834, a proper parish was established, which built a new St. Stephen's Church. This new building utilized the Romanesque Revival architecture style and was built between 1881 and 1883, and has since remained the parish's landmark. Also, Fachsenfeld received its own church, named Sacred Heart in 1895. All Catholic parishes within Aalen are today incorporated into four pastoral care units within the \"Ostalb\" Deanery of the Diocese of Rottenburg-Stuttgart; however these units also comprise some parishes outside of Aalen. Pastoral Care Unit two comprises the parishes of Essingen, Dewangen and Fachsenfeld, unit four comprises Hofen and Wasseralfingen, unit five comprises both parishes of Aalen's centre and Hofherrnweiler, unit five comprises Waldhausen, Ebnat, Oberkochen and Unterkochen.\nOther Christian communities.\nIn addition to the two major religions within Aalen, there are also free churches and other communities, including the United Methodist Church, the Baptists, the Seventh-day Adventist Church and the New Apostolic Church.\nOther religions.\nUntil the late 19th century, no Jews were documented within Aalen. In 1886 there were four Jews were living in Aalen, a number that rose to ten in 1900, fell to seven in 1905, and remained so until 1925. Upon the Nazis' rise to power in 1933, seven Jews, including two children, lived in Aalen. During the Kristallnacht in 1938, the vitrines of the three Jewish shops in the town were smashed and their proprietors imprisoned for several weeks. After their release, most Aalen Jews emigrated. The last Jews of Aalen, Fanny Kahn, was forcibly resettled to Oberdorf am Ipf, which had a large Jewish community. Today, a street of Aalen is named after her. The Jew Max Pfeffer returned from Brussels to Aalen in 1948 to continue his shop, but emigrated to Italy in 1967.\nIn Aalen, there is an Islamic Ditib community, which maintains the \"D.I.T.I.B. Mosque of Aalen (Central Mosque)\" located at Ulmer Stra\u00dfe. The mosque's construction started on 30 August 2008. The Islamist Mill\u00ee G\u00f6r\u00fc\u015f organisation maintains the Fatih Mosque, as well at Ulmer Stra\u00dfe.\nMergings.\nThe present-day make up of Aalen was created on 21 June 1975 by the unification of the cities of Aalen and Wasseralfingen, with the initial name of \"Aalen-Wasseralfingen\". This annexation made Aalen's territory one third larger than its prior size. On 1 July 1975, the name \"Aalen\" was revived. Prior to this merger, the town of Aalen had already annexed the following municipalities:\nPopulation's progression and structure.\nDuring the Middle Ages and the early modern period, Aalen was just a small town with a few hundred inhabitants. The population grew slowly due to numerous wars, famines and epidemics. It was the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century where Aalen's growth accelerated. Whereas in 1803, only 1,932 people inhabited the town, in 1905 it had already increased to 10,442. The number continued to rise and reached 15,890 in 1939.\nThe influx of refugees and ethnic Germans from Germany's former eastern territories after World War II pushed the population to 31,814 in 1961. The merger with Wasseralfingen on 21 June 1975 added 14,597 persons and resulted in a total population of 65,165 people. On 30 June 2005, the population, which was officially determined by the Statistical Office of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, was 67,125.\nThe following overview shows how the population figures of the borough were ascertained. Until 1823, the figures are mostly estimates, thereafter census results or official updates by the state statistical office. Starting in 1871, the figures were determined by non-uniform method of tabulation using extrapolation.\nOn 31 December 2008, Aalen had precisely 66,058 inhabitants, of which 33,579 were female and 32,479 were male. The average age of Aalen's inhabitants rose from 40.5 years in 2000 to 42.4 in 2008. Within the borough, 6,312 foreigners resided, which is 9.56\u00a0percent. Of them, the largest percentage are from Turkey (38\u00a0percent of all foreigners), the second largest group are from Italy (13\u00a0percent), followed by Croatians (6\u00a0percent) and Serbs (5\u00a0percent).\nThe number of married residents fell from 32,948 in 1996 to 31,357 in 2007, while the number of divorced residents rose in the same period from 2,625 to 3,859. The number of single residents slightly increased between 1996 and 2004 from 25,902 to 26,268 and fell slightly until 2007 to 26,147. The number of widowed residents fell from 5,036 in 1996 to 4,783 in 2007.\nPolitics.\nAalen has arranged a municipal association with Essingen and H\u00fcttlingen.\nCouncil.\nSince the local election of 25 May 2014, the town council consists of 51\u00a0representatives having a term of five years. The seats are distributed as follows on parties and groups (changes refer to the second last election of 2004):\nMayors.\nSince 1374, the mayor and the council maintain the government of the town. In the 16th century, the town had two, sometimes three mayors, and in 1552, the council had 13 members. Later, the head of the administration was reorganized several times. In the W\u00fcrttemberg era, the mayor's title was initially called \"B\u00fcrgermeister\", then from 1819 it was Schulthei\u00df, and since 1947 it is \"Oberb\u00fcrgermeister\". The mayor is elected for a term of eight years, and he is chairman and a voting member of the council. He has one deputy with the official title of \"Erster B\u00fcrgermeister\" (\"first mayor\") and one with the official title of \"B\u00fcrgermeister\" (\"mayor\").\nHeads of town in Aalen since 1802\nCoat of arms and flag.\nAalen's coat of arms depicts a black eagle with a red tongue on golden background, having a red shield on its breast with a bent silver eel on it. Eagle and eel were first acknowledged as Aalen's heraldic animals in the seal of 1385, with the eagle representing the town's imperial immediacy. After the territorial reform, it was bestowed again by the Administrative District of Stuttgart on 16 November 1976.\nThe coat of arms' blazon reads: \"In gold, the black imperial eagle, with a red breast shield applied to it, therein a bent silver eel\" \"(In Gold der schwarze Reichsadler, belegt mit einem roten Brustschild, darin ein gekr\u00fcmmter silberner Aal)\".\nAalen's flag is striped in red and white and contains the coat of arms.\nThe origin of the town's name is uncertain. Matth\u00e4us Merian (1593\u20131650) presumed the name to originate from its location at the Kocher river, where \"frequently eels are caught\", while \"Aal\" is German for \"eel\". Other explanations point to Aalen as the garrison of an ala during the Roman empire, respectively to an abridgement of the Roman name \"Aquileia\" as a potential name of the Roman fort, a name that nearby Heidenheim an der Brenz bore as well. Another interpretation points to a Celtic word aa meaning \"water\".\nGodparenthood.\nOn the occasion of the 1980 \"Reichsst\u00e4dter Tage\", Aalen took over godparenthood for the more than 3000 ethnic Germans displaced from the Wischau linguistic enclave. 972 of them settled in Aalen in 1946. The \"Wischau Linguistic Enclave Society\" \"(Gemeinschaft Wischauer Sprachinsel)\" regularly organises commemorative meetings in Aalen. Their traditional costumes are stored in the Old Town Hall.\nMunicipal finances.\nAccording to the 2007 municipal poll by the Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg chapter of the German Taxpayers Federation, municipal tax revenues totalling to 54,755 million Euros (2006) resp. 62,148 million Euros (2007) face the following debts:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAalen is twinned with:\nThe \"Twin Towns Society of Aalen\" \"(St\u00e4dtepartnerschaftsverein Aalen e.\u00a0V.)\" promotes friendly relations between Aalen and its twin towns, which comprises mutual exchanges of sports and cultural clubs, schools and other civic institutions. On the occasion of the Reichsst\u00e4dter Tage, from 11 until 13 September 2009 the first conference of twin towns was held.\nCulture and sights.\nTheatre.\nThe \"Theater der Stadt Aalen\" theatre was founded in 1991 and stages 400 to 500 performances a year.\nSchubart Literary Award.\nThe town endowed the \"Schubart Literary Award\" \"(Schubart-Literaturpreis)\" in 1955 in tribute to Christian Friedrich Daniel Schubart, who spent his childhood and youth in Aalen. It is one of the earliest literary awards in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg and is awarded biennially to German-language writers whose work coincide with Schubart's \"liberal and enlightened reasoning\". It is compensated with 12,000\u00a0Euros.\nMusic.\nFounded in 1958, the \"Music School of the Town of Aalen\" today has about 1,500 students taught by 27 music instructors in 30 subjects. In 1977, a symphony orchestra was founded in Aalen, which today is called \"Aalener Sinfonieorchester\", and consists mostly of instructors and students of the music school. It performs three public concerts annually: The \"New Year's Concert\" in January, the \"Symphony Concert\" in July and a \"Christmas Concert\" in December. Beyond that, music festivals regularly take place in Aalen, like the Aalen Jazzfest.\nThe Aalen volunteer fire department has had a marching band since 1952, whose roots date back to 1883. In 1959, the band received its first glockenspiel from TV host Peter Frankenfeld on the occasion of a TV appearance.\nA famous German rapper, designer and singer, that goes under the name of Cro, was born in Aalen and lived his early years here.\nArts.\nThe \"Kunstverein Aalen\" was founded in 1983 as a non-profit art association and today is located in the Old Town Hall. \nThe institution with more than 400 members focuses on solo and group exhibitions by international artists. It belongs to the \"Arbeitsgemeinschaft Deutscher Kunstvereine\" (ADKV), an umbrella organization for non-profit art associations.\nMuseums and memorial sites.\nMuseums.\nIn the central district of Aalen, there are two museums: The \"Aalen Limes Museum\" \"(Limesmuseum Aalen)\" is located at the place of the largest Roman cavalry fort north of the Alps until about 200 AD. It opened in 1964. The museum exhibits numerous objects from the Roman era. The ruins of the cavalry fort located beside the museum is open to museum visitors. Every other year, a Roman festival is held in the area of the museum (see below).\nIn the Geological-Paleontological Museum located in the historic town hall, there are more than 1500 fossils from the Swabian Jura, including ammonites, ichthyosaurs and corals, displayed.\nIn the Waldhausen district the \"Heimatst\u00fcble\" museum of local history has an exhibition on agriculture and rural living.\nIn the Wasseralfingen district, there are two more museums: The \"Museum Wasseralfingen\" comprises a local history exhibition and an art gallery including works of Hermann Plock, Helmut Schuster and Sieger K\u00f6der. Also, the stove plate collection of the \"Schw\u00e4bische H\u00fcttenwerke\" steel mill is exhibited, with artists, modellers and the production sequence of a cast plate from design to final product being presented.\nMemorial sites.\nThere is memorial stone at the \"Schillerlinde\" tree above Wasseralfingen's ore pit dedicated to four prisoners of the subcamp of Natzweiler-Struthof concentration camp killed there. Also in Wasseralfingen, in the cemetery a memorial with the Polish inscription \"To the victims of Hitler\" which commemorates the deceased forced labourers buried there.\nIn 1954, on the \"Schillerh\u00f6he\" hill the town erected a bell tower as a memorial to Aalen's victims of both world wars and to the displacement of ethnic Germans. The tower was planned by Emil Leo, the bell was endowed by Carl Schneider. The tower is open on request. Every evening at 18:45 (before 2003: at 19:45), the memorial's bell rings.\nBuildings.\nChurches.\nThe town centre is dominated by the Evangelical-Lutheran St. Nicholas' Church in the heart of the pedestrian area. The church, in its present shape being built between 1765 and 1767, is the only major Late Baroque building in Aalen and is the main church of the Evangelical-Lutheran parish of Aalen.\n\"St. John's Church\" is located inside of St. John's cemetery in the western centre. The building presumably is from the 9th century and thus is one of W\u00fcrttemberg's oldest existing churches. The interior features frescos from the early 13th century.\nFor other churches in Aalen, see the Religions section.\nHistoric Town Hall with \"Spy\".\nThe Historic Town Hall was originally built in the 14th century. After the fire of 1634, it was re-constructed in 1636. This building received a clock from Lauterburg, and the Imperial City of Nuremberg donated a Carillon. It features a figurine of the \"Spy of Aalen\" and historically displayed other figurines, however the latter ones were lost by a fire in 1884. Since then, the Spy resides inside the reconstructed tower and has become a symbol of the town. The building was used as the town hall until 1907. Since 1977, the Geological-Paleontological Museum resides in the Historic Town Hall.\nAccording to legend, the citizens of Aalen owe the \"Spy of Aalen\" \"(Spion von Aalen)\" their town having been spared from destruction by the emperor's army:\nThe Imperial City of Aalen was once in quarrel with the emperor, and his army was shortly before the gates to take the town. The people of Aalen got scared and thus dispatched their \"most cunning\" one out into the enemy's camp to spy out the strength of their troops. Without any digression, he went straight into the middle of the enemy camp, which inescapably led to him being seized and presented to the emperor. When the emperor asked him what he had lost here, he answered in Swabian German: \"Don't frighten, high lords, I just want to peek how many cannons and other war things you've got, since I am the spy of Aalen\". The emperor laughed upon such a blatancy and \"acted\" na\u00efvety, steered him all through the camp and then sent him back home. Soon the emperor withdrew with his army as he thought a town such \"wise guys\" reside in deserved being spared.\nOld Town Hall.\nThe earliest record of the Old Town Hall was in 1575. Its outside wall features the oldest known coat of arms, which is of 1664. Until 1851, the building also housed the \"Krone-Post\" hotel, which coincided with being a station of the Thurn und Taxis postal company. It has housed many notable persons. Thus the so-called \"Napoleon Window\" with its \"N\" painted on reminds of the stay of French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte in 1805. According to legend, he rammed his head so hard it bled on this window, when he was startled by the noise of his soldiers ridiculing the \"Spy of Aalen\". The building was used as Aalen's town hall from 1907 until 1975. Today it houses a cabaret caf\u00e9 and the stage of the Theatre of the Town of Aalen. The town has adopted the \"Wischau Linguistic Enclave Society\" due to their godparenthood and stores their traditional costumes in the building.\nB\u00fcrgerspital.\nThe \"B\u00fcrgerspital\" (\"Civic Asylum\") is a timber-frame house erected on \"Spritzenhausplatz\" (\"Fire Engine House Square\") in 1702. Until 1873, it was used as civic hospital, then, later as a retirement home. After a comprehensive renovation in 1980 it was turned into a senior citizen's community centre.\nLimes-Thermen.\nOn a slope of the \"Langert\" mountain, south of the town, the \"Limes-Thermen\" (\"Limes Thermae\") hot springs are located. They were built in ancient Roman style and opened in 1985. The health spa is supplied with water about .\nMarket square.\nThe market square is the historic hub of Aalen and runs along about from the town hall in the south to the Historic Town Hall and the Old Town Hall in the north, where it empties into \"Radgasse\" alley. Since 1809, it is site of the weekly market on Wednesday and Saturday. About in front of the \"Reichsst\u00e4dter Brunnen\" fountain at the town hall, the coats of arms of Aalen, its twinned cities and of the Wischau linguistic enclave are paved into the street as mosaic.\nMarket fountain.\nIn 1705, for the water supply of Aalen a well casing was erected at the northern point of the market square, in front of the Historic Town Hall. It was a present of duke Eberhard Louis. The fountain bore a statue of emperor Joseph\u00a0I., who was enthroned in 1705 and in 1707 renewed Aalen's Imperial City privileges. The fountain was supplied via a wooden pipe. Excessive water was dissipated through ditches branched from Kocher river. When in the early 1870s Aalen's water network was constructed, the fountain was replaced by a smaller fountain about distant. In 1975, the old market fountain was re-erected in baroque style. It bears a replica of the emperor's statue, with the original statue exhibited in the new town hall's lobby. The cast iron casing plates depict the 1718 coat of arms of the Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg and the coats of arms of Aalen and of the merged municipalities.\nReichsst\u00e4dter Brunnen.\nThe \"Reichsst\u00e4dter Brunnen\" fountain (\"Imperial Civic Fountain\") is located in front of the town hall at the southern point of the market square. It was created by sculptor Fritz Nuss in 1977 to commemorate Aalen's time as an Imperial City (1360\u20131803). On its circumference is a frieze showing bronze figurines illustrating the town's history.\nRadgasse.\nThe \"Radgasse\" (\"Wheel Alley\") features Aalen's oldest fa\u00e7ade. Originally a small pond was on its side. The buildings were erected between 1659 and 1662 for peasants with citizenry privileges and renovated in the mid-1980s. The namesake for the alley was the \"Wheel\" tavern, which was to be found at the site of today's address \"Radgasse 15\".\nTiefer Stollen.\nThe former iron ore pit \"Wilhelm\" at Braunenberg hill was converted into the \"Tiefer Stollen\" tourist mine in order to remind of the old-day miners' efforts and to maintain it as a memorial of early industrialisation in the Aalen area. It has a mining museum open for visitors, and a mine railway takes visitors deep into the mountain. The Town of Aalen, a sponsorship association, and many citizens volunteered several thousand hours of labour to put the mine into its current state. As far as possible, things were left in the original state. In 1989, a sanitary gallery was established where respiratory diseases are treated within rest cures. Thus the Aalen village of R\u00f6thard, where the gallery is located, was awarded the title of \"Place with sanitary gallery service\" in 2004.\nObservatory.\nThe Aalen Observatory was built in 1969 as school observatory for the Schubart Gymnasium. In 2001, it was converted to a public observatory. Since then, it has been managed by the \"Astronomische Arbeitsgemeinschaft Aalen\" (\"Aalen Astronomical Society\"). It is located on Schillerh\u00f6he hill and features two refractive telescopes. They were manufactured by Carl Zeiss AG which has its headquarters in nearby Oberkochen and operates a manufacturing works in Aalen (see below). In the observatory, guided tours and lectures are held regularly.\nWindpark Waldhausen.\nThe \"Windpark Waldhausen\" wind farm began operations in early 2007. It consists of seven REpower MM92 wind turbines with a nameplate capacity of 2 MW each. The hub height of each wind turbine is , with a rotor diameter of .\nAalb\u00e4umle observation tower.\nThe tall \"Aalb\u00e4umle\" observation tower is built atop \"Langert\" mountain. This popular hiking destination was built in 1898 and was remodelled in 1992. It features a good view over Aalen and the Welland region, up to the Rosenstein mountain and Ellwangen. Beneath the tower, an adventure playground and a cabin is located. A flag on the tower signals whether the cabin's restaurant is open.\nNatural monuments.\nThe Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg State Institute for Environment, Measurements and Natural Conservation has laid out six protected landscapes in Aalen (the \"Swabian Jura escarpment between Lautern and Aalen with adjacent territories\", the \"Swabian Jura escarpment between Unterkochen and Baiershofen\", the \"Hilllands around Hofen\", the \"Kugeltal and Ebnater Tal valleys with parts of Heiligental valley and adjacent territories\", \"Laubachtal valley\" and \"Lower Lein Valley with side valleys\"), two sanctuary forests (\"Glash\u00fctte\" and \"Kocher Origin\"), 65 extensive natural monuments, 30 individual natural monuments and the following two protected areas:\nThe large \"Dellenh\u00e4ule\" protected area between Aalen's Waldhausen district and Neresheim's Elchingen district, created in 1969, is a sheep pasture with juniper and wood pasture of old willow oaks.\nThe large \"Goldsh\u00f6fer Sande\" protected area was established in 2000 and is situated between Aalen's Hofen district and H\u00fcttlingen. The sands on the hill originated from the Early Pleistocene are of geological importance, and the various grove structures offer habitat to severely endangered bird species.\nSports.\nThe football team, VfR Aalen, was founded in 1921 and played in the 2nd German League between 2012 and 2015, after which they were relegated to 3. Liga. Its playing venue is the Scholz-Arena situated in the west of the town, which bore the name \"St\u00e4dtisches Waldstadion Aalen\" (\"Civic Forest Stadium of Aalen\") until 2008. From 1939 until 1945, the VfR played in the Gauliga W\u00fcrttemberg, then one of several parallel top-ranking soccer leagues of Germany.\nThe KSV Aalen wrestles in the Wrestling Federal League. It was German champion in team wrestling in 2010. Its predecessor, the \"KSV Germania Aalen\" disbanded in 2005, was German champion eight times and runner-up five times since 1976. Another Aalen club, the TSV Dewangen, wrestled in the Federal League until 2009.\nTwo American sports, American football and Baseball, are pursued by the \"MTV Aalen\". Volleyball has been gaining in popularity in Aalen for years. The first men's team of \"DJK Aalen\" accomplished qualification for regional league in the season of 2008/09.\nThe \"Ostalb\" ski lifts are located south of the town centre, at the northern slope of the Swabian Jura. The skiing area comprises two platter lifts that have a vertical rise of , with two runs with lengths of and a beginners' run.\nRegular events.\nReichsst\u00e4dter Tage.\nSince 1975, \"Reichsst\u00e4dter Tage\" (\"Imperial City days\") festival is held annually in the town centre on the second weekend in September. It is deemed the largest festival of the Ostw\u00fcrttemberg region, and is associated with a shopping Sunday in accordance with the code. The festival is also attended by delegations from the twinned cities. On the town hall square, on Sunday an ecumenical service is held.\nRoman Festival.\nThe international Roman Festival \"(R\u00f6mertage)\" are held biannially on the site of the former Roman fort and the modern Limes museum. The festival's ninth event in 2008 was attended by around 11,000 people.\nAalen Jazz Festival.\nAnnually during the second week of November, the Aalen Jazz Festival brings known and unknown artists to Aalen. It has already featured musicians like Miles Davis, B. B. King, Ray Charles, David Murray, McCoy Tyner, Al Jarreau, Esbj\u00f6rn Svensson and Albert Mangelsdorff. The festival is complemented by individual concerts in spring and summer, and, including the individual concerts, comprises around 25 concerts with a total of about 13,000 visitors.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nIn 2008 there were 30,008 employees liable to social insurance living in Aalen. 13,946 (46.5\u00a0percent) were employed in the manufacturing sector, 4,715 (15.7\u00a0percent) in commerce, catering, hotels and transport, and 11,306 (37.7\u00a0percent) in other services. Annually 16,000 employees commute to work, with about 9,000 living in the town and commuting out.\nAltogether in Aalen there are about 4,700 business enterprises, 1,100 of them being registered in the trade register. The others comprise 2,865 small enterprises and 701 craft enterprises.\nIn Aalen, metalworking is the predominant industry, along with machine-building. Other industries include optics, paper, information technology, chemicals, textiles, medical instruments, pharmaceuticals, and food.\nNotable enterprises include \"SHW Automotive\" (originating from the former \"Schw\u00e4bische H\u00fcttenwerke\" steel mills and a mill of 1671 in Wasseralfingen), the \"Alfing Kessler\" engineering works, the precision tools manufacturer \"MAPAL Dr.\u00a0Kress\", the snow chain manufacturer \"RUD\u00a0Ketten\u00a0Rieger\u00a0&amp;\u00a0Dietz\" and its subsidiary \"Erlau\", the \"Gesenkschmiede Schneider\" forging die smithery, the \"SDZ Druck und Medien\" media company, the \"Papierfabrik Palm\" paper mill, the alarm system manufacturer \"Telenot\", the laser show provider \"LOBO electronic\" and the textile finisher \"Lindenfarb\", which all have their seat in Aalen. A branch in Aalen is maintained by optical systems manufacturer Carl Zeiss headquartered in nearby Oberkochen.\nTransport.\nRail.\nAalen station is a regional railway hub on the Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt\u2013N\u00f6rdlingen railway from Stuttgart and N\u00f6rdlingen, the Aalen\u2013Ulm railway from Ulm and the Goldsh\u00f6fe\u2013Crailsheim railway to Crailsheim. Until 1972, the H\u00e4rtsfeld Railway connected Aalen with Dillingen an der Donau via Neresheim. Other railway stations within the town limits are \"Hofen (b Aalen)\", \"Unterkochen\", \"Wasseralfingen\" and Goldsh\u00f6fe station. The \"Aalen-Erlau\" stop situated in the south is no longer operational.\nAalen station is served at two-hour intervals by trains of Intercity line 61 Karlsruhe\u2013Stuttgart\u2013Aalen\u2013Nuremberg. For regional rail travel, Aalen is served by various lines of the Interregio-Express, Regional-Express and Regionalbahn categories. Since the beginning of 2019, the British company Go-Ahead took over the regional railway business of DB Regio in the region surrounding Aalen. The town also operates the Aalen industrial railway \"(Industriebahn Aalen)\", which carries about 250 carloads per year.\nBus.\nAalen also is a regional hub in the bus network of OstalbMobil, the transport network of the district Aalen is in. The bus lines are operated and serviced by regional companies like OVA and RBS RegioBus Stuttgart.\nStreet.\nThe junctions of \"Aalen/Westhausen\" and \"Aalen/Oberkochen\" connect Aalen with the Autobahn A7 (W\u00fcrzburg\u2013F\u00fcssen). Federal roads (\"Bundesstra\u00dfen\") connecting with Aalen are B\u00a019 (W\u00fcrzburg\u2013Ulm), B\u00a029 (Waiblingen\u2013N\u00f6rdlingen) and B\u00a0290 (Tauberbischofsheim\u2013Westhausen). The Schw\u00e4bische Dichterstra\u00dfe (\"Swabian Poets' Route\") tourist route established in 1977/78 leads through Aalen.\nSeveral bus lines operate within the borough. The \"Omnibus-Verkehr Aalen\" company is one of the few in Germany that use double-decker buses, it has done so since 1966. A district-wide fare system, \"OstalbMobil\", has been in effect since 2007.\nAir transport.\nStuttgart Airport, offering international connections, is about away, the travel time by train is about 100\u00a0Minutes. At Aalen-Heidenheim Airport, located south-east of Aalen, small aircraft are permitted. Gliding airfields nearby are in Heubach and Bartholom\u00e4.\nBicycle.\nBicycle routes stretching through Aalen are the \"Deutscher Limes-Radweg\" (\"German Limes Bicycle Route\") and the \"Kocher-Jagst\" Bicycle Route.\nPublic facilities.\nAalen houses an Amtsgericht (local district court), chambers of the Stuttgart Labour Court, a notary's office, a tax office and an employment agency. It is the seat of the Ostalbkreis district office, of the Aalen Deanery of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church and of the \"Ostalb\" deanery of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rottenburg-Stuttgart.\nThe Stuttgart administrative court, the Stuttgart Labour Court and the Ulm Social Welfare Court are in charge for Aalen.\nAalen had a civic hospital, which resided in the \"B\u00fcrgerspital\" building until 1873, then in a building at \"Alte Heidenheimer Stra\u00dfe\". In 1942, the hospital was taken over by the district. The district hospital at the present site of \"K\u00e4lblesrain\", known today as \"Ostalb-Klinikum\", was opened in 1955.\nMedia.\nThe first local newspaper, \"Der Bote von Aalen\" (\"The Herald of Aalen\"), has been published on Wednesdays and Saturdays since 1837.\nCurrently, local newspapers published in Aalen are the \"Schw\u00e4bische Post\", which obtains its supra-regional pages from the Ulm-based S\u00fcdwestpresse, and the \"Aalener Nachrichten\" (erstwhile \"Aalener Volkszeitung\"), a local edition of Schw\u00e4bische Zeitung in Leutkirch im Allg\u00e4u.\nTwo of Germany's biggest Lesezirkels (magazine rental services) are headquartered in Aalen: \"Brabandt LZ Plus Media\" and \"Lesezirkel Portal\".\nRegional event magazines are \"Xaver\", \"\u00e5la\", \"\u00e5lakultur\".\nThe commercial broadcasters \"Radio Ton\" and \"Radio 7\" have studios in Aalen.\nEducation.\nA Latin school was first recorded in Aalen in 1447; it was remodeled in 1616 and also later in various buildings that were all situated near the town church, and continued up through the 19th century. In the course of the reformation, a \"German school\" was established in tandem, being a predecessor of the latter Volksschule school type. In 1860, the \"Ritterschule\" was built as a \"Volksschule\" for girls; the building today houses the \"Pestalozzischule\". In 1866, a new building was erected for the Latin school and for the Realschule established in 1840. This building, later known as the \"Alte Gewerbeschule\", was torn down in 1975 to free up land for the new town hall. In 1912, the \"Parkschule\" building was opened. It was designed by Paul Bonatz and today houses the \"Schubart-Gymnasium\".\nThe biggest educational institution in the town is the \"Hochschule Aalen\", which was founded in 1962 and focuses on engineering and economics. It is attended by 5000 students on five campuses and employs 129 professors and 130 other lecturers.\nThe town provides three Gymnasiums, four Realschulen, two \"F\u00f6rderschulen\" (special schools), six combined Grundschulen and Hauptschulen and eight standalone Grundschulen. The Ostalbkreis district provides three vocational schools and three additional special schools. Finally, six non-state schools of various types exist.\nThe German Esperanto Library (German: \"Deutsche Esperanto-Bibliothek\", Esperanto: \"Germana Esperanto-Biblioteko\") has been located in the building of the town library since 1989.\nTV and radio transmission tower.\nThe S\u00fcdwestrundfunk broadcasting company operates the Aalen transmission tower on the \"Braunenberg\" hill. The tower was erected in 1956, it is tall and made of reinforced concrete.\nThings named after Aalen.\nThe following vehicles are named \"Aalen\":\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2383", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2383", "title": "Alois Alzheimer", "text": "German psychiatrist and neuropathologist (1864\u20131915)\nAlois Alzheimer ( , ; 14 June 1864 \u2013 19 December 1915) was a German psychiatrist, neuropathologist and colleague of Emil Kraepelin. He is credited with identifying the first published case of \"presenile dementia\", which Kraepelin later identified as Alzheimer's disease.\nEarly life and education.\nAlzheimer was born in Marktbreit, Bavaria, on 14 June 1864, the son of Anna Johanna Barbara Sabina and Eduard Rom\u00e1n Alzheimer. His father served in the office of notary public in the family's hometown. The family was devoutly Catholic.\nThe Alzheimers moved to Aschaffenburg when Alois was still young in order to give their children an opportunity to attend the Royal Humanistic Gymnasium (high school). After graduating with Abitur in 1883, Alzheimer studied medicine at University of Berlin, University of T\u00fcbingen, and University of W\u00fcrzburg. In his final year at university, he was a member of a fencing fraternity, and even received a fine for disturbing the peace while out with his team. In 1887, Alzheimer graduated from W\u00fcrzburg as Doctor of Medicine.\nCareer.\nIn 1888, Alzheimer spent five months assisting mentally ill women before he took an office in the city mental asylum in Frankfurt, the St\u00e4dtische Anstalt f\u00fcr Irre und Epileptische (Asylum for Lunatics and Epileptics). Emil Sioli, a noted psychiatrist, was the dean of the asylum. Another neurologist, Franz Nissl, began to work in the same asylum with Alzheimer. Together, they conducted research on the pathology of the nervous system, specifically the normal and pathological anatomy of the cerebral cortex. Alzheimer was the co-founder and co-publisher of the journal \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr die gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie\", though he never wrote a book that he could call his own.\nWhile at the Frankfurt asylum, Alzheimer also met Emil Kraepelin, one of the best-known German psychiatrists of the time. Kraepelin became a mentor to Alzheimer, and the two worked very closely for the next several years. When Kraepelin moved to Munich to work at the Royal Psychiatric Hospital in 1903, he invited Alzheimer to join him.\nAt the time, Kraepelin was doing clinical research on psychosis in senile patients; Alzheimer, on the other hand, was more interested in the lab work of senile illnesses. They faced many challenges involving the politics of the psychiatric community. For example, formal and informal arrangements were made among psychiatrists at asylums and universities to receive cadavers.\nIn 1904, Alzheimer completed his habilitation at Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, where he was appointed as a professor in 1908. Afterward, he left Munich for the Silesian Friedrich Wilhelm University in Breslau in 1912, where he accepted a post as professor of psychiatry and director of the Neurologic and Psychiatric Institute. His health deteriorated shortly after his arrival so that he was hospitalized. He died three years later.\nAlzheimer is known for having a variety of medical interests including vascular diseases of the brain, early dementia, brain tumors, forensic psychiatry and epilepsy.\nAuguste Deter.\nIn 1901, Alzheimer observed a patient at the Frankfurt asylum named Auguste Deter. The 51-year-old patient had strange behavioral symptoms, including a loss of short-term memory; she became his obsession over the coming years. Auguste Deter was a victim of the politics of the time in the psychiatric community; the Frankfurt asylum was too expensive for her husband. Herr Deter made several requests to have his wife moved to a less expensive facility, but Alzheimer intervened in these requests. Auguste D., as she was known, remained at the Frankfurt asylum, where Alzheimer had made a deal to receive her records and brain upon her death, paying for the remainder of her stay in return.\nOn 8 April 1906, Auguste Deter died, and Alzheimer had her medical records and brain brought to Munich where he was working in Kraepelin's laboratory. With two Italian physicians, he used the newly developed Bielschowsky stain to identify amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. These brain anomalies became identifiers of what is now known as Alzheimer's disease.\nOn 3November 1906, Alzheimer discussed his findings on the brain pathology and symptoms of presenile dementia publicly, at the T\u00fcbingen meeting of the Southwest German Psychiatrists. The attendees at this lecture seemed uninterested in what he had to say. The lecturer that followed Alzheimer was to speak on the topic of \"compulsive masturbation\", which the audience of 88 individuals was so eagerly awaiting that they sent Alzheimer away without any questions or comments on his discovery of the pathology of a peculiar case of early-onset dementia.\nFollowing his presentation, Alzheimer published a short paper summarizing his presentation; in 1907 he wrote a longer paper detailing the disease and his findings. It became known as Alzheimer's disease in 1910, when Kraepelin named it so in the chapter on \"Presenile and Senile Dementia\" in the 8th edition of his \"Handbook of Psychiatry\". By 1911, his description of the disease was being used by European physicians to diagnose patients in the US.\nAdditional case descriptions by Alzheimer and his colleagues continued in the following years, including older patients than the early-onset dementia of Auguste Deter. Alzheimer eventually conceived \"his\" disease as mainly characterized clinically by a severe dementia with instrumental symptoms, and pathologically by extended neurofibrillary tangles. He debated fiercely with Oskar Fischer, a German-speaking pathologist from Prague, who instead emphasized on the importance of neuritic plaques and of presbyophrenia as the phenotype. Finally, it must be highlighted that Fischer\u2013Alzheimer's nosological considerations had less impact than Kraepelin's 1910 Textbook of Psychiatry, which distinguished between \"Alzheimer's disease\" and senile dementia, including presbyophrenia. This textbook had a strong influence on early 20th century research on senile dementia and played a significant role in the classification of dementia in the following decades.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn 1894, Alzheimer married Cecilie Simonette Nathalie Geisenheimer, with whom he had three children. She died in 1901.\nIn August 1912, Alzheimer fell ill on the train on his way to the University of Breslau, where he had been appointed professor of psychiatry in July 1912. Most probably a streptococcal infection and subsequent rheumatic fever led to valvular heart disease, heart failure and kidney failure. He died of heart failure on 19 December 1915 at age 51, in Breslau, Silesia (present-day Wroc\u0142aw, Poland). His body was buried four days later, next to Cecilie's at the Frankfurt Main Cemetery.\nContemporaries.\nAmerican Solomon Carter Fuller gave a report similar to that of Alzheimer at a lecture five months before Alzheimer. Oskar Fischer was a fellow German psychiatrist, twelve years Alzheimer's junior, who reported twelve cases of senile dementia in 1907 around the time that Alzheimer published his short paper summarizing his presentation.\nAlzheimer and Fischer had different interpretations of the disease, but owing to Alzheimer's short life, they never had the opportunity to meet and discuss their ideas.\nCritics and rediscovery.\nIn the early 1990s, critics began to question Alzheimer's findings and form their own hypotheses based on Alzheimer's notes and papers. Amaducci and colleagues hypothesized that Auguste Deter had metachromatic leukodystrophy, a rare condition in which accumulations of fats affect the cells that produce myelin. Claire O'Brien, meanwhile, hypothesized that Auguste Deter actually had a vascular dementing disease.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2384", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2384", "title": "Aedile", "text": "Roman republican magistrate charged with city maintenance and order\nAn (English: ) was a magistrate in the Roman Republic who had responsibilities for the upkeep of the city, such as its buildings, roads, and markets; the availability of grain at reasonable prices; and the holding of games. It also had some judicial functions, being able to issue fines and corporal punishments with an additional right to prosecute crimes before the assemblies, but by the middle republic was mostly an office used for distributing largesse to win the officeholder popular acclaim.\nThere were two kinds of aediles, plebeian aediles and curule aediles. The former were, according to Roman tradition, the first aediles created (c.\u2009494\u00a0BC), initially as assistants to the plebeian tribunes, with the curule aediles created c.\u2009367\u00a0BC. The plebeian aediles, even though originally tribunician assistants, assimilated with the curule aediles: by the middle republic, aediles were junior to praetors and senior to quaestors, with the tribunate usually held \"before\" an aedilate. The two types of aediles had largely the same duties.\nThe duties of the aediles did not long survive the republic. While the office continued to exist under the empire, many of their public functions were assumed by the emperor or his appointees. There were, however, aediles in self-governing communities outside of Rome who continued to be elected by and support their localities in much the same way the republican aediles at Rome did.\nEtymology.\nThe Latin word for aedile, \"aedilis\", is derived from the word \"aedes\" (meaning temple or dwelling place) with the suffix \"-ilis\".\nRoman aediles.\nThere were two kinds of aediles: curule and plebeian. Curule aediles were elected in the tribal assembly, while plebeian aediles were elected in the plebeian council from plebeian candidates by a plebeian tribune. While curule aediles possessed a curule chair, they did not possess \"imperium\" or the immunity from prosecution which it implied.\nBy the late middle republic the two pairs of aediles had largely overlapping duties in the upkeep of temples, markets, and streets. They were also responsible for two major sets of annual games: the curule aediles held the \"ludi Romani\" and the Megalensian games; the plebeian aediles held the \"ludi plebii\" and the Floralian and Cerealian games. Plebeian aediles also had responsibilities to keep plebeian records, which were likely stored at the Temple of Ceres on the Aventine.\nIt was not necessary to hold the aedilate as part of the cursus honorum; however, if held, by the middle and late republic it usually was held after the plebeian tribunate and before the praetorship. Customarily, though not entirely observed by the late republic, two years had to elapse between the holding of the aedilate and the praetorship.\nResponsibilities.\nOne of the main responsibilities of the aediles was management of Rome's marketplaces. This included a responsibility to ensure the availability of grain and tolerable prices. Aediles managed markets by promulgating an edict specifying the Rome's commercial law and regulations observed therein, while also providing men to ensure the proper enforcement of those rules. Aediles also had a role in stabilising grain prices, but until the development of public granaries from Gaius Gracchus' tribunate in 122\u00a0BC, the aediles' ability achieve this goal was limited and contingent on officeholders' foreign contacts, their financial resources, and the availability of shipping.\nAediles also possessed a general \"cura urbis\". This entailed caring for the condition of streets and public buildings (such as basilicas and temples). At times this could also include the construction of new buildings, such as the erection of shops on the Tiber and a porticus by the aedilican pairs of 193 and 192\u00a0BC. Aediles also supervised more junior city magistrates such as the \"triumviri capitales\" or \"nocturni\", who were part of the minor \"vigintisexviri\", in their law enforcement duties.\nBoth curule and plebeian aediles possessed the power to prosecute by \"iudicium populi\" before the tribal assembly. The offences that aediles could prosecute were essentially unlimited, with attested aedilican prosecutorial jurisdiction over \"provocatio\" (violation of citizen appeal rights), \"\" (public violence), tax evasion, usury, \"veneficia\" (witchcraft), and \"stuprum\" (sexual assault). These judicial powers were exercised without \"imperium\" and also included the authority to issue summary corporal punishments.\nThis prosecutorial power also entailed the ability to assess fines from offenders, which were often used to defray costs incurred in the upkeep of the city. Indeed, aedilician fines collected from usurers or illegal graziers, are attested to have been used temple construction and games. However, many of the costs incurred were also paid for by the officeholders: this was especially the case with games which, when splendid, could win the man who paid for them substantial popularity with the voters. This was recognised by 182\u00a0BC, when Tiberius Gracchus spent so much as curule aedile on games that legislation was passed in 179 to put a cap on expenditures.\nDevelopment.\nThe annalistic tradition suggests that the first aediles at Rome were the plebeian pair, created as assistants to the plebeian tribunes with judicial powers in 494\u00a0BC. Livy also suggests that these first plebeian aediles were sacrosanct, like the tribunes, but this has been doubted. Some scholars have also suggested that the plebeian aediles first emerged as priests of the goddess Ceres but there is no ancient evidence of this.\nThe curule aediles, in the annalistic tradition, were created in the Licinio-Sextian settlement from 367\u00a0BC: plebeians being eligible for the consulship and the consular tribunate suppressed, a praetorship along with two curule aediles were added. Large parts of this tradition, which place the impulse for these reforms in the conflict between patricians and plebeians, have been doubted; the reforms before 367 may instead have largely reflected the city-state's then need for more specialised governance. If the curule aedilate was intended to be exclusive to the patricians, this was quickly dropped. Annalistic accounts of a compromise where alternating years had plebeian and patrician pairs as curule aedile, if at all accurate, did not reflect late republican practice which saw no such alternation.\nThe acquisition of Rome's overseas provinces and entanglements likely catalysed the development of aedilican responsibilities: consuls and some praetors would regularly have been absent from the city commanding troops; plebeian tribunes on the other hand, in their more political role, would have had little time for administrative affairs.\nDecline.\nThe dictator Julius Caesar introduced two more aediles in 44\u00a0BC. They may have been entrusted with care for the city's grain supply, the \"ludi Cereales\", or both. If these new aediles had responsibilities for the grain supply, their powers over it were likely stripped in 22\u00a0BC, when Augustus assumed responsibility over that matter. The two \"aediles Cereales\", however, were not disestablished; they likely were instead reassigned to other customary aedilician tasks.\nThe emergence of huge building projects during the triumviral period, which continued into the early empire under Augustus, tended against the continued relevance of the aediles. The expense of holding the office, along with the few political benefits, had by 33\u00a0BC made it something to avoid. That year, Augustus had his friend and ally Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa (who had previously been praetor and consul in 40 and 37\u00a0BC respectively) hold the office of aedile: Agrippa promptly started a huge building programme, repaired three aqueducts, began construction of a new one, and spent lavishly on games. In the years after Agrippa's aedilate, however, many of the customary maintenance functions of temples, aqueducts, and roads were assigned to the emperor in the name of the senate rather than kept with the annual aediles.\nMost of the aedilician responsibilities for public order were also stripped from the period after 44\u00a0BC, though some powers over public markets (especially the sale of goods) and jurisdiction over sumptuary laws was retained.\nNon-Roman aediles.\nOther cities in Italy also had their own aediles and they were also a standard feature of Roman \"municipia\". \"Municipia\" were commonly run by a board of four magistrates: the town's chief magistrates, the \"duoviri\" with two \"aediles\". This arrangement was common in attested colonies in Spain, but not all municipalities necessarily followed such a division. It was likely that, in some towns, there was a senior college of \"quattorviri\" assisted with two \"aediles\".\nElections for these positions were generally conducted in similar form to Roman republican elections, with the town's citizens divided into voting \"curiae\" and the victors decided by those \"curiae\". Candidates were also regulated by law, excluding those with dishonourable professions or reputations and requiring sureties to be posted for performance of duties. Even as elections for the aedilate at Rome came under the control of the emperors, they continued to be contested at the local level. At Pompeii, for example, there has been discovered graffiti of campaign messages for municipal elections to the municipal aedilate. Other cities that had aediles include Agrigentum in Sicily and Corinth, at the time a Roman colony, in Greece.\nThese municipal aediles were generally put in charge of similar tasks to those of the republican aediles at Rome: supervising road maintenance, public buildings, public markets, and night watches. Some towns also elected municipal quaestors, generally more junior than the aediles, to assist in these tasks but it is not clear that all towns had such a magistracy. Municipal aediles were also normally inducted into the town's council (\"curia\" or \"ordo decurionum\"), either by virtue of having held office or by wealth. There are few attested difficulties in filling these municipal offices until the late second century\u00a0AD, when complaints about the personal expense of holding these offices \u2013 which were paid out of the officeholder's pocket \u2013 become more common. The municipal office starts to disappear, probably after having been stripped of decision-making powers while retaining a rump notary function, in the fifth century\u00a0AD.\nNot all magistrates by the name \"aedile\" necessarily had similar duties, however. Cities within the Roman empire may have adopted Roman terms for magistrates but assigned them different duties or simply assigned the name to a preexisting local magistracy. Aediles, for example, appear as moneyers in Saguntum and other Spanish towns in the 1st century\u00a0BC. Localities with privileged status (such as \"municipia\" or \"colonia\") likely reformed their local constitutions to conform with more Roman practices.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2386", "revid": "51031898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2386", "title": "American Airlines", "text": "Airline of the United States\nAmerican Airlines, Inc. is a major airline in the United States headquartered in Fort Worth, Texas, within the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, and is the largest airline in the world in terms of passengers carried and daily flights. American, along with its regional subsidiaries and contractors operating under the brand name American Eagle, operate an extensive international and domestic network with almost 6,800 flights per day to nearly 350 destinations in 48 countries. The airline is also a founding member of the Oneworld alliance, one of the world's three major airline alliances.\nAmerican Airlines and American Eagle operate out of ten hubs, with Dallas Fort Worth International Airport (DFW) being the largest. The airline serves more than 200 million passengers annually, and averages more than 500,000 daily. As of 2024[ [update]], the company employs 103,440 staff members.\nHistory.\nAmerican Airlines was started in 1926 as a union of more than eighty small airlines. The two organizations from which American Airlines originated were Robertson Aircraft Corporation and Colonial Air Transport. The former was first created in Missouri in 1921, with both being merged in 1929 into holding company The Aviation Corporation. This, in turn, was made in 1930 into an operating company and rebranded as American Airways. In 1934, when new laws and attrition of mail contracts forced many airlines to reorganize, the corporation redid its routes into a connected system and was renamed American Airlines. The airline fully developed its international business between 1970 and 2000. It purchased Trans World Airlines in 2001.\nAmerican had a direct role in the development of the Douglas DC-3, which resulted from a marathon telephone call from American Airlines CEO C. R. Smith to Douglas Aircraft Company founder Donald Wills Douglas Sr., when Smith persuaded a reluctant Douglas to design a sleeper aircraft based on the DC-2 to replace American's Curtiss Condor II biplanes. (The existing DC-2's cabin was wide, too narrow for side-by-side berths.) Douglas agreed to proceed with development only after Smith informed him of American Airline's intention to purchase 20 aircraft. The prototype DST (Douglas Sleeper Transport) first flew on December 17, 1935, the 32nd anniversary of the Wright Brothers' flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Its cabin was wide, and a version with 21 seats instead of the 14\u201316 sleeping berths of the DST was given the designation DC-3. There was no prototype DC-3; the first DC-3 built followed seven DSTs off the production line and was delivered to American Airlines. American Airlines inaugurated passenger service on June 26, 1936, with simultaneous flights from Newark, New Jersey, and Chicago, Illinois.\nAmerican also had a direct role in the development of the DC-10, which resulted from a specification from American Airlines to manufacturers in 1966 to offer a widebody aircraft that was smaller than the Boeing 747, but capable of flying similar long-range routes from airports with shorter runways. McDonnell Douglas responded with the DC-10 trijet shortly after the two companies' merger. On February 19, 1968, the president of American Airlines, George A. Spater, and James S. McDonnell of McDonnell Douglas announced American's intention to acquire the DC-10. American Airlines ordered 25 DC-10s in its first order. The DC-10 made its first flight on August 29, 1970, and received its type certificate from the FAA on July 29, 1971. On August 5, 1971, the DC-10 entered commercial service with American Airlines on a round-trip flight between Los Angeles and Chicago.\nIn 2011, due to a downturn in the airline industry, American Airlines' parent company, the AMR Corporation, filed for bankruptcy protection. In 2013, American Airlines merged with US Airways but kept the American Airlines name, as it was the better-recognized brand internationally; the combination of the two airlines resulted in the creation of the largest airline in the United States, and ultimately the world.\nIn December 2023, the company was added to the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index.\nNetwork.\nDestinations.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], American Airlines flies (or has flown) to the following destinations. This table does not include destinations served by American's regional subsidiary, American Eagle.\nHubs.\nAmerican currently operates ten hubs.\nAlliance and codeshare agreements.\nAmerican Airlines is a member of the Oneworld alliance and have codeshares with the following airlines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJoint ventures.\nAmerican Airlines has established three joint ventures with fellow Oneworld alliance members, expanding beyond basic codesharing to include coordinated route planning, scheduling, and revenue sharing on jointly operated routes. The Atlantic Joint Business covers transatlantic flights with Aer Lingus, British Airways, Finnair and Iberia. The Pacific Joint Business encompasses transpacific flights with Japan Airlines. A joint venture with Qantas covers routes between the United States, Australia, and New Zealand.\nInterline agreements.\nAmerican Airlines have interline agreements with the following airlines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCabins.\nFlagship First is American's international and transcontinental first class product. It is offered only on Boeing 777-300ERs and select Airbus A321s, which American designates \"A321T\". The seats are fully lie-flat and offer direct aisle access with only one on each side of the aisle in each row. As with the airline's other premium cabins, Flagship First offers wider food and beverage options, larger seats, and lounge access at certain airports. American offers domestic Flagship First service on transcontinental routes between New York\u2013JFK and Los Angeles, New York\u2013JFK and San Francisco, New York-JFK and Santa Ana, Boston and Los Angeles, and Miami and Los Angeles, as well as on the standard domestic route between New York-JFK and Boston. The airline will debut new Flagship Suite premium seats and a revamped aircraft interior for its long-haul fleet with fresh deliveries of its Airbus A321XLR and Boeing 787-9 aircraft, beginning in 2024.\nFlagship Business is American's international and transcontinental business class product. It is offered on all Boeing 777-200ERs, Boeing 777-300ERs, Boeing 787-8s, and Boeing 787-9s, as well as select Airbus A321s. All Flagship Business seats are fully lie-flat. The amenities in Flagship Business include complimentary alcoholic/non-alcoholic beverages, multi-course meals, and lounge access.\nFirst Class is the highest class of service on domestically configured aircraft. When such aircraft are used on international services this cabin is branded as business class. Seats range from in width and have of pitch. Dining options include complimentary alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages on all flights as well as standard economy snack offerings, enhanced snack basket selections on flights over , and meals on flights or longer.\nPremium Economy is American's economy plus product. It is offered on all widebody aircraft. The cabin debuted on the airline's Boeing 787-9s in late 2016 and is also available on Boeing 777-200s and -300s, and Boeing 787-8s. Premium Economy seats are wider than seats in the main cabin (American's economy cabin) and provide more amenities: Premium Economy customers get two free checked bags, priority boarding, and enhanced food and drink service, including free alcohol. This product made American Airlines the first U.S. carrier to offer a four-cabin aircraft.\nMain Cabin (economy class) is American's economy product found on all mainline and regional aircraft in its fleet. Seats range from in width and have of pitch. American markets several rows within the main cabin immediately behind Main Cabin Extra as \"Main Cabin Preferred\", which requires an extra charge to select for those without status.\nMain Cabin Extra seats are located in the front few rows and exit rows of the economy cabin on all aircraft and have additional pitch, complimentary alcoholic beverages and boarding one group ahead of the main cabin. It is available on all of the mainline fleet and American Eagle aircraft.\nAmerican also offers Basic Economy, the airline's lowest main cabin fare on many routes. Basic Economy consists of a Main Cabin ticket with numerous restrictions, including waiting until check-in for a seat assignment, no upgrades or refunds, and boarding in the last group. Originally Basic Economy passengers could only carry a personal item. Later, American revised their Basic Economy policies to allow for a carry-on bag.\nIn May 2017, American announced it would add more seats to some of its Boeing 737 MAX 8 jets and reduce overall legroom in the basic economy class. The last three rows were to lose , going from the current . The remainder of the main cabin was to have of legroom. This \"Project Oasis\" seating configuration has since been expanded to all 737 MAX 8s as well as standard Boeing 737-800 and non-transcontinental Airbus A321 jets. New Airbus A321neo jets have been delivered with the same configuration. This configuration has been considered unpopular with passengers, especially American's frequent flyers, as the new seats have less padding, less legroom, and no seatback entertainment.\nReward programs.\nAAdvantage.\nAAdvantage is the frequent flyer program for American Airlines. It was launched on May 1, 1981, and remains the largest frequent flyer program, with over 115 million members as of 2021. Miles accumulated in the program allow members to redeem tickets, upgrade service class, or obtain free or discounted car rentals, hotel stays, merchandise, or other products and services through partners. The most active members, based on the accumulation of Loyalty Points with American Airlines, are designated AAdvantage Gold, AAdvantage Platinum, AAdvantage Platinum Pro, and AAdvantage Executive Platinum elite members, with privileges such as separate check-in, priority upgrade, and standby processing, or free upgrades. AAdvantage status corresponds with Oneworld status levels allowing elites to receive reciprocal benefits from American's Oneworld partner airlines.\nAAdvantage co-branded credit cards are also available and offer other benefits. The cards are issued by CitiCards, a subsidiary of Citigroup, Barclaycard, and Bilt card in the United States, by several banks including Butterfield Bank and Scotiabank in the Caribbean, and by Banco Santander in Brazil. In December 2024, it was announced that American would be cutting ties with Barclays and would instead be rolling members into its partnership with Citigroup starting in 2026.\nAAdvantage allows one-way redemption, starting at 7,500 miles.\nAdmirals Club.\nThe Admirals Club was conceived by AA president C.R. Smith as a marketing promotion shortly after he was made an honorary Texas Ranger. Inspired by the Kentucky colonels and other honorary title designations, Smith decided to make particularly valued passengers \"admirals\" of the \"Flagship fleet\" (AA called its aircraft \"Flagships\" at the time). The list of admirals included many celebrities, politicians, and other VIPs, as well as more \"ordinary\" customers who had been particularly loyal to the airline.\nThere was no physical Admirals Club until shortly after the opening of LaGuardia Airport. During the airport's construction, New York Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia had an upper-level lounge for press conferences and business meetings. At one such press conference, he noted that the entire terminal was being offered for lease to airline tenants; after a reporter asked whether the lounge would be leased as well, LaGuardia replied that it would, and a vice president of AA immediately offered to lease the premises. The airline then procured a liquor license and began operating the lounge as the \"Admirals Club\" in 1939.\nThe second Admirals Club opened at Washington National Airport. Because it was illegal to sell alcohol in Virginia at the time, the club contained refrigerators for the use of its members so they could store their liquor at the airport. For many years, membership in the Admirals Club (and most other airline lounges) was by the airline's invitation. After a passenger sued for discrimination, the club switched to a paid membership program in 1974.\nFlagship Lounge.\nThough affiliated with the Admirals Club and staffed by many of the same employees, the Flagship Lounge is a separate lounge designed explicitly for customers flying in first class and business class on international flights and transcontinental domestic flights.\nCorporate affairs.\nBusiness trends.\nThe key trends for American Airlines are (as of the financial year ending 31 December):\nOwnership and structure.\nAmerican Airlines, Inc., is publicly traded through its parent company, American Airlines Group Inc., under NASDAQ: AAL Nasdaq:\u00a0https://, with a market capitalization of about $11 billion as of 2024. In September 2024 was removed from the S&amp;P 500 index and placed into the S&amp;P MidCap 400\nAmerican Eagle is a network of six regional carriers that operate under a codeshare and service agreement with American, operating flights to destinations in the United States, Canada, the Caribbean, and Mexico. Three of these carriers are independent, and three are subsidiaries of American Airlines Group: Envoy Air Inc., Piedmont Airlines, Inc., and PSA Airlines Inc.\nHeadquarters.\nAmerican Airlines is headquartered across several buildings in Fort Worth, Texas that it calls the \"Robert L. Crandall Campus\" in honor of former president and CEO Robert Crandall. The , five-building office complex called was designed by Pelli Clarke Pelli Architects. The campus is located on 300 acres, adjacent to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, American's fortress hub.\nBefore it was headquartered in Texas, American Airlines was headquartered at 633 Third Avenue in the Murray Hill area of Midtown Manhattan, New York City. In 1979, American moved its headquarters to a site at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, which affected up to 1,300 jobs. Mayor of New York City Ed Koch described the move as a \"betrayal\" of New York City. American moved to two leased office buildings in Grand Prairie, Texas. On January 17, 1983, the airline finished moving into a $150\u00a0million ($ when adjusted for inflation), facility in Fort Worth; $147\u00a0million (about $ when adjusted for inflation) in Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport bonds financed the headquarters. The airline began leasing the facility from the airport, which owns the facility. Following the merger of US Airways and American Airlines, the new company consolidated its corporate headquarters in Fort Worth, abandoning the US Airways headquarters in Phoenix, AZ.\nAs of 2015, American Airlines is the corporation with the most significant presence in Fort Worth.\nIn 2015, American announced it would build a new headquarters in Fort Worth. Groundbreaking began in the spring of 2016, and occupancy was completed in September 2019. The airline plans to house 5,000 new workers in the building.\nIt will be located on a property adjacent to the airline's flight academy and conference and training center, west of Texas State Highway 360, west from the current headquarters. The airline will lease from Dallas\u2013Fort Worth International Airport, and this area will include the headquarters. Construction of the new headquarters began after the demolition of the Sabre facility, previously on the site.\nThe airline considered developing a new headquarters in Irving, Texas, on the old Texas Stadium site, before deciding to keep the headquarters in Fort Worth.\nCorporate identity.\nLogo.\nIn 1931, an American employee, Goodrich Murphy designed the AA logo as an entry in a logo contest. The eagle in the logo was copied from a Scottish hotel brochure. The logo was redesigned by Massimo Vignelli in 1967. Thirty years later, in 1997, American Airlines was able to make its logo Internet-compatible by buying the domain AA.com. \"AA\" is also American's two-letter IATA airline designator.\nOn January 17, 2013, American launched a new rebranding and marketing campaign with FutureBrand dubbed \"A New American\". This included a new logo, which includes elements of the 1967 logo.\nAmerican Airlines faced difficulty obtaining copyright registration for their 2013 logo. On June 3, 2016, American Airlines sought to register it with the United States Copyright Office, but in October of that year, the Copyright Office ruled that the logo was ineligible for copyright protection, as it did not pass the threshold of originality, and was thus in the public domain. American requested that the Copyright Office reconsider. Still, on January 8, 2018, the Copyright Office affirmed its initial determination. After American Airlines submitted additional materials, the Copyright Office reversed its decision on December 7, 2018, and ruled that the logo contained enough creativity to merit copyright protection.\nAircraft livery.\nAmerican's early liveries varied widely, but a standard livery was adopted in the 1930s, featuring an eagle painted on the fuselage. The eagle became a symbol of the company and inspired the name of American Eagle Airlines. Propeller aircraft featured an international orange lightning bolt running down the length of the fuselage, which was replaced by a simpler orange stripe with the introduction of jets.\nIn the late 1960s, American commissioned designer Massimo Vignelli to develop a new livery. The original design called for a red, white, and blue stripe on the fuselage and a simple \"AA\" logo, without an eagle, on the tail; instead, Vignelli created a highly stylized eagle, which remained the company's logo until January 16, 2013.\nOn January 17, 2013, American unveiled a new livery. Before then, American had been the only major U.S. airline to leave most of its aircraft surfaces unpainted. This was because C. R. Smith would not say he liked painted aircraft and refused to use any liveries that involved painting the entire plane. Robert \"Bob\" Crandall later justified the distinctive natural metal finish by noting that less paint reduced the aircraft's weight, thus saving fuel costs.\nIn January 2013, American launched a new rebranding and marketing campaign dubbed \"The New American.\" In addition to a new logo, American Airlines introduced a new livery for its fleet. The airline calls the new livery and branding \"a clean and modern update\". The current design features an abstract American flag on the tail, along with a silver-painted fuselage, as a throw-back to the old livery. The new design was painted by Leading Edge Aviation Services in California. Doug Parker, the incoming CEO, indicated that the new livery could be short-lived, stating that \"[the] only reason this is an issue now is that they just did it right in the middle [of the merger], which kind of makes it confusing, so that allows us, actually, to decide if we are going to do something different because we have so many airplanes to paint\". The current logo and livery have had mixed criticism, with \"Design Shack\" editor Joshua Johnson writing that they \"boldly and proudly communicate the concepts of American pride and freedom wrapped into a shape that instantly makes you think about an airplane\", and \"http://\" author Patrick Smith describing the logo as a linoleum knife poking through a shower curtain'. Later in January 2013, Bloomberg asked the designer of the 1968 American Airlines logo (Massimo Vignelli) on his opinion over the rebranding. Vignelli replied \"now they have something other than Helvetica that's not as good or as powerful\", adding that \"it has no sense of permanence\".\nIn the end, American let their employees decide the new livery's fate. On an internal website for employees, American posted two options, one the new livery and one a modified version of the old livery. All of the American Airlines Group employees (including US Airways and other affiliates) were able to vote. American ultimately decided to keep the new look. Parker announced that American would keep a US Airways and America West heritage aircraft in the fleet, with plans to add a heritage TWA aircraft and a heritage American plane with the old livery. As of September 2019, American has heritage aircraft for Piedmont, PSA, America West, US Airways, Reno Air, TWA, Allegheny, and AirCal in their fleet. They also have two AA branded heritage 737-800 aircraft, an AstroJet N905NN, and the polished aluminum livery used from 1967 to 2013, N921NN.\nLeadership.\n\"Current Chairman\" Greg Smith (since February 2023)\n\"Current Chief Executive Officer\" Robert Isom (since March 2022)\nPrevious Chief Executive Officers.\nCustomer Service.\nAmerican, both before and after the merger with US Airways, has consistently performed poorly in rankings. The Wall Street Journal's annual airline rankings have ranked American as the worst or second-worst U.S. carrier for ten of the past twelve years, and in the bottom three of U.S. Airlines for at least the past twelve years. The airline has persistently performed poorly in the areas of losing checked luggage and bumping passengers due to oversold flights.\nWorker relations.\nThe main representatives of key groups of employees are:\nSubsidiary companies.\nSky Chefs.\nIn 1942, American Airlines established Sky Chefs, a wholly owned subsidiary, as a catering company to serve their fleet. In 1986, Sky Chefs was sold to Toronto-based Onex Capital Corporation for $170 million. Since 2001, it has been fully owned by the LSG Group.\nFlagship Hotels / Americana Hotels.\nIn the late-1960s, American Airlines established the Flagship Hotels chain as a subsidiary of Sky Chefs. On July 21, 1972, American Airlines leased four hotels from the Loews Corporation, three of them branded as Americana Hotels, for a period of thirty years. American merged the hotels with their Flagship Hotels, and rebranded the entire chain as Americana Hotels. In 1980, American Airlines sold Americana Hotels to Bass Brothers Enterprises of Fort Worth, Texas.\nControversies and conflicts.\nEnvironmental violations.\nBetween October 1993 to July 1998, American Airlines was repeatedly cited for using high-sulfur fuel in motor vehicles at 10 major airports around the country, a violation of the Clean Air Act.\nLifetime AAirpass.\nIn 1981, as a means of creating revenue in a period of loss-making, American Airlines offered a lifetime pass of unlimited travel for the initial cost of $250,000. This entitled the pass holder to fly anywhere in the world. Twenty-eight were sold. However, after some time, the airline realized they were making losses on the tickets, with the ticketholders costing them up to $1 million each. Ticketholders were booking large numbers of flights with some ticketholders flying interstate for lunch or flying to London multiple times a month. AA raised the cost of the lifetime pass to $3 million, and then finally stopped offering it in 2003. AA then used litigation to cancel two of the lifetime offers, saying the passes \"had been terminated due to fraudulent activity\".\nDiscrimination complaints.\nOn October 24, 2017, the NAACP issued a travel advisory for American Airlines urging African Americans to \"exercise caution\" when traveling with the airline. The NAACP issued the advisory after four incidents. In one incident, a black woman was moved from first class to coach while her white traveling companion was allowed to remain in first class. In another incident, a black man was forced to give up his seats after being confronted by two unruly white passengers. According to the NAACP, while they did receive complaints on other airlines, most of their complaints in the year before their advisory were on American Airlines. In July 2018, the NAACP lifted their travel advisory saying that American has made improvements to mitigate discrimination and unsafe treatment of African Americans.\nIndustrial action.\nIn 1999, American Airlines sued Allied Pilot's Association for $45.5 million over damages due to strike action, one of the largest fines ever levied against a trade union.\nIn January 2020, the Allied Pilot's Association filed a lawsuit to stop flights between the United States and China over concerns about COVID-19. The Association of Professional Flight Attendents supported the court action. At the time, COVID-19 was mostly contained to China and had not reached pandemic status yet. Because of this action, American Airlines suspended their flights the following day.\nCarbon footprint.\nAmerican Airlines reported total CO2e emissions (direct and indirect) for the twelve months ending December 31, 2020, at 20,092 Kt (-21,347 /-51.5% y-o-y). The company aims to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050. In November 2023, American Airlines purchased the first carbon credit contract (for 10,000 metric tons of CO2 sequestered at $100 per ton) from Graphyte, a carbon removal startup company invested in by Breakthrough Energy that compresses sawdust, tree bark, rice hulls, plant stalks, and other agricultural waste into biomass bricks wrapped in a polymer barrier to prevent decomposition that are stored underground.\nEmissions and reporting.\nAmerican Airlines emitted roughly between 40,000,000-45,000,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents (MTCDE) annually between 2014-2019. In 2020, emissions declined to 20,000,000 MTCDE as a result of travel restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic, and have since increased back up to 40,000,000 MTCDE in 2023. According to Bloomberg terminal data, American Airlines receives an overall Environmental Social Governance (ESG) score of 5.82, which is ranked as a \u201cleading\u201d score compared to competitors in the industry.\nBloomberg calculates ESG scores on a scale of 1 to 10 by compiling publicly available environmental, social, and governance data such as greenhouse gas emissions, energy consumption, water usage, human rights practices, employee diversity, and board composition. American Airlines is not in compliance with the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) due to the lack of information published by the Airline relating to pollution and waste. TNFD is a reporting framework that provides guidance for effective environmental reporting.\nClimate change implications.\nClimate change is affecting the company\u2019s operations through extreme weather events that interrupt flight patterns. Extreme heat causes air density to decrease which makes it harder for planes to take off, causing the airline to burn more fuel, and therefore affecting both profits and the planet. High temperatures can also affect the weight limit, reducing the maximum revenue generated by each flight. A Harvard University study estimates that 30% of the flights departing during the hottest times of the day will not be able to carry their weight capacity by 2050.\nNotes and references.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2388", "revid": "45752487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2388", "title": "Antidepressant", "text": "Class of medication used to treat depression and other conditions\nAntidepressants are a class of medications used to treat major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, chronic pain, and addiction.\nCommon side effects of antidepressants include dry mouth, weight gain, dizziness, headaches, akathisia, sexual dysfunction, and emotional blunting. There is an increased risk of suicidal thinking and behavior when taken by children, adolescents, and young adults. Discontinuation syndrome, which resembles recurrent depression in the case of the SSRI class, may occur after stopping the intake of any antidepressant, having effects which may be permanent and irreversible. Tapering off medications gradually is shown to reduce the risk of withdrawal complications.\nThe effectiveness of antidepressants for treating depression in adults has strong support, though studies also highlight potential risks and limitations. In children and adolescents, evidence of efficacy is more limited, despite a marked increase in antidepressant prescriptions for these age groups since the 2000s. A 2018 meta-analysis reported that the 21 most commonly prescribed antidepressants were found in all studies to be more effective than placebos for the short-term treatment of major depressive disorder in adults. However, other research suggests that some benefits may be attributable to the placebo effect. Response to antidepressants is highly variable, and medications that are effective for certain patients may have no effect or a negative effect for others. Research into the factors that influence individual responses to antidepressants is ongoing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nAntidepressants are prescribed to treat major depressive disorder (MDD), anxiety disorders, chronic pain, and some addictions. Antidepressants are often used in combination with one another.\nDespite its longstanding prominence in pharmaceutical advertising, the idea that low serotonin levels cause depression is not supported by scientific evidence. Proponents of the monoamine hypothesis of depression recommend choosing an antidepressant which impacts the most prominent symptoms. Under this practice, for example, a person with MDD who is also anxious or irritable would be treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, while a person suffering from loss of energy and enjoyment of life would take a norepinephrine\u2013dopamine reuptake inhibitor.\nMajor depressive disorder.\nThe UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)'s 2022 guidelines indicate that antidepressants should not be routinely used for the initial treatment of mild depression, \"unless that is the person's preference\". The guidelines recommended that antidepressant treatment be considered:\nThe guidelines further note that in most cases, antidepressants should be used in combination with psychosocial interventions and should be continued for at least six months to reduce the risk of relapse and that SSRIs are typically better tolerated than other antidepressants.\nAmerican Psychiatric Association (APA) treatment guidelines recommend that initial treatment be individually tailored based on factors including the severity of symptoms, co-existing disorders, prior treatment experience, and the person's preference. Options may include antidepressants, psychotherapy, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), or light therapy. The APA recommends antidepressant medication as an initial treatment choice in people with mild, moderate, or severe major depression, and that should be given to all people with severe depression unless ECT is planned.\nReviews of antidepressants generally find that they benefit adults with depression. On the other hand, some contend that most studies on antidepressant medication are confounded by several biases: the lack of an active placebo, which means that many people in the placebo arm of a double-blind study may deduce that they are not getting any true treatment, thus destroying double-blindness; a short follow up after termination of treatment; non-systematic recording of adverse effects; very strict exclusion criteria in samples of patients; studies being paid for by the industry; selective publication of results. This means that the small beneficial effects that are found may not be statistically significant.\nAmong the 21 most commonly prescribed antidepressants, the most effective and well-tolerated are escitalopram, paroxetine, sertraline, agomelatine, and mirtazapine. For children and adolescents with moderate to severe depressive disorder, some evidence suggests fluoxetine (either with or without cognitive behavioral therapy) is the best treatment, but more research is needed to be certain. Sertraline, escitalopram, and duloxetine may also help reduce symptoms.\nA 2023 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of antidepressants for major depressive disorder found that the medications provided only small or doubtful benefits in terms of quality of life. Likewise, a 2022 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of antidepressants for major depressive disorder in children and adolescents found small improvements in quality of life. Quality of life as an outcome measure is often selectively reported in trials of antidepressants.\nAnxiety disorders.\nFor children and adolescents, fluvoxamine and escitalopram are effective in treating a range of anxiety disorders. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine can also help with managing various forms of anxiety in children and adolescents.\nMeta-analyses of published and unpublished trials have found that antidepressants have a placebo-subtracted effect size (standardized mean difference or SMD) in the treatment of anxiety disorders of around 0.3, which equates to a small improvement and is roughly the same magnitude of benefit as their effectiveness in the treatment of depression. The effect size (SMD) for improvement with placebo in trials of antidepressants for anxiety disorders is approximately 1.0, which is a large improvement in terms of effect size definitions. In relation to this, most of the benefit of antidepressants for anxiety disorders is attributable to placebo responses rather than to the effects of the antidepressants themselves.\nGeneralized anxiety disorder.\nAntidepressants are recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) that has failed to respond to conservative measures such as education and self-help activities. GAD is a common disorder in which the central feature is excessively worrying about numerous events. Key symptoms include excessive anxiety about events and issues going on around them and difficulty controlling worrisome thoughts that persists for at least 6 months.\nAntidepressants provide a modest to moderate reduction in anxiety in GAD. The efficacy of different antidepressants is similar.\nSocial anxiety disorder.\nSome antidepressants are used as a treatment for social anxiety disorder, but their efficacy is not entirely convincing, as only a small proportion of antidepressants showed some effectiveness for this condition. Paroxetine was the first drug to be FDA-approved for this disorder. Its efficacy is considered beneficial, although not everyone responds favorably to the drug. Sertraline and fluvoxamine extended-release were later approved for it as well, while escitalopram is used off-label with acceptable efficiency. However, there is not enough evidence to support citalopram for treating social anxiety disorder, and fluoxetine was no better than a placebo in clinical trials. Vortioxetine may be of benefit. SSRIs are used as a first-line treatment for social anxiety, but they do not work for everyone. One alternative would be venlafaxine, an SNRI, which has shown benefits for social phobia in five clinical trials against a placebo, while the other SNRIs are not considered particularly useful for this disorder as many of them did not undergo testing for it. As of 2008[ [update]], it is unclear if duloxetine and desvenlafaxine can provide benefits for people with social anxiety. However, another class of antidepressants called MAOIs are considered effective for social anxiety, but they come with many unwanted side effects and are rarely used. Phenelzine was shown to be a good treatment option, but its use is limited by dietary restrictions. Moclobemide is a RIMA and showed mixed results, but still received approval in some European countries for social anxiety disorder. TCA antidepressants, such as clomipramine and imipramine, are not considered effective for this anxiety disorder in particular. This leaves out SSRIs such as paroxetine, sertraline, and fluvoxamine CR as acceptable and tolerated treatment options for this disorder.\nObsessive\u2013compulsive disorder.\nSSRIs are a second-line treatment for adult obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD) with mild functional impairment, and a first-line treatment for those with moderate or severe impairment.\nIn children, SSRIs are considered as a second-line therapy in those with moderate-to-severe impairment, with close monitoring for psychiatric adverse effects. Sertraline and fluoxetine are effective in treating OCD for children and adolescents.\nClomipramine, a TCA drug, is considered effective and useful for OCD. However, it is used as a second-line treatment because it is less well-tolerated than SSRIs. Despite this, it has not shown superiority to fluvoxamine in trials. All SSRIs can be used effectively for OCD. SNRI use may also be attempted, though no SNRIs have been approved for the treatment of OCD. Despite these treatment options, many patients remain symptomatic after initiating the medication, and less than half achieve remission.\nPlacebo responses are a large component of the benefit of antidepressants in the treatment of depression and anxiety. However, placebo responses with antidepressants are lower in magnitude in the treatment of OCD compared to depression and anxiety. A 2019 meta-analysis found placebo improvement effect sizes (SMD) of about 1.2 for depression, 1.0 for anxiety disorders, and 0.6 for OCD with antidepressants.\nPost\u2013traumatic stress disorder.\nAntidepressants are one of the treatment options for PTSD. However, their efficacy is not well established. Paroxetine and sertraline have been FDA approved for the treatment of PTSD. Paroxetine has slightly higher response and remission rates than sertraline for this condition. However, neither drug is considered very helpful for a broad patient demographic. Fluoxetine and venlafaxine are used off-label. Fluoxetine has produced unsatisfactory mixed results. Venlafaxine showed response rates of 78%, which is significantly higher than what paroxetine and sertraline achieved. However, it did not address as many symptoms of PTSD as paroxetine and sertraline, in part due to the fact that venlafaxine is an SNRI. This class of drugs inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine, which may cause anxiety in some patients. Fluvoxamine, escitalopram, and citalopram were not well-tested for this disorder. MAOIs, while some of them may be helpful, are not used much because of their unwanted side effects. This leaves paroxetine and sertraline as acceptable treatment options for some people, although more effective antidepressants are needed.\nPanic disorder.\nPanic disorder is treated relatively well with medications compared to other disorders. Several classes of antidepressants have shown efficacy for this disorder, with SSRIs and SNRIs used first-line. Paroxetine, sertraline, and fluoxetine are FDA-approved for panic disorder, while fluvoxamine, escitalopram, and citalopram are also considered effective for them. SNRI venlafaxine is also approved for this condition. Unlike social anxiety and PTSD, some TCAs antidepressants, like clomipramine and imipramine, have shown efficacy for panic disorder. Moreover, the MAOI phenelzine is also considered useful. Panic disorder has many drugs for its treatment. However, the starting dose must be lower than the one used for major depressive disorder because people have reported an increase in anxiety as a result of starting the medication. In conclusion, while panic disorder's treatment options seem acceptable and useful for this condition, many people are still symptomatic after treatment with residual symptoms.\nEating disorders.\nAntidepressants are recommended as an alternative or additional first step to self-help programs in the treatment of bulimia nervosa. SSRIs (fluoxetine in particular) are preferred over other antidepressants due to their acceptability, tolerability, and superior reduction of symptoms in short-term trials. Long-term efficacy remains poorly characterized. Bupropion is not recommended for the treatment of eating disorders, due to an increased risk of seizure.\nSimilar recommendations apply to binge eating disorder. SSRIs provide short-term reductions in binge eating behavior, but have not been associated with significant weight loss.\nClinical trials have generated mostly negative results for the use of SSRIs in the treatment of anorexia nervosa. Treatment guidelines from the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommend against the use of SSRIs in this disorder. Those from the American Psychiatric Association (APA) note that SSRIs confer no advantage regarding weight gain, but may be used for the treatment of co-existing depressive, anxiety, or obsessive\u2013compulsive disorders.\nPain.\nFibromyalgia.\nA 2012 meta-analysis concluded that antidepressant treatment favorably affects pain, health-related quality of life, depression, and sleep in fibromyalgia syndrome. Tricyclics appear to be the most effective class, with moderate effects on pain and sleep, and small effects on fatigue and health-related quality of life. The fraction of people experiencing a 30% pain reduction on tricyclics was 48%, versus 28% on placebo. For SSRIs and SNRIs, the fractions of people experiencing a 30% pain reduction were 36% (20% in the placebo comparator arms) and 42% (32% in the corresponding placebo comparator arms) respectively. Discontinuation of treatment due to side effects was common. Antidepressants including amitriptyline, duloxetine, milnacipran, moclobemide, and pirlindole are recommended by the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) for the treatment of fibromyalgia based on \"limited evidence\".\nNeuropathic pain.\nA 2014 meta-analysis from the Cochrane Collaboration found the antidepressant duloxetine to be effective for the treatment of pain resulting from diabetic neuropathy. The same group reviewed data for amitriptyline in the treatment of neuropathic pain and found limited useful randomized clinical trial data. They concluded that the long history of successful use in the community for the treatment of fibromyalgia and neuropathic pain justified its continued use. The group was concerned about the potential overestimation of the amount of pain relief provided by amitriptyline, and highlighted that only a small number of people will experience significant pain relief by taking this medication.\nOther uses.\nAntidepressants may be modestly helpful for treating people who have both depression and alcohol dependence, however, the evidence supporting this association is of low quality. Bupropion is used to help people stop smoking. Antidepressants are also used to control some symptoms of narcolepsy. Antidepressants may be used to relieve pain in people with active rheumatoid arthritis. However, further research is required. Antidepressants have been shown to be superior to placebo in treating depression in individuals with physical illness, although reporting bias may have exaggerated this finding. Antidepressants have been shown to improve some parts of cognitive functioning for depressed users, such as memory, attention, and processing speed.\nCertain antidepressants acting as serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, such as trazodone and mirtazapine, have been used as hallucinogen antidotes or \"trip killers\" to block the effects of serotonergic psychedelics like psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD).\nLimitations and strategies.\nAmong individuals treated with a given antidepressant, between 30% and 50% do not show a response. Approximately one-third of people achieve a full remission, one-third experience a response, and one-third are non-responders. Partial remission is characterized by the presence of poorly defined residual symptoms. These symptoms typically include depressed mood, anxiety, sleep disturbance, fatigue, and diminished interest or pleasure. It is currently unclear which factors predict partial remission. However, it is clear that residual symptoms are powerful predictors of relapse, with relapse rates three to six\u00a0times higher in people with residual symptoms than in those, who experience full remission. In addition, antidepressant drugs tend to lose efficacy throughout long-term maintenance therapy. According to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, less than one-third of Americans taking one antidepressant medication have seen a mental health professional in the previous year. Several strategies are used in clinical practice to try to overcome these limits and variations. They include switching medication, augmentation, and combination.\nThere is controversy amongst researchers regarding the efficacy and risk-benefit ratio of antidepressants. Although antidepressants consistently out-perform a placebo in meta-analyses, the difference is modest and it is not clear that their statistical superiority results in clinical efficacy. The aggregate effect of antidepressants typically results in changes below the threshold of clinical significance on depression rating scales. Proponents of antidepressants counter that the most common scale, the HDRS, is not suitable for assessing drug action, that the threshold for clinical significance is arbitrary, and that antidepressants consistently result in significantly raised scores on the mood item of the scale. Assessments of antidepressants using alternative, more sensitive scales, such as the MADRS, do not result in marked difference from the HDRS and likewise only find a marginal clinical benefit. Another hypothesis proposed to explain the poor performance of antidepressants in clinical trials is a high treatment response heterogeneity. Some patients, that differ strongly in their response to antidepressants, could influence the average response, while the heterogeneity could itself be obscured by the averaging. Studies have not supported this hypothesis, but it is very difficult to measure treatment effect heterogeneity. Poor and complex clinical trial design might also account for the small effects seen for antidepressants. The randomized controlled trials used to approve drugs are short, and may not capture the full effect of antidepressants. Additionally, the placebo effect might be inflated in these trials by frequent clinical consultation, lowering the comparative performance of antidepressants. Critics agree that current clinical trials are poorly-designed, which limits the knowledge on antidepressants. More naturalistic studies, such as STAR*D, have produced results, which suggest that antidepressants may be less effective in clinical practice than in randomized controlled trials.\nCritics of antidepressants maintain that the superiority of antidepressants over placebo is the result of systemic flaws in clinical trials and the research literature. Trials conducted with industry involvement tend to produce more favorable results, and accordingly many of the trials included in meta-analyses are at high risk of bias. Additionally, meta-analyses co-authored by industry employees find more favorable results for antidepressants. The results of antidepressant trials are significantly more likely to be published if they are favorable, and unfavorable results are very often left unpublished or misreported, a phenomenon called publication bias or selective publication. Although this issue has diminished with time, it remains an obstacle to accurately assessing the efficacy of antidepressants. Misreporting of clinical trial outcomes and of serious adverse events, such as suicide, is common. Ghostwriting of antidepressant trials is widespread, a practice in which prominent researchers, or so-called key opinion leaders, attach their names to studies actually written by pharmaceutical company employees or consultants. A particular concern is that the psychoactive effects of antidepressants may lead to the unblinding of participants or researchers, enhancing the placebo effect and biasing results. Some have therefore maintained that antidepressants may only be active placebos. When these and other flaws in the research literature are not taken into account, meta-analyses may find inflated results on the basis of poor evidence.\nCritics contend that antidepressants have not been proven sufficiently effective by RCTs or in clinical practice and that the widespread use of antidepressants is not evidence-based. They also note that adverse effects, including withdrawal difficulties, are likely underreported, skewing clinicians' ability to make risk-benefit judgements. Accordingly, they believe antidepressants are overused, particularly for non-severe depression and conditions in which they are not indicated. Critics charge that the widespread use and public acceptance of antidepressants is the result of pharmaceutical advertising, research manipulation, and misinformation.\nCurrent mainstream psychiatric opinion recognizes the limitations of antidepressants but recommends their use in adults with more severe depression as a first-line treatment.\nSwitching antidepressants.\nThe American Psychiatric Association 2000 Practice Guideline advises that where no response is achieved within the following six to eight weeks of treatment with an antidepressant, switch to an antidepressant in the same class, and then to a different class. A 2006 meta-analysis review found wide variation in the findings of prior studies: for people who had failed to respond to an SSRI antidepressant, between 12% and 86% showed a response to a new drug. However, the more antidepressants an individual had previously tried, the less likely they were to benefit from a new antidepressant trial. However, a later meta-analysis found no difference between switching to a new drug and staying on the old medication: although 34% of treatment-resistant people responded when switched to the new drug, 40% responded without being switched.\nAugmentation and combination.\nFor a partial response, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) guidelines suggest augmentation or adding a drug from a different class. These include lithium and thyroid augmentation, dopamine agonists, sex steroids, NRIs, glucocorticoid-specific agents, or the newer anticonvulsants.\nA combination strategy involves adding another antidepressant, usually from a different class to affect other mechanisms. Although this may be used in clinical practice, there is little evidence for the relative efficacy or adverse effects of this strategy. Other tests conducted include the use of psychostimulants as an augmentation therapy. Several studies have shown the efficacy of combining modafinil for treatment-resistant people. It has been used to help combat SSRI-associated fatigue.\nLong-term use and stopping.\nThe effects of antidepressants typically do not continue once the course of medication ends. This results in a high rate of relapse. In 2003, a meta-analysis found that 18% of people who had responded to an antidepressant relapsed while still taking it, compared to 41% whose antidepressant was switched for a placebo.\nA gradual loss of therapeutic benefit occurs in a minority of people during the course of treatment. A strategy involving the use of pharmacotherapy in the treatment of the acute episode, followed by psychotherapy in its residual phase, has been suggested by some studies. For patients who wish to stop their antidepressants, engaging in brief psychological interventions such as Preventive Cognitive Therapy or mindfulness-based cognitive therapy while tapering down has been found to diminish the risk for relapse.\nAdverse effects.\nAntidepressants can cause various adverse effects, depending on the individual and the drug in question.\nAlmost any medication involved with serotonin regulation has the potential to cause serotonin toxicity (also known as \"serotonin syndrome\") \u2013 an excess of serotonin that can induce mania, restlessness, agitation, emotional lability, insomnia, and confusion as its primary symptoms. Although the condition is serious, it is not particularly common, generally only appearing at high doses or while on other medications. Assuming proper medical intervention has been taken (within about 24\u00a0hours) it is rarely fatal. Antidepressants appear to increase the risk of diabetes by about 1.3-fold.\nMAOIs tend to have pronounced (sometimes fatal) interactions with a wide variety of medications and over-the-counter drugs. If taken with foods that contain very high levels of tyramine (e.g., mature cheese, cured meats, or yeast extracts), they may cause a potentially lethal hypertensive crisis. At lower doses, the person may only experience a headache due to an increase in blood pressure.\nIn response to these adverse effects, a different type of MAOI, the class of reversible inhibitor of monoamine oxidase A (RIMA), has been developed. The primary advantage of RIMAs is that they do not require the person to follow a special diet while being purportedly effective as SSRIs and tricyclics in treating depressive disorders.\nTricyclics and SSRI can cause the so-called drug-induced QT prolongation, especially in older adults; this condition can degenerate into a specific type of abnormal heart rhythm called Torsades de points, which can potentially lead to sudden cardiac arrest.\nSome antidepressants are also believed to increase thoughts of suicidal ideation.\nAntidepressants have been associated with an increased risk of dementia in older adults.\nResearchers have developed a tool that allows people to rate their concern about common side effects of antidepressants. The tool ranks potential treatment options in a visual display that highlights the drugs with side effects of least concern to an individual.\nPregnancy.\nSSRI use in pregnancy has been associated with a variety of risks with varying degrees of proof of causation. As depression is independently associated with negative pregnancy outcomes, determining the extent to which observed associations between antidepressant use and specific adverse outcomes reflect a causative relationship has been difficult in some cases. In other cases, the attribution of adverse outcomes to antidepressant exposure seems fairly clear.\nSSRI use in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of spontaneous abortion of about 1.7-fold, and is associated with preterm birth and low birth weight.\nA systematic review of the risk of major birth defects in antidepressant-exposed pregnancies found a small increase (3% to 24%) in the risk of major malformations and a risk of cardiovascular birth defects that did not differ from non-exposed pregnancies. A study of fluoxetine-exposed pregnancies found a 12% increase in the risk of major malformations that did not reach statistical significance. Other studies have found an increased risk of cardiovascular birth defects among depressed mothers not undergoing SSRI treatment, suggesting the possibility of ascertainment bias, e.g. that worried mothers may pursue more aggressive testing of their infants. Another study found no increase in cardiovascular birth defects and a 27% increased risk of major malformations in SSRI exposed pregnancies. The FDA advises for the risk of birth defects with the use of paroxetine and the MAOI should be avoided.\nA 2013 systematic review and meta-analysis found that antidepressant use during pregnancy was statistically significantly associated with some pregnancy outcomes, such as gestational age and preterm birth, but not with other outcomes. The same review cautioned that because differences between the exposed and unexposed groups were small, it was doubtful whether they were clinically significant.\nA neonate (infant less than 28\u00a0days old) may experience a withdrawal syndrome from abrupt discontinuation of the antidepressant at birth. Antidepressants can be present in varying amounts in breast milk, but their effects on infants are currently unknown.\nMoreover, SSRIs inhibit nitric oxide synthesis, which plays an important role in setting the vascular tone. Several studies have pointed to an increased risk of prematurity associated with SSRI use, and this association may be due to an increased risk of pre-eclampsia during pregnancy.\nAntidepressant-induced mania.\nAnother possible problem with antidepressants is the chance of antidepressant-induced mania or hypomania in people with or without a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. Many cases of bipolar depression are very similar to those of unipolar depression. Therefore, the person can be misdiagnosed with unipolar depression and be given antidepressants. Studies have shown that antidepressant-induced mania can occur in 20\u201340% of people with bipolar disorder. For bipolar depression, antidepressants (most frequently SSRIs) can exacerbate or trigger symptoms of hypomania and mania. Bupropion has been associated with a lower risk of mood switch than other antidepressants.\nSuicide.\nStudies have shown that the use of antidepressants is correlated with an increased risk of suicidal behavior and thinking (suicidality) in those aged under 25 years old. This problem has been serious enough to warrant government intervention by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to warn of the increased risk of suicidality during antidepressant treatment. According to the FDA, the heightened risk of suicidality occurs within the first one to two months of treatment. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) places the excess risk in the \"early stages of treatment\". A meta-analysis suggests that the relationship between antidepressant use and suicidal behavior or thoughts is age-dependent. Compared with placebo, the use of antidepressants is associated with an increase in suicidal behavior or thoughts among those 25 years old or younger (OR=1.62). A review of RCTs and epidemiological studies by Healy and Whitaker found an increase in suicidal acts by a factor of 2.4. There is no effect or possibly a mild protective effect among those aged 25 to 64 (OR=0.79). Antidepressant treatment has a protective effect against suicidality among those aged 65 and over (OR=0.37).\nSexual dysfunction.\nSexual side effects are also common with SSRIs, such as loss of sexual drive, failure to reach orgasm, and erectile dysfunction. Although usually reversible, these sexual side-effects can, in rare cases, continue after the drug has been completely withdrawn.\nIn a study of 1,022 outpatients, overall sexual dysfunction with all antidepressants averaged 59.1% with SSRI values between 57% and 73%, mirtazapine 24%, nefazodone 8%, amineptine 7%, and moclobemide 4%. Moclobemide, a selective reversible MAO-A inhibitor, does not cause sexual dysfunction and can lead to an improvement in all aspects of sexual function.\nBiochemical mechanisms suggested as causative include increased serotonin, particularly affecting 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors; decreased dopamine; decreased norepinephrine; blockade of cholinergic and \u03b11adrenergic receptors; inhibition of nitric oxide synthetase; and elevation of prolactin levels. Mirtazapine is reported to have fewer sexual side effects, most likely because it antagonizes 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors and may, in some cases, reverse sexual dysfunction induced by SSRIs by the same mechanism.\nBupropion, a weak NDRI and nicotinic antagonist, may be useful in treating reduced libido as a result of SSRI treatment.\nEmotional blunting.\nCertain antidepressants may cause emotional blunting, characterized by a reduced intensity of both positive and negative emotions as well as symptoms of apathy, indifference, and amotivation. It may be experienced as either beneficial or detrimental depending on the situation. This side effect has been particularly associated with serotonergic antidepressants like SSRIs and SNRIs but may be less with atypical antidepressants like bupropion, agomelatine, and vortioxetine. Higher doses of antidepressants seem to be more likely to produce emotional blunting than lower doses. Emotional blunting can be decreased by reducing dosage, discontinuing the medication, or switching to a different antidepressant that may have less propensity for causing this side effect.\nChanges in weight.\nChanges in appetite or weight are common among antidepressants but are largely drug-dependent and related to which neurotransmitters they affect. Mirtazapine and paroxetine, for example, may be associated with weight gain and/or increased appetite, while others (such as bupropion and venlafaxine) achieve the opposite effect.\nThe antihistaminic properties of certain TCA- and TeCA-class antidepressants have been shown to contribute to the common side effects of increased appetite and weight gain associated with these classes of medication.\nBone loss.\nA 2021 nationwide cohort study in South Korea observed a link between SSRI use and bone loss, particularly in recent users. The study also stressed the need of further research to better understand these effects. A 2012 review found that SSRIs along with tricyclic antidepressants were associated with a significant increase in the risk of osteoporotic fractures, peaking in the months after initiation, and moving back towards baseline during the year after treatment was stopped. These effects exhibited a dose\u2013response relationship within SSRIs which varied between different drugs of that class. A 2018 meta-analysis of 11 small studies found a reduction in bone density of the lumbar spine in SSRI users which affected older people the most.\nRisk of death.\nA 2017 meta-analysis found that antidepressants were associated with a significantly increased risk of death (+33%) and new cardiovascular complications (+14%) in the general population. Conversely, risks were not greater in people with existing cardiovascular disease.\nDiscontinuation syndrome.\nAntidepressant discontinuation syndrome, also called antidepressant withdrawal syndrome, is a condition that can occur following the interruption, reduction, or discontinuation of antidepressant medication. The symptoms may include flu-like symptoms, trouble sleeping, nausea, poor balance, sensory changes, and anxiety. The problem usually begins within three days and may last for several months. Rarely psychosis may occur.\nA discontinuation syndrome can occur after stopping any antidepressant including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). The risk is greater among those who have taken the medication for longer and when the medication in question has a short half-life. The underlying reason for its occurrence is unclear. The diagnosis is based on the symptoms.\nMethods of prevention include gradually decreasing the dose among those who wish to stop, though it is possible for symptoms to occur with tapering. Treatment may include restarting the medication and slowly decreasing the dose. People may also be switched to the long-acting antidepressant fluoxetine, which can then be gradually decreased.\nApproximately 20\u201350% of people who suddenly stop an antidepressant develop an antidepressant discontinuation syndrome. The condition is generally not serious, though about half of people with symptoms describe them as severe. Some restart antidepressants due to the severity of the symptoms.\nPharmacology.\nAntidepressants act via a large number of different mechanisms of action. This includes serotonin reuptake inhibition (SSRIs, SNRIs, TCAs, vilazodone, vortioxetine), norepinephrine reuptake inhibition (NRIs, SNRIs, TCAs), dopamine reuptake inhibition (bupropion, amineptine, nomifensine), direct modulation of monoamine receptors (vilazodone, vortioxetine, SARIs, agomelatine, TCAs, TeCAs, antipsychotics), monoamine oxidase inhibition (MAOIs), and NMDA receptor antagonism (ketamine, esketamine, dextromethorphan), among others (e.g., brexanolone, tianeptine). Some antidepressants also have additional actions, like sigma receptor modulation (certain SSRIs, TCAs, dextromethorphan) and antagonism of histamine H1 and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (TCAs, TeCAs).\nThe earliest and most widely known scientific theory of antidepressant action is the monoamine hypothesis, which can be traced back to the 1950s and 1960s. This theory states that depression is due to an imbalance, most often a deficiency, of the monoamine neurotransmitters, namely serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine. However, serotonin in particular has been implicated, as in the serotonin hypothesis of depression. The monoamine hypothesis was originally proposed based on observations that reserpine, a drug which depletes the monoamine neurotransmitters, produced depressive effects in people, and that certain hydrazine antituberculosis agents like iproniazid, which prevent the breakdown of monoamine neurotransmitters, produced apparent antidepressant effects. Most currently marketed antidepressants, which are monoaminergic in their actions, are theoretically consistent with the monoamine hypothesis. Despite the widespread nature of the monoamine hypothesis, it has a number of limitations: for one, all monoaminergic antidepressants have a delayed onset of action of at least a week; and secondly, many people with depression do not respond to monoaminergic antidepressants. A number of alternative hypotheses have been proposed, including hypotheses involving glutamate, neurogenesis, epigenetics, cortisol hypersecretion, and inflammation, among others.\nIn 2022, a major systematic umbrella review by Joanna Moncrieff and colleagues showed that the serotonin theory of depression was not supported by evidence from a wide variety of areas. The authors concluded that there is no association between serotonin and depression, and that there is no evidence that strongly supports the theory that depression is caused by low serotonin activity or concentrations. Other literature had described the lack of support for the theory previously. In many of the expert responses to the review, it was stated that the monoamine hypothesis had already long been abandoned by psychiatry. This is in spite of about 90% of the general public in Western countries believing the theory to be true and many in the field of psychiatry continuing to promote the theory up to recent times. In addition to the serotonin umbrella review, reviews have found that reserpine, a drug that depletes the monoamine neurotransmitters\u2014including serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine\u2014shows no consistent evidence of producing depressive effects. Instead, findings of reserpine and mood are highly mixed, with similar proportions of studies finding that it has no influence on mood, produces depressive effects, or actually has antidepressant effects. In relation to this, the general monoamine hypothesis, as opposed to only the serotonin theory of depression, likewise does not appear to be well-supported by evidence.\nThe serotonin and monoamine hypotheses of depression have been heavily promoted by the pharmaceutical industry (e.g., in advertisements) and by the psychiatric profession at large despite the lack of evidence in support of them. In the case of the pharmaceutical industry, this can be attributed to obvious financial incentives, with the theory creating a bias against non-pharmacological treatments for depression.\nAn alternative theory for antidepressant action proposed by certain academics such as Irving Kirsch and Joanna Moncrieff is that they work largely or entirely via placebo mechanisms. This is supported by meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of antidepressants for depression, which consistently show that placebo groups in trials improve about 80 to 90% as much as antidepressant groups on average and that antidepressants are only marginally more effective for depression than placebos. The difference between antidepressants and placebo corresponds to an effect size (SMD) of about 0.3, which in turn equates to about a 2- to 3-point additional improvement on the 0\u201352-point (HRSD) and 0\u201360-point (MADRS) depression rating scales used in trials. Differences in effectiveness between different antidepressants are small and not clinically meaningful. The small advantage of antidepressants over placebo is often statistically significant and is the basis for their regulatory approval, but is sufficiently modest that its clinical significance is doubtful. Moreover, the small advantage of antidepressants over placebo may simply be a methodological artifact caused by unblinding due to the psychoactive effects and side effects of antidepressants, in turn resulting in enhanced placebo effects and apparent antidepressant efficacy. Placebos have been found to modify the activity of several brain regions and to increase levels of dopamine and endogenous opioids in the reward pathways. It has been argued by Kirsch that although antidepressants may be used efficaciously for depression as active placebos, they are limited by significant pharmacological side effects and risks, and therefore non-pharmacological therapies, such as psychotherapy and lifestyle changes, which can have similar efficacy to antidepressants but do not have their adverse effects, ought to be preferred as treatments in people with depression.\nThe placebo response, or the improvement in scores in the placebo group in clinical trials, is not only due to the placebo effect, but is also due to other phenomena such as spontaneous remission and regression to the mean. Depression tends to have an episodic course, with people eventually recovering even with no medical intervention, and people tend to seek treatment, as well as enroll in clinical trials, when they are feeling their worst. In meta-analyses of trials of depression therapies, Kirsch estimated based on improvement in untreated waiting-list controls that spontaneous remission and regression to the mean only account for about 25% of the improvement in depression scores with antidepressant therapy. However, another academic, Michael P. Hengartner, has argued and presented evidence that spontaneous remission and regression to the mean might actually account for most of the improvement in depression scores with antidepressants, and that the substantial placebo effect observed in clinical trials might largely be a methodological artifact. This suggests that antidepressants may be associated with much less genuine treatment benefit, whether due to the placebo effect or to the antidepressant itself, than has been traditionally assumed.\nIt has been proposed that psychedelics used for therapeutic purposes may act as active \"super placebos\".\nTypes.\nSelective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.\nSelective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are believed to increase the extracellular level of the neurotransmitter serotonin by limiting its reabsorption into the presynaptic cell, increasing the level of serotonin in the synaptic cleft available to bind to the postsynaptic receptor. They have varying degrees of selectivity for the other monoamine transporters, with pure SSRIs having only weak affinity for the norepinephrine and dopamine transporters.\nSSRIs are the most widely prescribed antidepressants in many countries. The efficacy of SSRIs in mild or moderate cases of depression has been disputed.\nSerotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.\nSerotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are potent inhibitors of the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine. These neurotransmitters are known to play an important role in mood. SNRIs can be contrasted with the more widely used selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which act mostly upon serotonin alone.\nThe human serotonin transporter (SERT) and norepinephrine transporter (NET) are membrane proteins that are responsible for the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine. Balanced dual inhibition of monoamine reuptake may offer advantages over other antidepressants drugs by treating a wider range of symptoms.\nSNRIs are sometimes also used to treat anxiety disorders, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), chronic neuropathic pain, and fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS), and for the relief of menopausal symptoms.\nSerotonin modulators and stimulators.\nSerotonin modulator and stimulators (SMSs), sometimes referred to more simply as \"serotonin modulators\", are a type of drug with a multimodal action specific to the serotonin neurotransmitter system. To be precise, SMSs simultaneously modulate one or more serotonin receptors and inhibit the reuptake of serotonin. The term was coined in reference to the mechanism of action of the serotonergic antidepressant vortioxetine, which acts as a serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI), a partial agonist of the 5-HT1A receptor, and antagonist of the 5-HT3 and 5-HT7 receptors. However, it can also technically be applied to vilazodone, which is an antidepressant as well and acts as an SRI and 5-HT1A receptor partial agonist.\nAn alternative term is serotonin partial agonist/reuptake inhibitor (SPARI), which can be applied only to vilazodone.\nSerotonin antagonists and reuptake inhibitors.\nSerotonin antagonist and reuptake inhibitors (SARIs) while mainly used as antidepressants are also anxiolytics and hypnotics. They act by antagonizing serotonin receptors such as 5-HT2A and inhibiting the reuptake of serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine. Additionally, most also act as \u03b11-adrenergic receptor antagonists. The majority of the currently marketed SARIs belong to the phenylpiperazine class of compounds. They include trazodone and nefazodone.\nTricyclic antidepressants.\nThe majority of the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) act primarily as serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) by blocking the serotonin transporter (SERT) and the norepinephrine transporter (NET), respectively, which results in an elevation of the synaptic concentrations of these neurotransmitters, and therefore an enhancement of neurotransmission. Notably, with the sole exception of amineptine, the TCAs have weak affinity for the dopamine transporter (DAT), and therefore have low efficacy as dopamine reuptake inhibitors (DRIs).\nAlthough TCAs are sometimes prescribed for depressive disorders, they have been largely replaced in clinical use in most parts of the world by newer antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (NRIs). Adverse effects have been found to be of a similar level between TCAs and SSRIs.\nTetracyclic antidepressants.\nTetracyclic antidepressants (TeCAs) are a class of antidepressants that were first introduced in the 1970s. They are named after their chemical structure, which contains four rings of atoms, and are closely related to tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), which contain three rings of atoms.\nMonoamine oxidase inhibitors.\nMonoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are chemicals that inhibit the activity of the monoamine oxidase enzyme family. They have a long history of use as medications prescribed for the treatment of depression. They are particularly effective in treating atypical depression. They are also used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease and several other disorders.\nBecause of potentially lethal dietary and drug interactions, MAOIs have historically been reserved as a last line of treatment, used only when other classes of antidepressant drugs (for example selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants) have failed.\nMAOIs have been found to be effective in the treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia, social phobia, atypical depression or mixed anxiety and depression, bulimia, and post-traumatic stress disorder, as well as borderline personality disorder. MAOIs appear to be particularly effective in the management of bipolar depression according to a retrospective-analysis. There are reports of MAOI efficacy in obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), trichotillomania, dysmorphophobia, and avoidant personality disorder, but these reports are from uncontrolled case reports.\nMAOIs can also be used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease by targeting MAO-B in particular (therefore affecting dopaminergic neurons), as well as providing an alternative for migraine prophylaxis. Inhibition of both MAO-A and MAO-B is used in the treatment of clinical depression and anxiety disorders.\nNMDA receptor antagonists.\nNMDA receptor antagonists like ketamine and esketamine are rapid-acting antidepressants and seem to work via blockade of the ionotropic glutamate NMDA receptor. Other NMDA antagonists may also play a role in treating depression. The combination medication dextromethorphan/bupropion (Auvelity), which contains the NMDA receptor antagonist dextromethorphan, was approved in the United States in 2022 for treating major depressive disorder.\nOthers.\nSee the list of antidepressants and management of depression for other drugs that are not specifically characterized.\nAdjuncts.\nAdjunct medications are an umbrella category of substances that increase the potency or \"enhance\" antidepressants. They work by affecting variables very close to the antidepressant, sometimes affecting a completely different mechanism of action. This may be attempted when depression treatments have not been successful in the past.\nCommon types of adjunct medication techniques generally fall into the following categories:\nIt is unknown if undergoing psychological therapy at the same time as taking anti-depressants enhances the anti-depressive effect of the medication.\nLess common adjuncts.\nLithium has been used to augment antidepressant therapy in those who have failed to respond to antidepressants alone. Furthermore, Lithium dramatically decreases the suicide risk in recurrent depression. There is some evidence for the addition of a thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine, in patients with normal thyroid function.\nPsychopharmacologists have also tried adding a stimulant, in particular, D-amphetamine. However, the use of stimulants in cases of treatment-resistant depression is relatively controversial. A review article published in 2007 found psychostimulants may be effective in treatment-resistant depression with concomitant antidepressant therapy, but a more certain conclusion could not be drawn due to substantial deficiencies in the studies available for consideration, and the somewhat contradictory nature of their results.\nHistory.\nThe idea of an antidepressant, if melancholy is thought synonymous with depression, existed at least as early as the 1599 pamphlet \"A pil to purge melancholie or, A preparative to a pvrgation: or, Topping, copping, and capping: take either or whether: or, Mash them, and squash them, and dash them, and diddle come derrie come daw them, all together..\". Thomas d'Urfey's \"Wit and Mirth: Or Pills to Purge Melancholy\", the title of a large collection of songs, was published between 1698 and 1720.\nBefore the 1950s, opioids and amphetamines were commonly used as antidepressants. Amphetamine has been described as the first antidepressant. Use of opioids and amphetamines for depression was later restricted due to their addictive nature and side effects. Extracts from the herb St John's wort have been used as a \"nerve tonic\" to alleviate depression.\nSt John's wort fell out of favor in most countries through the 19th and 20th centuries, except in Germany, where \"Hypericum\" extracts were eventually licensed, packaged, and prescribed. Small-scale efficacy trials were carried out in the 1970s and 1980s, and attention grew in the 1990s following a meta-analysis. It remains an over-the-counter (OTC) supplement in most countries. Lead contamination associated with its usage has been seen as concerning, as lead levels in women in the United States taking St. John's wort are elevated by about 20% on average. Research continues to investigate its active component hyperforin, and to further understand its mode of action.\nIsoniazid, iproniazid, and imipramine.\nIn 1951, Irving Selikoff and Edward H. Robitzek, working out of Sea View Hospital on Staten Island, began clinical trials on two new anti-tuberculosis agents developed by Hoffman-LaRoche, isoniazid, and iproniazid. Only patients with a poor prognosis were initially treated. Nevertheless, their condition improved dramatically. Selikoff and Robitzek noted \"a subtle general stimulation ... the patients exhibited renewed vigor and indeed this occasionally served to introduce disciplinary problems.\" The promise of a cure for tuberculosis in the Sea View Hospital trials was excitedly discussed in the mainstream press.\nIn 1952, learning of the stimulating side effects of isoniazid, the Cincinnati psychiatrist Max Lurie tried it on his patients. In the following year, he and Harry Salzer reported that isoniazid improved depression in two-thirds of their patients, so they then coined the term \"antidepressant\" to refer to its action. A similar incident took place in Paris, where Jean Delay, head of psychiatry at Sainte-Anne Hospital, heard of this effect from his pulmonology colleagues at Cochin Hospital. In 1952 (before Lurie and Salzer), Delay, with the resident Jean-Francois Buisson, reported the positive effect of isoniazid on depressed patients. The mode of antidepressant action of isoniazid is still unclear. It is speculated that its effect is due to the inhibition of diamine oxidase, coupled with a weak inhibition of monoamine oxidase A.\nSelikoff and Robitzek also experimented with another anti-tuberculosis drug, iproniazid; it showed a greater psychostimulant effect, but more pronounced toxicity. Later, Jackson Smith, Gordon Kamman, George E. Crane, and Frank Ayd, described the psychiatric applications of iproniazid. Ernst Zeller found iproniazid to be a potent monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Nevertheless, iproniazid remained relatively obscure until Nathan S. Kline, the influential head of research at Rockland State Hospital, began to popularize it in the medical and popular press as a \"psychic energizer\". Roche put a significant marketing effort behind iproniazid. Its sales grew until it was recalled in 1961, due to reports of lethal hepatotoxicity.\nThe antidepressant effect of a tricyclic antidepressant, a three-ringed compound, was first discovered in 1957 by Roland Kuhn in a Swiss psychiatric hospital. Antihistamine derivatives were used to treat surgical shock and later as neuroleptics. Although in 1955, reserpine was shown to be more effective than a placebo in alleviating anxious depression, neuroleptics were being developed as sedatives and antipsychotics.\nAttempting to improve the effectiveness of chlorpromazine, Kuhn \u2014 in conjunction with the Geigy Pharmaceutical Company \u2014 discovered the compound \"G 22355\", later renamed imipramine. Imipramine had a beneficial effect on patients with depression who showed mental and motor retardation. Kuhn described his new compound as a \"thymoleptic\" \"taking hold of the emotions,\" in contrast with neuroleptics, \"taking hold of the nerves\" in 1955\u201356. These gradually became established, resulting in the patent and manufacture in the US in 1951 by H\u00e4fliger and SchinderA.\nAntidepressants became prescription drugs in the 1950s. It was estimated that no more than fifty to one hundred individuals per million had the kind of depression that these new drugs would treat, and pharmaceutical companies were not enthusiastic about marketing for this small market. Sales through the 1960s remained poor compared to the sales of tranquilizers, which were being marketed for different uses. Imipramine remained in common use and numerous successors were introduced. The use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) increased after the development and introduction of \"reversible\" forms affecting only the MAO-A subtype of inhibitors, making this drug safer to use.\nBy the 1960s, it was thought that the mode of action of tricyclics was to inhibit norepinephrine reuptake. However, norepinephrine reuptake became associated with stimulating effects. Later tricyclics were thought to affect serotonin as proposed in 1969 by Carlsson and Lindqvist as well as Lapin and Oxenkrug.\nSecond-generation antidepressants.\nResearchers began a process of rational drug design to isolate antihistamine-derived compounds that would selectively target these systems. The first such compound to be patented was zimelidine in 1971, while the first released clinically was indalpine. Fluoxetine was approved for commercial use by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1988, becoming the first blockbuster SSRI. Fluoxetine was developed at Eli Lilly and Company in the early 1970s by Bryan Molloy, Klaus Schmiegel, David T. Wong, and others. SSRIs became known as \"novel antidepressants\" along with other newer drugs such as SNRIs and NRIs with various selective effects.\nRapid-acting antidepressants.\nEsketamine (brand name Spravato), the first rapid-acting antidepressant to be approved for clinical treatment of depression, was introduced for this indication in March 2019 in the United States.\nResearch.\nA 2016 randomized controlled trial evaluated the rapid antidepressant effects of the psychedelic Ayahuasca in treatment-resistant depression with a positive outcome. In 2018, the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation for psilocybin-assisted therapy for treatment-resistant depression and in 2019, the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation for psilocybin therapy treating major depressive disorder.\nPublication bias and aged research.\nA 2018 systematic review published in The Lancet comparing the efficacy of 21 different first and second generation antidepressants found that antidepressant drugs tended to perform better and cause less adverse events when they were novel or experimental treatments compared to when they were evaluated again years later. Unpublished data was also associated with smaller positive effect sizes. However, the review did not find evidence of bias associated with industry funded research.\nSociety and culture.\nPrescription trends.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, figures reported in 2010 indicated that the number of antidepressants prescribed by the National Health Service (NHS) almost doubled over a decade. Further analysis published in 2014 showed that number of antidepressants dispensed annually in the community went up by 25 million in the 14 years between 1998 and 2012, rising from 15 million to 40 million. Nearly 50% of this rise occurred in the four years after the Great Recession, during which time the annual increase in prescriptions rose from 6.7% to 8.5%. These sources also suggest that aside from the recession, other factors that may influence changes in prescribing rates may include: improvements in diagnosis, a reduction of the stigma surrounding mental health, broader prescribing trends, GP characteristics, geographical location, and housing status. Another factor that may contribute to increasing consumption of antidepressants is the fact that these medications now are used for other conditions including social anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder.\nBetween 2005 and 2017, the number of adolescents (12 to 17 years) in England who were prescribed antidepressants has doubled. On the other hand, antidepressant prescriptions for children aged 5\u201311 in England decreased between 1999 and 2017. From April 2015, prescriptions increased for both age groups (for people aged 0 to 17) and peaked during the first COVID lockdown in March 2020.\nAccording to National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines, antidepressants for children and adolescents with depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) should be prescribed together with therapy and after being assessed by a child and adolescent psychiatrist. However, between 2006 and 2017, only 1 in 4 of 12\u201317 year-olds who were prescribed an SSRI by their GP had seen a specialist psychiatrist and 1 in 6 has seen a pediatrician. Half of these prescriptions were for depression and 16% for anxiety, the latter not being licensed for treatment with antidepressants. Among the suggested possible reasons why GPs are not following the guidelines are the difficulties of accessing talking therapies, long waiting lists, and the urgency of treatment. According to some researchers, strict adherence to treatment guidelines would limit access to effective medication for young people with mental health problems.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, antidepressants were the most commonly prescribed medication in 2013. Of the estimated 16 million \"long term\" (over 24 months) users, roughly 70 percent are female. As of 2017[ [update]], about 16.5% of white people in the United States took antidepressants compared with 5.6% of black people in the United States.\nUnited States: The most commonly prescribed antidepressants in the US retail market in 2010 were:\nNetherlands: In the Netherlands, paroxetine is the most prescribed antidepressant, followed by amitriptyline, citalopram and venlafaxine.\nAdherence.\nAs of 2003[ [update]], worldwide, 30% to 60% of people did not follow their practitioner's instructions about taking their antidepressants, and as of 2013[ [update]] in the US, it appeared that around 50% of people did not take their antidepressants as directed by their practitioner.\nWhen people fail to take their antidepressants, there is a greater risk that the drug will not help, that symptoms get worse, that they miss work or are less productive at work, and that the person may be hospitalized.\nSocial science perspective.\nSome academics have highlighted the need to examine the use of antidepressants and other medical treatments in cross-cultural terms, because various cultures prescribe and observe different manifestations, symptoms, meanings, and associations of depression and other medical conditions within their populations. These cross-cultural discrepancies, it has been argued, then have implications on the perceived efficacy and use of antidepressants and other strategies in the treatment of depression in these different cultures. In India, antidepressants are largely seen as tools to combat marginality, promising the individual the ability to reintegrate into society through their use\u2014a view and association not observed in the West.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nBecause most antidepressants function by inhibiting the reuptake of neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine these drugs can interfere with natural neurotransmitter levels in other organisms impacted by indirect exposure. Antidepressants fluoxetine and sertraline have been detected in aquatic organisms residing in effluent-dominated streams. The presence of antidepressants in surface waters and aquatic organisms has caused concern because ecotoxicological effects on aquatic organisms due to fluoxetine exposure have been demonstrated.\nCoral reef fish have been demonstrated to modulate aggressive behavior through serotonin. Artificially increasing serotonin levels in crustaceans can temporarily reverse social status and turn subordinates into aggressive and territorial dominant males.\nExposure to Fluoxetine has been demonstrated to increase serotonergic activity in fish, subsequently reducing aggressive behavior. Perinatal exposure to Fluoxetine at relevant environmental concentrations has been shown to lead to significant modifications of memory processing in 1-month-old cuttlefish. This impairment may disadvantage cuttlefish and decrease their survival. Somewhat less than 10% of orally administered Fluoxetine is excreted from humans unchanged or as glucuronide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2389", "revid": "50262543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2389", "title": "Auger effect", "text": "Physical phenomenon\nThe Meitner-Auger effect is a physical phenomenon in which atoms eject electrons. It occurs when an inner-shell vacancy in an atom is filled by an electron, releasing energy that causes the emission of another electron from a different shell of the same atom.\nWhen a core electron is removed, leaving a vacancy, an electron from a higher energy level may fall into the vacancy, resulting in a release of energy. For light atoms (Z&lt;12), this energy is most often transferred to a valence electron which is subsequently ejected from the atom. This second ejected electron is called an Auger electron. For heavier atomic nuclei, the release of the energy in the form of an emitted photon becomes gradually more probable.\nEffect.\nUpon ejection, the kinetic energy of the Auger electron corresponds to the difference between the energy of the initial electronic transition into the vacancy and the ionization energy for the electron shell from which the Auger electron was ejected. These energy levels depend on the type of atom and the chemical environment in which the atom was located.\nAuger electron spectroscopy involves the emission of Auger electrons by bombarding a sample with either X-rays or energetic electrons and measures the intensity of Auger electrons that result as a function of the Auger electron energy. The resulting spectra can be used to determine the identity of the emitting atoms and some information about their environment.\nAuger recombination is a similar Auger effect which occurs in semiconductors. An electron and electron hole (electron-hole pair) can recombine, giving up their energy to an electron in the conduction band, increasing its energy. The reverse effect is known as impact ionization.\nThe Auger effect can impact biological molecules such as DNA. Following the K-shell ionization of the component atoms of DNA, Auger electrons are ejected, leading to damage to its sugar-phosphate backbone.\nDiscovery.\nThe Auger emission process was observed and published in 1922 by Lise Meitner, an Austrian-Swedish physicist, as a side effect in her competitive search for the nuclear beta electrons with the British physicist Charles Drummond Ellis.\nThe French physicist Pierre Victor Auger independently discovered it in 1923 upon analysis of a Wilson cloud chamber experiment and it became the central part of his PhD work. High-energy X-rays were applied to ionize gas particles and observe photoelectric electrons. The observation of electron tracks that were independent of the frequency of the incident photon suggested a mechanism for electron ionization that was caused by an internal conversion of energy from a radiationless transition. Further investigation and theoretical work using elementary quantum mechanics and transition rate/transition probability calculations showed that the effect was a radiationless effect more than an internal conversion effect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2391", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2391", "title": "Akio Morita", "text": "Japanese entrepreneur (1921\u20131999)\n was a Japanese entrepreneur and co-founder of Sony along with Masaru Ibuka.\nEarly life.\nAkio Morita was born in Nagoya. Morita's family was involved in sake, miso and soy sauce production in the village of Kosugaya (currently a part of Tokoname City) on the western coast of Chita Peninsula in Aichi Prefecture since 1665. He was the oldest of four siblings and his father Kyuzaemon trained him as a child to take over the family business. Akio, however, found his true calling in mathematics and physics, and in 1944 he graduated from Osaka Imperial University with a degree in physics. He was later commissioned as a sub-lieutenant in the Imperial Japanese Navy, and served in World War II. During his service, Morita met his future business partner Masaru Ibuka at a study group for developing infrared-guided bombs (Ke-Go) in the Navy's Wartime Research Committee.\nSony.\nIn September 1945, Ibuka founded a radio repair shop in the bombed out Shirokiya Department Store in Nihonbashi, Tokyo. Morita saw a newspaper article about Ibuka's new venture and, after some correspondence, chose to join him in Tokyo. With funding from Morita's father, they co-founded \"Tokyo Tsushin Kogyo Kabushiki Kaisha\" (Tokyo Telecommunications Engineering Corporation, the forerunner of Sony Corporation) in 1946 with about 20 employees and initial capital of \u00a5190,000.\nIn 1949, the company developed magnetic recording tape and, in 1950, sold the first tape recorder in Japan. Ibuka was instrumental in securing the licensing of transistor technology from Bell Labs to Sony in the 1950s, thus making Sony one of the first companies to apply transistor technology to non-military uses. In 1957, the company produced a pocket-sized radio (the first to be fully transistorized), and in 1958, Morita and Ibuka decided to rename their company Sony (derived from \"sonus\"\u2014Latin for \"sound\"\u2014and \"sonny\", a then-common American expression). Morita was an advocate for all the products made by Sony. However, since the radio was slightly too big to fit in a shirt pocket, Morita made his employees wear shirts with slightly larger pockets to give the radio a \"pocket sized\" appearance.\nMorita founded Sony Corporation of America (SONAM, currently abbreviated as SCA) in 1960. In the process, he was struck by the mobility of employees between American companies, which was unheard of in Japan at that time. When he returned to Japan, he encouraged experienced, middle-aged employees of other companies to reevaluate their careers and consider joining Sony. The company filled many positions in this manner, and inspired other Japanese companies to do the same. In 1961, Sony Corporation was the first Japanese company to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange, in the form of American depositary receipts (ADRs).\nIn March 1968, Morita set up a joint venture in Japan between Sony and CBS Records, with him as president, to manufacture \"software\" for Sony's hardware.\nMorita became president of Sony in 1971, taking over from Ibuka who had served from 1950 to 1971. In 1975, Sony released the first Betamax home videocassette recorder, a year before the VHS format came out.\nIbuka retired in 1976 and Morita was named chairman of the company. In 1979, the Walkman was introduced, making it one of the world's first portable music players and in 1982, Sony launched the world's first compact disc player, the Sony CDP-101, with a compact disc (CD) itself, a new data storage format Sony and Philips co-developed. In that year, a 3.5-inch floppy disk structure was introduced by Sony, and it soon became the defacto standard. In 1984, Sony launched the Discman series, which extended their Walkman brand to portable CD products.\nUnder the vision of Morita, the company aggressively expanded into new businesses. Part of its motivation for doing so was the pursuit of \"convergence\", linking film, music and digital electronics. Twenty years after setting up a joint venture with CBS Records in Japan, Sony bought CBS Records Group which consisted of Columbia Records, Epic Records and other CBS labels. In 1989, they acquired Columbia Pictures Entertainment (Columbia Pictures, TriStar Pictures and others).\nNorio Ohga, who had joined the company in the 1950s after sending Morita a letter denouncing the poor quality of the company's tape recorders, succeeded Morita as chief executive officer in 1989.\nMorita suffered a cerebral hemorrhage in 1993 while playing tennis and on November 25, 1994, stepped down as Sony chairman to be succeeded by Ohga.\nOther affiliations.\nMorita was vice chairman of the Japan Business Federation (Japan Federation of Economic Organizations), and was a member of the Japan-U.S. Economic Relations Group, also known as the \"Wise Men's Group\". He helped General Motors with its acquisition of an interest in Isuzu in 1972. He was the third Japanese chairman of the Trilateral Commission. His amateur radio call sign is JP1DPJ.\nPublications.\nIn 1966, Morita wrote a book called \"Gakureki Muy\u014d Ron\" (\u5b66\u6b74\u7121\u7528\u8ad6, Never Mind School Records), where he stresses that school records are not important to success or one's business skills. In 1986, Morita wrote an autobiography titled \"Made in Japan\". He co-authored the 1991 book \"The Japan That Can Say No\" with politician Shintaro Ishihara, where they criticized American business practices and encouraged Japanese to take a more independent role in business and foreign affairs. (Actually, Morita had no intention to criticize American practices at that time.) The book was translated into English and caused controversy in the United States, and Morita later had his chapters removed from the English version and distanced himself from the book.\nAwards and honours.\nIn 1972, Morita received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. Morita was awarded the Albert Medal by the United Kingdom's Royal Society of Arts in 1982, the first Japanese to receive the honor. Two years later, he received the prestigious Legion of Honour, and in 1991, was awarded the First Class Order of the Sacred Treasure from the Emperor of Japan. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1992 and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1993. That same year, he was awarded an honorary British knighthood (KBE). Morita received the International Distinguished Entrepreneur Award from the University of Manitoba in 1987. In 1998, he was the only Asian person on \"Time\" magazine's list of the 20 most influential business people of the 20th century as part of their . He was posthumously awarded the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun in 1999. In 2003, Anaheim University's Graduate School of Business was renamed the Akio Morita School of Business in his honor. The Morita family's support for the program led to the growth of the Anaheim University Akio Morita School of Business in Tokyo, Japan.\nDeath.\nMorita, who loved to play golf and tennis, suffered a stroke in 1993, during a game of tennis. The stroke weakened him and left him in a wheelchair. On November 25, 1994, he stepped down as Sony chairman. On October 3, 1999, Morita died of pneumonia at the age of 78 in a Tokyo hospital, where he had been admitted since August 1999.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2392", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2392", "title": "Anode", "text": "Electrode through which conventional current flows into a polarized electrical device\nAn anode usually is an electrode of a polarized electrical device through which conventional current enters the device. This contrasts with a cathode, which is usually an electrode of the device through which conventional current leaves the device. A common mnemonic is ACID, for \"anode current into device\". The direction of conventional current (the flow of positive charges) in a circuit is opposite to the direction of electron flow, so (negatively charged) electrons flow from the anode of a galvanic cell, into an outside or external circuit connected to the cell. For example, the end of a household battery marked with a \"+\" is the cathode (while discharging).\nIn both a galvanic cell and an electrolytic cell, the anode is the electrode at which the oxidation reaction occurs. In a galvanic cell the anode is the wire or plate having excess negative charge as a result of the oxidation reaction. In an electrolytic cell, the anode is the wire or plate upon which excess positive charge is imposed. As a result of this, anions will tend to move towards the anode where they will undergo oxidation.\nHistorically, the anode of a galvanic cell was also known as the zincode because it was usually composed of zinc.\nCharge flow.\nThe terms anode and cathode are not defined by the voltage polarity of electrodes, but are usually defined by the direction of current through the electrode. An anode usually is the electrode of a device through which conventional current (positive charge) flows into the device from an external circuit, while a cathode usually is the electrode through which conventional current flows out of the device.\nIn general, if the current through the electrodes reverses direction, as occurs for example in a rechargeable battery when it is being charged, the roles of the electrodes as anode and cathode are reversed. However, the definition of anode and cathode is different for electrical devices such as diodes and vacuum tubes where the electrode naming is fixed and does not depend on the actual charge flow (current). These devices usually allow substantial current flow in one direction but negligible current in the other direction. Therefore, the electrodes are named based on the direction of this \"forward\" current. In a diode the anode is the terminal through which current enters and the cathode is the terminal through which current leaves, when the diode is forward biased. The names of the electrodes do not change in cases where reverse current flows through the device. Similarly, in a vacuum tube only one electrode can thermionically emit electrons into the evacuated tube, so electrons can only enter the device from the external circuit through the heated electrode. Therefore, this electrode is permanently named the cathode, and the electrode through which the electrons exit the tube is named the anode.\nConventional current depends not only on the direction the charge carriers move, but also the carriers' electric charge. The currents outside the device are usually carried by electrons in a metal conductor. Since electrons have a negative charge, the direction of electron flow is opposite to the direction of conventional current. Consequently, electrons leave the device through the anode and enter the device through the cathode.\nExamples.\nThe polarity of voltage on an anode with respect to an associated cathode varies depending on the device type and on its operating mode. In the following examples, the anode is negative in a device that provides power, and positive in a device that consumes power:\nIn a discharging battery or galvanic cell (diagram on left), the anode is the negative terminal: it is where conventional current flows into the cell. This inward current is carried externally by electrons moving outwards.\nIn a recharging battery, or an electrolytic cell, the anode is the positive terminal imposed by an external source of potential difference. The current through a recharging battery is opposite to the direction of current during discharge; in other words, the electrode which was the cathode during battery discharge becomes the anode while the battery is recharging.\nIn battery engineering, it is common to designate one electrode of a rechargeable battery the anode and the other the cathode according to the roles the electrodes play when the battery is discharged. This is despite the fact that the roles are reversed when the battery is charged. When this is done, \"anode\" simply designates the negative terminal of the battery and \"cathode\" designates the positive terminal.\nIn a diode, the anode is the terminal represented by the tail of the arrow symbol (flat side of the triangle), where conventional current flows into the device. Note the electrode naming for diodes is always based on the direction of the forward current (that of the arrow, in which the current flows \"most easily\"), even for types such as Zener diodes where the current of interest is the reverse current.\nIn vacuum tubes or gas-filled tubes, the anode is the terminal where current enters the tube.\nEtymology.\nThe word was coined in 1834 from the Greek \u1f04\u03bd\u03bf\u03b4\u03bf\u03c2 (\"anodos\"), 'ascent', by William Whewell, who had been consulted by Michael Faraday over some new names needed to complete a paper on the recently discovered process of electrolysis. In that paper Faraday explained that when an electrolytic cell is oriented so that electric current traverses the \"decomposing body\" (electrolyte) in a direction \"from East to West, or, which will strengthen this help to the memory, that in which the sun appears to move\", the anode is where the current enters the electrolyte, on the East side: \"\"ano\" upwards, \"odos\" a way; the way which the sun rises\".\nThe use of 'East' to mean the 'in' direction (actually 'in' \u2192 'East' \u2192 'sunrise' \u2192 'up') may appear contrived. Previously, as related in the first reference cited above, Faraday had used the more straightforward term \"eisode\" (the doorway where the current enters). His motivation for changing it to something meaning 'the East electrode' (other candidates had been \"eastode\", \"oriode\" and \"anatolode\") was to make it immune to a possible later change in the direction convention for current, whose exact nature was not known at the time. The reference he used to this effect was the Earth's magnetic field direction, which at that time was believed to be invariant. He fundamentally defined his arbitrary orientation for the cell as being that in which the internal current would run parallel to and in the same direction as a hypothetical magnetizing current loop around the local line of latitude which would induce a magnetic dipole field oriented like the Earth's. This made the internal current East to West as previously mentioned, but in the event of a later convention change it would have become West to East, so that the East electrode would not have been the 'way in' any more. Therefore, \"eisode\" would have become inappropriate, whereas \"anode\" meaning 'East electrode' would have remained correct with respect to the unchanged direction of the actual phenomenon underlying the current, then unknown but, he thought, unambiguously defined by the magnetic reference. In retrospect the name change was unfortunate, not only because the Greek roots alone do not reveal the anode's function any more, but more importantly because as we now know, the Earth's magnetic field direction on which the \"anode\" term is based is subject to reversals whereas the current direction convention on which the \"eisode\" term was based has no reason to change in the future.\nSince the later discovery of the electron, an easier to remember and more durably correct technically although historically false, etymology has been suggested: anode, from the Greek \"anodos\", 'way up', 'the way (up) out of the cell (or other device) for electrons'.\nElectrolytic anode.\nIn electrochemistry, the \"anode\" is where oxidation occurs and is the positive polarity contact in an electrolytic cell. At the anode, anions (negative ions) are forced by the electrical potential to react chemically and give off electrons (oxidation) which then flow up and into the driving circuit. Mnemonics: LEO Red Cat (Loss of Electrons is Oxidation, Reduction occurs at the Cathode), or AnOx Red Cat (Anode Oxidation, Reduction Cathode), or OIL RIG (Oxidation is Loss, Reduction is Gain of electrons), or Roman Catholic and Orthodox (Reduction \u2013 Cathode, anode \u2013 Oxidation), or LEO the lion says GER (Losing electrons is Oxidation, Gaining electrons is Reduction).\nThis process is widely used in metals refining. For example, in copper refining, copper anodes, an intermediate product from the furnaces, are electrolysed in an appropriate solution (such as sulfuric acid) to yield high purity (99.99%) cathodes. Copper cathodes produced using this method are also described as electrolytic copper.\nHistorically, when non-reactive anodes were desired for electrolysis, graphite (called plumbago in Faraday's time) or platinum were chosen. They were found to be some of the least reactive materials for anodes. Platinum erodes very slowly compared to other materials, and graphite crumbles and can produce carbon dioxide in aqueous solutions but otherwise does not participate in the reaction.\nBattery or galvanic cell anode.\nIn a battery or galvanic cell, the anode is the negative electrode from which electrons flow out towards the external part of the circuit. Internally the positively charged cations are flowing away from the anode (even though it is negative and therefore would be expected to attract them, this is due to electrode potential relative to the electrolyte solution being different for the anode and cathode metal/electrolyte systems); but, external to the cell in the circuit, electrons are being pushed out through the negative contact and thus through the circuit by the voltage potential as would be expected. \nBattery manufacturers may regard the negative electrode as the anode, particularly in their technical literature. Though from an electrochemical viewpoint incorrect, it does resolve the problem of which electrode is the anode in a secondary (or rechargeable) cell. Using the traditional definition, the anode switches ends between charge and discharge cycles.\nVacuum tube anode.\nIn electronic vacuum devices such as a cathode ray tube, the anode is the positively charged electron collector. In a tube, the anode is a charged positive plate that collects the electrons emitted by the cathode through electric attraction. It also accelerates the flow of these electrons.\nDiode anode.\nIn a semiconductor diode, the anode is the P-doped layer which initially supplies holes to the junction. In the junction region, the holes supplied by the anode combine with electrons supplied from the N-doped region, creating a depleted zone. As the P-doped layer supplies holes to the depleted region, negative dopant ions are left behind in the P-doped layer ('P' for positive charge-carrier ions). This creates a base negative charge on the anode. When a positive voltage is applied to anode of the diode from the circuit, more holes are able to be transferred to the depleted region, and this causes the diode to become conductive, allowing current to flow through the circuit. The terms anode and cathode should not be applied to a Zener diode, since it allows flow in either direction, depending on the polarity of the applied potential (i.e. voltage).\nSacrificial anode.\nIn cathodic protection, a metal anode that is more reactive to the corrosive environment than the metal system to be protected is electrically linked to the protected system. As a result, the metal anode partially corrodes or dissolves instead of the metal system. As an example, an iron or steel ship's hull may be protected by a zinc sacrificial anode, which will dissolve into the seawater and prevent the hull from being corroded. Sacrificial anodes are particularly needed for systems where a static charge is generated by the action of flowing liquids, such as pipelines and watercraft. Sacrificial anodes are also generally used in tank-type water heaters.\nIn 1824 to reduce the impact of this destructive electrolytic action on ships hulls, their fastenings and underwater equipment, the scientist-engineer Humphry Davy developed the first and still most widely used marine electrolysis protection system. Davy installed sacrificial anodes made from a more electrically reactive (less noble) metal attached to the vessel hull and electrically connected to form a cathodic protection circuit.\nA less obvious example of this type of protection is the process of galvanising iron. This process coats iron structures (such as fencing) with a coating of zinc metal. As long as the zinc remains intact, the iron is protected from the effects of corrosion. Inevitably, the zinc coating becomes breached, either by cracking or physical damage. Once this occurs, corrosive elements act as an electrolyte and the zinc/iron combination as electrodes. The resultant current ensures that the zinc coating is sacrificed but that the base iron does not corrode. Such a coating can protect an iron structure for a few decades, but once the protecting coating is consumed, the iron rapidly corrodes.\nIf, conversely, tin is used to coat steel, when a breach of the coating occurs it actually accelerates oxidation of the iron.\nImpressed current anode.\nAnother cathodic protection is used on the impressed current anode. It is made from titanium and covered with mixed metal oxide. Unlike the sacrificial anode rod, the impressed current anode does not sacrifice its structure. This technology uses an external current provided by a DC source to create the cathodic protection. Impressed current anodes are used in larger structures like pipelines, boats, city water tower, water heaters and more.\nRelated antonym.\nThe opposite of an anode is a cathode. When the current through the device is reversed, the electrodes switch functions, so the anode becomes the cathode and the cathode becomes anode, as long as the reversed current is applied. The exception is diodes where electrode naming is always based on the forward current direction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2393", "revid": "44674645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2393", "title": "Analog television", "text": "Television that uses analog signals\nAnalog television (or analogue television), is the original television technology, that uses analog signals to transmit video and audio. In an analog television broadcast, brightness, color, and sound are represented by the amplitude, phase, and frequency of the signal.\nThe strength of an analog signal varies over a continuous range of possible values, meaning that electronic noise and interference may be introduced. Thus, a moderately weak signal becomes snowy and subject to interference. In contrast, picture quality from a digital television (DTV) signal remains good until the signal level drops below a certain threshold (the \"digital cliff\"), where reception is either no longer possible or becomes intermittent.\nAnalog television may be wireless (as in terrestrial and satellite television) or distributed over a cable network (cable television).\nAll broadcast television systems traditionally used analog signals. Starting after the year 2000, motivated by the lower bandwidth requirements of compressed digital signals, a digital television transition has been underway in most of the world, with different deadlines for the cessation of analog broadcasts. Countries that still primarily use analogue systems are mostly in Africa, Asia, and South America.\nDevelopment.\nThe earliest systems of analog television were mechanical television systems that used spinning disks with patterns of holes punched into the disc to scan an image. A similar disk reconstructed the image at the receiver. Synchronization of the receiver disc rotation was handled through sync pulses broadcast with the image information. Camera systems used similar spinning discs and required intensely bright illumination of the subject for the light detector to work. The reproduced images from these mechanical systems were dim, very low resolution and flickered severely.\nAnalog television did not begin in earnest as an industry until the development of the cathode ray tube (CRT), which uses a focused electron beam to trace lines across a phosphor coated surface. The electron beam could be swept across the screen much faster than any mechanical disc system, allowing for more closely spaced scan lines and much higher image resolution. Also, far less maintenance was required of an all-electronic system compared to a mechanical spinning disc system. All-electronic systems became popular with households after World War II.\nStandards.\nBroadcasters of analog television encode their signal using different systems. The official systems of transmission were defined by the ITU in 1961 as: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, K1, L, M and N. These systems determine the number of scan lines, frame rate, channel width, video bandwidth, video-audio separation, and so on. A color encoding scheme (NTSC, PAL, or SECAM) could be added to the base monochrome signal. Using RF modulation the signal is then modulated onto a very high frequency (VHF) or ultra high frequency (UHF) carrier wave. Each frame of a television image is composed of scan lines drawn on the screen. The lines are of varying brightness; the whole set of lines is drawn quickly enough that the human eye perceives it as one image. The process repeats and the next sequential frame is displayed, allowing the depiction of motion. The analog television signal contains timing and synchronization information so that the receiver can reconstruct a two-dimensional moving image from a one-dimensional time-varying signal.\nThe first commercial television systems were black-and-white; the beginning of color television was in the 1950s.\nA practical television system needs to take luminance, chrominance (in a color system), synchronization (horizontal and vertical), and audio signals, and broadcast them over a radio transmission. The transmission system must include a means of television channel selection.\nAnalog broadcast television systems come in a variety of frame rates and resolutions. Further differences exist in the frequency and modulation of the audio carrier. The monochrome combinations still existing in the 1950s were standardized by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) as capital letters A through N. When color television was introduced, the chrominance information was added to the monochrome signals in a way that black and white televisions ignore. In this way backward compatibility was achieved.\nThere are three standards for the way the additional color information can be encoded and transmitted. The first was the American NTSC system. The European and Australian PAL and the French and former Soviet Union SECAM standards were developed later and attempt to cure certain defects of the NTSC system. PAL's color encoding is similar to the NTSC systems. SECAM, though, uses a different modulation approach than PAL or NTSC. PAL had a late evolution called PALplus, allowing widescreen broadcasts while remaining fully compatible with existing PAL equipment.\nIn principle, all three color encoding systems can be used with any scan line/frame rate combination. Therefore, in order to describe a given signal completely, it is necessary to quote the color system plus the broadcast standard as a capital letter. For example, the United States, Canada, Mexico and South Korea used (or use) NTSC-M, Japan used NTSC-J, the UK used PAL-I, France used SECAM-L, much of Western Europe and Australia used (or use) PAL-B/G, most of Eastern Europe uses SECAM-D/K or PAL-D/K and so on. \nNot all of the possible combinations exist. NTSC is only used with system M, even though there were experiments with NTSC-A (405 line) in the UK and NTSC-N (625 line) in part of South America. PAL is used with a variety of 625-line standards (B, G, D, K, I, N) but also with the North American 525-line standard, accordingly named PAL-M. Likewise, SECAM is used with a variety of 625-line standards.\nFor this reason, many people refer to any 625/25 type signal as \"PAL\" and to any 525/30 signal as \"NTSC\", even when referring to digital signals; for example, on DVD-Video, which does not contain any analog color encoding, and thus no PAL or NTSC signals at all.\nAlthough a number of different broadcast television systems are in use worldwide, the same principles of operation apply.\nDisplaying an image.\nA CRT television displays an image by scanning a beam of electrons across the screen in a pattern of horizontal lines known as a raster. At the end of each line, the beam returns to the start of the next line; at the end of the last line, the beam returns to the beginning of the first line at the top of the screen. As it passes each point, the intensity of the beam is varied, varying the luminance of that point. A color television system is similar except there are three beams that scan together and an additional signal known as chrominance controls the color of the spot.\nWhen analog television was developed, no affordable technology for storing video signals existed; the luminance signal had to be generated and transmitted at the same time at which it is displayed on the CRT. It was therefore essential to keep the raster scanning in the camera (or other device for producing the signal) in exact synchronization with the scanning in the television.\nThe physics of the CRT require that a finite time interval be allowed for the spot to move back to the start of the next line (\"horizontal retrace\") or the start of the screen (\"vertical retrace\"). The timing of the luminance signal must allow for this.\nThe human eye has a characteristic called phi phenomenon. Quickly displaying successive scan images creates the illusion of smooth motion. Flickering of the image can be partially solved using a long persistence phosphor coating on the CRT so that successive images fade slowly. However, slow phosphor has the negative side effect of causing image smearing and blurring when rapid on-screen motion occurs.\nThe maximum frame rate depends on the bandwidth of the electronics and the transmission system, and the number of horizontal scan lines in the image. A frame rate of 25 or 30 hertz is a satisfactory compromise, while the process of interlacing two video fields of the picture per frame is used to build the image. This process doubles the apparent number of video frames per second and further reduces flicker and other defects in transmission.\nReceiving signals.\nThe television system for each country will specify a number of television channels within the UHF or VHF frequency ranges. A channel actually consists of two signals: the picture information is transmitted using amplitude modulation on one carrier frequency, and the sound is transmitted with frequency modulation at a frequency at a fixed offset (typically 4.5 to 6\u00a0MHz) from the picture signal.\nThe channel frequencies chosen represent a compromise between allowing enough bandwidth for video (and hence satisfactory picture resolution), and allowing enough channels to be packed into the available frequency band. In practice, a technique called vestigial sideband is used to reduce the channel spacing, which would be nearly twice the video bandwidth if pure AM was used.\nSignal reception is invariably done via a superheterodyne receiver: the first stage is a \"tuner\" which selects a television channel and frequency-shifts it to a fixed intermediate frequency (IF). The signal amplifier performs amplification to the IF stages from the microvolt range to fractions of a volt.\nExtracting the sound.\nAt this point, the IF signal consists of a video carrier signal at one frequency and the sound carrier at a fixed offset in frequency. A demodulator recovers the video signal. Also at the output of the same demodulator is a new frequency-modulated sound carrier at the offset frequency. In some sets made before 1948, this was filtered out, and the sound IF of about 22\u00a0MHz was sent to an FM demodulator to recover the basic sound signal. In newer sets, this new carrier at the offset frequency was allowed to remain as \"intercarrier sound\", and it was sent to an FM demodulator to recover the basic sound signal. One particular advantage of intercarrier sound is that when the front panel fine-tuning knob is adjusted, the sound carrier frequency does not change with the tuning, but stays at the above-mentioned offset frequency. Consequently, it is easier to tune the picture without losing the sound.\nSo the FM sound carrier is then demodulated, amplified, and used to drive a loudspeaker. Until the advent of the NICAM and MTS systems, television sound transmissions were monophonic.\nStructure of a video signal.\nThe video carrier is demodulated to give a composite video signal containing luminance, chrominance and synchronization signals. The result is identical to the composite video format used by analog video devices such as VCRs or CCTV cameras. To ensure good linearity and thus fidelity, consistent with affordable manufacturing costs of transmitters and receivers, the video carrier is never modulated to the extent that it is shut off altogether. When intercarrier sound was introduced later in 1948, not completely shutting off the carrier had the side effect of allowing intercarrier sound to be economically implemented.\nEach line of the displayed image is transmitted using a signal as shown above. The same basic format (with minor differences mainly related to timing and the encoding of color) is used for PAL, NTSC, and SECAM television systems. A monochrome signal is identical to a color one, with the exception that the elements shown in color in the diagram (the colorburst, and the chrominance signal) are not present.\nThe \"front porch\" is a brief (about 1.5 microsecond) period inserted between the end of each transmitted line of picture and the leading edge of the next line's sync pulse. Its purpose was to allow voltage levels to stabilise in older televisions, preventing interference between picture lines. The \"front porch\" is the first component of the horizontal blanking interval which also contains the horizontal sync pulse and the \"back porch\".\nThe \"back porch\" is the portion of each scan line between the end (rising edge) of the horizontal sync pulse and the start of active video. It is used to restore the black level (300\u00a0mV) reference in analog video. In signal processing terms, it compensates for the fall time and settling time following the sync pulse.\nIn color television systems such as PAL and NTSC, this period also includes the colorburst signal. In the SECAM system, it contains the reference subcarrier for each consecutive color difference signal in order to set the zero-color reference.\nIn some professional systems, particularly satellite links between locations, the digital audio is embedded within the line sync pulses of the video signal, to save the cost of renting a second channel. The name for this proprietary system is Sound-in-Syncs.\nMonochrome video signal extraction.\nThe luminance component of a composite video signal varies between 0\u00a0V and approximately 0.7\u00a0V above the \"black\" level. In the NTSC system, there is a \"blanking\" signal level used during the front porch and back porch, and a \"black\" signal level 75\u00a0mV above it; in PAL and SECAM these are identical.\nIn a monochrome receiver, the luminance signal is amplified to drive the control grid in the electron gun of the CRT. This changes the intensity of the electron beam and therefore the brightness of the spot being scanned. Brightness and contrast controls determine the DC shift and amplification, respectively.\nColor video signal extraction.\nU and V signals.\nA color signal conveys picture information for each of the red, green, and blue components of an image. However, these are not simply transmitted as three separate signals, because: such a signal would not be compatible with monochrome receivers, an important consideration when color broadcasting was first introduced. It would also occupy three times the bandwidth of existing television, requiring a decrease in the number of television channels available.\nInstead, the RGB signals are converted into YUV form, where the Y signal represents the luminance of the colors in the image. Because the rendering of colors in this way is the goal of both monochrome film and television systems, the Y signal is ideal for transmission as the luminance signal. This ensures a monochrome receiver will display a correct picture in black and white, where a given color is reproduced by a shade of gray that correctly reflects how light or dark the original color is.\nThe U and V signals are \"color difference\" signals. The U signal is the difference between the B signal and the Y signal, also known as B minus Y (B-Y), and the V signal is the difference between the R signal and the Y signal, also known as R minus Y (R-Y). The U signal then represents how purplish-blue or its complementary color, yellowish-green, the color is, and the V signal how purplish-red or its complementary, greenish-cyan, it is. The advantage of this scheme is that the U and V signals are zero when the picture has no color content. Since the human eye is more sensitive to detail in luminance than in color, the U and V signals can be transmitted with reduced bandwidth with acceptable results.\nIn the receiver, a single demodulator can extract an additive combination of U plus V. An example is the X demodulator used in the X/Z demodulation system. In that same system, a second demodulator, the Z demodulator, also extracts an additive combination of U plus V, but in a different ratio. The X and Z color difference signals are further matrixed into three color difference signals, (R-Y), (B-Y), and (G-Y). The combinations of usually two, but sometimes three demodulators were:\nIn the end, further matrixing of the above color-difference signals c through f yielded the three color-difference signals, (R-Y), (B-Y), and (G-Y).\nThe R, G, and B signals in the receiver needed for the display device (CRT, Plasma display, or LCD display) are electronically derived by matrixing as follows: R is the additive combination of (R-Y) with Y, G is the additive combination of (G-Y) with Y, and B is the additive combination of (B-Y) with Y. All of this is accomplished electronically. It can be seen that in the combining process, the low-resolution portion of the Y signals cancel out, leaving R, G, and B signals able to render a low-resolution image in full color. However, the higher resolution portions of the Y signals do not cancel out, and so are equally present in R, G, and B, producing the higher-resolution image detail in monochrome, although it appears to the human eye as a full-color and full-resolution picture.\nNTSC and PAL systems.\nIn the NTSC and PAL color systems, U and V are transmitted by using quadrature amplitude modulation of a subcarrier. This kind of modulation applies two independent signals to one subcarrier, with the idea that both signals will be recovered independently at the receiving end. For NTSC, the subcarrier is at 3.58\u00a0MHz. For the PAL system it is at 4.43\u00a0MHz. The subcarrier itself is not included in the modulated signal (suppressed carrier), it is the subcarrier sidebands that carry the U and V information. The usual reason for using suppressed carrier is that it saves on transmitter power. In this application a more important advantage is that the color signal disappears entirely in black and white scenes. The subcarrier is within the bandwidth of the main luminance signal and consequently can cause undesirable artifacts on the picture, all the more noticeable in black and white receivers.\nA small sample of the subcarrier, the colorburst, is included in the horizontal blanking portion, which is not visible on the screen. This is necessary to give the receiver a phase reference for the modulated signal. Under quadrature amplitude modulation the modulated chrominance signal changes phase as compared to its subcarrier and also changes amplitude. The chrominance amplitude (when considered together with the Y signal) represents the approximate saturation of a color, and the chrominance phase against the subcarrier reference approximately represents the hue of the color. For particular test colors found in the test color bar pattern, exact amplitudes and phases are sometimes defined for test and troubleshooting purposes only.\nDue to the nature of the quadrature amplitude modulation process that created the chrominance signal, at certain times, the signal represents only the U signal, and 70 nanoseconds (NTSC) later, it represents only the V signal. About 70 nanoseconds later still, -U, and another 70 nanoseconds, -V. So to extract U, a synchronous demodulator is utilized, which uses the subcarrier to briefly gate the chroma every 280 nanoseconds, so that the output is only a train of discrete pulses, each having an amplitude that is the same as the original U signal at the corresponding time. In effect, these pulses are discrete-time analog samples of the U signal. The pulses are then low-pass filtered so that the original analog continuous-time U signal is recovered. For V, a 90-degree shifted subcarrier briefly gates the chroma signal every 280 nanoseconds, and the rest of the process is identical to that used for the U signal.\nGating at any other time than those times mentioned above will yield an additive mixture of any two of U, V, -U, or -V. One of these \"off-axis\" (that is, of the U and V axis) gating methods is called I/Q demodulation. Another much more popular off-axis scheme was the X/Z demodulation system. Further matrixing recovered the original U and V signals. This scheme was actually the most popular demodulator scheme throughout the 1960s.\nThe above process uses the subcarrier. But as previously mentioned, it was deleted before transmission, and only the chroma is transmitted. Therefore, the receiver must reconstitute the subcarrier. For this purpose, a short burst of the subcarrier, known as the colorburst, is transmitted during the back porch (re-trace blanking period) of each scan line. A subcarrier oscillator in the receiver locks onto this signal (see phase-locked loop) to achieve a phase reference, resulting in the oscillator producing the reconstituted subcarrier.\nNTSC uses this process unmodified. Unfortunately, this often results in poor color reproduction due to phase errors in the received signal, sometimes caused by multipath but mostly by poor implementation at the studio end. With the advent of solid-state receivers, cable TV, and digital studio equipment for conversion to an over-the-air analog signal, these NTSC problems have been largely fixed, leaving operator error at the studio end as the sole color rendition weakness of the NTSC system. In any case, the PAL D (delay) system mostly corrects these kinds of errors by reversing the phase of the signal on each successive line, and averaging the results over pairs of lines. This process is achieved by the use of a 1H (where H = horizontal scan frequency) duration delay line. Phase shift errors between successive lines are therefore canceled out and the wanted signal amplitude is increased when the two in-phase signals are re-combined.\nNTSC is more spectrum efficient than PAL, giving more picture detail for a given bandwidth. This is because sophisticated comb filters in receivers are more effective with NTSC's 4 color frame sequence compared to PAL's 8-field sequence. However, in the end, the larger channel width of most PAL systems in Europe still gives PAL systems the edge in transmitting more picture detail.\nSECAM system.\nIn the SECAM television system, U and V are transmitted on \"alternate\" lines, using simple frequency modulation of two different color subcarriers.\nIn some analog color CRT displays, starting in 1956, the brightness control signal (luminance) is fed to the cathode connections of the electron guns, and the color difference signals (chrominance signals) are fed to the control grids connections. This simple CRT matrix mixing technique was replaced in later solid state designs of signal processing with the original matrixing method used in the 1954 and 1955 color TV receivers.\nSynchronization.\nSynchronizing pulses added to the video signal at the end of every scan line and video frame ensure that the sweep oscillators in the receiver remain locked in step with the transmitted signal so that the image can be reconstructed on the receiver screen.\nA \"sync separator\" circuit detects the sync voltage levels and sorts the pulses into horizontal and vertical sync.\nHorizontal synchronization.\nThe horizontal sync pulse separates the scan lines. The horizontal sync signal is a single short pulse that indicates the start of every line. The rest of the scan line follows, with the signal ranging from 0.3\u00a0V (black) to 1\u00a0V (white), until the next horizontal or vertical synchronization pulse.\nThe format of the horizontal sync pulse varies. In the 525-line NTSC system it is a 4.85\u00a0\u03bcs pulse at 0\u00a0V. In the 625-line PAL system the pulse is 4.7\u00a0\u03bcs at 0\u00a0V. This is lower than the amplitude of any video signal (\"blacker than black\") so it can be detected by the level-sensitive \"sync separator\" circuit of the receiver.\nTwo timing intervals are defined\u00a0\u2013 the \"front porch\" between the end of the displayed video and the start of the sync pulse, and the \"back porch\" after the sync pulse and before the displayed video. These and the sync pulse itself are called the \"horizontal blanking\" (or \"retrace\") \"interval\" and represent the time that the electron beam in the CRT is returning to the start of the next display line.\nVertical synchronization.\nVertical synchronization separates the video fields. In PAL and NTSC, the vertical sync pulse occurs within the vertical blanking interval. The vertical sync pulses are made by prolonging the length of horizontal sync pulses through almost the entire length of the scan line.\nThe \"vertical sync\" signal is a series of much longer pulses, indicating the start of a new field. The sync pulses occupy the whole line interval of a number of lines at the beginning and end of a scan; no picture information is transmitted during vertical retrace. The pulse sequence is designed to allow horizontal sync to continue during vertical retrace; it also indicates whether each field represents even or odd lines in interlaced systems (depending on whether it begins at the start of a horizontal line, or midway through).\nThe format of such a signal in 625-line PAL and 525-line NTSC is:\nEach pre- or post-equalizing pulse consists of half a scan line of black signal: 2\u00a0\u03bcs at 0\u00a0V, followed by 30\u00a0\u03bcs at 0.3\u00a0V. Each long sync pulse consists of an equalizing pulse with timings inverted: 30\u00a0\u03bcs at 0\u00a0V, followed by 2\u00a0\u03bcs at 0.3\u00a0V.\nIn video production and computer graphics, changes to the image are often performed during the vertical blanking interval to avoid visible discontinuity of the image. If this image in the framebuffer is updated with a new image while the display is being refreshed, the display shows a mishmash of both frames, producing page tearing partway down the image.\nHorizontal and vertical hold.\nThe sweep (or deflection) oscillators were designed to run without a signal from the television station (or VCR, computer, or other composite video source). This allows the television receiver to display a raster and to allow an image to be presented during antenna placement. With sufficient signal strength, the receiver's sync separator circuit would split timebase pulses from the incoming video and use them to reset the horizontal and vertical oscillators at the appropriate time to synchronize with the signal from the station.\nThe free-running oscillation of the horizontal circuit is especially critical, as the horizontal deflection circuits typically power the flyback transformer (which provides acceleration potential for the CRT) as well as the filaments for the high voltage rectifier tube and sometimes the filament(s) of the CRT itself. Without the operation of the horizontal oscillator and output stages in these television receivers, there would be no illumination of the CRT's face.\nThe lack of precision timing components in early equipment meant that the timebase circuits occasionally needed manual adjustment. If their free-run frequencies were too far from the actual line and field rates, the circuits would not be able to follow the incoming sync signals. Loss of horizontal synchronization usually resulted in an unwatchable picture; loss of vertical synchronization would produce an image rolling up or down the screen.\nOlder analog television receivers often provide manual controls to adjust horizontal and vertical timing. The adjustment takes the form of \"horizontal hold\" and \"vertical hold\" controls, usually on the front panel along with other common controls. These adjust the free-run frequencies of the corresponding timebase oscillators.\nA slowly rolling vertical picture demonstrates that the vertical oscillator is nearly synchronized with the television station but is not locking to it, often due to a weak signal or a failure in the sync separator stage not resetting the oscillator.\nHorizontal sync errors cause the image to be torn diagonally and repeated across the screen as if it were wrapped around a screw or a barber's pole; the greater the error, the more copies of the image will be seen at once wrapped around the barber pole.\nBy the early 1980s the efficacy of the synchronization circuits, plus the inherent stability of the sets' oscillators, had been improved to the point where these controls were no longer necessary. Integrated Circuits which eliminated the horizontal hold control were starting to appear as early as 1969.\nThe final generations of analog television receivers used IC-based designs where the receiver's timebases were derived from accurate crystal oscillators. With these sets, adjustment of the free-running frequency of either sweep oscillator was unnecessary and unavailable.\nHorizontal and vertical hold controls were rarely used in CRT-based computer monitors, as the quality and consistency of components were quite high by the advent of the computer age, but might be found on some composite monitors used with the 1970s\u201380s home or personal computers.\nOther technical information.\nComponents of a television system.\nThe tuner is the object which, with the aid of an antenna, isolates the television signals received over the air. There are two types of tuners in analog television, VHF and UHF tuners. The VHF tuner selects the VHF television frequency. This consists of a 4\u00a0MHz video bandwidth and about 100\u00a0kHz audio bandwidth. It then amplifies the signal and converts it to a 45.75\u00a0MHz Intermediate Frequency (IF) amplitude-modulated video and a 41.25\u00a0MHz IF frequency-modulated audio carrier.\nThe IF amplifiers are centered at 44\u00a0MHz for optimal frequency transference of the audio and video carriers. Like radio, television has automatic gain control (AGC). This controls the gain of the IF amplifier stages and the tuner.\nThe video amp and output amplifier is implemented using a pentode or a power transistor. The filter and demodulator separates the 45.75\u00a0MHz video from the 41.25\u00a0MHz audio then it simply uses a diode to detect the video signal. After the video detector, the video is amplified and sent to the sync separator and then to the picture tube.\nThe audio signal goes to a 4.5\u00a0MHz amplifier. This amplifier prepares the signal for the 4.5\u00a0MHz detector. It then goes through a 4.5\u00a0MHz IF transformer to the detector. In television, there are 2 ways of detecting FM signals. One way is by the ratio detector. This is simple but very hard to align. The next is a relatively simple detector. This is the quadrature detector. It was invented in 1954. The first tube designed for this purpose was the 6BN6 type. It is easy to align and simple in circuitry. It was such a good design that it is still being used today in the Integrated circuit form. After the detector, it goes to the audio amplifier.\nImage synchronization is achieved by transmitting negative-going pulses. The \"horizontal sync\" signal is a single short pulse that indicates the start of every line. Two-timing intervals are defined\u00a0\u2013 the \"front porch\" between the end of the displayed video and the start of the sync pulse, and the \"back porch\" after the sync pulse and before the displayed video. These and the sync pulse itself are called the \"horizontal blanking\" (or \"retrace\") \"interval\" and represent the time that the electron beam in the CRT is returning to the start of the next display line.\nThe \"vertical sync\" signal is a series of much longer pulses, indicating the start of a new field. The vertical sync pulses occupy the whole of line interval of a number of lines at the beginning and end of a scan; no picture information is transmitted during vertical retrace. The pulse sequence is designed to allow horizontal sync to continue during vertical retrace.\nA \"sync separator\" circuit detects the sync voltage levels and extracts and conditions signals that the horizontal and vertical oscillators can use to keep in sync with the video. It also forms the AGC voltage.\nThe horizontal and vertical oscillators form the raster on the CRT. They are driven by the sync separator. There are many ways to create these oscillators. The earliest is the thyratron oscillator. Although it is known to drift, it makes a perfect sawtooth wave. This sawtooth wave is so good that no linearity control is needed. This oscillator was designed for the electrostatic deflection CRTs but also found some use in electromagnetically deflected CRTs. The next oscillator developed was the blocking oscillator which uses a transformer to create a sawtooth wave. This was only used for a brief time period and never was very popular. Finally the multivibrator was probably the most successful. It needed more adjustment than the other oscillators, but it is very simple and effective. This oscillator was so popular that it was used from the early 1950s until today.\nTwo oscillator amplifiers are needed. The vertical amplifier directly drives the yoke. Since it operates at 50 or 60\u00a0Hz and drives an electromagnet, it is similar to an audio amplifier. Because of the rapid deflection required, the horizontal oscillator requires a high-power flyback transformer driven by a high-powered tube or transistor. Additional windings on this flyback transformer typically power other parts of the system.\nLoss of horizontal synchronization usually results in a scrambled and unwatchable picture; loss of vertical synchronization produces an image rolling up or down the screen.\nTimebase circuits.\nIn an analog receiver with a CRT display sync pulses are fed to horizontal and vertical \"timebase\" circuits (commonly called \"sweep circuits\" in the United States), each consisting of an oscillator and an amplifier. These generate modified sawtooth and parabola current waveforms to scan the electron beam. Engineered waveform shapes are necessary to make up for the distance variations from the electron beam source and the screen surface. The oscillators are designed to free-run at frequencies very close to the field and line rates, but the sync pulses cause them to reset at the beginning of each scan line or field, resulting in the necessary synchronization of the beam sweep with the originating signal. The output waveforms from the timebase amplifiers are fed to the horizontal and vertical \"deflection coils\" wrapped around the CRT tube. These coils produce magnetic fields proportional to the changing current, and these deflect the electron beam across the screen.\nIn the 1950s, the power for these circuits was derived directly from the mains supply. A simple circuit consisted of a series voltage dropper resistance and a rectifier. This avoided the cost of a large high-voltage mains supply (50 or 60\u00a0Hz) transformer. It was inefficient and produced a lot of heat.\nIn the 1960s, semiconductor technology was introduced into timebase circuits. During the late 1960s in the UK, synchronous (with the scan line rate) power generation was introduced into solid state receiver designs.\nIn the UK use of the simple (50\u00a0Hz) types of power, circuits were discontinued as thyristor based switching circuits were introduced. The reason for design changes arose from the electricity supply contamination problems arising from EMI, and supply loading issues due to energy being taken from only the positive half cycle of the mains supply waveform.\nCRT flyback power supply.\nMost of the receiver's circuitry (at least in transistor- or IC-based designs) operates from a comparatively low-voltage DC power supply. However, the anode connection for a CRT requires a very high voltage (typically 10\u201330\u00a0kV) for correct operation.\nThis voltage is not directly produced by the main power supply circuitry; instead, the receiver makes use of the circuitry used for horizontal scanning. Direct current (DC), is switched through the line output transformer, and alternating current (AC) is induced into the scan coils. At the end of each horizontal scan line the magnetic field, which has built up in both transformer and scan coils by the current, is a source of latent electromagnetic energy. This stored collapsing magnetic field energy can be captured. The reverse flow, short duration, (about 10% of the line scan time) current from both the line output transformer and the horizontal scan coil is discharged again into the primary winding of the flyback transformer by the use of a rectifier which blocks this counter-electromotive force. A small value capacitor is connected across the scan-switching device. This tunes the circuit inductances to resonate at a much higher frequency. This lengthens the flyback time from the extremely rapid decay rate that would result if they were electrically isolated during this short period. One of the secondary windings on the flyback transformer then feeds this brief high-voltage pulse to a Cockcroft\u2013Walton generator design voltage multiplier. This produces the required high-voltage supply. A flyback converter is a power supply circuit operating on similar principles.\nA typical modern design incorporates the flyback transformer and rectifier circuitry into a single unit with a captive output lead, known as a diode split line output transformer or an Integrated High Voltage Transformer (IHVT), so that all high-voltage parts are enclosed. Earlier designs used a separate line output transformer and a well-insulated high-voltage multiplier unit. The high frequency (15\u00a0kHz or so) of the horizontal scanning allows reasonably small components to be used.\nTransition to digital.\nIn many countries, over-the-air broadcast television of analog audio and analog video signals has been discontinued to allow the re-use of the television broadcast radio spectrum for other services.\nThe first country to make a wholesale switch to digital over-the-air (terrestrial television) broadcasting was Luxembourg in 2006, followed later in 2006 by the Netherlands. The Digital television transition in the United States for high-powered transmission was completed on 12 June 2009, the date that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) set. Almost two million households could no longer watch television because they had not prepared for the transition. The switchover had been delayed by the DTV Delay Act. While the majority of the viewers of over-the-air broadcast television in the U.S. watch full-power stations (which number about 1800), there are three other categories of television stations in the U.S.: low-power broadcasting stations, class A stations, and television translator stations. These were given later deadlines.\nIn Japan, the switch to digital began in northeastern Ishikawa Prefecture on 24 July 2010 and ended in 43 of the country's 47 prefectures (including the rest of Ishikawa) on 24 July 2011, but in Fukushima, Iwate, and Miyagi prefectures, the conversion was delayed to 31 March 2012, due to complications from the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami and its related nuclear accidents.\nIn Canada, most of the larger cities turned off analog broadcasts on 31 August 2011.\nChina turned off analog broadcasting between 2015 and 2021.\nBrazil switched to digital television on 2 December 2007 in S\u00e3o Paulo and planned to end analog broadcasting nationwide by 30 June 2016. However, the Ministry of Communications announced in 2012 that the deadline would be delayed. As of 2024, Brazil is in the process of implementing its next-generation digital television system, known as TV 3.0. In July 2024, ATSC 3.0 standard was officially selected for the country's next-generation digital television system. The transition to TV 3.0 began in 2025, with initial deployments planned for key cities such as S\u00e3o Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Bras\u00edlia.\nIn Malaysia, the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission advertised for tender bids to be submitted in the third quarter of 2009 for the 470 through 742\u00a0MHz UHF allocation, to enable Malaysia's broadcast system to move into DTV. The new broadcast band allocation would result in Malaysia's having to build an infrastructure for all broadcasters, using a single digital terrestrial television broadcast channel. Large portions of Malaysia are covered by television broadcasts from Singapore, Thailand, Brunei, and Indonesia (from Borneo and Batam). Starting from 1 November 2019, all regions in Malaysia were no longer using the analog system after the states of Sabah and Sarawak finally turned it off on 31 October 2019.\nIn Singapore, digital television under DVB-T2 began on 16 December 2013. The switchover was delayed many times until analog TV was switched off at midnight on 2 January 2019.\nIn the Philippines, the National Telecommunications Commission required all broadcasting companies to end analog broadcasting on 31 December 2015 at 11:59\u00a0p.m. Due to delay of the release of the implementing rules and regulations for digital television broadcast, the target date was moved to 2020. Full digital broadcast was expected in 2021 and all of the analog TV services were to be shut down by the end of 2023. However, in February 2023, the NTC postponed the ASO/DTV transition to 2025 due to many provincial television stations not being ready to start their digital TV transmissions.\nIn the Russian Federation, the Russian Television and Radio Broadcasting Network (RTRS) disabled analog broadcasting of federal channels in five stages, shutting down broadcasting in multiple federal subjects at each stage. The first region to have analog broadcasting disabled was Tver Oblast on 3 December 2018, and the switchover was completed on 14 October 2019. During the transition, DVB-T2 receivers and monetary compensations for purchasing of terrestrial or satellite digital TV reception equipment were provided to disabled people, World War II veterans, certain categories of retirees and households with income per member below living wage.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2395", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2395", "title": "April 11", "text": "Date in Gregorian calendars\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearApril 11 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2396", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2396", "title": "Adhesive", "text": "Non-metallic material used to bond various materials together\nAdhesive, also known as glue, cement, mucilage, or paste, is any non-metallic substance applied to one or both surfaces of two separate items that binds them together and resists their separation.\nThe use of adhesives offers certain advantages over other binding techniques such as sewing, mechanical fastenings, and welding. These include the ability to bind different materials together, the more efficient distribution of stress across a joint, the cost-effectiveness of an easily mechanized process, and greater flexibility in design. Disadvantages of adhesive use include decreased stability at high temperatures, relative weakness in bonding large objects with a small bonding surface area, and greater difficulty in separating objects during testing. Adhesives are typically organized by the method of adhesion followed by \"reactive\" or \"non-reactive\", a term which refers to whether the adhesive chemically reacts in order to harden. Alternatively, they can be organized either by their starting physical phase or whether their raw stock is of natural or synthetic origin.\nAdhesives may be found naturally or produced synthetically. The earliest human use of adhesive-like substances was approximately 200,000 years ago, when Neanderthals produced tar from the dry distillation of birch bark for use in binding stone tools to wooden handles. The first references to adhesives in literature appeared approximately 2000 BC. The Greeks and Romans made great contributions to the development of adhesives. In Europe, glue was not widely used until the period AD 1500\u20131700. From then until the 1900s increases in adhesive use and discovery were relatively gradual. Only since the 20th century has the development of synthetic adhesives accelerated rapidly, and innovation in the field continues to the present.\nHistory.\nThe earliest evidence of human adhesive use was discovered in central Italy when three stone implements were discovered with birch bark tar indications. The tools were dated to about 200,000 before present in the Middle Paleolithic. It is the earliest example of tar-hafted stone tools.\nAn experimental archeology study published in 2019 demonstrated how birch bark tar can be produced in an easier, more discoverable process. It involves directly burning birch bark under an overhanging rock surface in an open-air environment and collecting the tar that builds up on the rock.\nAlthough sticky enough, plant-based, single-component adhesives can be brittle and vulnerable to environmental conditions. The first use of compound adhesives was discovered in Sibudu, South Africa. Here, 70,000-year-old stone segments that were once inserted in axe hafts were discovered covered with an adhesive composed of plant gum and red ochre (natural iron oxide) as adding ochre to plant gum produces a stronger product and protects the gum from disintegrating under wet conditions. The ability to produce stronger adhesives allowed middle Stone Age humans to attach stone segments to sticks in greater variations, which led to the development of new tools. A study of material from Le Moustier indicates that Middle Paleolithic people, possibly Neanderthals, used glue made from a mixture of ocher and bitumen to make hand grips for cutting and scraping stone tools.\nMore recent examples of adhesive use by prehistoric humans have been found at the burial sites of ancient tribes. Archaeologists studying the sites found that approximately 6,000 years ago the tribesmen had buried their dead together with food found in broken clay pots repaired with tree resins. Another investigation by archaeologists uncovered the use of bituminous cements to fasten ivory eyeballs to statues in Babylonian temples dating to approximately 4000 BC.\nIn 2000, a paper revealed the discovery of a 5,200-year-old man nicknamed the \"Tyrolean Iceman\" or \"\u00d6tzi\", who was preserved in a glacier near the Austria-Italy border. Several of his belongings were found with him including two arrows with flint arrowheads and a copper hatchet, each with evidence of organic glue used to connect the stone or metal parts to the wooden shafts. The glue was analyzed as pitch, which requires the heating of tar during its production. The retrieval of this tar requires a transformation of birch bark by means of heat, in a process known as pyrolysis.\nThe first references to adhesives in literature appeared in approximately 2000 BC. Further historical records of adhesive use are found from the period spanning 1500\u20131000 BC. Artifacts from this period include paintings depicting wood gluing operations and a casket made of wood and glue in King Tutankhamun's tomb. Other ancient Egyptian artifacts employ animal glue for bonding or lamination. Such lamination of wood for bows and furniture is thought to have extended their life and was accomplished using casein (milk protein)-based glues. The ancient Egyptians also developed starch-based pastes for the bonding of papyrus to clothing and a plaster of Paris-like material made of calcined gypsum.\nFrom AD 1 to 500 the Greeks and Romans made great contributions to the development of adhesives. Wood veneering and marquetry were developed, the production of animal and fish glues refined, and other materials utilized. Egg-based pastes were used to bond gold leaves, and incorporated various natural ingredients such as blood, bone, hide, milk, cheese, vegetables, and grains. The Greeks began the use of slaked lime as mortar while the Romans furthered mortar development by mixing lime with volcanic ash and sand. This material, known as pozzolanic cement, was used in the construction of the Roman Colosseum and Pantheon. The Romans were also the first people known to have used tar and beeswax as caulk and sealant between the wooden planks of their boats and ships.\nIn Central Asia, the rise of the Mongols in approximately AD 1000 can be partially attributed to the good range and power of the bows of Genghis Khan's hordes. These bows were made of a bamboo core, with horn on the belly (facing towards the archer) and sinew on the back, bound together with animal glue.\nIn Europe, glue fell into disuse until the period AD 1500\u20131700. At this time, world-renowned cabinet and furniture makers such as Thomas Chippendale and Duncan Phyfe began to use adhesives to hold their products together. In 1690, the first commercial glue plant was established in The Netherlands. This plant produced glues from animal hides. In 1750, the first British glue patent was issued for fish glue. The following decades of the next century witnessed the manufacture of casein glues in German and Swiss factories. In 1876, the first U.S. patent (number 183,024) was issued to the Ross brothers for the production of casein glue.\nThe first U.S. postage stamps used starch-based adhesives when issued in 1847. The first US patent (number 61,991) on dextrin (a starch derivative) adhesive was issued in 1867.\nNatural rubber was first used as material for adhesives in 1830, which marked the starting point of the modern adhesive. In 1862, a British patent (number 3288) was issued for the plating of metal with brass by electrodeposition to obtain a stronger bond to rubber. The development of the automobile and the need for rubber shock mounts required stronger and more durable bonds of rubber and metal. This spurred the development of cyclized rubber treated in strong acids. By 1927, this process was used to produce solvent-based thermoplastic rubber cements for metal to rubber bonding.\nNatural rubber-based sticky adhesives were first used on a backing by Henry Day (US Patent 3,965) in 1845. Later these kinds of adhesives were used in cloth backed surgical and electric tapes. By 1925, the pressure-sensitive tape industry was born.\nToday, sticky notes, Scotch Tape, and other tapes are examples of pressure-sensitive adhesives (PSA).\nA key step in the development of synthetic plastics was the introduction of a thermoset plastic known as Bakelite phenolic in 1910. Within two years, phenolic resin was applied to plywood as a coating varnish. In the early 1930s, phenolics gained importance as adhesive resins.\nThe 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s witnessed great advances in the development and production of new plastics and resins due to the First and Second World Wars. These advances greatly improved the development of adhesives by allowing the use of newly developed materials that exhibited a variety of properties. With changing needs and ever evolving technology, the development of new synthetic adhesives continues to the present. However, due to their low cost, natural adhesives are still more commonly used.\nTypes.\nAdhesives are typically organized by the method of adhesion. These are then organized into reactive and non-reactive adhesives, which refers to whether the adhesive chemically reacts in order to harden. Alternatively they can be organized by whether the raw stock is of natural, or synthetic origin, or by their starting physical phase.\nBy reactiveness.\nNon-reactive.\nDrying.\nThere are two types of adhesives that harden by drying: \"solvent-based adhesives\" and \"polymer dispersion adhesives\", also known as \"emulsion adhesives\". Solvent-based adhesives are a mixture of ingredients (typically polymers) dissolved in a solvent. White glue, contact adhesives and rubber cements are members of the \"drying adhesive\" family. As the solvent evaporates, the adhesive hardens. Depending on the chemical composition of the adhesive, they will adhere to different materials to greater or lesser degrees.\nPolymer dispersion adhesives are milky-white dispersions often based on polyvinyl acetate (PVAc). They are used extensively in the woodworking and packaging industries. They are also used with fabrics and fabric-based components, and in engineered products such as loudspeaker cones.\nPressure-sensitive.\n\"Pressure-sensitive adhesives\" (PSA) form a bond by the application of light pressure to bind the adhesive with the adherend. They are designed to have a balance between flow and resistance to flow. The bond forms because the adhesive is soft enough to flow (i.e., \"wet\") to the adherend. The bond has strength because the adhesive is hard enough to resist flow when stress is applied to the bond. Once the adhesive and the adherend are in close proximity, molecular interactions, such as van der Waals forces, become involved in the bond, contributing significantly to its ultimate strength.\nPSAs are designed for either permanent or removable applications. Examples of permanent applications include safety labels for power equipment, foil tape for HVAC duct work, automotive interior trim assembly, and sound/vibration damping films. Some high performance permanent PSAs exhibit high adhesion values and can support kilograms of weight per square centimeter of contact area, even at elevated temperatures. Permanent PSAs may initially be removable (for example to recover mislabeled goods) and build adhesion to a permanent bond after several hours or days.\nRemovable adhesives are designed to form a temporary bond, and ideally can be removed after months or years without leaving residue on the adherend. Removable adhesives are used in applications such as surface protection films, masking tapes, bookmark and note papers, barcode labels, price marking labels, promotional graphics materials, and for skin contact (wound care dressings, EKG electrodes, athletic tape, analgesic and trans-dermal drug patches, etc.). Some removable adhesives are designed to repeatedly stick and unstick. They have low adhesion, and generally cannot support much weight. Pressure-sensitive adhesive is used in Post-it notes.\nPressure-sensitive adhesives are manufactured with either a liquid carrier or in 100% solid form. Articles are made from liquid PSAs by coating the adhesive and drying off the solvent or water carrier. They may be further heated to initiate a cross-linking reaction and increase molecular weight. 100% solid PSAs may be low viscosity polymers that are coated and then reacted with radiation to increase molecular weight and form the adhesive, or they may be high viscosity materials that are heated to reduce viscosity enough to allow coating, and then cooled to their final form. Major raw material for PSA's are acrylate-based polymers.\nContact.\n\"Contact adhesives\" form high shear-resistance bonds with a rapid cure time. They are often applied in thin layers for use with laminates, such as bonding Formica to countertops, and in footwear, as in attaching outsoles to uppers. Natural rubber and polychloroprene (Neoprene) are commonly used contact adhesives. Both of these elastomers undergo strain crystallization.\nContact adhesives must be applied to both surfaces and allowed some time to dry before the two surfaces are pushed together. Some contact adhesives require as long as 24 hours to dry completely before the surfaces are to be held together. Once the surfaces are pushed together, the bond forms very quickly. Clamping is not required due to the rapid bond formation.\nHot.\n\"Hot adhesives\", also known as \"hot melt adhesives\", are thermoplastics applied in molten form (in the 65\u2013180\u00a0\u00b0C range) which solidify on cooling to form strong bonds between a wide range of materials. Ethylene-vinyl acetate-based hot-melts are particularly popular for crafts because of their ease of use and the wide range of common materials they can join. A glue gun (shown at right) is one method of applying hot adhesives. The glue gun melts the solid adhesive, then allows the liquid to pass through its barrel onto the material, where it solidifies.\nThermoplastic glue may have been invented around 1940 by Procter &amp; Gamble as a solution to the problem that water-based adhesives, commonly used in packaging at that time, failed in humid climates, causing packages to open. However, water-based adhesives are still of strong interest as they typically do not contain volatile solvents.\nReactive.\nAnaerobic.\nAnaerobic adhesives cure when in contact with metal, in the absence of oxygen. They work well in a close-fitting space, as when used as a Thread-locking fluid.\nMulti-part.\n\"Multi-component adhesives\" harden by mixing two or more components which chemically react. This reaction causes polymers to cross-link into acrylates, urethanes, and epoxies &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nThere are several commercial combinations of multi-component adhesives in use in industry. Some of these combinations are:\nThe individual components of a multi-component adhesive are not adhesive by nature. The individual components react with each other after being mixed and show full adhesion only on curing. The multi-component resins can be either solvent-based or solvent-less. The solvents present in the adhesives are a medium for the polyester or the polyurethane resin. The solvent is dried during the curing process.\nPre-mixed and frozen adhesives.\n\"Pre-mixed and frozen adhesives\" (PMFs) are adhesives that are mixed, deaerated, packaged, and frozen. As it is necessary for PMFs to remain frozen before use, once they are frozen at \u221280\u00a0\u00b0C they are shipped with dry ice and are required to be stored at or below \u221240\u00a0\u00b0C. PMF adhesives eliminate mixing mistakes by the end user and reduce exposure of curing agents that can contain irritants or toxins. PMFs were introduced commercially in the 1960s and are commonly used in aerospace and defense.\nOne-part.\n\"One-part adhesives\" harden via a chemical reaction with an external energy source, such as radiation, heat, and moisture.\n\"Ultraviolet\" (UV) \"light curing adhesives\", also known as \"light curing materials\" (LCM), have become popular within the manufacturing sector due to their rapid curing time and strong bond strength. Light curing adhesives can cure in as little as one second and many formulations can bond dissimilar substrates (materials) and withstand harsh temperatures. These qualities make UV curing adhesives essential to the manufacturing of items in many industrial markets such as electronics, telecommunications, medical, aerospace, glass, and optical. Unlike traditional adhesives, UV light curing adhesives not only bond materials together but they can also be used to seal and coat products. They are generally acrylic-based.\n\"Heat curing adhesives\" consist of a pre-made mixture of two or more components. When heat is applied the components react and cross-link. This type of adhesive includes thermoset epoxies, urethanes, and polyimides.\n\"Moisture curing adhesives\" cure when they react with moisture present on the substrate surface or in the air. This type of adhesive includes cyanoacrylates and urethanes.\nBy origin.\nNatural.\nNatural adhesives are made from organic sources such as vegetable starch (dextrin), natural resins, or animals (e.g. the milk protein casein and hide-based animal glues). These are often referred to as bioadhesives.\nOne example is a simple paste made by cooking flour in water. Starch-based adhesives are used in corrugated board and paper sack production, paper tube winding, and wallpaper adhesives. Casein glue is mainly used to adhere glass bottle labels. Animal glues have traditionally been used in bookbinding, wood joining, and many other areas but now are largely replaced by synthetic glues except in specialist applications like the production and repair of stringed instruments. Albumen made from the protein component of blood has been used in the plywood industry. Masonite, a wood hardboard, was originally bonded using natural wood lignin, an organic polymer, though most modern particle boards such as MDF use synthetic thermosetting resins.\nSynthetic.\nSynthetic adhesives are made out of organic compounds. Many are based on elastomers, thermoplastics, emulsions, and thermosets. Examples of thermosetting adhesives are: epoxy, polyurethane, cyanoacrylate and acrylic polymers. The first commercially produced synthetic adhesive was Karlsons Klister in the 1920s.\nApplication.\nApplicators of different adhesives are designed according to the adhesive being used and the size of the area to which the adhesive will be applied. The adhesive is applied to either one or both of the materials being bonded. The pieces are aligned and pressure is added to aid in adhesion and rid the bond of air bubbles.\nCommon ways of applying an adhesive include brushes, rollers, using films or pellets, spray guns and applicator guns (\"e.g.\", caulk gun). All of these can be used manually or automated as part of a machine.\nMechanisms of adhesion.\nFor an adhesive to be effective it must have three main properties. Firstly, it must be able to wet the base material. Wetting is the ability of a liquid to maintain contact with a solid surface. It must also increase in strength after application, and finally it must be able to transmit load between the two surfaces/substrates being adhered.\nAdhesion, the attachment between adhesive and substrate may occur either by mechanical means, in which the adhesive works its way into small pores of the substrate, or by one of several chemical mechanisms. The strength of adhesion depends on many factors, including the means by which it occurs.\nIn some cases, an actual chemical bond occurs between adhesive and substrate. Thiolated polymers, for example, form chemical bonds with endogenous proteins such as mucus glycoproteins, integrins or keratins via disulfide bridges. Because of their comparatively high adhesive properties, these polymers find numerous biomedical applications. In others, electrostatic forces, as in static electricity, hold the substances together. A third mechanism involves the van der Waals forces that develop between molecules. A fourth means involves the moisture-aided diffusion of the glue into the substrate, followed by hardening.\nMethods to improve adhesion.\nThe quality of adhesive bonding depends strongly on the ability of the adhesive to efficiently cover (wet) the substrate area. This happens when the surface energy of the substrate is greater than the surface energy of the adhesive. However, high-strength adhesives have high surface energy. Thus, they bond poorly to low-surface-energy polymers or other materials. To solve this problem, surface treatment can be used to increase the surface energy as a preparation step before adhesive bonding. Importantly, surface preparation provides a reproducible surface allowing consistent bonding results. The commonly used surface activation techniques include plasma activation, flame treatment and wet chemistry priming.\nElectrically-debondable adhesive (EDA).\nAdhesives can be designed so that they debond when an electric current or electric field is applied, thereby eliminating part damage, or the need for heating.\nFailure.\nThere are several factors that could contribute to the failure of two adhered surfaces. Sunlight and heat may weaken the adhesive. Solvents can deteriorate or dissolve adhesive. Physical stresses may also cause the separation of surfaces. When subjected to loading, debonding may occur at different locations in the adhesive joint. The major fracture types are the following:\nCohesive fracture.\n\"Cohesive fracture\" is obtained if a crack propagates in the bulk polymer which constitutes the adhesive. In this case the surfaces of both adherends after debonding will be covered by fractured adhesive. The crack may propagate in the center of the layer or near an interface. For this last case, the cohesive fracture can be said to be \"cohesive near the interface\".\nAdhesive fracture.\n\"Adhesive fracture\" (sometimes referred to as \"interfacial fracture\") is when debonding occurs between the adhesive and the adherend. In most cases, the occurrence of adhesive fracture for a given adhesive goes along with smaller fracture toughness.\nOther types of fracture.\nOther types of fracture include:\nDesign of adhesive joints.\nAs a general design rule, the material properties of the object need to be greater than the forces anticipated during its use. (i.e. geometry, loads, etc.). The engineering work will consist of having a good model to evaluate the function. For most adhesive joints, this can be achieved using fracture mechanics. Concepts such as the stress concentration factor and the strain energy release rate can be used to predict failure. In such models, the behavior of the adhesive layer itself is neglected and only the adherents are considered.\nFailure will also very much depend on the opening \"mode\" of the joint.\nAs the loads are usually fixed, an acceptable design will result from combination of a material selection procedure and geometry modifications, if possible. In adhesively bonded structures, the global geometry and loads are fixed by structural considerations and the design procedure focuses on the material properties of the adhesive and on local changes on the geometry.\nIncreasing the joint resistance is usually obtained by designing its geometry so that:\nShelf life.\nSome glues and adhesives have a limited shelf life. Shelf life is dependent on multiple factors, the foremost of which being temperature. Adhesives may lose their effectiveness at high temperatures, as well as become increasingly stiff. Other factors affecting shelf life include exposure to oxygen or water vapor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2397", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2397", "title": "Anthony Hopkins", "text": "Welsh actor (born 1937)\nSir Philip Anthony Hopkins (born 31 December 1937) is a Welsh actor. Considered one of Britain's most recognisable and prolific actors, he is known for his performances on the screen and stage. Hopkins has received numerous accolades, including two Academy Awards, four BAFTA Awards, two Primetime Emmy Awards, and a Laurence Olivier Award. He has also received the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2005 and the BAFTA Fellowship for lifetime achievement in 2008. He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for his services to drama in 1993.\nAfter graduating from the Royal Welsh College of Music &amp; Drama in 1957, Hopkins trained at RADA (the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art) in London. He was then spotted by Laurence Olivier, who invited him to join the Royal National Theatre in 1965. Productions at the National included \"King Lear\" (his favourite Shakespeare play), \"Coriolanus\", \"Macbeth\", and \"Antony and Cleopatra\". In 1985, he received acclaim and a Laurence Olivier Award for his performance in the David Hare play \"Pravda\". His last stage play was a West End production of \"M. Butterfly\" in 1989.\nHopkins's early film roles include \"The Lion in Winter\" (1968), \"A Bridge Too Far\" (1977), \"Magic\" (1978), and \"The Elephant Man\" (1980). He won two Academy Awards for Best Actor for playing Hannibal Lecter in the horror thriller \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (1991) and an octogenarian with dementia in the psychological drama \"The Father\" (2020). He was also Oscar-nominated for \"The Remains of the Day\" (1993), \"Nixon\" (1995), \"Amistad\" (1997), and \"The Two Popes\" (2019). Other notable films include \"84 Charing Cross Road\" (1987), \"Howards End\" (1992), \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\" (1992), \"Shadowlands\" (1993), \"Legends of the Fall\" (1994), \"The Mask of Zorro\" (1998), and the Marvel Cinematic Universe films (2011\u20132017).\nFor his work on television, Hopkins received a British Academy Television Award for Best Actor for his performance in \"War and Peace\" (1972). He won two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie for \"The Lindbergh Kidnapping Case\" (1976) and \"The Bunker\" (1981). Other notable projects include the BBC film \"The Dresser\" (2015), PBS' \"King Lear\" (2018), and the HBO series \"Westworld\" (2016\u20132018).\nEarly life and education.\nPhilip Anthony Hopkins was born in the Margam district of Port Talbot, Wales, on 31 December 1937, the son of Annie Muriel (n\u00e9e Yeates) and baker Richard Arthur Hopkins. One of his grandfathers was from Wiltshire, England. He stated his father's working-class values have always underscored his life, \"Whenever I get a feeling that I may be special or different, I think of my father and I remember his hands \u2013 his hardened, broken hands.\" His school days were unproductive; he would rather immerse himself in art, such as painting and drawing, or playing the piano than attend to his studies. In 1949, to instil discipline, his parents insisted he attend Jones' West Monmouth Boys' School in Pontypool. He remained there for five terms and was then educated at Cowbridge Grammar School in the Vale of Glamorgan. In an interview in 2002, he stated, \"I was a poor learner, which left me open to ridicule and gave me an inferiority complex. I grew up absolutely convinced I was stupid.\"\nHopkins was inspired by fellow Welsh actor Richard Burton, whom he met at the age of 15. He later called Burton \"very gracious, very nice\" but elaborated, \"I don't know where everyone gets the idea we were good friends. I suppose it's because we are both Welsh and grew up near the same town. For the record, I didn't really know him at all.\" He enrolled at the Royal Welsh College of Music &amp; Drama in Cardiff, from which he graduated in 1957. He next met Burton in 1975 as Burton prepared to take over Hopkins' role as the psychiatrist in Peter Shaffer's \"Equus\", with Hopkins stating, \"He was a phenomenal actor. So was Peter O'Toole \u2013 they were wonderful, larger-than-life characters.\" He spent two years doing his national service between 1958 and 1960, which he served in the British Army's Royal Artillery regiment where he was known as \"Gunner Hopkins\", before moving to London to study at RADA (the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art) from where he graduated in 1963.\nCareer.\n1960\u20131979: Theatre roles and film debut.\nHopkins made his first professional stage appearance in the Palace Theatre, Swansea, in 1960 with Swansea Little Theatre's production of \"Have a Cigarette\". In 1965, after several years in repertory, he was spotted by Laurence Olivier, who invited him to join the Royal National Theatre in London. Hopkins became Olivier's understudy, and filled in when Olivier was struck with appendicitis during a 1967 production of August Strindberg's \"The Dance of Death\". Olivier noted in his memoir, \"Confessions of an Actor\", that, \"A new young actor in the company of exceptional promise named Anthony Hopkins was understudying me and walked away with the part of Edgar like a cat with a mouse between its teeth.\" Up until that night, Hopkins was always nervous prior to going on stage. This has since changed, and Hopkins quoted his mentor as saying: \"He [Olivier] said: 'Remember: \"nerves\" is vanity \u2013 you're wondering what people think of you; to hell with them, just jump off the edge'. It was great advice.\"\nHopkins made his small-screen debut in a 1967 BBC broadcast of \"A Flea in Her Ear\". His first starring role in a film came in 1964 in \"Changes\", a short directed by Drewe Henley, written and produced by James Scott and co-starring Jacqueline Pearce. In 1968, Hopkins got his break in \"The Lion in Winter\" playing Richard the Lionheart, a performance which saw him nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role. Hopkins portrayed Charles Dickens in the BBC television film \"The Great Inimitable Mr. Dickens\" in 1970, and Pierre Bezukhov in the BBC's mini series \"War and Peace\" (1972), receiving the British Academy Television Award for Best Actor for his performance in the latter. Making a name for himself as a screen actor, he appeared in Frank Pierson's neo-noir action thriller \"The Looking Glass War\" (1970), and \u00c9tienne P\u00e9rier's \"When Eight Bells Toll\" (1971). The first of five collaborations with director Richard Attenborough, in 1972 Hopkins starred as British politician David Lloyd George in \"Young Winston\".\nIn 1973, he again portrayed David Lloyd George in the BBC miniseries \"The Edwardians\" which aired in the US in 1974 on \"Masterpiece Theatre\". Hopkins starred in a film adaptation of the Henrik Ibsen play \"A Doll's House\" (1973) alongside Claire Bloom, Ralph Richardson, Denholm Elliott, and Edith Evans. He then appeared in the comedy \"The Girl from Petrovka\" (1974) with Goldie Hawn and Hal Holbrook and also starred in the Richard Lester suspense film \"Juggernaut\" opposite Richard Harris and Omar Sharif. In October 1974, Hopkins played the psychologist Dysart in the original Broadway production of Sir Peter Shaffer's play \"Equus\", starring opposite Peter Firth. For this performance, he received the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actor in a Play for the 1974\u201375 season. In 1977, he played British Army officer John Frost in Attenborough's World War II-set film \"A Bridge Too Far\". In 1978, he starred in the sequel to \"National Velvet\" (1944), entitled \"International Velvet\" with Tatum O'Neal, Christopher Plummer, which was directed by Bryan Forbes. That same year, he also starred in Attenborough's psychological horror film \"Magic\" about a demonic ventriloquist's puppet with Gene Siskel adding it as one of the best films of the year. In 1979, Hopkins appeared as Prospero in a production of \"The Tempest\" held at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles.\n1980\u20131989: National Theatre and acclaim.\nIn 1980, he starred in David Lynch's \"The Elephant Man\" as the English doctor Sir Frederick Treves, who attends to Joseph Merrick (portrayed by John Hurt), a severely deformed man in 19th century London. The film received critical praise and attention from critics and received eight Academy Award nominations including for Best Picture. That year he also starred opposite Shirley MacLaine in \"A Change of Seasons\". They famously did not get along; Hopkins later called her \"the most obnoxious actress I have ever worked with\". The film was a box office and critical failure. In 1981, he starred in the CBS television film \"The Bunker\" portraying Adolf Hitler during the final weeks of his life in and around his underground bunker in Berlin. John O'Connor praised Hopkins in his \"New York Times\" review: \"The portrait becomes all the more riveting through an extraordinarily powerful performance from Anthony Hopkins. His Hitler is mad, often contemptible, but always understandable. Part of the problem, perhaps, is that the monster becomes a little too understandable. He is not made sympathetic, exactly, but he is given decidedly pathetic dimensions, making him just that much more \"acceptable\" as a dramatic and historical character.\" For his performance, he received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie. That same year he starred as Paul the Apostle opposite Robert Foxworth as Saint Peter in the biblical drama and miniseries \"Peter and Paul\" (1981).\nIn 1983, Hopkins also became a company member of The Mirror Theater Ltd's Repertory Company. In 1984, he portrayed Deeley in Harold Pinter's play \"Old Times\" at the Roundabout Theatre in New York. In 1984, he starred opposite Mel Gibson in \"The Bounty\" as William Bligh, captain of the Royal Navy ship , in a more accurate retelling of the mutiny on the \"Bounty\". The following year, he starred as Quasimodo in the CBS television film \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\" (1982). The film also starred Derek Jacobi, David Suchet, Tim Pigott-Smith, Nigel Hawthorne, and John Gielgud. He also starred in \"Strangers and Brothers\" (1984), \"Arch of Triumph\" (1984), \"Guilty Conscience\" (1985), \"Mussolini and I\" (1985), and \"The Tenth Man\" (1988). In 1985, Hopkins starred opposite Colin Firth in the Arthur Schnitzler play \"The Lonely Road\" at The Old Vic in London. That same year, he featured as Lambert Le Roux in the National Theatre production of \"Pravda\" in Sir David Hare and Howard Brenton's satirical play on the British newspaper industry in the Thatcher era. Receiving acclaim for his performance, Hopkins won the Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Achievement. Frank Rich in his \"New York Times\" review wrote, \"Mr. Hopkins creates a memorable image of a perversely brilliant modern-day barbarian.\"\nHe played the Soviet spy Guy Burgess in the BBC film \"Blunt: the Fourth Man\" (1986) opposite Ian Richardson as Anthony Blunt, fellow spy and Surveyor of The King's Pictures.\nIn 1986 he starred in David Hare's production of \"King Lear\", Hopkins' favourite Shakespeare play, at the National Theatre. The next year, he starred as Mark Antony in the National Theatre production of \"Antony and Cleopatra\" opposite Judi Dench, and in 1989, Hopkins made his last appearance on stage in a West End production of \"M. Butterfly\". \"It was a torment\", he claimed in a later interview. Of a matinee where nobody laughed, there was, he said \"not a titter\". When the lights came up, the cast realised the entire audience was Japanese. \"Oh God\", he recalled, \"You'd go to your dressing room and someone would pop their head round the door and say, 'Coffee? Tea?' And I'd think, 'An open razor, please.'\" In 1989, he starred as Abel Magwitch in the miniseries \"Great Expectations\" which was broadcast on ITV in the UK and The Disney Channel in the US. The adaptation of the Dickens' novel also starred Jean Simmons and John Rhys-Davies. He received his fourth Primetime Emmy Award nomination, this time for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited Series or Movie.\n1990\u20131999: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" and film stardom.\nHopkins won acclaim among critics and audiences as the cannibalistic serial killer Hannibal Lecter in \"The Silence of the Lambs\", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1991, with Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling, who also won for Best Actress. The film won Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay, and Hopkins also picked up his first BAFTA for Best Actor. Hopkins reprised his role as Lecter twice; in Ridley Scott's \"Hannibal\" (2001), and \"Red Dragon\" (2002). His original portrayal of the character in \"The Silence of the Lambs\" has been labelled by the AFI as the number-one film villain. Director Jonathan Demme wanted a British actor for the role, with Foster stating, \"Lecter is a manipulator and has a way of using language to keep people at bay. You wanted to see that Shakespearean monster.\" At the time he was offered the role, Hopkins was making a return to the London stage, performing in \"M. Butterfly\". He had come back to Britain after living for a number of years in Hollywood, having all but given up on a career there, saying, \"Well that part of my life's over; it's a chapter closed. I suppose I'll just have to settle for being a respectable actor poncing around the West End and doing respectable BBC work for the rest of my life.\"\nHopkins reprised the role, returning to the iconic villain in adaptations of the first three of the Lecter novels by Thomas Harris. The author was reportedly pleased with Hopkins' portrayal of his antagonist. However, Hopkins stated that \"Red Dragon\" (2002) would feature his final performance as the character and that he would not reprise even a narrative role in the latest addition to the series, \"Hannibal Rising\" (2007). The following year, Hopkins was featured in Mark Joffe's film \"Spotswood\" and the science fiction film \"Freejack\" and also played supporting roles as Charlie Chaplin's biographer in Richard Attenborough's biographical drama \"Chaplin\" (1992) and Professor Van Helsing in Francis Ford Coppola's horror adaptation \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\" (1992).\nIn 1992, Hopkins starred in Merchant-Ivory's period film based on the E. M. Forster novel \"Howards End\". Hopkins acted alongside Emma Thompson and Helena Bonham Carter where he played the cold businessman Henry Wilcox. The film received enormous critical acclaim, with critic Leonard Maltin calling it \"extraordinarily good on every level\". The following year, Hopkins reunited with Merchant-Ivory and Emma Thompson in \"The Remains of the Day\" (1993), a film set in 1950s post-war Britain based on the novel by Kazuo Ishiguro. David Hunter of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" praised Hopkins' performance describing it as \"colossal\" and a \"tour de force\". The film was ranked by the British Film Institute as the 64th greatest British film of the 20th century. Starring as the butler Stevens, Hopkins named it among his favourite films. He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance and received the BAFTA Award for Best Actor.\nHopkins portrayed Oxford academic C. S. Lewis in the 1993 British biographical film \"Shadowlands\", for which he was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor. Also that year he acted opposite Isabella Rossellini in the drama \"The Innocent\" (1993) which was adapted from the Ian McEwan novel of the same name. During this period, Hopkins had the chance to work with Bart the Bear in two films: \"Legends of the Fall\" (1994) and \"The Edge\" (1997). According to trainer Lynn Seus, \"Tony Hopkins was absolutely brilliant with Bart...He acknowledged and respected him like a fellow actor. He would spend hours just looking at Bart and admiring him. He did so many of his own scenes with Bart.\" Hopkins was Britain's highest-paid performer in 1998, starring in \"The Mask of Zorro\" and \"Meet Joe Black\", and also agreed to reprise his role as Hannibal Lecter for a fee of \u00a315\u00a0million.\n2000\u20132015: Established actor.\nIn 2000, Hopkins narrated Ron Howard's live action remake of \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas\". He then reprised the role of Hannibal Lecter in \"The Silence of the Lambs\" sequel simply entitled \"Hannibal\" (2001). Director Ridley Scott and actress Julianne Moore replaced Jonathan Demme and Jodie Foster who declined to participate in the sequel. Hopkins, who previously starred with Moore in \"Surviving Picasso\" (1996), agreed to do the role approving of the script. In the book, Lecter uses bandages to disguise himself as a plastic surgery patient. This was left out of the film because Scott and Hopkins agreed to leave the face alone. Hopkins said: \"It's as if he's making a statement\u2014'catch me if you can'. With his big hat, he's so obvious that nobody thinks he's Hannibal Lecter. I've always thought he's a very elegant man, a Renaissance man.\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He's still the sort of Robin Hood of killers. He kills the\u2014what do they call them? The terminally rude.\u2014\u200a\nIn the film, Lecter is first seen in Florence \"as the classical Lecter, lecturing and being smooth\", according to Hopkins. When the film moves to the U.S., Hopkins changed his appearance by building up muscle and cropping his hair short \"to make him like a mercenary, that he would be so fit and so strong that he could just snap somebody in two if they got ... in his way\". The film broke international box office records receiving $351\u00a0million, but received mixed reviews from critics. Hopkins starred in the third film in the series \"Red Dragon\" (2002) alongside Ralph Fiennes, Edward Norton, Harvey Keitel, Emily Watson, and Philip Seymour Hoffman. The film received generally favourable reviews and was a box office hit.\nIn 2003, Hopkins received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Hopkins stated that his role as Burt Munro, whom he portrayed in his 2005 film \"The World's Fastest Indian\", was his favourite. He also asserted that Munro was the easiest role that he had played because both men have a similar outlook on life. In 2006, Hopkins was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement. In 2008, he received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, the highest award the British Film Academy can bestow. In a 2003 poll conducted by Channel 4, Hopkins was ranked seventh on their list of the 100 Greatest Movie Stars.\nOn 24 February 2010, it was announced that Hopkins had been cast in \"The Rite\", which was released on 28 January 2011. He played a priest who is \"an expert in exorcisms and whose methods are not necessarily traditional\". Hopkins, an agnostic who is quoted as saying \"I don't know what I believe, myself personally\", reportedly wrote a line\u2014\"Some days I don't know if I believe in God or Santa Claus or Tinkerbell\"\u2014into his character to identify with it. In 2011, Hopkins said, \"what I enjoy is uncertainty. ... I don't know. You don't know.\" On 21 September 2011, Peter R. de Vries cast Hopkins in the role of the Heineken owner Freddy Heineken, in the film about his kidnapping, \"Kidnapping Freddy Heineken\" (2015).\nHopkins portrayed Odin, the Allfather or \"king\" of Asgard, in the 2011 film adaptation of Marvel Comics' \"Thor\" and would go on to reprise his role as Odin in ' in 2013, and again in 2017's '. Hopkins portrayed Alfred Hitchcock in Sacha Gervasi's biopic \"Hitchcock\" alongside Helen Mirren who played Hitchcock's wife, Alma Reville. The film focuses on the filming of \"Psycho\" and that which followed. He starred in the comedy action film \"Red 2\" (2013) as the main antagonist Edward Bailey. In 2014, he portrayed Methuselah in Darren Aronofsky's \"Noah\". Hopkins played Order of the Witwiccans member Sir Edmund Burton in \"\" which was released in June 2017.\nIn October 2015, Hopkins appeared as Sir in a BBC Two production of Ronald Harwood's \"The Dresser\", alongside Ian McKellen, Edward Fox and Emily Watson. \"The Dresser\" is set in a London theatre during the Blitz, where an aging actor-manager, Sir, prepares for his starring role in \"King Lear\" with the help of his devoted dresser, Norman. Hopkins described his role as Sir as \"the highlight of my life. It was a chance to work with the actors I had run away from. To play another actor is fun because you know the ins and outs of their thinking \u2013 especially with someone like Sir, who is a diabolically insecure, egotistical man.\" He spoke again on the impact the role had on him in 2018, \"When I was at the Royal National Theatre all those years ago, I knew I had something in me, but I didn't have the discipline. I had a Welsh temperament and didn't have that 'fitting in' mechanism. I would fight, I would rebel. I thought, 'Well, I don't belong here.' And for almost 50 years afterwards, I felt that edge of, 'I don't belong anywhere, I'm a loner.' But in \"The Dresser\", when Ian [McKellen] responded, it was wonderful. We got on so well and I suddenly felt at home, as though that lack of belonging was all in my imagination, all in my vanity\".\n2016\u2013present: Career resurgence.\nBeginning in October 2016, Hopkins starred as Robert Ford in the HBO sci-fi series \"Westworld\" where he received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his performance. Hopkins starred as Lear in the 2018 television film \"King Lear\" acting alongside Emma Thompson, Florence Pugh, and Jim Broadbent which was broadcast on BBC Two on 28 May 2018. Hopkins received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for his performance. \"Vulture\" stated the film \"capture[d] the heart of the classic Shakespeare tragedy\" and described Hopkins' performance as \"devastating\".\nIn 2019, Hopkins portrayed Pope Benedict XVI opposite Jonathan Pryce as Pope Francis in Fernando Meirelles' \"The Two Popes\". He stated, \"The great treasure was working with \u2013 apart from [director] Meirelles \u2013 Pryce. We're both from Wales. He's from the north, and I'm from the south\". The film is set in the Vatican City in the aftermath of the Vatican leaks scandal and follows Pope Benedict XVI as he attempts to convince Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio to reconsider his decision to resign as an archbishop as he confides his own intentions to abdicate the papacy. In August 2019, the film premiered at the Telluride Film Festival to critical acclaim. The film started streaming on 20 December 2019, by Netflix. The performances of Pryce and Hopkins, as well as McCarten's screenplay, received high praise from critics, and all three men received nominations for their work at the Academy Awards, Golden Globes and British Academy Film Awards.\nIn 2020, Hopkins played a man struggling with Alzheimer's disease in \"The Father\". The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival where it received critical acclaim, with many critics praising Hopkins' performance and calling him a standout and Oscar frontrunner. The film also stars Olivia Colman as his daughter. It is based on a Tony Award nominated play \"Le P\u00e8re\" by Florian Zeller, who also directed the film. \"The Father\" was released on 18 December 2020 by Sony Pictures Classics. In a Q&amp;A at the Telluride Film Festival Hopkins praised both Colman and Zeller saying comparing the working experience saying it \"might've been the highlight of my life\". Hopkins mentioned how lucky he's been over the past five years working with Ian McKellen in \"The Dresser\", Emma Thompson in \"King Lear\", and Jonathan Pryce in \"The Two Popes\". Hopkins won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his performance in \"The Father\", making it his fourth BAFTA and his third for Best Actor. He also won a second Academy Award for Best Actor for his role, becoming the oldest person to win an acting Oscar. Hopkins did not attend the Oscars ceremony, but accepted the award in a video posted on social media, from Wales, the following day, saying: \"Here I am in my homeland in Wales. And at 83 years of age, I did not expect to get this award. I really didn't and am very grateful to the Academy and thank you.\" He also paid tribute to fellow nominee Chadwick Boseman, who had died the previous year.\nIn 2022, he acted in James Gray's semi-autobiographical coming of age drama \"Armageddon Time\" (2023). In an interview with \"El Pa\u00eds\" he said that his performance was inspired by his grandfather who had encouraged him to become an actor. Hopkins starred alongside Jeremy Strong and Anne Hathaway. Hopkins received positive reviews for his turn as a kindly elderly grandfather. A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Hopkins finds the essential grit hiding underneath the twinkle\". That same year he reunited with Florian Zeller, acting in \"The Son\" (2022) alongside Hugh Jackman. In 2023, Hopkins starred as stockbroker and humanitarian Sir Nicholas Winton in the biographical drama film \"One Life\", and also played Sigmund Freud in \"Freud's Last Session\". Hopkins also appeared in the Netflix science fiction film \"\" directed by Zack Snyder. In 2024, Hopkins portrayed Herod the Great in the Netflix film \"Mary\".\nOther activities.\nActivism and philanthropy.\nHopkins has offered his support to various charities and appeals, notably becoming President of the National Trust's Snowdonia Appeal, raising funds for the preservation of Snowdonia National Park in north Wales. In 1998 he donated \u00a31\u00a0million towards the \u00a33\u00a0million needed to aid the Trust's efforts in purchasing parts of Snowdon. Prior to the campaign, Hopkins wrote \"Anthony Hopkins' Snowdonia\", which was published in 1995. Due to his contributions to Snowdonia, in addition to his film career, in 2004 Hopkins was named among the 100 Welsh Heroes in a Welsh poll.\nHopkins has been a patron of the YMCA centre in his home town of Port Talbot, south Wales, for more than 20 years, having first joined the YMCA in the 1950s. He supports other various philanthropic groups. He was a Guest of Honour at a Gala Fundraiser for Women in Recovery, Inc., a Venice, California-based non-profit organisation offering rehabilitation assistance to women in recovery from substance abuse. He is also a volunteer teacher at the Ruskin School of Acting in Santa Monica, California. Hopkins served as the Honorary Patron of The New Heritage Theatre Company in Boise, Idaho from 1997 to 2007, participating in fundraising and marketing efforts for the repertory theatre.\nHopkins contributed toward the refurbishment of a \u00a32.3\u00a0million wing at his alma mater, the Royal Welsh College of Music &amp; Drama in Cardiff, named the Anthony Hopkins Centre. It opened in 1999.\nHopkins is a prominent member of the environmental protection group Greenpeace and as of early 2008 featured in a television advertisement campaign, voicing concerns about whaling in Japan. He has also been a patron of RAPt (Rehabilitation for Addicted Prisoners Trust) since its early days and in 1992 helped open their first intensive drug and alcohol rehabilitation unit at Downview (HM Prison), a women's prison in Surrey, England.\nHopkins is an admirer of the late Welsh comedian Tommy Cooper. On 23 February 2008, as patron of the Tommy Cooper Society, he unveiled a commemorative statue in the entertainer's home town of Caerphilly. For the ceremony, he donned Cooper's trademark fez and performed a comic routine.\nComposing.\nIn an interview, Hopkins stated, \"I've been composing music all my life and if I'd been clever enough at school I would like to have gone to music college. As it was I had to settle for being an actor.\" In 1986, he released a single called \"Distant Star\", which peaked at No. 75 in the UK singles chart.\nIn 2007, he announced he would retire temporarily from the screen to tour around the world. Hopkins has also written music for the concert hall, in collaboration with Stephen Barton as orchestrator. These compositions include \"The Masque of Time\", given its world premiere with the Dallas Symphony Orchestra in October 2008, and \"Schizoid Salsa\".\nOn 31 October 2011, Andr\u00e9 Rieu released an album including a waltz which Hopkins had composed in 1964, at the age of 26. Hopkins had never heard his composition, \"And the Waltz Goes On\", before it was premiered by Rieu's orchestra in Vienna; Rieu's album was given the same name as Hopkins' piece.\nIn January 2012, Hopkins released an album of classical music, entitled \"Composer\", performed by the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, and released on CD via the UK radio station Classic FM. The album consists of nine of his original works and film scores, with one of the pieces titled \"Margam\" in tribute to his home town near Port Talbot in Wales.\nIn January 2025, Hopkins hosted a gala concert in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia featuring pieces he had composed, performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra.\nDirecting.\nIn 1990, Hopkins directed a film about his Welsh compatriot, poet Dylan Thomas, titled \"Dylan Thomas: Return Journey\", which was his directing debut for the screen. In the same year, as part of the restoration process for the Stanley Kubrick film \"Spartacus\", Hopkins was approached to re-record lines from a scene that was being added back to the film; this scene featured Laurence Olivier and Tony Curtis, with Hopkins recommended by Olivier's widow, Joan Plowright to perform her late husband's part thanks to his talent for mimicry.\nIn 1995, he directed \"August\", an adaptation of Chekhov's \"Uncle Vanya\" set in Wales. His first screenplay, an experimental drama called \"Slipstream\", which he also directed and scored, premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2007. In 1997, Hopkins narrated the BBC natural documentary series, \"Killing for a Living\", which showed predatory behaviour in nature. He narrated episode 1 through 3 before being replaced by John Shrapnel.\nArtistry and reception.\nHopkins is renowned for his preparation for roles. He indicated in interviews that once he has committed to a project, he will go over his lines as many times as is needed (sometimes upwards of 200) until the lines sound natural to him, so that he can \"do it without thinking\". This leads to an almost casual style of delivery that belies the amount of groundwork done beforehand. While it can allow for some careful improvisation, it has also brought him into conflict with the occasional director who departs from the script or demands what the actor views as an excessive number of takes. Hopkins has stated that after he is finished with a scene, he simply discards the lines, not remembering them later on. This is unlike others who usually remember their lines from a film, even years later.\nIn the mid-1970s, he started a collaboration with Richard Attenborough who called him \"the greatest actor of his generation\". Attenborough, who directed Hopkins on five occasions, found himself going to great lengths during the filming of \"Shadowlands\" (1993) to accommodate the differing approaches of his two stars (Hopkins and Debra Winger), who shared many scenes. Whereas Hopkins preferred the spontaneity of a fresh take and liked to keep rehearsals to a minimum, Winger rehearsed continuously. To allow for this, Attenborough stood in for Hopkins during Winger's rehearsals, only bringing him in for the last one before a take. The director praised Hopkins for \"this extraordinary ability to make you believe when you hear him that it is the very first time he has ever said that line. It's an incredible gift.\"\nRenowned for his ability to remember lines, Hopkins keeps his memory supple by learning things by heart such as poetry and Shakespeare. In Steven Spielberg's \"Amistad\" (1997), Hopkins astounded the crew with his memorisation of a seven-page courtroom speech, delivering it in one go. An overawed Spielberg could not bring himself to call Hopkins \"Tony\" and insisted on addressing him as Sir Anthony throughout the shoot.\nIn a 2016 interview with the \"Radio Times\", Hopkins spoke of his ability to frighten people since he was a boy growing up in Port Talbot, Wales. \"I don't know why but I've always known what scares people. When I was a kid I'd tell the girls around the street the story about Dracula and I'd go 'th-th-th' (the sucking noise which he reproduced in \"The Silence of the Lambs\"). As a result, they'd run away screaming.\" He recalled going through the script of \"Silence of the Lambs\" for the first time with fellow cast members. \"I didn't know what they were going to make of it but I'd prepared it\u2014my first line to Jodie Foster was: 'Good morning. You're one of Jack Crawford's aren't you?' Everyone froze. There was a silence. Then one of the producers said, 'Holy crap, don't change a thing'.\" On Hopkins' approach to playing villains, Miranda Sawyer in \"The Guardian\" writes, \"When he portrays deliberately scary people, he plays them quietly, emphasising their sinister control.\"\nSpeaking on his favourite performances which inspired him in his own approach to acting, Morgan Freeman mentioned Hopkins' portrayal of the butler Stevens in \"The Remains of the Day\". Discussing how he learnt \"stillness\" from Jos\u00e9 Ferrer, Freeman continued, \"It\u2019s what I learn from the great actors that I work with. Stillness. That\u2019s all and that\u2019s the hardest thing. The other actor still like that is Anthony Hopkins. Learning how to be still, to really be still and let life happen\u2013that stillness becomes a radiance. It\u2019s all about eloquent stillness. I\u2019ve told Hopkins that that performance was one of the great lessons for me as an actor.\"\nHopkins is a well-known mimic, adept at turning his native Welsh accent into whatever is required by a character. In the 1991 restoration of \"Spartacus\", he recreated the voice of his late mentor Laurence Olivier in a scene for which the soundtrack had been lost. His interview on the 1998 relaunch edition of the British television talk show \"Parkinson\" featured an impersonation of comedian Tommy Cooper. Hopkins has said acting \"like a submarine\" has helped him to deliver credible performances in his thrillers. He said, \"It's very difficult for an actor to avoid, you want to show a bit. But I think the less one shows the better.\"\nPersonal life.\nHopkins has a residence in Malibu, California. In January 2025, his two neighbouring homes in Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles, were destroyed by the Palisades Fire. He moved to the United States once before, during the late 1970s, to pursue his film career, but returned to London in the late 1980s. He decided to return to the US following his 1990s success. Retaining his British citizenship, he became a naturalised American citizen on 12 April 2000.\nHopkins has been married three times. He was married to actress Petronella Barker from 1966 to 1972, Jennifer Lynton from 1973 to 2002, and Stella Arroyave since 2003. Hopkins met Arroyave, a Colombian-born antiques dealer, in the early 2000s, and he credits her with helping him overcome his feelings of depression at the time. On Christmas Eve 2013, he celebrated his 10th wedding anniversary by having a blessing at a private service at St Davids Cathedral in St Davids. He has a daughter from his first marriage. The two are estranged; when asked if he had any grandchildren, he said, \"I don't have any idea. People break up. Families split and, you know, 'Get on with your life.' People make choices. I don't care one way or the other.\" In another interview, he said, \"I guess I am selfish. I have not been a good husband or father.\"\nHopkins is a recovering alcoholic; he has stayed sober since just after Christmas 1975. He said, \"I made that quantum leap when I asked for help. I just found something and a woman talked to me and she said, just trust in God. And I said, well, why not?\" When asked, \"Did you literally pray?\" Hopkins responded: \"No, I didn't. I think because I asked for help, which is a form of prayer.\" In January 2020, when asked if he was still agnostic, he responded, \"Agnosticism is a bit strange. An agnostic doubts and atheism denies. I'm not a holy Joe; I'm just an old sinner like everyone else. I do believe more than ever now that there is a vast area of our own lives that we know nothing about. As I get older, I can cry at the drop of a hat because the wonderful, terrible passion of life is so short. I have to believe there's something bigger than me. I'm just a microbe. That, for me, is the biggest feeling of relief \u2013 acknowledging that I am really nothing. I'm compelled to say, whoever's running the show, thank you very much.\"\nHopkins quit smoking using the Allen Carr method. In 2008, he embarked on a weight loss programme, and by 2010, he had lost 5st 10\u00a0lb (80\u00a0lb or 36\u00a0kg). In January 2017, in an interview with \"The Desert Sun\", Hopkins said that he had been diagnosed with Asperger syndrome three years earlier, but that he was \"high end\". In 2020, he said that \"it's a great gift, actually\".\nHe has a pet cat named Niblo, which he adopted in Budapest. Hopkins eschews meat and prefers a pescatarian diet.\nHe is a fan of the BBC sitcom \"Only Fools and Horses\", and once remarked in an interview how he would love to appear in the series. Writer John Sullivan saw the interview, and with Hopkins in mind created the character Danny Driscoll, a local villain, but filming of the new series coincided with the filming of \"The Silence of the Lambs\", making Hopkins unavailable. The role instead went to Roy Marsden.\nHopkins published his memoir, \"We Did OK, Kid\" in November 2025.\nActing credits and accolades.\nHopkins was appointed a CBE in 1987 and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for \"services to the arts\" at Buckingham Palace in 1993. In 1988, he was awarded an honorary D.Litt. degree and in 1992 received an honorary fellowship from the University of Wales, Lampeter. He was made a freeman of his home town, Port Talbot, in 1996.\nHe has received numerous accolades for his performances, including two Academy Awards, four BAFTA Awards, a Critics' Choice Movie Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards and a Laurence Olivier Award as well as nominations for eight Golden Globe Awards and seven Screen Actors Guild Awards. In receiving the Oscar for Best Actor for his role in \"The Father\" (2020), he became the oldest nominee and winner of the award.\nHopkins has also been honoured with various lifetime achievement awards for his work in film and television. In 2006, Gwyneth Paltrow presented him with the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award. In 2008, Richard Attenborough presented Hopkins with the BAFTA Fellowship for lifetime achievement from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Hopkins has also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2003.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2398", "revid": "14770366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2398", "title": "Ardal O'Hanlon", "text": "Irish comedian and actor (born 1965)\nArdal O'Hanlon (; born 8 October 1965) is an Irish comedian, actor, and author. He played Father Dougal McGuire in \"Father Ted\" (1995\u20131998), George Sunday/Thermoman in \"My Hero\" (2000\u20132005), and DI Jack Mooney in \"Death in Paradise \" (2017\u20132020). He has written two novels \"The Talk of the Town\" (1998) and \"Brouhaha\" (2022).\nEarly life.\nO'Hanlon was born in Carrickmacross, County Monaghan, the son of Fianna F\u00e1il TD and physician Rory O'Hanlon and Teresa (n\u00e9e Ward). He is the third of six children and has three brothers and two sisters. \nO'Hanlon was educated in Blackrock College in Dublin. He graduated in 1987 from the National Institute for Higher Education, Dublin, (now Dublin City University) with a degree in communication studies.\nCareer.\nWith Kevin Gildea and Barry Murphy, O'Hanlon founded the International Comedy Cellar, upstairs in the International Bar on Dublin's South Wicklow Street. Dublin had no comedy scene at the time. As a stand up comic, O'Hanlon won the Hackney Empire New Act of the Year competition in 1994. and was for a time the presenter of \"The Stand Up Show\".\nO'Hanlon was cast as Father Dougal McGuire in \"Father Ted\" (1995\u20131998), which he said was his \"first proper job in television\". During filming, O'Hanlon went to buy shoes. Still being in costume, the seller thought he was a real priest and offered the footwear for free. He and Dermot Morgan (Father Ted) often did their own stunts, and he recalled that on one occasion they were dragged through a field behind a tractor. In 1995 he received the Top TV Comedy Newcomer at the British Comedy Awards for this role. In 1995, he appeared as Father Dougal in a Channel 4 ident (\"Hello, you're watching ... television\"), and during Comic Relief on BBC1. This was followed by the award-winning short comedy film \"Flying Saucer Rock'n'Roll\". \nIn a 2019 interview, O'Hanlon said he had attempted to distance himself from \"Father Ted\" once the show had finished. He moved into straight acting, alongside Emma Fielding and Beth Goddard, in the ITV comedy-drama \"Big Bad World\", which aired for two series in summer 1999 and winter 2001. He also had a minor role in \"The Butcher Boy\" as Joe's (Francie's best friend) father, and appeared in an episode of the original \"Whose Line is it Anyway?\". In 2000, O'Hanlon starred in the comedy series \"My Hero\", in which he played a naive superhero from the planet Ultron. His character juggled world-saving heroics with life in suburbia. He stayed in the role until the first episode of series 6 in July 2006, when he was replaced by James Dreyfus during the same episode.\nO'Hanlon provided the voice of the lead character in the three Christmas television cartoon specials of \"Robbie the Reindeer\". He appeared in the 2005 BBC One sitcom \"Blessed\", written by Ben Elton, which was publicly slated by Jonathan Ross, albeit in jest, at the 2005 British Comedy Awards. Towards the end of 2005, O'Hanlon played an eccentric Scottish character, Coconut Tam, in the family based film, \"The Adventures of Greyfriars Bobby\". He has also appeared on radio, including an appearance on \"Quote... Unquote\" on BBC Radio 4 on 18 July 2011, where one of his questions concerned a quotation from \"Father Ted\". In 2015 he appeared on the same channel as incompetent angel Smallbone in the sitcom \"The Best Laid Plans.\"\nIn 2006, O'Hanlon wrote and presented an RT\u00c9 television series called \"Leagues Apart\", in which he investigated the biggest and most passionate football rivalries in several European countries. Included were Roma vs Lazio in Italy, Barcelona vs Real Madrid in Spain, and Galatasaray vs Fenerbahce in Turkey. He followed this with another RT\u00c9 show, \"So You Want To Be Taoiseach?\" in 2007, a political series in which he gave tongue-in-cheek advice on how to go about becoming Taoiseach of Ireland.\nO'Hanlon appeared in a \"Doctor Who\" episode \"Gridlock\", broadcast on 14 April 2007, in which he played a catlike creature named Thomas Kincade Brannigan. He appeared in series 3 of the TV show \"Skins\" playing Kieran, Naomi Campbell (Lily Loveless)'s politics teacher, who attempts to kiss her, and forms a relationship with Naomi's mother (Olivia Colman). O'Hanlon played the lead role in the Irish comedy television programme \"Val Falvey, TD\" on RT\u00c9 One. In February 2011 he returned to the Gate Theatre, Dublin, starring in the Irish premiere of Christopher Hampton's translation of Yasmina Reza's \"God of Carnage\", alongside Maura Tierney. Later that year he appeared in the comedy panel show \"Argumental\". In 2012, he performed in the Edinburgh Fringe\nO'Hanlon has written a novel, \"The Talk of the Town\" (known in the United States as \"Knick Knack Paddy Whack\"), which was published in 1998. The novel is about a teenage boy, Patrick Scully, and his friends. His second novel, \"Brouhaha\", a darkly comic murder mystery set in the Irish border country, was published in 2022. In February 2015 he launched the 2015 Sky Cat Laughs Comedy Festival, which took place in Kilkenny from 28 May to 1 June. In 2015 he played the role of Peter the Milkman in the Sky One sitcom \"After Hours\". In February 2017 it was announced that he would play the lead role in the BBC crime drama \"Death in Paradise,\" taking the role of DI Jack Mooney following Kris Marshall's departure. He announced his intention to leave the series in early 2020 and was replaced by Ralf Little. Starting in 2024, he has reprised the role in a spin-off series, \"Return to Paradise\". \nOn 25 November 2021, it was announced that O'Hanlon would participate in series 13 of \"Taskmaster\". He finished in 4th place ahead of Judi Love. In 2023, he played Uncle Jack in the National Theatre's production of \"Dancing at Lughnasa\" by Brian Friel, alongside Siobhan McSweeney and Tom Vaughan-Lawlor. In January 2024 he presented his first Irish language show, \"Inis na nIontas\", on TG4, exploring the islands around the coast of Ireland. In 2025 he starred in the video for the single \"Invisible Thread\" by The Divine Comedy.\nPersonal life.\nO'Hanlon met his wife Melanie as a teenager. They have a son who lives in Houston, Texas, and two daughters. O'Hanlon is a supporter of Leeds United and a club tennis player.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2400", "revid": "25128333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2400", "title": "AMD", "text": "American multinational technology company\nAdvanced Micro Devices, Inc. (AMD) is an American multinational technology company headquartered in Santa Clara, California, with significant operations in Austin, Texas. It develops central processing units (CPUs), graphics processing units (GPUs), field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), system-on-chips (SoCs), and high-performance computer components. AMD serves a wide range of business and consumer markets, including gaming, data centers, artificial intelligence (AI), and embedded systems.\nAMD's main products include microprocessors, motherboard chipsets, embedded processors, and graphics processors for servers, workstations, personal computers, and embedded system applications. The company has also expanded into new markets, such as the data center, gaming, and high-performance computing markets. AMD's processors are used in a wide range of computing devices, including personal computers, servers, laptops, and gaming consoles. While it initially manufactured its own processors, the company later outsourced its manufacturing, after GlobalFoundries was spun off in 2009. Through its Xilinx acquisition in 2022, AMD offers field-programmable gate array (FPGA) products.\nAMD was founded in 1969 by Jerry Sanders and a group of other technology professionals. The company's early products were primarily memory chips and other components for computers. In 1975, AMD entered the microprocessor market, competing with Intel, its primary rival in the industry. In the early 2000s, it experienced significant growth and success, thanks in part to its strong position in the PC market and the success of its Athlon and Opteron processors. However, the company faced challenges in the late 2000s and early 2010s, as it struggled to keep up with Intel in the race to produce faster and more powerful processors.\nIn the late 2010s, AMD regained market share by pursuing a penetration pricing strategy and building on the success of its Ryzen processors, which were considerably more competitive with Intel microprocessors in terms of performance whilst offering attractive pricing. In 2022, AMD surpassed Intel by market capitalization for the first time.\nHistory.\nFoundational years.\nAdvanced Micro Devices was formally incorporated by Jerry Sanders, along with seven of his colleagues from Fairchild Semiconductor, on May 1, 1969. Sanders, an electrical engineer who was the director of marketing at Fairchild, had, like many Fairchild executives, grown frustrated with the increasing lack of support, opportunity, and flexibility within the company. He later decided to leave to start his own semiconductor company, following the footsteps of Robert Noyce (developer of the first silicon integrated circuit at Fairchild in 1959) and Gordon Moore, who together founded the semiconductor company Intel in July 1968.\nIn September 1969, AMD moved from its temporary location in Santa Clara to its new $500,000 15,000sqft headquarters at 901 Thompson Place, Sunnyvale, which housed the entire company, including the 8-mask, 7\u00a0\u00b5m feature size, 2-inch diameter wafer production. To immediately secure a customer base, AMD initially became a second source supplier of microchips designed by Fairchild (the 5V TTL \"9300\" logic series) and National Semiconductor. AMD first focused on producing logic chips. The company guaranteed quality control to United States Military Standard, an advantage in the early computer industry since unreliability in microchips was a distinct problem that customers \u2013 including computer manufacturers, the telecommunications industry, and instrument manufacturers \u2013 wanted to avoid.\nIn November 1969, the company manufactured its first product: the Am9300, a 4-bit MSI shift register, which began selling in 1970. Also in 1970, AMD produced its first proprietary product, the Am2501 logic counter, which was highly successful. Its bestselling product in 1971 was the Am2505, the fastest multiplier available.\nIn 1971, AMD entered the RAM chip market, beginning with the Am3101, a 64-bit bipolar RAM. That year AMD also greatly increased the sales volume of its linear integrated circuits, and by year-end the company's total annual sales reached US$4.6\u00a0million.\nAMD went public in September 1972. The company was a second source for Intel MOS/LSI circuits by 1973, with products such as Am14/1506 and Am14/1507, dual 100-bit dynamic shift registers. By 1975, AMD was producing 212 products \u2013 of which 49 were proprietary, including the Am9102 (a static N-channel 1024-bit RAM) and three low-power Schottky MSI circuits: Am25LS07, Am25LS08, and Am25LS09.\nIntel had created the first microprocessor, its 4-bit 4004, in 1971. By 1975, AMD entered the microprocessor market with the Am9080, a reverse-engineered clone of the Intel 8080, and the Am2900 bit-slice microprocessor family. When Intel began installing microcode in its microprocessors in 1976, it entered into a cross-licensing agreement with AMD, which was granted a copyright license to the microcode in its microprocessors and peripherals, effective October 1976.\nIn 1977, AMD entered into a joint venture with Siemens, a German engineering conglomerate wishing to enhance its technology expertise and enter the American market. Siemens purchased 20% of AMD's stock, giving the company an infusion of cash to increase its product lines. The two companies also jointly established Advanced Micro Computers (AMC), located in Silicon Valley and in Germany, allowing AMD to enter the microcomputer development and manufacturing field, in particular based on AMD's second-source Zilog Z8000 microprocessors. When the two companies' vision for Advanced Micro Computers diverged, AMD bought out Siemens' stake in the American division in 1979. AMD closed Advanced Micro Computers in late 1981 after switching focus to manufacturing second-source Intel x86 microprocessors.\nTotal sales in fiscal year 1978 topped $100\u00a0million, and in 1979, AMD debuted on the New York Stock Exchange. In 1979, production also began on AMD's new semiconductor fabrication plant in Austin, Texas; the company already had overseas assembly facilities in Penang and Manila, and began construction on a fabrication plant in San Antonio in 1981. In 1980, AMD began supplying semiconductor products for telecommunications, an industry undergoing rapid expansion and innovation.\nIntel partnership.\nIntel had introduced the first x86 microprocessors in 1978. In 1981, IBM created its PC, and wanted Intel's x86 processors, but only under the condition that Intel would also provide a second-source manufacturer for its patented x86 microprocessors. Intel and AMD entered into a 10-year technology exchange agreement, first signed in October 1981 and formally executed in February 1982. The terms of the agreement were that each company could acquire the right to become a second-source manufacturer of semiconductor products developed by the other; that is, each party could \"earn\" the right to manufacture and sell a product developed by the other, if agreed to, by exchanging the manufacturing rights to a product of equivalent technical complexity. The technical information and licenses needed to make and sell a part would be exchanged for a royalty to the developing company. The 1982 agreement also extended the 1976 AMD\u2013Intel cross-licensing agreement through 1995. The agreement included the right to invoke arbitration of disagreements, and after five years the right of either party to end the agreement with one year's notice. The main result of the 1982 agreement was that AMD became a second-source manufacturer of Intel's x86 microprocessors and related chips, and Intel provided AMD with database tapes for its 8086, 80186, and 80286 chips. However, in the event of a bankruptcy or takeover of AMD, the cross-licensing agreement would be effectively canceled.\nBeginning in 1982, AMD began volume-producing second-source Intel-licensed 8086, 8088, 80186, and 80188 processors, and by 1984, its own Am286 clone of Intel's 80286 processor, for the rapidly growing market of IBM PCs and IBM clones. It also continued its successful concentration on proprietary bipolar chips.\nThe company continued to spend greatly on research and development, and created the world's first 512K EPROM in 1984. That year, AMD was listed in the book \"The 100 Best Companies to Work for in America\", and later made the \"Fortune\" 500 list for the first time in 1985.\nBy mid-1985, the microchip market experienced a severe downturn, mainly due to long-term aggressive trade practices (dumping) from Japan, but also due to a crowded and non-innovative chip market in the United States. AMD rode out the mid-1980s crisis by aggressively innovating and modernizing, devising the Liberty Chip program of designing and manufacturing one new chip or chipset per week for 52 weeks in fiscal year 1986, and by heavily lobbying the U.S. government until sanctions and restrictions were put in place to prevent predatory Japanese pricing. During this time, AMD withdrew from the DRAM market, and made some headway into the CMOS market, which it had lagged in entering, having focused instead on bipolar chips.\nAMD had some success in the mid-1980s with the AMD7910 and AMD7911 \"World Chip\" FSK modem, one of the first multi-standard devices that covered both Bell and CCITT tones at up to 1200 baud half duplex or 300/300 full duplex. Beginning in 1986, AMD embraced the perceived shift toward RISC with their own AMD Am29000 (29k) processor; the 29k survived as an embedded processor. The company also increased its EPROM memory market share in the late 1980s. Throughout the 1980s, AMD was a second-source supplier of Intel x86 processors. In 1991, it introduced its 386-compatible Am386, an AMD-designed chip. Creating its own chips, AMD began to compete directly with Intel.\nIn January 1996, AMD acquired NexGen for $857 million to develop what eventually became AMD K6. At the time, NexGen was working on their Nx686 microprocessor.\nAMD had a large, successful flash memory business, even during the dotcom bust. In 2003, to divest some manufacturing and aid its overall cash flow, which was under duress from aggressive microprocessor competition from Intel, AMD spun off its flash memory business and manufacturing into Spansion, a joint venture with Fujitsu, which had been co-manufacturing flash memory with AMD since 1993. In December 2005, AMD divested itself of Spansion to focus on the microprocessor market, and Spansion went public in an IPO.\n2006\u20132019.\nOn July 24, 2006, AMD announced its acquisition of the Canadian 3D graphics card company ATI Technologies. AMD paid $4.3\u00a0billion and 58\u00a0million shares of its capital stock, for approximately $5.4\u00a0billion. The transaction was completed on October 25, 2006. On August 30, 2010, AMD announced that it would retire the ATI brand name for its graphics chipsets in favor of the AMD brand name.\nIn October 2008, AMD announced plans to spin off manufacturing operations in the form of GlobalFoundries Inc., a multibillion-dollar joint venture with Advanced Technology Investment Co., an investment company formed by the government of Abu Dhabi. The partnership and spin-off gave AMD an infusion of cash and allowed it to focus solely on chip design. To assure the Abu Dhabi investors of the new venture's success, AMD's CEO Hector Ruiz stepped down in July 2008, while remaining executive chairman, in preparation for becoming chairman of GlobalFoundries in March 2009. President and COO Dirk Meyer became AMD's CEO. Recessionary losses necessitated AMD cutting 1,100 jobs in 2009.\nIn August 2011, AMD announced that former Lenovo executive Rory Read would be joining the company as CEO, replacing Meyer. In November 2011, AMD announced plans to lay off more than 10% (1,400) of its employees from across all divisions worldwide. In October 2012, it announced plans to lay off an additional 15% of its workforce to reduce costs in the face of declining sales revenue. The inclusion of AMD chips into the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One were later seen as saving AMD from bankruptcy.\nAMD acquired the low-power server manufacturer SeaMicro in early 2012, with an eye to bringing out an Arm64 server chip.\nOn October 8, 2014, AMD announced that Rory Read had stepped down after three years as president and chief executive officer. He was succeeded by Lisa Su, a key lieutenant who had been chief operating officer since June.\nOn October 16, 2014, AMD announced a new restructuring plan along with its Q3 results. Effective July 1, 2014, AMD reorganized into two business groups: Computing and Graphics, which primarily includes desktop and notebook processors and chipsets, discrete GPUs, and professional graphics; and Enterprise, Embedded, and Semi-Custom, which primarily includes server and embedded processors, dense servers, semi-custom SoC products (including solutions for gaming consoles), engineering services, and royalties. As part of this restructuring, AMD announced that 7% of its global workforce would be laid off by the end of 2014.\nAfter the GlobalFoundries spin-off and subsequent layoffs, AMD was left with significant vacant space at 1 AMD Place, its aging Sunnyvale headquarters office complex. In August 2016, AMD's 47 years in Sunnyvale came to a close when it signed a lease with the Irvine Company for a new 220,000 sq. ft. headquarters building in Santa Clara. AMD's new location at Santa Clara Square faces the headquarters of arch-rival Intel across the Bayshore Freeway and San Tomas Aquino Creek. Around the same time, AMD also agreed to sell 1 AMD Place to the Irvine Company. In April 2019, the Irvine Company secured approval from the Sunnyvale City Council of its plans to demolish 1 AMD Place and redevelop the entire 32-acre site into townhomes and apartments.\n2020\u2013present.\nIn October 2020, AMD announced that it was acquiring Xilinx, the market leader in field programmable gate arrays and complex programmable logic devices (FPGAs and CPLDs) in an all-stock transaction. The acquisition was completed in February 2022, with an estimated acquisition price of $50\u00a0billion.\nIn October 2023, AMD acquired an open-source AI software provider, Nod.ai, to bolster its AI software ecosystem.\nIn January 2024, AMD announced it was discontinuing the production of all complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs) acquired through Xilinx.\nIn March 2024, a rally in semiconductor stocks pushed AMD's valuation above $300B for the first time.\nIn July 2024, AMD announced that it would acquire the Finnish-based artificial intelligence start-up company Silo AI in a $665 million all-cash deal in an attempt to better compete with AI chip market leader Nvidia.\nIn August 2024, AMD signed a deal to acquire ZT Systems for $4.9 billion. The company creates custom computing infrastructure that is used for AI tasks.\nSince early 2024, AMD has made significant gains in the server CPU market, reducing the gap with Intel. Initial reports of a 50:50 market split drew on incorrect data and were later revised. As of July 2025, Intel holds 63.3% of the server CPU market, while AMD has reached 36.5%, showing a strong upward trend for AMD despite Intel's continuing lead.\nIn June 2025, AMD unveiled the AI server for 2026, the MI400 series of chips, which will be the basis of a new server called \"Helios\".\nIn October 2025, the company announced it had agreed a deal with OpenAI to sell six gigawatts of its AI processors over the next five years. As part of the deal, OpenAI has the option to acquire a 10 per cent stake in AMD: 160 million shares at a token price of $0.01 per share contingent on meeting undisclosed performance targets, the final tranche of options requiring AMD common stock to reach $600 per share.\nProducts.\nCPUs and APUs.\nIBM PC and the x86 architecture.\nIn February 1982, AMD signed a contract with Intel, becoming a licensed second-source manufacturer of 8086 and 8088 processors. IBM wanted to use the Intel 8088 in its IBM PC, but its policy at the time was to require at least two sources for its chips. AMD later produced the Am286 under the same arrangement. In 1984, Intel internally decided to no longer cooperate with AMD in supplying product information to shore up its advantage in the marketplace, and delayed and eventually refused to convey the technical details of the Intel 80386. In 1987, AMD invoked arbitration over the issue, and Intel reacted by canceling the 1982 technological-exchange agreement altogether. After three years of testimony, AMD eventually won in arbitration in 1992, but Intel disputed this decision. Another long legal dispute followed, ending in 1994 when the Supreme Court of California sided with the arbitrator and AMD.\nIn 1990, Intel countersued AMD, renegotiating AMD's right to use derivatives of Intel's microcode for its cloned processors. In the face of uncertainty during the legal dispute, AMD was forced to develop clean room designed versions of Intel code for its x386 and x486 processors, the former long after Intel had released its own x386 in 1985. In March 1991, AMD released the Am386, its clone of the Intel 386 processor. By October of the same year it had sold one million units.\nIn 1993, AMD introduced the first of the Am486 family of processors, which proved popular with a large number of original equipment manufacturers, including Compaq, which signed an exclusive agreement using the Am486. The Am5x86, another Am486-based processor, was released in November 1995, and continued AMD's success as a fast, cost-effective processor.\nFinally, in an agreement effective 1996, AMD received the rights to the microcode in Intel's x386 and x486 processor families, but not the rights to the microcode in the following generations of processors.\nK5, K6, Athlon, Duron, and Sempron.\nAMD's first in-house x86 processor was the K5, launched in 1996. The \"K\" in its name was a reference to Kryptonite, the only substance known to harm comic book character Superman. This itself was a reference to Intel's hegemony over the market, i.e., an anthropomorphization of them as Superman. The number \"5\" was a reference to the fifth generation of x86 processors; rival Intel had previously introduced its line of fifth-generation x86 processors as Pentium because the U.S. Trademark and Patent Office had ruled that mere numbers could not be trademarked.\nIn 1996, AMD purchased NexGen, specifically for the rights to their Nx series of x86-compatible processors. AMD gave the NexGen design team their own building, left them alone, and gave them time and money to rework the Nx686. The result was the K6 processor, introduced in 1997. Although it was based on Socket 7, variants such as K6-III/450 were faster than Intel's Pentium II (sixth-generation processor).\nThe K7 was AMD's seventh-generation x86 processor, making its debut under the brand name Athlon on June 23, 1999. Unlike previous AMD processors, it could not be used on the same motherboards as Intel's, due to licensing issues surrounding Intel's Slot 1 connector, and instead used a Slot A connector, referenced to the Alpha processor bus. The Duron was a lower-cost and limited version of the Athlon (64\u00a0KB instead of 256\u00a0KB L2 cache) in a 462-pin socketed PGA (socket A) or soldered directly onto the motherboard. Sempron was released as a lower-cost Athlon XP, replacing Duron in the socket A PGA era. It has since been migrated upward to all new sockets, up to AM3.\nOn October 9, 2001, the Athlon XP was released. On February 10, 2003, the Athlon XP with 512\u00a0KB L2 Cache was released.\nAthlon 64, Opteron, and Phenom.\nThe K8 was a major revision of the K7 architecture, with the most notable features being the addition of a 64-bit extension to the x86 instruction set (called x86-64, AMD64, or x64), the incorporation of an on-chip memory controller, and the implementation of an extremely high-performance point-to-point interconnect called HyperTransport, as part of the Direct Connect Architecture. The technology was initially launched as the Opteron server-oriented processor on April 22, 2003. Shortly thereafter, it was incorporated into a product for desktop PCs, branded Athlon 64.\nOn April 21, 2005, AMD released the first dual-core Opteron, an x86-based server CPU. A month later, it released the Athlon 64 X2, the first desktop-based dual-core processor family. In May 2007, AMD abandoned the string \"64\" in its dual-core desktop product branding, becoming Athlon X2, downplaying the significance of 64-bit computing in its processors. Further updates involved improvements to the microarchitecture, and a shift of the target market from mainstream desktop systems to value dual-core desktop systems. In 2008, AMD started to release dual-core Sempron processors exclusively in China, branded as the Sempron 2000 series, with lower HyperTransport speed and smaller L2 cache. AMD completed its dual-core product portfolio for each market segment.\nIn September 2007, AMD released the first server Opteron K10 processors, followed in November by the Phenom processor for desktop. K10 processors came in dual-core, triple-core, and quad-core versions, with all cores on a single die. AMD released a new platform codenamed \"Spider\", which used the new Phenom processor, and an R770 GPU and a 790 GX/FX chipset from the AMD 700 chipset series. However, AMD built the Spider at 65nm, which was uncompetitive with Intel's smaller and more power-efficient 45nm.\nIn January 2009, AMD released a new processor line dubbed Phenom II, a refresh of the original Phenom built using the 45\u00a0nm process. AMD's new platform, codenamed \"Dragon\", used the new Phenom II processor, and an ATI R770 GPU from the R700 GPU family, and a 790 GX/FX chipset from the AMD 700 chipset series. The Phenom II came in dual-core, triple-core and quad-core variants, all using the same die, with cores disabled for the triple-core and dual-core versions. The Phenom II resolved issues that the original Phenom had, including a low clock speed, a small L3 cache, and a Cool'n'Quiet bug that decreased performance. The Phenom II cost less but was not performance-competitive with Intel's mid-to-high-range Core 2 Quads. The Phenom II also enhanced its predecessor's memory controller, allowing it to use DDR3 in a new native socket AM3, while maintaining backward compatibility with AM2+, the socket used for the Phenom, and allowing the use of the DDR2 memory that was used with the platform.\nIn April 2010, AMD released a new Phenom II Hexa-core (6-core) processor codenamed \"Thuban\". This was a totally new die based on the hexa-core \"Istanbul\" Opteron processor. It included AMD's \"turbo core\" technology, which allows the processor to automatically switch from 6 cores to 3 faster cores when more pure speed is needed.\nThe Magny Cours and Lisbon server parts were released in 2010. The Magny Cours part came in 8 to 12\u00a0cores and the Lisbon part in 4 and 6\u00a0core parts. Magny Cours is focused on performance while the Lisbon part is focused on high performance per watt. Magny Cours is an MCM (multi-chip module) with two hexa-core \"Istanbul\" Opteron parts. This will use a new socket G34 for dual and quad-socket processors and thus will be marketed as Opteron 61xx series processors. Lisbon uses socket C32 certified for dual-socket use or single socket use only and thus will be marketed as Opteron 41xx processors. Both will be built on a 45 nm SOI process.\nFusion becomes the AMD APU.\nFollowing AMD's 2006 acquisition of Canadian graphics company ATI Technologies, an initiative codenamed \"Fusion\" was announced to integrate a CPU and GPU together on some of AMD's microprocessors, including a built in PCI Express link to accommodate separate PCI Express peripherals, eliminating the northbridge chip from the motherboard. The initiative intended to move some of the processing originally done on the CPU (e.g. floating-point unit operations) to the GPU, which is better optimized for some calculations. The Fusion was later renamed the AMD APU (Accelerated Processing Unit).\nLlano was AMD's first APU built for laptops. Llano was the second APU released, targeted at the mainstream market. It incorporated a CPU and GPU on the same die, and northbridge functions, and used \"Socket FM1\" with DDR3 memory. The CPU part of the processor was based on the Phenom II \"Deneb\" processor. AMD suffered an unexpected decrease in revenue based on production problems for the Llano. More AMD APUs for laptops running Windows 7 and Windows 8 OS are being used commonly. These include AMD's price-point APUs, the E1 and E2, and their mainstream competitors with Intel's Core i-series: The Vision A- series, the A standing for accelerated. These range from the lower-performance A4 chipset to the A6, A8, and A10. These all incorporate next-generation Radeon graphics cards, with the A4 utilizing the base Radeon HD chip and the rest using a Radeon R4 graphics card, with the exception of the highest-model A10 (A10-7300) which uses an R6 graphics card.\nNew microarchitectures.\nHigh-power, high-performance Bulldozer cores.\nBulldozer was AMD's microarchitecture codename for server and desktop AMD FX processors, first released on October 12, 2011. This family 15h microarchitecture is the successor to the family 10h (K10) microarchitecture design. Bulldozer was a clean-sheet design, not a development of earlier processors. The core was specifically aimed at 10\u2013125\u00a0W TDP computing products. AMD claimed dramatic performance-per-watt efficiency improvements in high-performance computing (HPC) applications with Bulldozer cores. While hopes were high that Bulldozer would bring AMD to be performance-competitive with Intel once more, most benchmarks were disappointing. In some cases the new Bulldozer products were slower than the K10 models they were built to replace.\nThe Piledriver microarchitecture was the 2012 successor to Bulldozer, increasing clock speeds and performance relative to its predecessor. Piledriver would be released in AMD FX, APU, and Opteron product lines. Piledriver was subsequently followed by the Steamroller microarchitecture in 2013. Used exclusively in AMD's APUs, Steamroller focused on greater parallelism.\nIn 2015, the Excavator microarchitecture replaced Piledriver. Expected to be the last microarchitecture of the Bulldozer series, Excavator focused on improved power efficiency.\nLow-power Cat cores.\nThe Bobcat microarchitecture was revealed during a speech from AMD executive vice-president Henri Richard in Computex 2007 and was put into production during the first quarter of 2011. Based on the difficulty competing in the x86 market with a single core optimized for the 10\u2013100\u00a0W range, AMD had developed a simpler core with a target range of 1\u201310\u00a0watts. In addition, it was believed that the core could migrate into the hand-held space if the power consumption can be reduced to less than 1\u00a0W.\nJaguar is a microarchitecture codename for Bobcat's successor, released in 2013, that is used in various APUs from AMD aimed at the low-power/low-cost market. Jaguar and its derivates would go on to be used in the custom APUs of the PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PlayStation 4 Pro, Xbox One S, and Xbox One X. Jaguar would be later followed by the Puma microarchitecture in 2014.\nARM architecture-based designs.\nIn 2012, AMD announced it was working on ARM products, both as a semi-custom product and server product. The initial server product was announced as the Opteron A1100 in 2014, an 8-core Cortex-A57-based ARMv8-A SoC, and was expected to be followed by an APU incorporating a Graphics Core Next GPU. However, the Opteron A1100 was not released until 2016, with the delay attributed to adding software support. The A1100 was also criticized for not having support from major vendors upon its release.\nIn 2014, AMD also announced the K12 custom core for release in 2016. While being ARMv8-A instruction set architecture compliant, the K12 was expected to be entirely custom-designed, targeting the server, embedded, and semi-custom markets. While ARM architecture development continued, products based on K12 were subsequently delayed with no release planned. Development of AMD's x86-based Zen microarchitecture was preferred.\nZen-based CPUs and APUs.\nZen is an architecture for x86-64 based Ryzen series of CPUs and APUs, introduced in 2017 by AMD and built from the ground up by a team led by Jim Keller, beginning with his arrival in 2012, and taping out before his departure in September 2015.\nOne of AMD's primary goals with Zen was an IPC increase of at least 40%, however in February 2017 AMD announced that they had actually achieved a 52% increase. Processors made on the Zen architecture are built on the 14\u00a0nm FinFET node and have a renewed focus on single-core performance and HSA compatibility. Previous processors from AMD were either built in the 32\u00a0nm process (\"Bulldozer\" and \"Piledriver\" CPUs) or the 28\u00a0nm process (\"Steamroller\" and \"Excavator\" APUs). Because of this, Zen is much more energy efficient.\nThe Zen architecture is the first to encompass CPUs and APUs from AMD built for a single socket (Socket AM4). Also new for this architecture is the implementation of simultaneous multithreading (SMT) technology, something Intel has had for years on some of their processors with their proprietary hyper-threading implementation of SMT. This is a departure from the \"Clustered MultiThreading\" design introduced with the Bulldozer architecture. Zen also has support for DDR4 memory.\nAMD released the Zen-based high-end Ryzen 7 \"Summit Ridge\" series CPUs on March 2, 2017, mid-range Ryzen 5 series CPUs on April 11, 2017, and entry level Ryzen 3 series CPUs on July 27, 2017. AMD later released the Epyc line of Zen derived server processors for 1P and 2P systems. In October 2017, AMD released Zen-based APUs as Ryzen Mobile, incorporating Vega graphics cores. In January 2018, AMD announced their new lineup plans, with Ryzen 2. AMD launched CPUs with the 12nm Zen+ microarchitecture in April 2018, following up with the 7nm Zen 2 microarchitecture in June 2019, including an update to the Epyc line with new processors using the Zen\u00a02 microarchitecture in August 2019, and Zen 3 slated for release in Q3 2020.\nAs of 2019, AMD's Ryzen processors were reported to outsell Intel's consumer desktop processors. At CES 2020 AMD announced their Ryzen Mobile 4000, as the first 7\u00a0nm x86 mobile processor, the first 7\u00a0nm 8-core (also 16-thread) high-performance mobile processor, and the first 8-core (also 16-thread) processor for ultrathin laptops. This generation is still based on the Zen\u00a02 architecture. In October 2020, AMD announced new processors based on the Zen 3 architecture. On PassMark's Single thread performance test the Ryzen 5 5600x bested all other CPUs besides the Ryzen 9 5950X.\nIn April 2020, AMD launched three new SKUs which target commercial HPC workloads &amp; hyperconverged infrastructure applications. The launch was based on Epyc\u2019s 7\u00a0nm second-generation Rome platform and supported by Dell EMC, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Lenovo, Supermicro, and Nutanix. IBM Cloud was its first public cloud partner. In August 2022, AMD announced their initial lineup of CPUs based on the new Zen 4 architecture.\nThe Steam Deck, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X and Series S all use chips based on the Zen\u00a02 microarchitecture, with proprietary tweaks and different configurations in each system's implementation than AMD sells in its own commercially available APUs.\nGraphics products and GPUs.\nRadeon within AMD.\nIn 2007, the ATI division of AMD released the TeraScale microarchitecture implementing a unified shader model. This design replaced the previous fixed-function hardware of previous graphics cards with multipurpose, programmable shaders. Initially released as part of the GPU for the Xbox 360, this technology would go on to be used in Radeon branded HD 2000 parts. Three generations of TeraScale would be designed and used in parts from 2007 to 2015.\nCombined GPU and CPU divisions.\nIn a 2009 restructuring, AMD merged the CPU and GPU divisions to support the company's APUs, which fused both graphics and general purpose processing. In 2011, AMD released the successor to TeraScale, Graphics Core Next (GCN). This new microarchitecture emphasized GPGPU compute capability in addition to graphics processing, with a particular aim of supporting heterogeneous computing on AMD's APUs. GCN's reduced instruction set ISA allowed for significantly increased compute capability over TeraScale's very long instruction word ISA. Since GCN's introduction with the HD 7970, five generations of the GCN architecture have been produced from 2011 through at least 2018.\nRadeon Technologies Group.\nIn September 2015, AMD separated the graphics technology division of the company into an independent internal unit called the Radeon Technologies Group (RTG), headed by Raja Koduri. This gave the graphics division of AMD autonomy in product design and marketing. The RTG then went on to create and release the Polaris and Vega microarchitectures released in 2016 and 2017, respectively. In particular the Vega, or fifth-generation GCN, microarchitecture includes a number of major revisions to improve performance and compute capabilities.\nIn November 2017, Raja Koduri left RTG and CEO and President Lisa Su took his position. In January 2018, it was reported that two industry veterans joined RTG, namely Mike Rayfield as senior vice president and general manager of RTG, and David Wang as senior vice president of engineering for RTG. In January 2020, AMD announced that its second-generation RDNA graphics architecture was in development, with the aim of competing with the Nvidia RTX graphics products for performance leadership. In October 2020, AMD announced their new RX 6000 series series GPUs, their first high-end product based on RDNA2 and capable of handling ray-tracing natively, aiming to challenge Nvidia's RTX 3000 GPUs.\nSemi-custom and game console products.\nIn 2012, AMD's then CEO Rory Read began a program to offer semi-custom designs. Rather than AMD simply designing and offering a single product, potential customers could work with AMD to design a custom chip based on AMD's intellectual property. Customers pay a non-recurring engineering fee for design and development, and a purchase price for the resulting semi-custom products. In particular, AMD noted their unique position of offering both x86 and graphics intellectual property. These semi-custom designs would have design wins as the APUs in the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One and the subsequent PlayStation 4 Pro, Xbox One S, Xbox One X, Xbox Series X/S, and PlayStation 5. Financially, these semi-custom products would represent a majority of the company's revenue in 2016. In November 2017, AMD and Intel announced that Intel would market a product combining in a single package an Intel Core CPU, a semi-custom AMD Radeon GPU, and HBM2 memory.\nOther hardware.\nAMD motherboard chipsets.\nBefore the launch of Athlon 64 processors in 2003, AMD designed chipsets for their processors spanning the K6 and K7 processor generations. The chipsets include the AMD-640, AMD-751, and the AMD-761 chipsets. The situation changed in 2003 with the release of Athlon 64 processors, and AMD chose not to further design its own chipsets for its desktop processors while opening the desktop platform to allow other firms to design chipsets. This was the \"Open Platform Management Architecture\" with ATI, VIA and SiS developing their own chipset for Athlon 64 processors and later Athlon 64 X2 and Athlon 64 FX processors, including the Quad FX platform chipset from Nvidia.\nThe initiative went further with the release of Opteron server processors as AMD stopped the design of server chipsets in 2004 after releasing the AMD-8111 chipset, and again opened the server platform for firms to develop chipsets for Opteron processors. As of today, Nvidia and Broadcom are the sole designing firms of server chipsets for Opteron processors.\nAs the company completed the acquisition of ATI Technologies in 2006, the firm gained the ATI design team for chipsets which previously designed the Radeon Xpress 200 and the Radeon Xpress 3200 chipsets. AMD then renamed the chipsets for AMD processors under AMD branding (for instance, the CrossFire Xpress 3200 chipset was renamed as AMD 580X CrossFire chipset). In February 2007, AMD announced the first AMD-branded chipset since 2004 with the release of the AMD 690G chipset (previously under the development codename \"RS690\"), targeted at mainstream IGP computing. It was the industry's first to implement a HDMI 1.2 port on motherboards, shipping for more than a million units. While ATI had aimed at releasing an Intel IGP chipset, the plan was scrapped and the inventories of Radeon Xpress 1250 (codenamed \"RS600\", sold under ATI brand) was sold to two OEMs, Abit and ASRock. Although AMD stated the firm would still produce Intel chipsets, Intel had not granted the license of 1333 MHz FSB to ATI.\nOn November 15, 2007, AMD announced a new chipset series portfolio, the AMD 7-Series chipsets, covering from the enthusiast multi-graphics segment to the value IGP segment, to replace the AMD 480/570/580 chipsets and AMD 690 series chipsets, marking AMD's first enthusiast multi-graphics chipset. Discrete graphics chipsets were launched on November 15, 2007, as part of the codenamed \"Spider\" desktop platform, and IGP chipsets were launched at a later time in spring 2008 as part of the codenamed \"Cartwheel\" platform.\nAMD returned to the server chipsets market with the AMD 800S series server chipsets. It includes support for up to six SATA 6.0 Gbit/s ports, the C6 power state, which is featured in Fusion processors and AHCI 1.2 with SATA FIS-based switching support. This is a chipset family supporting Phenom processors and Quad FX enthusiast platform (890FX), IGP (890GX).\nWith the advent of AMD's APUs in 2011, traditional northbridge features such as the connection to graphics and the PCI Express controller were incorporated into the APU die. Accordingly, APUs were connected to a single chip chipset, renamed the Fusion Controller Hub (FCH), which primarily provided southbridge functionality.\nAMD released new chipsets in 2017 to support the release of their new Ryzen products. As the Zen microarchitecture already includes much of the northbridge connectivity, the AM4-based chipsets primarily varied in the number of additional PCI Express lanes, USB connections, and SATA connections available. These AM4 chipsets were designed in conjunction with ASMedia.\nEmbedded products.\nEmbedded CPUs.\nIn the early 1990s, AMD began marketing a series of embedded system-on-a-chips (SoCs) called AMD \u00c9lan, starting with the SC300 and SC310. Both combines a 32-Bit, Am386SX, low-voltage 25\u00a0MHz or 33\u00a0MHz CPU with memory controller, PC/AT peripheral controllers, real-time clock, PLL clock generators and ISA bus interface. The SC300 integrates in addition two PC card slots and a CGA-compatible LCD controller. They were followed in 1996 by the SC4xx types, now supporting VESA Local Bus and using the Am486 with up to 100\u00a0MHz clock speed. An SC450 at 33\u00a0MHz, for example, was used in the Nokia 9110 Communicator. In 1999 the SC520 was announced. Using an Am586 with 100\u00a0MHz or 133\u00a0MHz and supporting SDRAM and PCI it was the latest member of the series.\nIn February 2002, AMD acquired Alchemy Semiconductor for its Alchemy line of MIPS processors for the hand-held and portable media player markets. On June 13, 2006, AMD officially announced that the line was to be transferred to Raza Microelectronics, Inc., a designer of MIPS processors for embedded applications.\nIn August 2003, AMD also purchased the Geode business which was originally the Cyrix MediaGX from National Semiconductor to augment its existing line of embedded x86 processor products. During the second quarter of 2004, it launched new low-power Geode NX processors based on the K7 Thoroughbred architecture with speeds of fanless processors 667 MHz and 1 GHz, and 1.4\u00a0GHz processor with fan, of TDP 25\u00a0W. This technology is used in a variety of embedded systems (Casino slot machines and customer kiosks for instance), several UMPC designs in Asia markets, and the OLPC XO-1 computer, an inexpensive laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries around the world. The Geode LX processor was announced in 2005 and is said will continue to be available through 2015.\nAMD has also introduced 64-bit processors into its embedded product line, starting with the AMD Opteron processor. Leveraging the high throughput enabled through HyperTransport and the Direct Connect Architecture these server-class processors have been targeted at high-end telecom and storage applications. In 2007, AMD added the AMD Athlon, AMD Turion, and Mobile AMD Sempron processors to its embedded product line. Leveraging the same 64-bit instruction set and Direct Connect Architecture as the AMD Opteron but at lower power levels, these processors were well suited to a variety of traditional embedded applications. Throughout 2007 and into 2008, AMD continued to add both single-core Mobile AMD Sempron and AMD Athlon processors and dual-core AMD Athlon X2 and AMD Turion processors to its embedded product line and now offers embedded 64-bit solutions starting with 8\u00a0W TDP Mobile AMD Sempron and AMD Athlon processors for fan-less designs up to multi-processor systems leveraging multi-core AMD Opteron processors all supporting longer than standard availability.\nThe ATI acquisition in 2006 included the Imageon and Xilleon product lines. In late 2008, the entire handheld division was sold off to Qualcomm, who have since produced the Adreno series. Also in 2008, the Xilleon division was sold to Broadcom.\nIn April 2007, AMD announced the release of the M690T integrated graphics chipset for embedded designs. This enabled AMD to offer complete processor and chipset solutions targeted at embedded applications requiring high-performance 3D and video such as emerging digital signage, kiosk, and Point of Sale applications. The M690T was followed by the M690E specifically for embedded applications which removed the TV output, which required Macrovision licensing for OEMs, and enabled native support for dual TMDS outputs, enabling dual independent DVI interfaces.\nIn January 2011, AMD announced the AMD Embedded G-Series Accelerated Processing Unit. This was the first APU for embedded applications. These were followed by updates in 2013 and 2016.\nIn May 2012, AMD announced the AMD Embedded R-Series Accelerated Processing Unit. This family of products incorporates the Bulldozer CPU architecture, and Discrete-class Radeon HD 7000G Series graphics. This was followed by a system-on-a-chip (SoC) version in 2015 which offered a faster CPU and faster graphics, with support for DDR4 SDRAM memory.\nEmbedded graphics.\nAMD builds graphic processors for use in embedded systems. They can be found in anything from casinos to healthcare, with a large portion of products being used in industrial machines. These products include a complete graphics processing device in a compact multi-chip module including RAM and the GPU. ATI began offering embedded GPUs with the E2400 in 2008. Since then, AMD has released regular updates to their embedded GPU lineup in 2009, 2011, 2015, and 2016; reflecting improvements in their GPU technology.\nAMD FPGAs.\nIn October 2020, AMD announced its acquisition of Xilinx, which was completed on February 14, 2022, through an all-stock transaction valued at approximately $60 billion. Xilinx remained a wholly owned subsidiary of AMD until the brand was phased out in June 2023, with Xilinx's product lines now branded under AMD.\nCurrent product lines.\nCPU and APU products.\nAMD's portfolio of CPUs and APUs as of 2020[ [update]]\nGraphics products.\nAMD's portfolio of dedicated graphics processors as of 2017[ [update]]\nRadeon-branded products.\nRAM.\nIn 2011, AMD began selling Radeon branded DDR3 SDRAM to support the higher bandwidth needs of AMD's APUs. While the RAM is sold by AMD, it was manufactured by Patriot Memory and VisionTek. This was later followed by higher speeds of gaming oriented DDR3 memory in 2013. Radeon branded DDR4 SDRAM memory was released in 2015, despite no AMD CPUs or APUs supporting DDR4 at the time. AMD noted in 2017 that these products are \"mostly distributed in Eastern Europe\" and that it continues to be active in the business.\nSolid-state drives.\nAMD announced in 2014 that it would sell Radeon branded solid-state drives manufactured by OCZ with capacities up to 480\u00a0GB and using the SATA interface.\nTechnologies.\nCPU hardware.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] technologies found in AMD CPU/APU and other products include:\nGraphics hardware.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] technologies found in AMD GPU products include:\nSoftware.\nAMD has made considerable efforts towards opening its software tools above the firmware level in the past decade.\nFor the following mentions, software not expressely stated as being free can be assumed to be proprietary.\nDistribution.\nAMD Radeon Software is the default channel for official software distribution from AMD. It includes both free and proprietary software components, and supports both Microsoft Windows and Linux.\nGPU.\nMost notable public AMD software is on the GPU side.\nAMD has opened both its graphic and compute stacks:\nFabrication.\nPreviously, AMD produced its chips at company-owned semiconductor foundries. AMD pursued a strategy of collaboration with other semiconductor manufacturers IBM and Motorola to co-develop production technologies. AMD's founder Jerry Sanders termed this the \"Virtual Gorilla\" strategy to compete with Intel's significantly greater investments in fabrication. Two former fabrication sites in Sunnyvale are listed as a Superfund site, added in 1986 and 1990 when volatile organic compounds were discovered in groundwater. Acid neutralization system (ANS) tank vaults were discovered with holes when excavated with the contaminated soil.\nIn 2008, AMD spun off its chip foundries into an independent company named GlobalFoundries. This breakup of the company was attributed to the increasing costs of each process node. The Emirate of Abu Dhabi purchased the newly created company through its subsidiary Advanced Technology Investment Company (ATIC), purchasing the final stake from AMD in 2009.\nWith the spin-off of its foundries, AMD became a fabless semiconductor manufacturer, designing products to be produced at for-hire foundries. Part of the GlobalFoundries spin-off included an agreement with AMD to produce some number of products at GlobalFoundries. Both prior to the spin-off and after, AMD has pursued production with other foundries including TSMC and Samsung. It has been argued that this would reduce risk for AMD by decreasing dependence on any one foundry which has caused issues in the past.\nIn 2018, AMD started shifting the production of their CPUs and GPUs to TSMC, following GlobalFoundries' announcement that they were halting development of their 7 nm process. AMD revised their wafer purchase requirement with GlobalFoundries in 2019, allowing AMD to freely choose foundries for 7\u00a0nm nodes and below, while maintaining purchase agreements for 12\u00a0nm and above through 2021.\nCorporate affairs.\nBusiness trends.\nThe key trends for AMD are (as of the financial year ending in late December):\nPartnerships.\nAMD uses strategic industry partnerships to further its business interests and to rival Intel's dominance and resources:\nLitigation with Intel.\nAMD has a long history of litigation with former (and current) partner and x86 creator Intel.\nSponsorships.\nAMD's sponsorship of Formula 1 racing began in 2002, and since 2020 has sponsored the Mercedes-AMG Petronas team. AMD was also a sponsor of the BMW Sauber and Scuderia Ferrari Formula 1 teams together with Intel, Vodafone, AT&amp;T, Pernod Ricard and Diageo. On 18 April 2018, AMD began a multi-year sponsorship with Scuderia Ferrari. In February 2020, just prior to the start of the 2020 race season, the Mercedes Formula 1 team announced it was adding AMD to its sponsorship portfolio.\nAMD began a sponsorship deal with Victory Five (V5) for the League of Legends Pro League (LPL) in 2022. AMD was a sponsor of the Chinese Dota Pro Circuit together with Perfect World.\nIn February 2024, AMD was a Diamond sponsor for the World Artificial Intelligence Cannes Festival (WAICF).\nAMD was a Platinum sponsor for the HPE Discover 2024, an event hosted by Hewlett Packard Enterprise to showcase technology for government and business customers. The event was held from 17 to 20 June 2024 in Las Vegas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2402", "revid": "6012230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2402", "title": "Albrecht D\u00fcrer", "text": "German painter, printmaker and theorist (1471\u20131528)\nAlbrecht D\u00fcrer ( , ; 21 May 1471 \u2013 6 April 1528), sometimes spelled in English as Durer or Duerer, was a German painter, printmaker, and theorist of the German Renaissance. Born in Nuremberg, D\u00fcrer established his reputation and influence across Europe in his twenties due to his high-quality woodcut prints. He was in contact with the major Italian artists of his time, including Raphael, Giovanni Bellini and Leonardo da Vinci, and from 1512 was patronized by Emperor Maximilian I.\nD\u00fcrer's vast body of work includes engravings, his preferred technique in his later prints, altarpieces, portraits and self-portraits, watercolours and books. The woodcuts series are stylistically more Gothic than the rest of his work, but revolutionised the potential of that medium, while his extraordinary handling of the burin expanded especially the tonal range of his engravings.\nD\u00fcrer's introduction of classical motifs and of the nude into Northern art, through his knowledge of Italian artists and German humanists, has secured his reputation as one of the most important figures of the Northern Renaissance. This is reinforced by his theoretical treatises, which involve principles of mathematics for linear perspective and body proportions.\nBiography.\nEarly life (1471\u20131490).\nDurer was born on 21 May 1471, the third child and second son of Albrecht D\u00fcrer the Elder and Barbara Holper, who married in 1467. Albrecht D\u00fcrer the Elder (originally Albrecht Ajt\u00f3si) was a successful goldsmith who by 1455 had moved to Nuremberg from Ajt\u00f3s, near Gyula in Hungary. He married Barbara, his master's daughter, when he himself qualified as a master. Her mother, Klinga \u00d6llinger had some roots in Hungary too, as she was born in Sopron. The couple had eighteen children together, of which only three survived. Hans D\u00fcrer (1490\u20131534), also became a painter, trained under the older Albrecht. The other surviving brother, Endres D\u00fcrer (1484\u20131555), took over their father's business and was a master goldsmith. The German name \"D\u00fcrer\" is a translation from the Hungarian, \"Ajt\u00f3si\". Initially, it was \"T\u00fcrer\", meaning doormaker, which is \"ajt\u00f3s\" in Hungarian (from \"ajt\u00f3\", meaning door). A door is featured in the coat-of-arms the family acquired. Albrecht D\u00fcrer the Younger later changed \"T\u00fcrer\", his father's diction of the family's surname, to \"D\u00fcrer\", to adapt to the local Nuremberg dialect.\nBecause D\u00fcrer left autobiographical writings and was widely known by his mid-twenties, his life is well documented. After a few years of school, D\u00fcrer learned the basics of goldsmithing and drawing from his father. Though his father wanted him to continue his training as a goldsmith, he showed such a precocious talent in drawing that he was allowed to start as an apprentice to Michael Wolgemut at the age of fifteen in 1486. A self-portrait, a drawing in silverpoint, is dated 1484 (Albertina, Vienna) \"when I was a child\", as his later inscription says. The drawing is one of the earliest surviving children's drawings of any kind, and, as D\u00fcrer's Opus One, has helped define his oeuvre as deriving from, and always linked to, himself. Wolgemut was the leading artist in Nuremberg at the time, with a large workshop producing a variety of works of art, in particular woodcuts for books. Nuremberg was then an important and prosperous city, a centre for publishing and many luxury trades. It had strong links with Italy, especially Venice, a relatively short distance across the Alps.\nD\u00fcrer's godfather Anton Koberger left goldsmithing to become a printer and publisher in the year of D\u00fcrer's birth. He became the most successful publisher in Germany, eventually owning twenty-four printing-presses and a number of offices in Germany and abroad. Koberger's most famous publication was the \"Nuremberg Chronicle\", published in 1493 in German and Latin editions. It contained an unprecedented 1,809 woodcut illustrations (albeit with many repeated uses of the same block) by the Wolgemut workshop. D\u00fcrer may have worked on some of these, as the work on the project began while he was with Wolgemut.\n\"Wanderjahre\" and marriage (1490\u20131494).\nAfter completing his apprenticeship, D\u00fcrer followed the common German custom of taking \"Wanderjahre\"\u2014in effect gap years\u2014in which the apprentice learned skills from other masters, their local tradition and individual styles; D\u00fcrer was to spend about four years away. He left in 1490, possibly to work under Martin Schongauer, the leading engraver of Northern Europe, but who died shortly before D\u00fcrer's arrival at Colmar in 1492. It is unclear where D\u00fcrer travelled in the intervening period, though it is likely that he went to Frankfurt and the Netherlands. In Colmar, D\u00fcrer was welcomed by Schongauer's brothers, the goldsmiths Caspar and Paul and the painter Ludwig. Later that year, D\u00fcrer travelled to Basel to stay with another brother of Martin Schongauer, the goldsmith Georg. In 1493 D\u00fcrer went to Strasbourg, where he would have experienced the sculpture of Nikolaus Gerhaert. D\u00fcrer's first painted self-portrait (now in the Louvre) was painted at this time, probably to be sent back to his fianc\u00e9e in Nuremberg.\nVery soon after his return to Nuremberg, on 7 July 1494, at the age of 23, D\u00fcrer was married to Agnes Frey following an arrangement made during his absence. Agnes was the daughter of a prominent brass worker (and amateur harpist) in the city. However, no children resulted from the marriage, and with Albrecht, the D\u00fcrer name died out. The marriage between Agnes and Albrecht was believed not to be a generally happy one, as indicated by a letter of D\u00fcrer in which he quipped to Willibald Pirckheimer in a rough tone about his wife, calling her an \"old crow\" and made other vulgar remarks. Pirckheimer also made no secret of his antipathy towards Agnes, describing her as a miserly shrew with a bitter tongue, who helped cause D\u00fcrer's death at a relatively young age. It has been hypothesized by many scholars that Albrecht was bisexual or homosexual, due to the recurrence of allegedly homoerotic themes in some of his works (e.g. \"The Men's Bath\"), and the nature of his correspondence with close friends.\nFirst journey to Italy (1494\u20131495).\nWithin three months of his marriage, D\u00fcrer left for Italy, alone, perhaps prompted by an outbreak of plague in Nuremberg. He made watercolour sketches as he traveled over the Alps. Some have survived and others may be deduced from accurate landscapes of real places in his later work, for example, his engraving \"Nemesis\".\nIn Italy, he went to Venice to study its more advanced artistic world. Through Wolgemut's tutelage, D\u00fcrer had learned how to make prints in drypoint and design woodcuts in the German style, based on the works of Schongauer and the Housebook Master. He also would have had access to some Italian works in Germany, but the two visits he made to Italy had an enormous influence on him. He wrote that Giovanni Bellini was the oldest and still the best of the artists in Venice. His drawings and engravings show the influence of others, notably Antonio del Pollaiuolo, with his interest in the proportions of the body; Lorenzo di Credi; and Andrea Mantegna, whose work he produced copies of while training. D\u00fcrer probably also visited Padua and Mantua on this trip.\nReturn to Nuremberg (1495\u20131505).\nOn his return to Nuremberg in 1495, D\u00fcrer opened his own workshop (being married was a requirement for this). Over the next five years, his style increasingly integrated Italian influences into underlying Northern forms. Arguably his best works in the first years of the workshop were his woodcut prints, mostly religious, but including secular scenes such as \"The Men's Bath\" (c.\u20091496). These were larger and more finely cut than the great majority of German woodcuts hitherto, and far more complex and balanced in composition.\nIt is now thought unlikely that D\u00fcrer cut any of the woodblocks himself; this task would have been performed by a specialist craftsman. However, his training in Wolgemut's studio, which made many carved and painted altarpieces and both designed and cut woodblocks for woodcut, evidently gave him great understanding of what the technique could be made to produce, and how to work with block cutters. D\u00fcrer either drew his design directly onto the woodblock itself, or glued a paper drawing to the block. Either way, his drawings were destroyed during the cutting of the block.\nHis series of sixteen designs for the \"Apocalypse\" is dated 1498, as is his engraving of \"St. Michael Fighting the Dragon\". He made the first seven scenes of the \"Great Passion\" in the same year, and a little later, a series of eleven on the Holy Family and saints. The \"Seven Sorrows Polyptych\", commissioned by Frederick III of Saxony in 1496, was executed by D\u00fcrer and his assistants c.\u00a01500. In 1502, D\u00fcrer's father died. Around 1503\u20131505 D\u00fcrer produced the first 17 of a set illustrating the \"Life of the Virgin\", which he did not finish for some years. Neither these nor the \"Great Passion\" were published as sets until several years later, but prints were sold individually in considerable numbers.\nDuring the same period D\u00fcrer perfected the difficult art of using the burin to make engravings. Most likely he had learned this skill during his early training with his father, as it was also an essential skill of the goldsmith. In 1496 he executed the \"Prodigal Son\", which the Italian Renaissance art historian Giorgio Vasari singled out for praise some decades later, noting its Germanic quality. He was soon producing some spectacular and original images, notably \"Nemesis\" (1502), \"The Sea Monster\" (1498), and \"Saint Eustace\" (c.\u20091501), with a highly detailed landscape background and animals. His landscapes of this period, such as \"Pond in the Woods\" and \"Willow Mill\", are quite different from his earlier watercolours. There is a much greater emphasis on capturing atmosphere, rather than depicting topography. He made a number of Madonnas, single religious figures, and small scenes with comic peasant figures. Prints are highly portable and these works made D\u00fcrer famous throughout the main artistic centres of Europe within a very few years.\nThe Venetian artist Jacopo de' Barbari, whom D\u00fcrer had met in Venice, visited Nuremberg in 1500, and D\u00fcrer said that he learned much about the new developments in perspective, anatomy, and proportion from him. To D\u00fcrer it seemed that De' Barbari was unwilling to explain everything he knew, so he began his own studies, which would become a lifelong preoccupation. A series of extant drawings show D\u00fcrer's experiments in human proportion, leading to the famous engraving of \"Adam and Eve\" (1504), which shows his subtlety while using the burin in the texturing of flesh surfaces. This is the only existing engraving signed with his full name.\nD\u00fcrer created large numbers of preparatory drawings, especially for his paintings and engravings, and many survive, most famously the \"Betende H\u00e4nde\" (\"Praying Hands\") from circa 1508, a study for an apostle in the Heller altarpiece. He continued to make images in watercolour and bodycolour (usually combined), including a number of still lifes of meadow sections or animals, including his \"Young Hare\" (1502) and the \"Great Piece of Turf\" (1503).\nSecond journey to Italy (1505\u20131507).\nIn Italy, he returned to painting, at first producing a series of works executed in tempera on linen. These include portraits and altarpieces, notably, the Paumgartner altarpiece and the \"Adoration of the Magi\". In early 1506, he returned to Venice and stayed there until the spring of 1507. It was in Venice that he took up the material of blue paper, which he used to execute preparatory drawing for paintings he completed there in 1505\u20131507. By this time D\u00fcrer's engravings had attained great popularity and were being copied. In Venice he was given a valuable commission from the emigrant German community for the church of San Bartolomeo. This was the altar-piece known as the \"Feast of the Rosary\" (or the \"Feast of Rose Garlands\"). It shows Pope Julius II and Emperor Maximilian I, peacefully kneeling in adoration before her throne, both with their crowns taken off. It also includes portraits of members of Venice's German community and of D\u00fcrer himself on the upper right holding a designation of his authorship. Besides the Flemish verism in the depiction of the greenery and the garments, and the use of his own hues, the altar-piece shows a strong Italian influence. It was later acquired by the Emperor Rudolf II and taken to Prague.\nNuremberg and the masterworks (1507\u20131520).\nD\u00fcrer returned to Nuremberg by mid-1507, remaining in Germany until 1520. His reputation had spread throughout Europe and he was on friendly terms and in communication with many of the major artists including Raphael. Between 1507 and 1511 D\u00fcrer worked on some of his most celebrated paintings: \"Adam and Eve\" (1507), \"Martyrdom of the Ten Thousand\" (1508, for Frederick of Saxony), \"Virgin with the Iris\" (1508), the altarpiece \"Assumption of the Virgin\" (1509, for Jacob Heller of Frankfurt), and \"Adoration of the Trinity\" (1511, for Matthaeus Landauer). During this period he also completed two woodcut series, the \"Great Passion\" and the \"Life of the Virgin\", both published in 1511 together with a second edition of the \"Apocalypse\" series. The post-Venetian woodcuts show D\u00fcrer's development of chiaroscuro modelling effects, creating a mid-tone throughout the print to which the highlights and shadows can be contrasted.\nOther works from this period include the thirty-seven \"Little Passion\" woodcuts, published in 1511, and a set of fifteen small engravings on the same theme in 1512. Complaining that painting did not make enough money to justify the time spent when compared to his prints, he produced no paintings from 1513 to 1516. In 1513 and 1514 D\u00fcrer created his three most famous engravings: \"Knight, Death and the Devil\" (1513, probably based on Erasmus's \"Handbook of a Christian Knight\"), \"St. Jerome in His Study\", and the much-debated \"Melencolia\u00a0I\" (both 1514, the year D\u00fcrer's mother died). Further outstanding pen and ink drawings of D\u00fcrer's period of artwork of 1513 were drafts for his friend Pirckheimer. These drafts were later used to design Lusterweibchen chandeliers, combining an antler with a wooden sculpture.\nIn 1515, D\u00fcrer created his \"woodcut of a Rhinoceros\" which had arrived in Lisbon from a written description and sketch by another artist, without ever seeing the animal himself. An image of the Indian rhinoceros, the image has such force that it remains one of his best-known and was still used in some German school science text-books as late as last century. In the years leading to 1520 he produced a wide range of works, including the woodblocks for the first western printed star charts in 1515 and portraits in tempera on linen in 1516. His only experiments with etching came in this period, producing five between 1515\u20131516 and a sixth in 1518; a technique he may have abandoned as unsuited to his aesthetic of methodical, classical form.\nPatronage of Maximilian I.\nFrom 1512, Maximilian I became D\u00fcrer's major patron. He commissioned \"The Triumphal Arch\", a vast work printed from 192 separate blocks, the symbolism of which is partly informed by Pirckheimer's translation of Horapollo's \"Hieroglyphica\". The design program and explanations were devised by Johannes Stabius, the architectural design by the master builder and court-painter J\u00f6rg K\u00f6lderer and the woodcutting itself by Hieronymous Andreae, with D\u00fcrer as designer-in-chief. \"The Arch\" was followed by \"The Triumphal Procession\" completed c.\u20091512.\nD\u00fcrer worked with pen on the marginal images for an edition of the Emperor's printed prayer book; these were quite unknown until facsimiles were published in 1808 as part of the first book published in lithography. D\u00fcrer's work on the book was halted for an unknown reason, and the decoration was continued by artists including Lucas Cranach the Elder and Hans Baldung. D\u00fcrer also made several portraits of the Emperor, including one shortly before Maximilian's death in 1519.\nMaximilian was a very cash-strapped prince who sometimes failed to pay, yet turned out to be D\u00fcrer's most important patron. In his court, artists and learned men were respected, which was not common at that time (later, D\u00fcrer commented that in Germany, as a non-noble, he was treated as a parasite). Pirckheimer (who he met in 1495, before entering the service of Maximilian) was also an important personage in the court and great cultural patron, who had a strong influence on D\u00fcrer as his tutor in classical knowledge and humanistic critical methodology, as well as collaborator. In Maximilian's court, D\u00fcrer also collaborated with a great number of other brilliant artists and scholars of the time who became his friends, like Johannes Stabius, Konrad Peutinger, Conrad Celtes, and Hans Tscherte (an imperial architect).\nD\u00fcrer was proud of his ability. When the emperor tried to sketch D\u00fcrer an idea on charcoal, D\u00fcrer took the material from Maximilian's hand, finished the drawing and told him: \"This is my scepter.\" On another occasion, Maximilian noticed that the ladder D\u00fcrer used was too short and unstable, thus told a noble to hold it for him. The noble refused, saying that it was beneath him to serve a non-noble. Maximilian then came to hold the ladder himself, and told the noble that he could make a noble out of a peasant any day, but he could not make an artist like D\u00fcrer out of a noble.\nThis story and a 1849 painting depicting it by August Siegert have become relevant recently. This nineteenth-century painting shows D\u00fcrer painting a mural at St. Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna. Apparently, this reflects a seventeenth-century \"artists' legend\" about the previously mentioned encounter (in which the emperor held the ladder) \u2013 that this encounter corresponds with the period D\u00fcrer was working on the Viennese murals. In 2020, during restoration work, art connoisseurs discovered a piece of handwriting now attributed to D\u00fcrer, suggesting that the Nuremberg master had actually participated in creating the murals at St. Stephen's Cathedral. In the recent 2022 D\u00fcrer exhibition in Nuremberg (in which the drawing technique is also traced and connected to D\u00fcrer's other works), the identity of the commissioner is discussed. Now the painting of Siegert (and the legend associated with it) is used as evidence to suggest that this was Maximilian. D\u00fcrer is historically recorded to have entered the emperor's service in 1511, and the mural's date is calculated to be around 1505, but it is possible they have known and worked with each other earlier than 1511.\nCartographic and astronomical works.\nD\u00fcrer's exploration of space led to a relationship and cooperation with the court astronomer Johannes Stabius. Stabius also often acted as D\u00fcrer's and Maximilian's go-between for their financial problems.\nIn 1515 D\u00fcrer and Stabius created the first world map projected on a solid geometric sphere. Also in 1515, Stabius, D\u00fcrer and the astronomer Konrad Heinfogel produced the first planispheres of both southern and northerns hemispheres, as well as the first printed celestial maps, which prompted the revival of interest in the field of uranometry throughout Europe.\nJourney to the Netherlands (1520\u20131521).\nMaximilian's death came at a time when D\u00fcrer was concerned he was losing \"my sight and freedom of hand\" (perhaps caused by arthritis) and increasingly affected by the writings of Martin Luther. In July 1520 D\u00fcrer made his fourth and last major journey, to renew the Imperial pension Maximilian had given him and to secure the patronage of the new emperor, Charles V, who was to be crowned at Aachen. D\u00fcrer journeyed with his wife and her maid via the Rhine to Cologne and then to Antwerp, where he was well received and produced numerous drawings in silverpoint, chalk and charcoal. In addition to attending the coronation, he visited Cologne (where he admired the painting of Stefan Lochner), Nijmegen, 's-Hertogenbosch, Bruges (where he saw Michelangelo's \"Madonna of Bruges\"), Ghent (where he saw Jan van Eyck's \"Ghent Altarpiece\"), and Zeeland.\nD\u00fcrer took a large stock of prints with him and wrote in his diary to whom he gave, exchanged or sold them, and for how much. This provides rare information of the monetary value placed on prints at this time. Unlike paintings, their sale was very rarely documented. While providing valuable documentary evidence, D\u00fcrer's Netherlandish diary also reveals that the trip was not a profitable one. For example, D\u00fcrer offered his last portrait of Maximilian to his daughter, Margaret of Austria, but eventually traded the picture for some white cloth after Margaret disliked the portrait and declined to accept it. During this trip he also met Bernard van Orley, Jan Provoost, Gerard Horenbout, Jean Mone, Joachim Patinir and Tommaso Vincidor, though he did not, it seems, meet Quentin Matsys.\nHaving secured his pension, D\u00fcrer returned home in July 1521, having caught an undetermined illness, which afflicted him for the rest of his life, and greatly reduced his rate of work.\nFinal years, Nuremberg (1521\u20131528).\nOn his return to Nuremberg, D\u00fcrer worked on a number of grand projects with religious themes, including a crucifixion scene and a , though neither was completed. This may have been due in part to his declining health, but perhaps also because of the time he gave to the preparation of his theoretical works on geometry and perspective, the proportions of men and horses, and fortification.\nHowever, one consequence of this shift in emphasis was that during the last years of his life, D\u00fcrer produced comparatively little as an artist. In painting, there was only a portrait of , a , , and two panels showing St. John with St. Peter and St. Paul with St. Mark beside him. This last great work, \"The Four Apostles\", was given by D\u00fcrer to the City of Nuremberg\u2014although he was given 100 guilders in return.\nAs for engravings, D\u00fcrer's work was restricted to portraits and illustrations for his treatise. The portraits include his boyhood friend Willibald Pirckheimer, Cardinal-Elector Albert of Mainz; Frederick the Wise, elector of Saxony; Philipp Melanchthon, and Erasmus of Rotterdam. For those of the Cardinal, Melanchthon, and D\u00fcrer's final major work, a drawn portrait of the Nuremberg patrician Ulrich Starck, D\u00fcrer depicted the sitters in profile.\nDespite complaining of his lack of a formal classical education, D\u00fcrer was greatly interested in intellectual matters and learned much from Willibald Pirckheimer, whom he no doubt consulted on the content of many of his images. He also derived great satisfaction from his friendships and correspondence with Erasmus and other scholars. D\u00fcrer succeeded in producing two books during his lifetime. \"The Four Books on Measurement\" were published at Nuremberg in 1525 and was the first book for adults on mathematics in German, as well as being cited later by Galileo and Kepler. The other, a work on city fortifications, was published in 1527. \"The Four Books on Human Proportion\" were published posthumously, shortly after his death in 1528.\nD\u00fcrer died in Nuremberg at the age of 56, leaving an estate valued at 6,874 florins \u2013 a considerable sum. He is buried in the Johannisfriedhof cemetery. His large house (purchased in 1509 from the heirs of the astronomer Bernhard Walther), where his workshop was located and where his widow lived until her death in 1539, remains a prominent Nuremberg landmark.\nD\u00fcrer and the Reformation.\nD\u00fcrer's writings suggest that he may have been sympathetic to Luther's ideas, though it is unclear if he ever left the Catholic Church. D\u00fcrer wrote of his desire to draw Luther in his diary in 1520: \"And God help me that I may go to Dr. Martin Luther; thus I intend to make a portrait of him with great care and engrave him on a copper plate to create a lasting memorial of the Christian man who helped me overcome so many difficulties.\" In a letter to Nicholas Kratzer in 1524, D\u00fcrer wrote, \"because of our Christian faith we have to stand in scorn and danger, for we are reviled and called heretics\". Most tellingly, Pirckheimer wrote in a letter to Johann Tscherte in 1530: \"I confess that in the beginning I believed in Luther, like our Albert of blessed memory ... but as anyone can see, the situation has become worse.\" D\u00fcrer may even have contributed to the Nuremberg City Council's mandating Lutheran sermons and services in March 1525. Notably, D\u00fcrer had contacts with various reformers, such as Zwingli, Andreas Karlstadt, Melanchthon, Erasmus and Cornelius Grapheus from whom D\u00fcrer received Luther's \"Babylonian Captivity\" in 1520. Yet Erasmus and C. Grapheus are better said to be Catholic change agents. Also, from 1525, \"the year that saw the peak and collapse of the Peasants' War, the artist can be seen to distance himself somewhat from the [Lutheran] movement...\"\nHowever, D\u00fcrer's later works have also been claimed to show Protestant sympathies. His 1523 \"The Last Supper\" woodcut has often been understood to have an evangelical theme, focusing as it does on Christ espousing the Gospel, as well as the inclusion of the Eucharistic cup, perhaps alluding to tenets of Protestant utraquism, although this interpretation has been questioned. The delaying of the engraving of St. Philip, completed in 1523 but not distributed until 1526, may have been due to D\u00fcrer's uneasiness with images of saints; even if D\u00fcrer was not an iconoclast, in his last years he evaluated and questioned the role of art in religion.\nTheoretical works.\nIn all his theoretical works, in order to communicate his theories in the German language rather than in Latin, D\u00fcrer used graphic expressions based on a vernacular, craftsmen's language. For example, (\"snail-line\") was his term for a spiral form. Thus, D\u00fcrer contributed to the expansion in German prose which Luther had begun with his translation of the Bible.\n\"Four Books on Measurement\".\nD\u00fcrer's work on geometry is called the \"Four Books on Measurement\" (\"Underweysung der Messung mit dem Zirckel und Richtscheyt\" or \"Instructions for Measuring with Compass and Ruler\"). The first book focuses on linear geometry. D\u00fcrer's geometric constructions include helices, conchoids and epicycloids. He also draws on Apollonius, and Johannes Werner's of 1522.\nThe second book moves onto two-dimensional geometry, i.e. the construction of regular polygons. Here D\u00fcrer favours the methods of Ptolemy over Euclid. The third book applies these principles of geometry to architecture, engineering and typography. In architecture D\u00fcrer cites Vitruvius but elaborates his own classical designs and columns. In typography, D\u00fcrer depicts the geometric construction of the Latin alphabet, relying on Italian precedent. However, his construction of the Gothic alphabet is based upon an entirely different modular system. The fourth book completes the progression of the first and second by moving to three-dimensional forms and the construction of polyhedra. Here D\u00fcrer discusses the five Platonic solids, as well as seven Archimedean semi-regular solids, and several of his own invention.\n\"Four Books on Human Proportion\".\nD\u00fcrer's work on human proportions is called the \"Four Books on Human Proportion\" (\"Vier B\u00fccher von menschlicher Proportion\") of 1528. The first book was mainly composed by 1512/13 and completed by 1523, showing five differently constructed types of both male and female figures, all parts of the body expressed in fractions of the total height. D\u00fcrer based these constructions on both Vitruvius and empirical observations of \"two to three hundred living persons\", in his own words. The second book includes eight further types, broken down not into fractions but an Albertian system, which D\u00fcrer probably learned from Francesco di Giorgio's of 1525. In the third book, D\u00fcrer gives principles by which the proportions of the figures can be modified, including the mathematical simulation of convex and concave mirrors; here D\u00fcrer also deals with human physiognomy. The fourth book is devoted to the theory of movement.\nAppended to the last book, however, is a self-contained essay on aesthetics, which D\u00fcrer worked on between 1512 and 1528, and it is here that we learn of his theories concerning 'ideal beauty'. D\u00fcrer rejected Alberti's concept of an objective beauty, proposing a relativist notion of beauty based on variety. Nonetheless, D\u00fcrer still believed that truth was hidden within nature, and that there were rules which ordered beauty, even though he found it difficult to define the criteria for such a code. In 1512/13 his three criteria were function (\"Nutz\"), na\u00efve approval (\"Wohlgefallen\") and the happy medium (\"Mittelmass\"). However, unlike Alberti and Leonardo, D\u00fcrer was most troubled by understanding not just the abstract notions of beauty but also as to how an artist can create beautiful images. Between 1512 and the final draft in 1528, D\u00fcrer's belief developed from an understanding of human creativity as spontaneous or inspired to a concept of 'selective inward synthesis'. In other words, that an artist builds on a wealth of visual experiences in order to imagine beautiful things. D\u00fcrer's belief in the abilities of a single artist over inspiration prompted him to assert that \"one man may sketch something with his pen on half a sheet of paper in one day, or may cut it into a tiny piece of wood with his little iron, and it turns out to be better and more artistic than another's work at which its author labours with the utmost diligence for a whole year\".\n\"Book on Fortification\".\nIn 1527, D\u00fcrer also published \"Various Lessons on the Fortification of Cities, Castles, and Localities\" (\"Etliche Underricht zu Befestigung der Stett, Schloss und Flecken\"). It was printed in Nuremberg, probably by Hieronymus Andreae and reprinted in 1603 by Johan Janssenn in Arnhem. In 1535 it was also translated into Latin as \"On Cities, Forts, and Castles, Designed and Strengthened by Several Manners: Presented for the Most Necessary Accommodation of War\" (\"De vrbibus, arcibus, castellisque condendis, ac muniendis rationes aliquot : praesenti bellorum necessitati accommodatissimae\"), published by Christian Wechel (Wecheli/Wechelus) in Paris.\nFencing.\nD\u00fcrer created many sketches and woodcuts of soldiers and knights over the course of his life. His most significant martial works, however, were made in 1512 as part of his efforts to secure the patronage of Maximilian I. Using existing manuscripts from the \"Nuremberg Group\" as his reference, his workshop produced the extensive \"\u039f\u03c0\u03bb\u03bf\u03b4\u03b9\u03b4\u03b1\u03c3\u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03b9\u03b1 sive Armorvm Tractandorvm Meditatio Alberti Dvreri\" (\"Weapon Training, or Albrecht D\u00fcrer's Meditation on the Handling of Weapons\", MS 26-232). Another manuscript based on the Nuremberg texts as well as one of Hans Talhoffer's works, the untitled \"Berlin Picture Book\" (Libr.Pict.A.83), is also thought to have originated in his workshop around this time. These sketches and watercolours show the same careful attention to detail and human proportion as D\u00fcrer's other work, and his illustrations of grappling, long sword, dagger, and messer are among the highest-quality in any fencing manual.\nLegacy and influence.\nD\u00fcrer exerted a huge influence on the artists of succeeding generations, especially in printmaking, the medium through which his contemporaries mostly experienced his art, as his paintings were predominantly in private collections located in only a few cities. His success in spreading his reputation across Europe through prints was undoubtedly an inspiration for major artists such as Raphael, Titian, and Parmigianino, all of whom collaborated with printmakers to promote and distribute their work.\nHis engravings seem to have had an intimidating effect upon his German successors; the \"Little Masters\" who attempted few large engravings but continued D\u00fcrer's themes in small, rather cramped compositions. Lucas van Leyden was the only Northern European engraver to successfully continue to produce large engravings in the first third of the 16th century. The generation of Italian engravers who trained in the shadow of D\u00fcrer all either directly copied parts of his landscape backgrounds (Giulio Campagnola, Giovanni Battista Palumba, Benedetto Montagna and Cristofano Robetta), or whole prints (Marcantonio Raimondi and Agostino Veneziano). However, D\u00fcrer's influence became less dominant after 1515, when Marcantonio perfected his new engraving style, which in turn travelled over the Alps to also dominate Northern engraving.\nD\u00fcrer had relatively little influence in Italy, where probably only his altarpiece in Venice was seen, and his German successors were less effective in blending German and Italian styles. His intense and self-dramatizing self-portraits have continued to have a strong influence up to the present, especially on painters in the 19th and 20th century who desired a more dramatic portrait style. D\u00fcrer has never fallen from critical favour, and there have been significant revivals of interest in his works in Germany in the \"D\u00fcrer Renaissance\" of about 1570 to 1630, in the early nineteenth century, and in German nationalism from 1870 to 1945.\nThe Lutheran Church commemorates D\u00fcrer annually on 6 April, along with Michelangelo, Lucas Cranach the Elder and Hans Burgkmair.\nIn 1993, two of D\u00fcrer's drawings \u2013 \"Women's Bathhouse\", valued at about $10 million, and \"Sitting Mary and Child\" \u2013 along with other works of art were stolen from the National Art Museum of Azerbaijan. The drawings were later recovered.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2403", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2403", "title": "Australian rules football", "text": "Contact sport\nAustralian football, also called Australian rules football or Aussie rules, or more simply football or footy, is a contact sport played between two teams of 18 players on an oval field, often a modified cricket ground. Points are scored by kicking the ovoid ball between the central goal posts (worth six points), or between a central and outer post (worth one point, otherwise known as a \"behind\").\nDuring general play, players may position themselves anywhere on the field and use any part of their bodies to move the ball. The primary methods are kicking, handballing and running with the ball. There are rules on how the ball can be handled; for example, players running with the ball must intermittently bounce or touch it on the ground. Throwing the ball is not allowed, and players must not get caught holding the ball. A distinctive feature of the game is the mark, where players anywhere on the field who catch the ball from a kick (with specific conditions) are awarded unimpeded possession. Possession of the ball is in dispute at all times except when a free kick or mark is paid. Players can tackle using their hands or use their whole body to obstruct opponents. Dangerous physical contact (such as pushing an opponent in the back), interference when marking, and deliberately slowing the play are discouraged with free kicks, distance penalties, or suspension for a certain number of matches depending on the severity of the infringement. The game features frequent physical contests, spectacular marking, fast movement of both players and the ball, and high scoring.\nThe sport's origins can be traced to football matches played in Melbourne, Victoria, in 1858, inspired by English public school football games. Seeking to develop a game more suited to adults and Australian conditions, the Melbourne Football Club published the first laws of Australian football in May 1859.\nAustralian football has the highest spectator attendance of all sports in Australia while the Australian Football League (AFL), the sport's only fully professional competition, is the nation's wealthiest sporting body. The AFL Grand Final, held annually at the 100,000-capacity Melbourne Cricket Ground, is the highest-attended club championship event of any football code. The sport is also played at amateur level in many countries and in several variations. Its rules are governed by the AFL Commission with the advice of the AFL's Laws of the Game Committee.\nName.\nAustralian football is known by several nicknames, including Australian rules football, Aussie rules, football and footy. In some regions, where other codes of football are more popular, the sport is most often called AFL after the Australian Football League, while the league itself also uses this name for local competitions in some areas.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nPrimitive forms of football were played sporadically in the Australian colonies in the first half of the 19th century. Compared to cricket and horse racing, football was considered a mere \"amusement\" by colonists at the time, and while little is known about these early one-off games, evidence does not support a causal link with Australian football. In Melbourne, in 1858, in a move that would help to shape Australian football in its formative years, private schools (then termed \"public schools\" in accordance with nomenclature in England) began organising football games inspired by precedents at English public schools. The earliest match, held on 15 June, was between Melbourne Grammar and St Kilda Grammar.\nOn 10 July 1858, the Melbourne-based \"Bell's Life in Victoria and Sporting Chronicle\" published a letter by Tom Wills, captain of the Victoria cricket team, calling for the formation of a \"foot-ball club\" with a \"code of laws\" to keep cricketers fit during winter. Born in Australia, Wills played a nascent form of rugby football while a pupil at Rugby School in England, and returned to his homeland a star athlete and cricketer. Two weeks later, Wills' friend, cricketer Jerry Bryant, posted an advertisement for a scratch match at the Richmond Paddock adjoining the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG). This was the first of several \"kickabouts\" held that year involving members of the Melbourne Cricket Club, including Wills, Bryant, W. J. Hammersley and J. B. Thompson. Trees were used as goalposts and play typically lasted an entire afternoon. Without an agreed-upon code of laws, some players were guided by rules they had learned in the British Isles, \"others by no rules at all\". Another milestone in 1858 was a 40-a-side match played under experimental rules between Melbourne Grammar and Scotch College, held at the Richmond Paddock. Umpired by Wills and teacher John Macadam, it began on 7 August and continued over two subsequent Saturdays, ending in a draw with each side kicking one goal. It is commemorated with a statue outside the MCG, and the two schools have since competed annually in the Cordner\u2013Eggleston Cup, the world's oldest continuous football competition.\nSince the 1920s, it has been suggested that Australian football may have been derived from the Irish sport of Gaelic football. However, there is no archival evidence in favour of a Gaelic influence, and the style of play shared between the two modern codes appeared in Australia long before the Irish game evolved in a similar direction. Another theory, first proposed in 1983, posits that Wills, having grown up among Aboriginals in Victoria, may have seen or played the Aboriginal ball game of Marn Grook, and incorporated some of its features into early Australian football. There is only circumstantial evidence that he knew of the game, and according to biographer Greg de Moore's research, Wills was \"almost solely influenced by his experience at Rugby School\".\nFirst rules.\nA loosely organised Melbourne side, captained by Wills, played against other football enthusiasts in the winter and spring of 1858. The following year, on 14 May, the Melbourne Football Club was officially established, making it one of the world's oldest football clubs. Three days later, Wills, Hammersley, Thompson and teacher Thomas H. Smith met near the MCG at the Parade Hotel, owned by Bryant, and drafted ten rules: \"The Rules of the Melbourne Football Club\". These are the laws from which Australian football evolved. The club aimed to create a simple code suited to the hard playing surfaces around Melbourne, and to eliminate the roughest aspects of English school games\u2014such as \"hacking\" (shin-kicking) in Rugby School football\u2014to reduce the risk of injuries to working men. In another significant departure from English public school football, the Melbourne rules omitted any offside law. \"The new code was as much a reaction against the school games as influenced by them\", writes Mark Pennings. The rules were distributed throughout the colony; Thompson in particular did much to promote the new code in his capacity as a journalist.\nEarly competition in Victoria.\nFollowing Melbourne's lead, Geelong and Melbourne University also formed football clubs in 1859. While many early Victorian teams participated in one-off matches, most had not yet formed clubs for regular competition. A South Yarra club devised its own rules. To ensure the supremacy of the Melbourne rules, the first club-level competition in Australia, the Caledonian Society's Challenge Cup (1861\u201364), stipulated that only the Melbourne rules were to be used. This law was reinforced by the Athletic Sports Committee (ASC), which ran a variation of the Challenge Cup in 1865\u201366. With input from other clubs, the rules underwent several minor revisions, establishing a uniform code known as \"Victorian rules\". In 1866, the \"first distinctively Victorian rule\", the running bounce, was formalised at a meeting of club delegates chaired by H. C. A. Harrison, an influential pioneer who took up football in 1859 at the invitation of Wills, his cousin.\nThe game around this time was defensive and low-scoring, played low to the ground in congested rugby-style scrimmages. The typical match was a 20-per-side affair, played with a ball that was roughly spherical, and lasted until a team scored two goals. The shape of the playing field was not standardised; matches often took place in rough, tree-spotted public parks, most notably the Richmond Paddock (Yarra Park), known colloquially as the Melbourne Football Ground. Wills argued that the turf of cricket fields would benefit from being trampled upon by footballers in winter, and, as early as 1859, football was allowed on the MCG. However, cricket authorities frequently prohibited football on their grounds until the 1870s, when they saw an opportunity to capitalise on the sport's growing popularity. Football gradually adapted to an oval-shaped field, and most grounds in Victoria expanded to accommodate the dual purpose\u2014a situation that continues to this day.\nSpread to other colonies.\nFootball became organised in South Australia in 1860 with the formation of the Adelaide Football Club, the oldest football club in Australia outside Victoria. It devised its own rules, and, along with other Adelaide-based clubs, played a variety of codes until 1876, when they uniformly adopted most of the Victorian rules, with South Australian football pioneer Charles Kingston noting their similarity to \"the old Adelaide rules\". Similarly, Tasmanian clubs quarrelled over different rules until they adopted a slightly modified version of the Victorian game in 1879. The South Australian Football Association (SAFA), the sport's first governing body, formed on 30 April 1877, firmly establishing Victorian rules as the preferred code in that colony. The Victorian Football Association (VFA) formed the following month.\nClubs began touring the colonies in the late 1870s, and in 1879 the first intercolonial match took place in Melbourne between Victoria and South Australia. In 1883, delegates representing the football associations of South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Queensland met to standardise the code across Australia. New rules such as holding the ball led to a \"golden era\" of fast, long-kicking and high-marking football in the 1880s, a time which also saw players such as George Coulthard achieve superstardom, as well as the rise of professionalism, particularly in Victoria and Western Australia, where the code took hold during a series of gold rushes. Likewise, when New Zealand experienced a gold rush, the sport arrived with a rapid influx of Australian miners. Now known as Australian rules or Australasian rules, the sport became the first football code to develop mass spectator appeal, attracting world record attendances for sports viewing and gaining a reputation as \"the people's game\".\nAustralian rules football reached Queensland and New South Wales as early as 1866; the sport experienced a period of dominance in the former, and in the latter, several regions remain strongholds of Australian rules, such as the Riverina. However, by the late 1880s, rugby football had become the dominant code in both colonies, as well as in New Zealand. This shift was largely due to rugby's spread with British migration, regional rivalries and the lack of strong local governing bodies. In the case of Sydney, denial of access to grounds, the influence of university headmasters from Britain who favoured rugby, and the loss of players to other codes inhibited the game's growth.\nEmergence of the VFL.\nIn 1896, delegates from six of the wealthiest VFA clubs\u2014Carlton, Essendon, Fitzroy, Geelong, Melbourne and South Melbourne\u2014met to discuss the formation of a breakaway professional competition. Later joined by Collingwood and St Kilda, the clubs formed the Victorian Football League (VFL), which held its inaugural season in 1897. The VFL's popularity grew rapidly as it made several innovations, such as instituting a finals system, reducing teams from 20 to 18 players, and introducing the behind as a score. Richmond and University joined the VFL in 1908, and by 1925, with the addition of Hawthorn, Footscray and North Melbourne, it had become the preeminent league in the country and would take a leading role in many aspects of the sport.\nInterstate football and the World Wars.\nThe time around the federation of the Australian colonies in 1901 saw Australian rules undergo a revival in New South Wales, New Zealand and Queensland. In 1903, both the Queensland Australian Football League and the NSW Australian Football Association were established, and in New Zealand, as it moved towards becoming a dominion, leagues were also established in the major cities. This renewed popularity helped encourage the formation of the Australasian Football Council, which in 1908 in Melbourne staged the first national interstate competition, the Jubilee Australasian Football Carnival, with teams representing each state and New Zealand.\nThe game was also established early on in the new territories. In the new national capital Canberra both soccer and rugby had a head start, but following the first matches in 1911, Australian rules football in the Australian Capital Territory became a major participation sport. By 1981 it had become much neglected and quickly lagged behind the other football codes. Australian rules football in the Northern Territory began shortly after the outbreak of the war in 1916 with the first match in Darwin. The game went on to become the most popular sport in the Territory and build the highest participation rate for the sport nationally.\nBoth World War I and World War II had a devastating effect on Australian football and on Australian sport in general. While scratch matches were played by Australian \"diggers\" in remote locations around the world, the game lost many of its great players to wartime service. Some clubs and competitions never fully recovered. Between 1914 and 1915, a proposed hybrid code of Australian football and rugby league, the predominant code of football in New South Wales and Queensland, was trialled without success. In Queensland, the state league went into recess for the duration of the war. VFL club University left the league and went into recess due to severe casualties. The West Australian Football League (WAFL) lost two clubs and the SANFL was suspended for one year in 1916 due to heavy club losses. The Anzac Day match, the annual game between Essendon and Collingwood on Anzac Day, is one example of how the war continues to be remembered in the football community.\nThe role of the Australian National Football Council (ANFC) was primarily to govern the game at a national level and to facilitate interstate representative and club competition. In 1968, the ANFC revived the Championship of Australia, a competition first held in 1888 between the premiers of the VFA and SAFA. Although clubs from other states were at times invited, the final was almost always between the premiers from the two strongest state competitions of the time\u2014South Australia and Victoria\u2014with Adelaide hosting most of the matches at the request of the SAFA/SANFL. The last match took place in 1976, with North Adelaide being the last non-Victorian winner in 1972. Between 1976 and 1987, the ANFC, and later the Australian Football Championships (AFC) ran a night series, which invited clubs and representative sides from around the country to participate in a knock-out tournament parallel to the premiership seasons, which Victorian sides still dominated.\nWith the lack of international competition, state representative matches were regarded with great importance. Due in part to the VFL poaching talent from other states, Victoria dominated interstate matches for three-quarters of a century. State of Origin rules, introduced in 1977, stipulated that rather than representing the state of their adopted club, players would return to play for the state they were first recruited in. This instantly broke Victoria's stranglehold over state titles and Western Australia and South Australia began to win more of their games against Victoria. Both New South Wales and Tasmania scored surprise victories at home against Victoria in 1990.\nTowards a national league.\nThe term \"Barassi Line\", named after VFL star Ron Barassi, was coined by scholar Ian Turner in 1978 to describe the \"fictitious geographical barrier\" separating the rugby-following parts of New South Wales and Queensland from the rest of the country, where Australian football reigned. It became a reference point for the expansion of Australian football and for establishing a national league.\nThe way the game was played had changed dramatically due to innovative coaching tactics, with the phasing out of many of the game's kicking styles and the increasing use of handball; while presentation was influenced by television.\nIn 1982, in a move that heralded big changes within the sport, one of the original VFL clubs, South Melbourne, relocated to Sydney and became known as the Sydney Swans. In the late 1980s, due to the poor financial standing of many of the Victorian clubs, and a similar situation existing in Western Australia in the sport, the VFL pursued a more national competition. Two more non-Victorian clubs, West Coast and Brisbane, joined the league in 1987 generating more than $8\u00a0million in license revenue for the Victorian clubs and increasing broadcast revenues which helped the Victorian clubs survive. In their early years, the Sydney and Brisbane clubs struggled both on and off-field because the substantial TV revenues they generated by playing on a Sunday went to the VFL. To protect these revenues the VFL granted significant draft concessions and financial aid to keep the expansion clubs competitive.\nThe VFL changed its name to the Australian Football League (AFL) for the 1990 season, and over the next decade, three non-Victorian clubs gained entry: Adelaide (1991), Fremantle (1995) and the SANFL's Port Adelaide (1997), the only pre-existing club outside Victoria to join the league. In 2011 and 2012, respectively, two new non-Victorian clubs were added to the competition: Gold Coast and Greater Western Sydney. The AFL, currently with 18 member clubs, is the sport's elite competition and most powerful body. Following the emergence of the AFL, state leagues were quickly relegated to a second-tier status. The VFA merged with the former VFL reserves competition in 1998, adopting the VFL name. State of Origin also declined in importance, especially after an increasing number of player withdrawals. The AFL turned its focus to the annual International Rules Series against Ireland in 1998 before abolishing State of Origin the following year. State and territorial leagues still contest interstate matches, as do AFL Women players.\nIn the 2010s, the AFL signalled further attempts at expanding into markets outside Australian football's traditional heartlands by hosting home-and-away matches in New Zealand, followed by China. After several failed bids since the early 1990s for a Tasmania-based AFL team, the Tasmania Football Club secured the 19th AFL license in 2023, and is set to compete by 2028.\nLaws of the game.\nPlayers and equipment.\nIn a standard match, a team may consist of anywhere between 14 and 18 players who may be permitted on the playing surface at any given time. Each team may have up to four interchange (reserve) players who may be swapped for those on the field at any time during the game, although some leagues in less populated areas may use as few as 12 players. In addition, some leagues notably including the AFL, have each team designate one additional player as a substitute who can be used to make a single permanent exchange of players during a game for either medical or tactical reasons.\nPlayers on the playing surface can be swapped with those on the interchange bench at any time. They must though pass through a designated \"Interchange Area\". In the event a player fails to pass through this area correctly, or if too many players from one team are found to be on the ground at a time, a free kick will be awarded to the opposing side.\nWhile there is no set uniform, the basic equipment for Australian football consists of a guernsey, shorts, socks and football boots (though specialised boots are more often used which have a curved toe for punting and metal studs are officially banned), with additional pieces of apparel such as headbands and gloves additionally being permitted. Players may wear certain pieces of protective equipment, such as helmets or arm guards, if approved by the relevant controlling body. Mouthguards are strongly recommended for all players.\nPlayers are not permitted to wear jewellery, or other materials which the field umpire has deemed to be either potentially dangerous or increase the risk of injury to other players.\nBall.\nAustralian rules football is played with an ellipsoid ball, between in long circumference, and in short circumference. For women's competitions, a smaller ball size of is used. The ball must be inflated to a pressure of . There are no defined laws regarding what material a ball must be made from, but standard AFL match-used balls are produced by Sherrin using cowhide leather.\nWhile there is no standard colour of the ball, red and yellow are most common and the only colours used at AFL level. Yellow is used for games beginning after 3\u00a0pm or in an enclosed stadium, due to its greater visibility, and to assist score reviews.\nField.\nUnlike other forms of football which are played on rectangular fields, Australian rules football playing fields are oval-shaped, and are between long and wide.\nAt either end of the field, two sets of posts are erected in a straight line to indicate the scoring areas on the field, each with two kinds of posts, named the goal posts and the behind posts respectively. The goal posts are placed first, located apart from each other, with a behind post being placed a further 6.4 metres to the side of each goal post. The name for the field line between two goal posts is known as the Goal Line.\nAround the perimeter of the field, two white lines are drawn between the set of behind posts in an arc-shape, marking the field of play.\nOther field markings include:\nThe 50m arcs, centre square, centre circle and goal square are used at the beginning of each quarter or after each goal. Each team is permitted a maximum of six players in each 50m arc, with one in the goal square and four players in the centre square with one in the centre circle. If this is breached, a free kick is awarded.\nMatch duration.\nA game lasts for 80 minutes, split into four quarters consisting of 20 minutes playing time, with the clock being stopped for stoppages in play such as scores, or at the umpire's discretion, e.g. for serious injury. Leagues may choose to employ shorter quarters of play at their discretion, such as the AFLW using 17 minutes per quarter.\nFor any given match, two timekeepers are appointed to officiate the duration. The timekeepers record all relevant statistics for the match, such as total quarter duration and score by each team. Additionally timekeepers are required to sound a siren prior to and at the conclusion of each quarter until such time they are acknowledged by the field umpires. To stop and recommence the clock, the field umpires are required to signal to the timekeepers to indicate when the clock should be stopped or restarted.\nBetween each quarter, a break is observed to allow players a rest period. Two six-minute breaks are observed between the first and second quarters, and the third and fourth quarters. A longer 20-minute break is observed between the second and third quarter, commonly known as \"half-time\".\nOfficiation.\nEach game is officiated by at least five match officials, known as an umpire. These match officials are placed into three categories based upon their roles and responsibilities, with varying minimum numbers of Umpires required depending on position:\nAt AFL level, a video score review system is utilised. Only umpires are permitted to request a review, and only scoring shots and potential scoring shots are permitted to be reviewed.\nGame skills.\nBall movement.\nAn Australian rules football may only be propelled forward in a select few ways as defined by the Laws of Australian Football, published by the AFL. The ball can be propelled in any direction by way of a kick or a clenched fist (called a handball)\u2014deemed a correct disposal. Failure to dispose of the ball in one of these two methods will result in a free kick to the opposing team. If the ball is not currently in a player's possession, it can be moved legally through the usage of other means, such as punching. While in possession of the ball, players may run with the ball, but are required to either bounce or touch the ball on the ground at least once every .\nTackling.\nTackling is a technique employed by players used to force opposition players to dispose of the ball when they are in possession. Failure to dispose of the ball when legally tackled may see the player penalised for 'holding the ball', except if the umpire deems there was a lack of prior opportunity to do so.\nThe ball carrier may only be tackled between the shoulders and knees from the front or side. If the player forcefully contacts the opposing in the back while performing a tackle, the opposition player will be penalised for a push in the back. If the opposition tackles the player with possession below the knees (a \"low tackle\" or a \"trip\") or above the shoulders (a \"high tackle\"), the team with possession of the football gets a free kick. Furthermore, tackles deemed to be dangerous by the umpire and those conducted from front-on while an opposition player has their head over the football are deemed to be prohibited contact, and will incur a free kick against the offending player.\nAdditionally, players may perform a technique known shepherding when the ball is within of an opposition player. Shepherding involves the use of a player's body to push, bump or otherwise block an opposition player, providing they do not have possession of the ball.\nMarking.\nIf a player takes possession of the ball that has travelled more than from another player's kick, by way of a catch within the field of play, it is deemed as a \"mark\". To be awarded a mark, it must be deemed that the player sufficiently controlled the ball and took possession prior to it being touched, touching the ground, or in the case of a contest, being spoiled by an opponent. Upon a mark being taken, one opposition player may choose to stand on the point on the field where the mark was taken, known as \"the mark\". When a mark is taken, a small protected zone is established on the field, extending either side of \"the mark\" and the player who marked the ball, with a small protected corridor between \"the mark\" and the player. The opposition player is permitted to jump, but is not allowed to move from their position on \"the mark\". Any other movements result in a distance penalty (50 metres in the AFL). The player who was awarded the mark may then choose to either dispose of the ball over \"the mark\" or may choose to attempt disposal via a different method, in which case the field umpire will call \"play on\"\u2014a verbal instruction to continue play. \"Play on\" may also be called if the umpire deems the player awarded the mark to be taking an unreasonable amount of time to dispose of the football.\nOnce the player has disposed of the ball, or \"play on\" is called, normal play resumes.\nRucking.\nRucking is the only specialist skill and is performed by a ruck, the term for designated players from each side to which the umpire sends the ball to commence play. Only a nominated ruck may contest ball-ups and throw-ins. They are the only player allowed within the 10 metre circle at a centre bounce. Functionally the role is analogous to a basketball center and as such rucks are typically the tallest player on the team. Lifting teammates is not allowed so the ruck may only jump to reach the ball. If the ruck does not take possession of the football, it must be tapped or fisted, which is known as a hit-out. An effective hit-out that passes the ball to a teammate is known as a hit-out to advantage.\nMisconduct.\nIn the event a player breaks a rule, a free kick is awarded to the opposing team, from the location that the misconduct occurred, or the ball's current location\u2014whichever is closer to the team's scoring zone. As when a mark is taken, this location is called \"the mark\", and the same protections regarding the space apply.\nIn the event a player engages in unsportsmanlike conduct after a free kick has been awarded or a mark has been paid to the opposing team, the umpire may instead award a 50-metre penalty. When imposed, the field umpire will advance \"the mark\" an additional down the field or to the goal line, whichever is closer. Additional 50-metre penalties may be awarded if the behaviour continues after the initial penalty.\nThe laws of the game allow umpires to send off players for egregious foul play, although this law does not apply to the AFL and is largely only used at the local level.\nScoring.\nThere are two types of scoring shots in Australian football: goals and behinds. A \"goal\" is worth six points, and is scored when the football is propelled between the goal posts and across the goal line at any height by way of a kick from the attacking team. It may touch the ground, but must not have been touched by any player from either team or a goalpost prior to crossing the goal line.\nA \"behind\" is worth one point and is scored when:\nA behind is also awarded to the team if the ball touches any part of an opposition player, including a foot, before passing across their goal or behind line. A free kick is awarded against any player who is deemed to have deliberately rushed a behind.\nThe team that has scored the most points at the end of play wins the game. If the scores are level on points at the end of play, then the game is a draw; extra time applies only during finals matches in some competitions.\nAs an example of a score report, consider a match between Sydney and Geelong with the former as the home team. Sydney's score of 17 goals and 5 behinds equates to 107 points. Geelong's score of 10 goals and 17 behinds equates to a 77-point tally. Sydney wins the match by a margin of 30 points. Such a result would be written as:\n\"Sydney 17.5 (107) defeated Geelong 10.17 (77)\".\nAnd spoken as:\n\"Sydney, seventeen-five, one hundred and seven, defeated Geelong, ten-seventeen, seventy-seven\".\nAdditionally, it can be said that:\n\"Sydney defeated Geelong by 30 points\".\nThe home team is typically listed first and the visiting side is listed second.\nA draw would be written as:\n\"Greater Western Sydney 10.8 (68) drew with Geelong 10.8 (68)\".\nGoverning bodies and competitions.\nThe football season proper is from March to August (early autumn to late winter in Australia) with finals being held in September and October. In the tropics, the game is sometimes played in the wet season (October to March).\nThe AFL is recognised by the Australian Sports Commission as being the National Sporting Organisation for Australian football. There are also seven state/territory-based organisations in Australia, all of which are affiliated with the AFL. These state leagues hold annual semi-professional club competitions, with some also overseeing more than one league. Local semi-professional or amateur organisations and competitions are often affiliated to their state organisations.\nIn 2003, the AFL became the \"de facto\" world governing body for Australian football when it pushed for the closure of the International Australian Football Council. There are also a number of affiliated organisations governing amateur clubs and competitions around the world.\nFor almost all Australian football club competitions, the aim is to win the premiership, which is typically decided by a finals series. The teams that occupy the highest positions on the ladder after the home-and-away season play-off in a \"semi-knockout\" finals series, culminating in a single Grand Final match to determine the premiers. Between four and eight teams contest a finals series, typically using the AFL final eight system or a variation of the McIntyre system. The team which finishes first on the ladder after the home-and-away season is referred to as a \"minor premier\", but this usually holds little stand-alone significance, other than receiving a better draw in the finals.\nSome metropolitan leagues have several tiered divisions, with promotion of the lower division premiers and relegation of the upper division's last placed team at the end of each year.\nWomen and Australian football.\nThe high level of interest shown by women in Australian football is considered unique among the world's football codes. It was the case in the 19th century, as it is in modern times, that women made up approximately half of total attendances at Australian football matches\u2014a far greater proportion than, for example, the estimated 10 per cent of women that comprise British soccer crowds. This has been attributed in part to the egalitarian character of Australian football's early years in public parks where women could mingle freely and support the game in various ways.\nIn terms of participation, there are occasional 19th-century references to women playing the sport, but it was not until the 1910s that the first organised women's teams and competitions appeared. Women's state leagues emerged in the 1980s, and in 2013, the AFL announced plans to establish a national semi-professional women's competition. Amidst a surge in viewing interest and participation in women's football, the AFL pushed the founding date of the competition, named AFL Women's (AFLW), to 2017. Eight AFL clubs won licences to field sides in its inaugural season. By 2022, all 18 clubs fielded an AFLW side.\nVariations and related sports.\nMany related games have emerged from Australian football, mainly with variations of contact to encourage greater participation. These include Auskick (played by children aged between 5 and 12), kick-to-kick (and its variants end-to-end footy and marks up), rec footy, 9-a-side footy, masters Australian football, handball and longest-kick competitions. Players outside Australia sometimes engage in related games adapted to available fields, like metro footy (played on gridiron fields) and Samoa rules (played on rugby fields). One such prominent example in use since 2018 is AFLX, a shortened variation of the game with seven players a side, played on a soccer-sized pitch.\nInternational rules football.\nThe similarities between Australian football and the Irish sport of Gaelic football have allowed for the creation of a hybrid code known as international rules football. The first international rules matches were contested in Ireland during the 1967 Australian Football World Tour. Since then, various sets of compromise rules have been trialed, and in 1984 the International Rules Series commenced with national representative sides selected by Australia's state leagues (later by the AFL) and the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA). The competition became an annual event in 1998, but was postponed indefinitely in 2007 when the GAA pulled out due to Australia's severe and aggressive style of play. It resumed in Australia in 2008 under new rules to protect the player with the ball.\nGlobal reach.\nDuring the colonial period, Australian rules was sometimes referred to as Australasian rules, reflecting its popularity in New Zealand. The game was played outside Australasia as early as 1888 when Australians studying at Edinburgh University and London University formed teams and competed in London. Further international exposure came that same year, when the first British rugby side to tour the Southern Hemisphere played Australian rules matches in both Australia and New Zealand. By the early 20th century, it had spread with the Australian diaspora to South Africa, the United States and other parts of the Anglosphere; however this growth went into rapid decline during and after World War I, leading also to a decades long hiatus in New Zealand. After World War II, it experienced growth in the Pacific region, particularly in Papua New Guinea and Nauru, where it is now the national sport.\nToday, the sport is played at an amateur level in various countries throughout the world. Twenty-three countries have participated in the International Cup, which was held triennially in Australia from 2002 to 2017. International competition resumed in 2024 with three regional tournaments: the Transatlantic Cup, Asia Cup, and Pacific Cup. Nine countries have also participated in the AFL Europe Championship. In 2013, participation across AFL Europe's 21 member nations was more than 5,000 players, the majority of which are European nationals rather than Australian expats. The sport also has a growing presence in India. Over 20 countries have either affiliation or working agreements with the AFL.\nMost present-day international amateur clubs and leagues are based in North America, Europe and Asia, with the oldest typically having originated in the 1980s. That decade, the sport developed a cult following in the United States when matches were broadcast on the fledgling ESPN network. Growing international interest has been assisted by exhibition matches, players switching between football codes, and Australia's multicultural makeup. Many VFL/AFL players were born overseas, with a growing number recruited through various initiatives. One notable example is the Irish experiment, which, since the 1980s, has seen many Gaelic footballers leave the amateur GAA to play Australian rules professionally. This has expanded to women's football, with 39 Irish players on AFLW lists for the 2025 season.\nAlthough Australian rules football is not an Olympic sport, it was showcased at the MCG as part of the 1956 Summer Olympics, held in Melbourne. In addition, when Brisbane hosted the 1982 Commonwealth Games, an exhibition match between Richmond and Carlton was held at the Gabba.\nCultural influence and popularity.\nAustralian football has attracted more overall interest among Australians than any other football code.\nThe 2024 AFL season saw an average attendance of 38,344 fans per match, making the AFL Australia's, and one of the world's best-attended sports leagues. Also that year, data indicated 1,319,687 people, or 1 in 20 Australians, are members of an AFL club. The most-visited sports website in Australia in 2023 was the AFL's, attracting 1.89 billion total visits.\nApproximately 40% of Australians aged 14+ watch AFL matches on TV either occasionally or regularly. The 2024 AFL Grand Final was that year's highest-rating free-to-air television broadcast in Australia, with an in-home audience of 4 million watching Seven's coverage; overall TV viewership reached at least 7,569,000. The AFL's current TV broadcasting rights deal with Seven and Foxtel is worth an Australian record $4.5 billion.\nIn terms of participation, there were at least 581,000 registered players in Australia in 2024. This figure encompasses community football at junior, youth, and senior levels, as well as programs such as Footy 9s. Among Australian children aged 0\u201314, it is the fifth most common sporting activity, behind swimming, soccer, basketball and gymnastics. Women and girls account for 20% of all community football registrations.\nIn the arts and popular culture.\nAustralian football has inspired works by many writers and poets, including C. J. Dennis, Helen Garner, Peter Goldsworthy and Kerry Greenwood. Historians Manning Clarke and Geoffrey Blainey have also written extensively on the sport. Slang within Australian football has impacted Australian English more broadly, with a number of expressions taking on new meanings in non-sporting contexts, e.g., to \"get a guernsey\" is to gain recognition or approval, while \"shirt-fronting\" someone is to accost them.\nIn 1889, Australian impressionist painter Arthur Streeton captured football games \"en plein air\" for the 9 by 5 Impression Exhibition, titling one work \"The National Game\". Paintings by Sidney Nolan (\"Footballer\", 1946) and John Brack (\"Three of the Players\", 1953) helped to establish Australian football as a serious subject for modernists, and many Aboriginal artists have explored the game, often fusing it with the mythology of their region. Vincent Namatjira won the 2020 Archibald Prize for his portrait of Adam Goodes.\nIn cartooning, WEG's VFL/AFL premiership posters\u2014inaugurated in 1954\u2014have achieved iconic status among Australian football fans. Australian football statues can be found throughout the country, some based on famous photographs, among them Haydn Bunton Sr.'s leap, Jack Dyer's charge and Nicky Winmar lifting his jumper. In the 1980s, a group of postmodern architects based in Melbourne began incorporating references to Australian football into their buildings, an example being Building 8 by Edmond and Corrigan.\nDance sequences based on Australian football feature heavily in Robert Helpmann's 1964 ballet \"The Display\", his first and most famous work for the Australian Ballet. The game has also inspired well-known plays such as \"And the Big Men Fly\" (1963) by Alan Hopgood and David Williamson's \"The Club\" (1977), which was adapted into a 1980 film, directed by Bruce Beresford. Mike Brady's 1979 hit \"Up There Cazaly\" is considered an Australian football anthem, and references to the sport can be found in works by popular musicians, from singer-songwriter Paul Kelly to the alternative rock band TISM. Others, such as Tame Impala's Kevin Parker, have written songs for their favourite AFL club. Many Australian football video games have been released, notably the AFL series.\nAustralian Football Hall of Fame.\nFor the centenary of the VFL/AFL in 1996, the Australian Football Hall of Fame was established. That year, 136 significant figures across the various competitions were inducted into the Hall of Fame. Each years since the creation of the Hall of Fame, a panel selects a small group of players they deem worthy for this prestigious honour, resulting in a total number of more than 300 inductees as of 2024.\nIn addition to the Hall of Fame, select members are chosen to receive the elite \"Legend\" status. Due to restrictions limiting the number of Legend status players to 10% of the total number of Hall of Fame inductees, there are currently only 32 players with the status in the Hall of Fame as of 2024.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal and conference articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2404", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2404", "title": "Aon Insurance", "text": ""}
{"id": "2405", "revid": "20480869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2405", "title": "Aon (company)", "text": "Professional services firm\nAon plc () is a British-American professional services firm. The company operates two divisions: Risk Capital (67% of 2024 revenues), which provides brokerage and consulting services for risk management and insurance and reinsurance, and Human Capital (33% of 2024 revenues), which provides services for health insurance, retirement plans, pension plans, and talent advisory.\nIt is the second largest insurance broker worldwide.\nThe company is ranked 300th on the Fortune 500 and 388th on the Forbes Global 2000.\nFounded in Chicago by Patrick Ryan, Aon was created in 1982 when the Ryan Insurance Group merged with the Combined Insurance Company of America under W. Clement Stone. In 1987, the holding company was renamed Aon from \"aon\", a Gaelic word meaning \"one\". The company is globally headquartered in London with its North America operations based in Chicago at the Aon Center.\nHistory.\nW. Clement Stone's mother bought a small Detroit insurance agency, and in 1918 brought her son into the business. Mr. Stone sold low-cost, low-benefit accident insurance, underwriting and issuing policies on-site. The next year he founded his own agency, the Combined Registry Co.\nAs the Great Depression began, Stone reduced his workforce and improved training. Forced by his son's respiratory illness to winter in the South, Stone moved to Arkansas and Texas. In 1939 he bought American Casualty Insurance Co. of Dallas, Texas. It was consolidated with other purchases as the Combined Insurance Co. of America in 1947. The company continued through the 1950s and 1960s, continuing to sell health and accident policies. In the 1970s, Combined expanded overseas despite being hit hard by the recession.\nIn 1982, after 10 years of stagnation under Clement Stone Jr., the elder Stone, then 79, resumed control until the completion of a merger with Ryan Insurance Co. allowed him to transfer control to Patrick Ryan. Ryan, the son of a Ford dealer in Wisconsin and a graduate of Northwestern University, had started his company as an auto credit insurer in 1964. In 1976, the company bought the insurance brokerage units of the Esmark conglomerate. Ryan focused on insurance brokering and added more upscale insurance products. He also trimmed staff and took other cost-cutting measures, and in 1987 he changed Combined's name to Aon. In 1992, he bought Dutch insurance broker Hudig-Langeveldt. In 1995, the company sold its remaining direct life insurance holdings to General Electric to focus on consulting.\nIn June 1995, Aon acquired the Garden City based travel insurance firm Berkely Arm, Inc (also known as BerkelyCare Ltd. and The Berkely Group), known for providing travel insurance offerings to cruise lines and tour operators in the United States. This division eventually became known as Aon Affinity Travel Practice.\nAon built a global presence through purchases. In 1997, it bought The Minet Group, as well as the insurance brokerage A&amp;A Services, Inc., founded by Alexander Howden in the late 19th century. It was then that insurance broker David Howden reclaimed the family brand name for the Howden Group. These transactions made Aon (temporarily) the largest insurance broker worldwide. The firm made no US buys in 1998, but doubled its employee base with purchases including Spain's largest retail insurance broker, Gil y Carvajal, and the formation of Aon Korea.\nResponding to industry demands, Aon announced its new fee disclosure policy in 1999, and the company reorganised to focus on buying personal line insurance firms and to integrate its acquisitions. That year it bought Nikols Sedgwick Group, an Italian insurance firm, and formed RiskAttack (with Zurich US), a risk analysis and financial management concern aimed at technology companies. The cost of integrating its numerous purchases, however, hammered profits in 1999.\nDespite its troubles, in 2000 Aon bought Reliance Group's accident and health insurance business, as well as Actuarial Sciences Associates, a compensation and employee benefits consulting company. Later in that year, however, the company decided to cut 6% of its workforce as part of a restructuring effort. In 2003, the company saw revenues increase primarily because of rate hikes in the insurance industry. Also that year, Endurance Specialty, a Bermuda-based underwriting operation that Aon helped to establish in November 2001 along with other investors, went public. The next year Aon sold most of its holdings in Endurance.\nAon's New York offices were on the 92nd and 98th\u2013105th floors of the South Tower of the World Trade Center at the time of the September 11 attacks. When the North Tower was struck by American Airlines Flight 11 at 8:46\u00a0a.m., an evacuation of Aon's offices was quickly initiated by executive Eric Eisenberg, and 924 of the estimated 1,100 Aon employees present at the time managed to get below the 77th floor before United Airlines Flight 175 crashed between Floors 77 and 85 at 9:03\u00a0a.m. Many, however, did not manage to get beneath in the 17 minutes they had between the two impacts. As a result, 176 employees of Aon were killed in the crash or died in the eventual collapse of the tower or from smoke inhalation. At 9:59\u00a0a.m., the tower collapsed, killing any survivors still within, including Eisenberg and Kevin Cosgrove.\nIn 2004\u20132005, Aon, along with other brokers including Marsh &amp; McLennan and Willis, fell under regulatory investigation under New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer and other state attorneys general. At issue was the practice of insurance companies' payments to brokers (known as contingent commissions). The payments were thought to bring a conflict of interest, swaying broker decisions on behalf of carriers, rather than customers. In the spring of 2005, without acknowledging any wrongdoing, Aon agreed to a $190\u00a0million settlement, payable over 30 months.\nIn the late 2007, Aon divested its two major underwriting subsidiaries: Combined Insurance Company of America (acquired by ACE Limited for $2.4 billion) and Sterling Life Insurance Company (purchased by Munich Re Group for $352 million) sold due to their low margin and capital-intensive nature.\nIn November 2008, Aon acquired reinsurance intermediary and capital advisor Benfield Group Limited for $1.75 billion. The acquisition amplified the firm's broking capabilities, positioning Aon one of the largest players in the reinsurance brokerage industry.\nIn 2010, Aon acquired Hewitt Associates for $4.9 billion. Aside from drastically boosting Aon's human resources consulting capacity and entering the firm into the business process outsourcing industry, the move added 23,000 colleagues and more than $3 billion in revenue.\nIn January 2012, Aon announced that its headquarters would be moved to London, although North American operations and jobs remained in Chicago.\nIn February 2017, Aon sold its employee benefits outsourcing business to private equity firm The Blackstone Group for US$4.8 billion (\u00a33.8 billion).\nIn February 2020, Aon named Eric Andersen as president of Aon.\nIn 2021, Aon agreed to merge with Willis Towers Watson; the merger agreement was terminated due to regulatory concerns.\nLegal issues.\nUK regulatory breach.\nIn January 2009, Aon was fined \u00a35.69 million in the UK by the Financial Services Authority, who stated that the fine related to the company's inadequate bribery and corruption controls, claiming that between 14 January 2005 and 30 September 2007 Aon had failed to properly assess the risks involved in its dealings with overseas firms and individuals. The Authority did not find that any money had actually made its way to illegal organisations. Aon qualified for a 30% discount on the fine as a result of its cooperation with the investigation. Aon said its conduct was not deliberate, adding it had since \"significantly strengthened and enhanced its controls around the usage of third parties\".\nUS Foreign Corrupt Practices Act violations.\nIn December 2011, Aon Corporation paid a $16.26 million penalty to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice for violations of the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.\nAccording to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Aon's subsidiaries made improper payments of over $3.6 million to government officials and third-party facilitators in Costa Rica, Egypt, Vietnam, Indonesia, the United Arab Emirates, Myanmar and Bangladesh, between 1983 and 2007, to obtain and retain insurance contracts.\nMajor acquisitions.\nIn January 2007, Aon announced that its Aon Affinity group had acquired the WedSafe Wedding Insurance program.\nIn August 2008, Aon announced that it had acquired London-based Benfield Group. The acquiring price was US$1.75 billion or \u00a3935 million, with US$170 million of debt.\nIn March 2010, Hewitt Associates announced that it acquired Senior Educators Ltd. The acquisition offers companies a new way to address retiree medical insurance commitments.\nIn July 2010, Aon announced that it had agreed to buy Lincolnshire, Illinois-based Hewitt Associates for $4.9 billion in cash and stock.\nIn April 2011, Aon announced that it had acquired Johannesburg, South Africa-based Glenrand MIB.\nIn July 2011, Aon announced that it bought Westfield Financial, the owner of insurance-industry consulting firm Ward Financial Group, from Ohio Farmers Insurance Co.\nIn October 2012, Aon announced that it agreed to buy OmniPoint, Inc, a Workday consulting firm. Financial terms were not disclosed.\nIn June 2014, Aon announced that it agreed to buy National Flood Services, Inc., a large processor of flood insurance, from Stoneriver Group, L.P.\nIn October 2016, Aon's Aon Risk Solutions acquired Stroz Friedberg LLC, a specialised risk management firm focusing on cybersecurity.\nIn November 2016, Aon acquired CoCubes an online Indian Assessment firm, facilitating hiring of entry-level engineering graduates.\nIn February 2017, Aon plc agreed to sell its human resources outsourcing platform for US$4.8 billion (\u00a33.8 billion) to Blackstone Group L.P. (BX.N), creating a new company called Alight Solutions.\nIn September 2017, Aon announced its intent to purchase real estate investment management firm The Townsend Group from Colony NorthStar for $475 million, expanding Aon's property investment management portfolio.\nIn December 2023, Aon agreed to acquire NFP, a middle-market provider of risk, benefits, wealth and retirement plan advisory services company, for $13.4\u00a0billion.\nIn March 2024, Aon plc acquired the technology assets and intellectual property of Humn.ai, an AI-powered platform. This will enhance its commercial fleet proposition.\nSponsorship of Manchester United.\nIn June 2009, Aon signed a four-year shirt sponsorship deal with Manchester United F.C.. On 1 June 2010, Aon replaced American International Group as the principal sponsor of the club. The Aon logo was prominently displayed on the front of the club's shirts until the 2014/2015 season when Aon was replaced by Chevrolet. The deal was said to be worth \u00a380 million over four years, replacing United's deal with AIG as the most lucrative shirt deal in history at the time.\nFrom 2013 to 2021 Aon owned the naming rights to the Trafford Training Centre and sponsored the club's training kits, reportedly worth \u00a3180 million to the club.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2406", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2406", "title": "Alban Berg", "text": "Austrian composer (1885\u20131935)\nAlban Maria Johannes Berg ( ; ; 9 February 1885 \u2013 24 December 1935) was an Austrian composer of the Second Viennese School. His compositional style combined Romantic lyricism with the twelve-tone technique. Although he left a relatively small \"oeuvre\", he is remembered as one of the most important composers of the 20th century for his expressive style encompassing \"entire worlds of emotion and structure\".\nBerg was born and lived in Vienna. He began to compose at the age of fifteen. He studied counterpoint, music theory and harmony with Arnold Schoenberg between 1904 and 1911, and adopted his principles of \"developing variation\" and the twelve-tone technique. Berg's major works include the operas \"Wozzeck\" (1924) and \"Lulu\" (1935, finished posthumously), the chamber pieces \"Lyric Suite\" and Chamber Concerto, as well as a Violin Concerto. He also composed a number of songs (\"lieder\"). He is said to have brought more \"human values\" to the twelve-tone system; his works are seen as more \"emotional\" than those of Schoenberg. His music had a surface glamour that won him admirers when Schoenberg himself had few.\nBerg died from sepsis in 1935.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n [... T]here are things that can't be measured by the yardstick of Nature \u2013 \u2013 things that have sprung \"solely\" from the human spirit, towering far above the material world\u2014things that are \"real\" only in our \"longing\" for them, 'when the sublime and beautiful things, the good and wise things, that we long for, turn into reality\u2014not a reality that can be picked and put in the mouth or that can be counted and put in one's pocket!' (Otto Ernst).\n&lt;br&gt;Music is like that \u2013 \u2013 \u2013 and quite a few literary works that are written from within a \"longing\"-filled heart! \u2013 \u2013 : \u2013 \u2013\n&lt;br&gt;\u2013 I've now got to \"A Doll's House\". ...\nBerg wrote in a typically freewheeling manner to share his reading of Ibsen's \"A Doll's House\" with Watznauer on October 18, 1906, here quoting from Ernst's https:// in relating music to dreams, fantasies, feelings, and desires, especially those of a counterfactual and universal nature. Such themes predominate in Berg's often quasi-autobiographical and programmatic \"\u0153uvre\", not only romantically as in his \"Lyric Suite\", but also socially as in \"Lulu\", politically as in \"Wozzeck\", and even mortally as in his Violin Concerto. By contrast, Webern, who also started studying with Schoenberg in 1904, took from an evening with Mahler in 1905 that: \"Nature is for us the model ...\"\nBerg was born in Vienna, the third of four children of Johanna and Konrad Berg. His father ran a successful export business, and the family owned several estates in Vienna and the countryside. The family's financial situation turned to the worse after the death of Konrad Berg in 1900, and it particularly affected young Berg, who had to repeat both his sixth and seventh grade to pass the exams. One of his closest lifelong friends and earliest biographer (under the pseudonym Hermann Herrenried), architect Hermann Watznauer, became a father figure (partly at Konrad's request), being ten years Berg's senior. Berg wrote him letters as long as thirty pages, often in florid, dramatic prose with idiosyncratic punctuation. Berg was more interested in literature than music as a child and would consider a career as a writer several times, turning to music slowly and at times unconfidently until the success of \"Wozzeck\". He did not begin to compose until he was fifteen, when he started to teach himself music, although he did take piano lessons from his sister's governess. With Marie Scheuchl, a maid in the family estate of Berghof in Carinthia and fifteen years his senior, he fathered a daughter, Albine, born 4 December 1902.\nIn 1906 Berg met the singer Helene Nahowski (1885\u20131976), daughter of a wealthy family (rumoured to be in fact the illegitimate daughter of Emperor Franz Joseph I from his liaison with Anna Nahowski). Despite the outward hostility of her family, the couple married on 3 May 1911, although \"her father insisted on a Protestant ceremony to facilitate the divorce he foresaw as inevitable.\"\nEarly works (1907\u20131914).\nWith little prior music education, Berg began studying counterpoint, music theory, and harmony under Arnold Schoenberg in October 1904. By 1906 he was studying music full-time; by 1907 he began composition lessons. His student compositions included five drafts for piano sonatas. He also wrote songs, including his \"Seven Early Songs\" (\"Sieben fr\u00fche Lieder\"), three of which were Berg's first publicly performed work in a concert that featured the music of Schoenberg's pupils in Vienna that year.\nThe early sketches eventually culminated in the Piano Sonata, Op. 1, published in 1910 and likely composed 1908\u20131909; it has been described as one of the most formidable \"first\" works ever written. Berg studied with Schoenberg for six years until 1911. Among Schoenberg's teachings was the idea that the unity of a musical composition depends upon all its aspects being derived from a single basic idea; this idea was later known as \"developing variation\". Berg passed this on to his students, one of whom, Theodor W. Adorno, stated: \"The main principle he conveyed was that of variation: everything was supposed to develop out of something else and yet be intrinsically different\". The Piano Sonata is an example\u2014the whole composition is derived from the work's opening quartal gesture and its opening phrase.\nBerg was a part of Vienna's cultural elite during the heady \"fin de si\u00e8cle\" period. His circle included the musicians Alexander von Zemlinsky and Franz Schreker, the painter Gustav Klimt, the writer and satirist Karl Kraus, the architect Adolf Loos, and the poet Peter Altenberg.\nIn 1913 two of Berg's \"Altenberg Lieder\" (1912) premiered in Vienna, conducted by Schoenberg in the infamous \"Skandalkonzert\". Settings of aphoristic poetic utterances, the songs are accompanied by a very large orchestra. The performance caused a riot, and had to be halted. Berg effectively withdrew the work, and it was not performed in full until 1952. The full score remained unpublished until 1966.\nBerg had a particular interest in the number 23, using it to structure several works. Various suggestions have been made as to the reason for this interest: that he took it from the biorhythms theory of Wilhelm Fliess, in which a 23-day cycle is considered significant, or because he first suffered an asthma attack on the 23rd of the month.\n\"Wozzeck\" (1917\u20131924) and \"Lulu\" (1928\u20131929).\nFrom 1915 to 1918 Berg served in the Austro-Hungarian Army. During a period of leave in 1917 he accelerated work on his first opera, \"Wozzeck\". After the end of World War I, he settled again in Vienna, where he taught private pupils. He also helped Schoenberg run his Society for Private Musical Performances, which sought to create the ideal environment for the exploration and appreciation of unfamiliar new music by means of open rehearsals, repeat performances, and the exclusion of professional critics.\nIn 1924 three excerpts from \"Wozzeck\" were performed, which brought Berg his first public success. The opera, which Berg completed in 1922, was first performed on 14 December 1925, when Erich Kleiber conducted the first performance in Berlin. Today, \"Wozzeck\" is seen as one of the century's most important works. Berg made a start on his second opera, the three-act \"Lulu\", in 1928 but interrupted the work in 1929 for the concert aria \"Der Wein\" which he completed that summer. \"Der Wein\" presaged \"Lulu\" in a number of ways, including vocal style, orchestration, design and text.\nOther well-known Berg compositions include the \"Lyric Suite\" (1926), which was later shown to employ elaborate cyphers to document a secret love affair; the post-Mahlerian Three Pieces for Orchestra (completed in 1915 but not performed until after \"Wozzeck\"); and the Chamber Concerto (\"Kammerkonzert\", 1923\u201325) for violin, piano, and 13 wind instruments: this latter is written so conscientiously that Pierre Boulez has called it \"Berg's strictest composition\" and it, too, is permeated by cyphers and posthumously disclosed hidden programs. It was at this time he began exhibiting tone clusters in his works after meeting with American avant-garde composer Henry Cowell, with whom he would eventually form a lifelong friendship.\nFinal years (1930\u20131935).\nLife for the musical world was becoming increasingly difficult in the 1930s both in Vienna and Germany due to the rising tide of antisemitism and the Nazi cultural ideology that denounced modernity. Even to have an association with someone who was Jewish could lead to denunciation, and Berg's \"crime\" was to have studied with the Jewish composer Arnold Schoenberg. Berg found that opportunities for his work to be performed in Germany were becoming rare, and eventually his music was proscribed and placed on the list of degenerate music.\nIn 1932 Berg and his wife acquired an isolated lodge, the \"Waldhaus\" on the southern shore of the W\u00f6rthersee, near Schiefling am See in Carinthia, where he was able to work in seclusion, mainly on \"Lulu\" and the Violin Concerto. At the end of 1934, Berg became involved in the political intrigues around finding a replacement for Clemens Krauss as director of the Vienna State Opera.\nAs more of the performances of his work in Germany were cancelled by the Nazis, who had come to power in early 1933, he needed to ensure the new director would be an advocate for modernist music. Originally, the premiere of \"Lulu\" had been planned for the Berlin State Opera, where Erich Kleiber continued to champion his music and had conducted the premiere of \"Wozzeck\" in 1925, but now this was looking increasingly uncertain, and \"Lulu\" was rejected by the Berlin authorities in the spring of 1934. Kleiber's production of the \"Lulu\" symphonic suite on 30 November 1934 in Berlin was also the occasion of his resignation in protest at the extent of conflation of culture with politics. Even in Vienna, the opportunities for the Vienna School of musicians were dwindling.\nBerg had interrupted the orchestration of \"Lulu\" because of an unexpected (and financially much-needed) commission from the Russian-American violinist Louis Krasner for a Violin Concerto (1935). This profoundly elegiac work, composed at unaccustomed speed and posthumously premiered, has become one of Berg's frequently performed compositions. Like much of his mature work, it employs an idiosyncratic adaptation of Schoenberg's \"dodecaphonic\" or twelve-tone technique, that enables the composer to produce passages openly evoking tonality, including quotations from historical tonal music, such as a Bach chorale and a Carinthian folk song. The Violin Concerto was dedicated \"to the memory of an Angel\", Manon Gropius, the deceased daughter of architect Walter Gropius and Alma Mahler.\nDeath.\nBerg died aged 50 in Vienna, on Christmas Eve 1935, from blood poisoning apparently caused by a furuncle on his back, induced by an insect sting that occurred in November. He was buried at the Hietzing Cemetery in Vienna.\nBefore he died, Berg had completed the orchestration of only the first two of the three acts of \"Lulu\". The completed acts were successfully premi\u00e8red in Z\u00fcrich in 1937. For personal reasons Helene Berg subsequently imposed a ban on any attempt to \"complete\" the final act, which Berg had in fact completed in short score. An orchestration was therefore commissioned in secret from Friedrich Cerha and premi\u00e8red in Paris (under Pierre Boulez) only in 1979, soon after Helene Berg's own death.\nLegacy.\nBerg is remembered as one of the most important composers of the 20th century and the most widely performed opera composer among the Second Viennese School. He is said to have brought more \"human values\" to the twelve-tone system, his works seen as more \"emotional\" than Schoenberg's. Critically, he is seen as having preserved the Viennese tradition in his music.\nBerg scholar Douglas Jarman writes in \"The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" that \"[as] the 20th century closed, the 'backward-looking' Berg suddenly came as [George] Perle remarked, to look like its most forward-looking composer.\"\nThe Alban Berg Foundation, founded by the composer's widow in 1969, cultivates the memory and works of the composer, and awards scholarships. The Alban Berg Monument, situated next to the Vienna State Opera and unveiled in 2016, was funded by the Foundation.\nThe Alban Berg Quartett was a string quartet named after him, active from 1971 until 2008.\nThe asteroid 4528 Berg is named after him (1983).\nMajor compositions.\nPiano\nPiano Sonata, Op. 1\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Chamber\nString Quartet, Op. 3\n\"Lyric Suite\", string quartet\n\"Chamber Concerto\" (1925) for piano, violin and 13 wind instruments\nOrchestral\nThree Pieces for Orchestra, Op. 6\nViolin Concerto\nVocal\nSeven Early Songs\n\"Vier Lieder\" (\"Four Songs\"), Op. 2\n\"Five Orchestral Songs on Postcard Texts of Peter Altenberg\", Op. 4\n\"Der Wein\"\n\"Schlie\u00dfe mir die Augen beide\"\nOperas\n\"Wozzeck\", Op. 7 (1925)\n\"Lulu\" (1937)\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "2408", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2408", "title": "Analytical chemistry", "text": "Study of the separation, identification, and quantification of matter\nAnalytical chemistry (or chemical analysis) is the branch of chemistry concerned with the development and application of methods to identify the chemical composition of materials and quantify the amounts of components in mixtures. It focuses on methods to identify unknown compounds, possibly in a mixture or solution, and quantify a compound's presence in terms of amount of substance (in any phase), concentration (in aqueous or solution phase), percentage by mass or number of moles in a mixture of compounds (or partial pressure in the case of gas phase).\nIt encompasses both classical techniques (e.g. titration, gravimetric analysis) and modern instrumental approaches (e.g. spectroscopy, chromatography, mass spectrometry, electrochemical methods). Modern analytical chemistry is deeply intertwined with data analysis and chemometrics, and is increasingly shaped by trends such as automation, miniaturization, and real-time sensing, with applications across fields as diverse as biochemistry, medicinal chemistry, forensic science, archaeology, nutritional science, agricultural chemistry, chemical synthesis, metallurgy, chemical engineering, materials science.\nIn the age of \"big data\" analytical chemistry alongside with chemometrics and bioinformatics is becoming central to interpreting complex results from high-throughput techniques like gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GCMS), high-performance liquid chromatography, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, and high-resolution mass spectrometry. There is also a strong trend towards miniaturization, automation, and the development of real-time, point-of-care diagnostic sensors.\nHistory.\nAnalytical chemistry has been important since the early days of chemistry, providing methods for determining which elements and chemicals are present in the object in question. During this period, significant contributions to analytical chemistry included the development of systematic elemental analysis by Justus von Liebig and systematized organic analysis based on the specific reactions of functional groups.\nThe first instrumental analysis was flame emissive spectrometry developed by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff who discovered rubidium (Rb) and caesium (Cs) in 1860.\nMost of the major developments in analytical chemistry took place after 1900. During this period, instrumental analysis became progressively dominant in the field. In particular, many of the basic spectroscopic and spectrometric techniques were discovered in the early 20th century and refined in the late 20th century.\nThe separation sciences follow a similar timeline of development and have also became increasingly transformed into high-performance instruments. In the 1970s many of these techniques began to be used together as hybrid techniques to achieve a complete characterization of samples.\nStarting in the 1970s, analytical chemistry became progressively more inclusive of biological questions (bioanalytical chemistry), whereas it had previously been largely focused on inorganic or small organic molecules. Lasers have been increasingly used as probes and even to initiate and influence a wide variety of reactions. The late 20th century also saw an expansion of the application of analytical chemistry from somewhat academic chemical questions to forensic, environmental, industrial and medical questions, such as in histology.\nModern analytical chemistry is dominated by instrumental analysis. Many analytical chemists focus on a single type of instrument. Academics tend to either focus on new applications and discoveries or on new methods of analysis. The discovery of a chemical present in blood that increases the risk of cancer would be a discovery that an analytical chemist might be involved in. An effort to develop a new method might involve the use of a tunable laser to increase the specificity and sensitivity of a spectrometric method. Many methods, once developed, are kept purposely static so that data can be compared over long periods of time. This is particularly true in industrial quality assurance (QA), forensic and environmental applications. Analytical chemistry plays an increasingly important role in the pharmaceutical industry where, aside from QA, it is used in the discovery of new drug candidates and in clinical applications where understanding the interactions between the drug and the patient are critical.\nThe 21st century has been defined by the digitalization of analytical chemistry. The handling of large datasets (\"big data\") from instruments like Orbitrap mass spectrometers has made advanced data analysis, including machine learning, an essential skill. This era also focuses strongly on sustainability, leading to the principles of Green Analytical Chemistry, which aim to minimize the environmental impact of chemical analyses.\nClassical methods.\nAlthough modern analytical chemistry is dominated by sophisticated instrumentation, the roots of analytical chemistry and some of the principles used in modern instruments are from traditional techniques, many of which are still used today. These techniques also tend to form the backbone of most undergraduate analytical chemistry educational labs.\nQualitative analysis.\nChemical tests.\nThere are numerous qualitative chemical tests, for example, the acid test for gold and the Kastle-Meyer test for the presence of blood. \nFlame test.\nInorganic qualitative analysis generally refers to a systematic scheme to confirm the presence of certain aqueous ions or elements by performing a series of reactions that eliminate a range of possibilities and then confirm suspected ions with a confirming test. Sometimes small carbon-containing ions are included in such schemes. With modern instrumentation, these tests are rarely used but can be useful for educational purposes and in fieldwork or other situations where access to state-of-the-art instruments is not available or expedient.\nQuantitative analysis.\n Quantitative analysis is the measurement of the quantities of particular chemical constituents present in a substance. Quantities can be measured by mass (gravimetric analysis) or volume (volumetric analysis). \nGravimetric analysis.\n The gravimetric analysis involves determining the amount of material present by weighing the sample before and/or after some transformation. A common example used in undergraduate education is the determination of the amount of water in a hydrate by heating the sample to remove the water such that the difference in weight is due to the loss of water.\nVolumetric analysis.\n Titration involves the gradual addition of a measurable reactant to an exact volume of a solution being analyzed until some equivalence point is reached. Titration is a family of techniques used to determine the concentration of an analyte. Titrating accurately to either the half-equivalence point or the endpoint of a titration allows the chemist to determine the amount of moles used, which can then be used to determine a concentration or composition of the titrant. Most familiar to those who have taken chemistry during secondary education is the acid-base titration involving a color-changing indicator, such as phenolphthalein. There are many other types of titrations, for example, potentiometric titrations or precipitation titrations. Chemists might also create titration curves in order by systematically testing the pH every drop in order to understand different properties of the titrant.\nInstrumental methods.\nSpectroscopy.\nSpectroscopy measures the interaction of the molecules with electromagnetic radiation. Spectroscopy consists of many different applications such as time-resolved raman spectroscopy, atomic absorption spectroscopy, atomic emission spectroscopy, ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, X-ray spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, dual polarization interferometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, photoemission spectroscopy, M\u00f6ssbauer spectroscopy and so on.\nMass spectrometry.\nMass spectrometry measures mass-to-charge ratio of molecules using electric and magnetic fields. In a mass spectrometer, a small amount of sample is ionized and converted to gaseous ions, where they are separated and analyzed according to their mass-to-charge ratios.\nThere are several ionization methods: electron ionization, chemical ionization, electrospray ionization, fast atom bombardment, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, and others. Also, mass spectrometry is categorized by approaches of mass analyzers: magnetic-sector, quadrupole mass analyzer, quadrupole ion trap, time-of-flight, Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance, and so on.\nElectrochemical analysis.\nElectroanalytical methods measure the potential (volts) and/or current (amps) in an electrochemical cell containing the analyte. These methods can be categorized according to which aspects of the cell are controlled and which are measured. The four main categories are potentiometry (the difference in electrode potentials is measured), coulometry (the transferred charge is measured over time), amperometry (the cell's current is measured over time), and voltammetry (the cell's current is measured while actively altering the cell's potential).\nPotentiometry measures the cell's potential, coulometry measures the cell's current, and voltammetry measures the change in current when cell potential changes.\nThermal analysis.\nCalorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis measure the interaction of a material and heat.\nSeparation.\nSeparation processes are used to decrease the complexity of material mixtures. Chromatography, electrophoresis and field flow fractionation are representative of this field.\nChromatographic assays.\nChromatography can be used to determine the presence of substances in a sample, as different components in a mixture have different tendencies to adsorb onto the stationary phase or dissolve in the mobile phase. Thus, different components of the mixture move at different speeds. Different components of a mixture can therefore be identified by their respective R\"\u0192\" values, which is the ratio between the migration distance of the substance and the migration distance of the solvent front during chromatography.\nIn combination with the instrumental methods, chromatography can be used in the quantitative determination of substances. Chromatography separates the analyte from in. There are different types of chromatography that differ from the media they use to separate the analyte and the sample. In Thin-layer chromatography, the analyte mixture moves up and separates along the coated sheet under the volatile mobile phase. In Gas chromatography, the gas phase separates the volatile analytes. A common method of chromatography using liquid as a mobile phase is High-performance liquid chromatography.\nHybrid techniques.\nCombinations of the above techniques produce a \"hybrid\" or \"hyphenated\" technique. Several examples are in popular use today and new hybrid techniques are under development. For example, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, gas chromatography-infrared spectroscopy, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, liquid chromatography-NMR spectroscopy, liquid chromatography-infrared spectroscopy, and capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry.\nHyphenated separation techniques refer to a combination of two (or more) techniques to detect and separate chemicals from solutions. Most often the other technique is some form of chromatography. Hyphenated techniques are widely used in chemistry and biochemistry. A slash is sometimes used instead of hyphen, especially if the name of one of the methods contains a hyphen itself.\nMicroscopy.\nThe visualization of single molecules, single cells, biological tissues, and nanomaterials is an important and attractive approach in analytical science. Also, hybridization with other traditional analytical tools is revolutionizing analytical science. Microscopy can be categorized into three different fields: optical microscopy, electron microscopy, and scanning probe microscopy. Recently, this field is rapidly progressing because of the rapid development of the computer and camera industries.\nLab-on-a-chip.\nDevices that integrate (multiple) laboratory functions on a single chip of only millimeters to a few square centimeters in size and that are capable of handling extremely small fluid volumes down to less than picoliters.\nData analysis and chemometrics.\nThe vast amount of data produced by modern analytical instruments has made computational data analysis an integral part of the field. The field of chemometrics uses statistical and mathematical methods to design optimal experimental procedures and to extract meaningful information from chemical data.\nKey areas include:\nErrors.\nError can be defined as numerical difference between observed value and true value. The experimental error can be divided into two types, systematic error and random error. Systematic error results from a flaw in equipment or the design of an experiment while random error results from uncontrolled or uncontrollable variables in the experiment.\nIn error the true value and observed value in chemical analysis can be related with each other by the equation\n formula_1\nwhere\nAn error of a measurement is an inverse measure of accurate measurement, i.e. smaller the error greater the accuracy of the measurement.\nErrors can be expressed relatively. Given the relative error(formula_5):\n formula_6\nThe percent error can also be calculated:\n formula_7\nIf we want to use these values in a function, we may also want to calculate the error of the function. Let formula_8 be a function with formula_9 variables. Therefore, the propagation of uncertainty must be calculated in order to know the error in formula_8:\n formula_11\nStandards.\nStandard curve.\nA general method for analysis of concentration involves the creation of a calibration curve. This allows for the determination of the amount of a chemical in a material by comparing the results of an unknown sample to those of a series of known standards. If the concentration of an element or compound in a sample exceeds the detection range of the technique, it can simply be diluted in a pure solvent. If the amount in the sample is below an instrument's range of measurement, the method of addition can be used. In this method, a known quantity of the element or compound under study is added, and the difference between the concentration added and the concentration observed is the amount actually in the sample.\nInternal standards.\nSometimes an internal standard is added at a known concentration directly to an analytical sample to aid in quantitation. The amount of analyte present is then determined relative to the internal standard as a calibrant. An ideal internal standard is an isotopically enriched analyte which gives rise to the method of isotope dilution.\nStandard addition.\nThe method of standard addition is used in instrumental analysis to determine the concentration of a substance (analyte) in an unknown sample by comparison to a set of samples of known concentration, similar to using a calibration curve. Standard addition can be applied to most analytical techniques and is used instead of a calibration curve to solve the matrix effect problem.\nSignals and noise.\nOne of the most important components of analytical chemistry is maximizing the desired signal while minimizing the associated noise. The analytical figure of merit is known as the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N or SNR).\nNoise can arise from environmental factors as well as from fundamental physical processes.\nThermal noise.\nThermal noise results from the motion of charge carriers (usually electrons) in an electrical circuit generated by their thermal motion. Thermal noise is white noise meaning that the power spectral density is constant throughout the frequency spectrum.\nThe root mean square value of the thermal noise in a resistor is given by\n formula_12\nwhere \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant, \"T\" is the temperature, \"R\" is the resistance, and formula_13 is the bandwidth of the frequency formula_14.\nShot noise.\nShot noise is a type of electronic noise that occurs when the finite number of particles (such as electrons in an electronic circuit or photons in an optical device) is small enough to give rise to statistical fluctuations in a signal.\nShot noise is a Poisson process, and the charge carriers that make up the current follow a Poisson distribution. The root mean square current fluctuation is given by\n formula_15\nwhere \"e\" is the elementary charge and \"I\" is the average current. Shot noise is white noise.\nFlicker noise.\nFlicker noise is electronic noise with a 1/\"\u0192\" frequency spectrum; as \"f\" increases, the noise decreases. Flicker noise arises from a variety of sources, such as impurities in a conductive channel, generation, and recombination noise in a transistor due to base current, and so on. This noise can be avoided by modulation of the signal at a higher frequency, for example, through the use of a lock-in amplifier.\nEnvironmental noise.\nEnvironmental noise arises from the surroundings of the analytical instrument. Sources of electromagnetic noise are power lines, radio and television stations, wireless devices, compact fluorescent lamps and electric motors. Many of these noise sources are narrow bandwidth and, therefore, can be avoided. Temperature and vibration isolation may be required for some instruments.\nNoise reduction.\nNoise reduction can be accomplished either in computer hardware or software. Examples of hardware noise reduction are the use of shielded cable, analog filtering, and signal modulation. Examples of software noise reduction are digital filtering, ensemble average, boxcar average, and correlation methods.\nApplications.\nAnalytical chemistry has applications across science and industry. It is fundamental to forensic science (e.g., DNA fingerprinting and toxicology), bioanalysis (e.g., measuring drug concentrations in pharmacokinetic studies), clinical analysis (e.g., blood glucose monitoring and COVID-19 PCR testing), environmental monitoring (e.g., testing for pollutants in water and air), and materials science (e.g., quality control of semiconductors and nanomaterials).\nGreat effort is being put into shrinking the analysis techniques to chip size. Although there are few examples of such systems competitive with traditional analysis techniques, potential advantages include size/portability, speed, and cost. (micro total analysis system (\u03bcTAS) or lab-on-a-chip). Microscale chemistry reduces the amounts of chemicals used.\nMany developments improve the analysis of biological systems. Examples of rapidly expanding fields in this area are genomics, DNA sequencing and related research in genetic fingerprinting and DNA microarray; proteomics, the analysis of protein concentrations and modifications, especially in response to various stressors, at various developmental stages, or in various parts of the body, metabolomics, which deals with metabolites; transcriptomics, including mRNA and associated fields; lipidomics - lipids and its related fields; peptidomics - peptides and its related fields; and metallomics, dealing with metal concentrations and especially with their binding to proteins and other molecules.\nAnalytical chemistry has played a critical role in the understanding of basic science to a variety of practical applications, such as biomedical applications, environmental monitoring, quality control of industrial manufacturing, forensic science, and so on.\nThe recent developments in computer automation and information technologies have extended analytical chemistry into several new biological fields. For example, automated DNA sequencing machines were the basis for completing human genome projects, leading to the birth of genomics. Protein identification and peptide sequencing by mass spectrometry opened a new field of proteomics. In addition to automating specific processes, there is effort to automate larger sections of lab testing, such as in companies like Emerald Cloud Lab and Transcriptic.\nAnalytical chemistry has been an indispensable area in the development of nanotechnology. Surface characterization instruments, electron microscopes and scanning probe microscopes enable scientists to visualize atomic structures with chemical characterizations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2411", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2411", "title": "A cappella", "text": "Group or solo singing without instrumental sound\nMusic performed a cappella ( , , ; lit.\u2009'in [the style of] the chapel'), less commonly spelled acapella in English, is music performed by a singer or a singing group without instrumental accompaniment. The term \"a cappella\" was originally intended to differentiate between Renaissance polyphonic and Baroque \"concertato\" musical styles. In the 19th century, a renewed interest in Renaissance polyphony, coupled with an ignorance of the fact that vocal parts were often doubled by instrumentalists, led to the term coming to mean unaccompanied vocal music. The term is also used, rarely, as a synonym for \"alla breve\".\nEarly history.\nResearch suggests that singing and vocables may have been what early humans used to communicate before the invention of language. The earliest piece of sheet music is thought to have originated as early as 2000\u00a0BC, while the earliest that has survived in its entirety is from the first century AD: a piece from Greece called the Seikilos epitaph.\nReligious origins.\nA cappella music was originally used in religious music, especially church music as well as anasheed and zemirot. Gregorian chant is an example of a cappella singing, as is the majority of secular vocal music from the Renaissance. The madrigal, up until its development in the early Baroque into an instrumentally accompanied form, is also usually in a cappella form. The Psalms note that some early songs were accompanied by string instruments, though Jewish and Early Christian music was largely a cappella; the use of instruments has subsequently increased within both of these religions as well as in Islam.\nChristian.\nThe polyphony of Christian (predominantly Catholic) a cappella music began to develop in Europe around the 9th century AD with the practice of organum, reaching its height between the 14th and 16th centuries with compositions by composers of the Franco-Flemish school (such as Guillaume Du Fay, Johannes Ockeghem, and Josquin des Prez). The early a cappella polyphonies were sometimes doubled with other instruments, which were often wind or string instruments, or organs. By the 16th century, a cappella polyphony had further developed, but gradually, the cantata began to take the place of a cappella forms. Sixteenth-century a cappella polyphony, nonetheless, continued to influence church composers throughout this period and to the present day. Recent evidence has shown that some of the early pieces by Palestrina, such as those written for the Sistine Chapel, were intended to be accompanied by an organ \"doubling\" for some or all of the voices.\nOther composers that utilized the a cappella style, if only for the occasional piece, were Claudio Monteverdi and his \"Lagrime d'amante al sepolcro dell'amata\" (A lover's tears at his beloved's grave), composed in 1610, and Andrea Gabrieli when upon his death many choral pieces were discovered, one of which was in the unaccompanied style. Learning from the preceding two composers, Heinrich Sch\u00fctz utilized the a cappella style in numerous pieces; chief among these were the pieces in the oratorio style, which were traditionally performed during the Easter week and dealt with the religious subject matter of that week, such as the Passion. Five of Schutz's \"Historien\" were Easter pieces, and of these the latter three, which dealt with the passion from three different viewpoints, those of Matthew, Luke and John, were all done a cappella style. The parts of the crowd were sung while the solo parts which were the quoted parts from either Christ or the authors were performed in a plainchant.\nIn the Byzantine Rite of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Eastern Lutheran Churches and the Eastern Catholic Churches, the music performed in the liturgies is exclusively sung without instrumental accompaniment. Early Russian \"musika\" which started appearing in the late 17th century, in what was known as \"khorov\u00efye kontsert\u00ef\" (choral concertos) made a cappella adaptations of Venetian-styled pieces, such as the treatise, \"Grammatika musikiyskaya\" (1675), by Nikolai Diletsky. Divine Liturgies and Western Rite Masses composed by famous composers such as Peter Tchaikovsky, Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Arkhangelsky, and Mykola Leontovych are examples.\nInstruments have divided Christendom since their introduction into worship. They were considered a Roman Catholic innovation, not widely practiced until the 18th century, and were opposed vigorously in worship by a number of Protestant Reformers, including Martin Luther, Ulrich Zwingli, John Calvin, and John Wesley. Opponents of musical instruments in the Christian worship believe that such opposition is supported by the Christian scriptures and Church history. There is no reference to instrumental music in early church worship in the New Testament, or in the worship of churches for the first six centuries. Several reasons have been posited throughout church history for the absence of instrumental music in church worship.\nThose who do not adhere to the regulative principle of interpreting Christian scripture, believe that limiting praise to the unaccompanied chant of the early church is not commanded in scripture, and that churches in any age are free to offer their songs with or without musical instruments. Those who subscribe to this interpretation believe that since the Christian scriptures never counter instrumental language with any negative judgment on instruments, opposition to instruments instead comes from an interpretation of history. There is no written opposition to musical instruments in any setting in the first century and a half of Christian churches (33\u2013180 AD). The use of instruments for Christian worship during this period is also undocumented. Toward the end of the 2nd century, Christians began condemning the instruments themselves. Those who oppose instruments today believe these Church Fathers had a better understanding of God's desire for the church, but there are significant differences between the teachings of these Church Fathers and Christian opposition to instruments today. Modern Christians typically believe it is acceptable to play instruments or to attend weddings, funerals, banquets, etc., where instruments are heard playing religious music. The Church Fathers made no exceptions. Since the New Testament never condemns instruments themselves, much less in any of these settings, author Everett Ferguson wrote that \"the church Fathers go beyond the New Testament in pronouncing a negative judgment on musical instruments.\" Written opposition to instruments in worship began near the turn of the 5th century. \nSince \"a cappella\" singing brought a new polyphony (more than one note at a time) with instrumental accompaniment, it is not surprising that Protestant reformers who opposed the instruments (such as Calvin and Zwingli) also opposed the polyphony. While Zwingli was destroying organs in Switzerland\u00a0\u2013 Luther called him a fanatic\u00a0\u2013 the Church of England was burning books of polyphony.\nSome Holiness Churches such as the Free Methodist Church opposed the use of musical instruments in church worship until the mid-20th century. The Free Methodist Church allowed for local church decision on the use of either an organ or piano in the 1943 Conference before lifting the ban entirely in 1955. The Reformed Free Methodist Church and Evangelical Wesleyan Church were formed as a result of a schism with the Free Methodist Church, with the former retaining a cappella worship and the latter retaining the rule limiting the number of instruments in the church to the piano and organ.\nPresent-day Christian religious bodies known for conducting their worship services without musical accompaniment include many Oriental Orthodox Churches (such as the Coptic Orthodox Church), many Anabaptist communities (including Old Order Anabaptist groups\u2014such as the Amish, Old German Baptist Brethren, Old Order Mennonites, as well as Conservative Anabaptist groups\u2014such as the Dunkard Brethren Church and Conservative Mennonites), some Presbyterian churches devoted to the regulative principle of worship, Old Regular Baptists, Primitive Baptists, Plymouth Brethren, Churches of Christ, Church of God, the Reformed Free Methodists, Doukhobors, and the Byzantine Rite of Eastern Christianity. Certain high church services and other musical events in liturgical churches (such as the Roman Catholic Mass and the Lutheran Divine Service) may be a cappella, a practice remaining from apostolic times. Many Mennonites also conduct some or all of their services without instruments. Sacred Harp, a type of folk music, is an a cappella style of religious singing with shape notes, usually sung at singing conventions.\nJewish.\nTraditional Jewish religious services did not include musical instruments given the practice of scriptural cantillation. The use of musical instruments is traditionally forbidden on the Sabbath out of concern that players would be tempted to repair (or tune) their instruments, which is forbidden on those days. (This prohibition has been relaxed in many Reform and some Conservative congregations.) Similarly, when Jewish families and larger groups sing traditional Sabbath songs known as zemirot outside the context of formal religious services, they usually do so a cappella, and Bar and Bat Mitzvah celebrations on the Sabbath sometimes feature entertainment by a cappella ensembles. During the Three Weeks musical instruments are prohibited. Many Jews consider a portion of the 49-day period of the counting of the omer between Passover and Shavuot to be a time of semi-mourning and instrumental music is not allowed during that time. This has led to a tradition of a cappella singing sometimes known as \"sefirah\" music.\nThe popularization of the Jewish chant may be found in the writings of the Jewish philosopher Philo, born 20 BC. Weaving together Jewish and Greek thought, Philo promoted praise without instruments, and taught that \"silent singing\" (without even vocal chords) was better still. The shofar is the only temple instrument still being used today in the synagogue, and it is only used from Rosh Chodesh Elul through the end of Yom Kippur. The shofar is used by itself, without any vocal accompaniment, and is limited to a very strictly defined set of sounds and specific places in the synagogue service. \nIn the United States.\nPeter Christian Lutkin, dean of the Northwestern University School of Music, helped popularize a cappella music in the United States by founding the Northwestern A Cappella Choir in 1906. The A Cappella Choir was \"the first permanent organization of its kind in America.\"\nAn a cappella tradition was begun in 1911 by F. Melius Christiansen, a music faculty member at St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota. The St. Olaf College Choir was established as an outgrowth of the local St. John's Lutheran Church, where Christiansen was organist and the choir was composed, at least partially, of students from the nearby St. Olaf campus. The success of the ensemble was emulated by other regional conductors, and a tradition of a cappella choral music was born in the region at colleges like Concordia College (Moorhead, Minnesota), Augustana College (Rock Island, Illinois), Waldorf University (Forest City, Iowa), Luther College (Decorah, Iowa), Gustavus Adolphus College (St. Peter, Minnesota), Augustana College (Sioux Falls, South Dakota), and Augsburg University (Minneapolis, Minnesota). The choirs typically range from 40 to 80 singers and are recognized for their efforts to perfect blend, intonation, phrasing and pitch in a large choral setting.\nMovements in modern a cappella over the past century include barbershop and doo wop. The Barbershop Harmony Society, Sweet Adelines International, and Harmony Inc. host educational events including Harmony University, Directors University, and the International Educational Symposium, and international contests and conventions, recognizing international champion choruses and quartets.\nMany a cappella groups can be found in high schools and colleges. There are amateur Barbershop Harmony Society and professional groups that sing a cappella exclusively. Although a cappella is technically defined as singing without instrumental accompaniment, some groups use their voices to emulate instruments; others are more traditional and focus on harmonizing. A cappella styles range from gospel music to contemporary to barbershop quartets and choruses.\nThe Contemporary A Cappella Society (CASA) is a membership option for former students, whose funds support hosted competitions and events.\nA cappella music was popularized between the late 2000s and the early to mid-2010s with media hits such as the 2009\u20132014 TV show \"The Sing-Off\" and the musical comedy film series \"Pitch Perfect\".\nRecording artists.\nIn July 1943, as a result of the American Federation of Musicians boycott of US recording studios, the a cappella vocal group \"The Song Spinners\" had a best-seller with \"Comin' In on a Wing and a Prayer\". In the 1950s, several recording groups, notably The Hi-Los and the Four Freshmen, introduced complex jazz harmonies to a cappella performances. The King's Singers are credited with promoting interest in small-group a cappella performances in the 1960s. Frank Zappa loved doo wop and a cappella, so Zappa released The Persuasions' first album from his label in 1970. Judy Collins recorded \"Amazing Grace\" a cappella. In 1983, an a cappella group known as The Flying Pickets had a Christmas 'number one' in the UK with a cover of Yazoo's (known in the US as Yaz) \"Only You\". A cappella music attained renewed prominence from the late 1980s onward, spurred by the success of Top 40 recordings by artists such as The Manhattan Transfer, Bobby McFerrin, Huey Lewis and the News, All-4-One, The Nylons, Backstreet Boys, Boyz II Men, and *NSYNC.\nContemporary a cappella includes many vocal groups and bands who add vocal percussion or beatboxing to create a pop/rock/gospel sound, in some cases very similar to bands with instruments. Examples of such professional groups include Straight No Chaser, Pentatonix, The House Jacks, Rockapella, Mosaic, Home Free and M-pact. There also remains a strong a cappella presence within Christian music, as some denominations purposefully do not use instruments during worship. Examples of such groups are Take 6, Glad and Acappella. Arrangements of popular music for small a cappella ensembles typically include one voice singing the lead melody, one singing a rhythmic bass line, and the remaining voices contributing chordal or polyphonic accompaniment.\nA cappella can also describe the isolated vocal track(s) from a multitrack recording that originally included instrumentation. These vocal tracks may be remixed or put onto vinyl records for DJs, or released to the public so that fans can remix them. One such example is the a cappella release of Jay-Z's \"Black Album\", which Danger Mouse mixed with the Beatles' \"White Album\" to create \"The Grey Album\".\nOn their 1966 album titled \"Album\", Peter, Paul and Mary included the song \"Norman Normal\". All the sounds on that song, both vocals and instruments, were created by Paul's voice, with no actual instruments used.\nIn 2013, an artist by the name Smooth McGroove rose to prominence with his style of a cappella music. He is best known for his a cappella covers of video game music tracks on YouTube.\nin 2015, an a cappella version of Jerusalem by multi-instrumentalist Jacob Collier was selected for Beats by Dre \"The Game Starts Here\" for the England Rugby World Cup campaign.\nMusical theatre.\nA cappella has been used as the sole orchestration for original works of musical theatre that have had commercial runs Off-Broadway (theatres in New York City with 99 to 500 seats) only four times. The first was \"Avenue X\" which opened on 28 January 1994, and ran for 77 performances. It was produced by Playwrights Horizons with book by John Jiler, music and lyrics by Ray Leslee. The musical style of the show's score was primarily doo-wop as the plot revolved around doo-wop group singers of the 1960s.\nIn 2001, The Kinsey Sicks, produced and starred in the critically acclaimed off-Broadway hit, \"DRAGAPELLA! Starring the Kinsey Sicks\" at New York's Studio 54. That production received a nomination for a Lucille Lortel award as Best Musical and a Drama Desk nomination for Best Lyrics. It was directed by Glenn Casale with original music and lyrics by Ben Schatz.\nThe a cappella musical \"Perfect Harmony\", a comedy about two high school a cappella groups vying to win the national championship, made its Off Broadway debut at Theatre Row's Acorn Theatre on 42nd Street in New York City in October 2010 after a successful out-of-town run at the Stoneham Theatre, in Stoneham, Massachusetts. Perfect Harmony features the hit music of The Jackson 5, Pat Benatar, Billy Idol, Marvin Gaye, Scandal, Tiffany, The Romantics, The Pretenders, The Temptations, The Contours, The Commodores, Tommy James &amp; the Shondells and The Partridge Family, and has been compared to a cross between \"Altar Boyz\" and \"The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee\".\nThe fourth a cappella musical to appear Off-Broadway, \"In Transit\", premiered October 5, 2010, and was produced by Primary Stages with book, music, and lyrics by Kristen Anderson-Lopez, James-Allen Ford, Russ Kaplan, and Sara Wordsworth. Set primarily in the New York City subway system its score features an eclectic mix of musical genres (including jazz, hip hop, Latin, rock, and country). In Transit incorporates vocal beat boxing into its contemporary a cappella arrangements through the use of a subway beat boxer character. Beat boxer and actor Chesney Snow performed this role for the 2010 Primary Stages production. According to the show's website, it is scheduled to reopen for an open-ended commercial run in the Fall of 2011. In 2011, the production received four Lucille Lortel Award nominations including Outstanding Musical, Outer Critics Circle and Drama League nominations, as well as five Drama Desk nominations including Outstanding Musical and won for Outstanding Ensemble Performance. In December 2016, \"In Transit\" became the first a cappella musical on Broadway.\nBarbershop style.\nBarbershop music is one of several uniquely American art forms. The earliest reports of this style of a cappella music involved African Americans. The earliest documented quartets all began in barber shops. In 1938, the first formal men's barbershop organization was formed, known as the Society for the Preservation and Encouragement of Barber Shop Quartet Singing in America (S.P.E.B.S.Q.S.A), and in 2004 rebranded itself and officially changed its public name to the Barbershop Harmony Society (BHS). Today the BHS has about 22,000 members in approximately 800 chapters across the United States and Canada, and the barbershop style has spread around the world with organizations in many other countries. The Barbershop Harmony Society provides a highly organized competition structure for a cappella quartets and choruses singing in the barbershop style.\nIn 1945, the first formal women's barbershop organization, Sweet Adelines, was formed. In 1953, Sweet Adelines became an international organization, although it did not change its name to Sweet Adelines International until 1991. The membership of nearly 25,000 women, all singing in English, includes choruses in most of the fifty United States as well as in Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. Headquartered in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the organization encompasses more than 1,200 registered quartets and 600 choruses.\nIn 1959, a second women's barbershop organization started as a break off from Sweet Adelines due to ideological differences. Based on democratic principles which continue to this day, http:// is smaller than its counterpart, but has an atmosphere of friendship and competition. With about 2,500 members in the United States and Canada, Harmony, Inc. uses the same rules in contest that the Barbershop Harmony Society uses. Harmony, Inc. is registered in Providence, Rhode Island.\nAmateur and high school.\nHigh school groups may have conductors or student leaders who keep the tempo for the group, or beatboxers/vocal percussionists.\nSince 2013, summer training programs have appeared, such as A Cappella Academy in Los Angeles, California (founded by Ben Bram, Rob Dietz, and Avi Kaplan) and Camp A Cappella in Dayton, Ohio (founded by Deke Sharon and Brody McDonald). These programs teach about different aspects of a cappella music, including vocal performance, arranging, and beatboxing/vocal percussion.\nA cappella in popular culture.\nThe popularity of a cappella was revived by television shows and movies such as \"Glee\" and \"Pitch Perfect,\" with the latter being more a cappella-focused than the former, whose focus lies more on traditional musical theater. Since the release of Pitch Perfect in late 2012, the amount of coed a cappella groups has risen far more sharply than in the years prior.\nIn other countries.\nAfghanistan.\nThe Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan has no official anthem because of views by the Taliban of music as un-Islamic. However, the \"de facto\" national anthem of Afghanistan is an a cappella nasheed, as musical instruments are virtually banned as corrupting and un-Islamic.\nIran.\nThe first a cappella group in Iran is the Damour Vocal Band, which was able to perform on national television despite a ban on women singing.\nPakistan.\nThe musical show \"Strepsils Stereo\" is credited for introducing the art of a cappella in Pakistan.\nSri Lanka.\nComposer Dinesh Subasinghe became the first Sri Lankan to write a cappella pieces for SATB choirs. He wrote \"The Princes of the Lost Tribe\" and \"Ancient Queen of Somawathee\" for Menaka De Sahabandu and Bridget Helpe's choirs, respectively, based on historical incidents in ancient Sri Lanka. Voice Print is also a professional a cappella music group in Sri Lanka.\nSweden.\nThe European a cappella tradition is especially strong in the countries around the Baltic and perhaps most so in Sweden as described by Richard Sparks in his doctoral thesis \"The Swedish Choral Miracle\" in 2000.\nSwedish a cappella choirs have over the last 25 years won around 25% of the annual prestigious European Grand Prix for Choral Singing (EGP) that despite its name is open to choirs from all over the world (see list of laureates in the Wikipedia article on the EGP competition).\nThe reasons for the strong Swedish dominance are as explained by Richard Sparks manifold; suffice to say here that there is a long-standing tradition, an unusually large proportion of the populations (5% is often cited) regularly sing in choirs, the Swedish choral director Eric Ericson had an enormous impact on a cappella choral development not only in Sweden but around the world, and finally there are a large number of very popular primary and secondary schools ('music schools') with high admission standards based on auditions that combine a rigid academic regimen with high level choral singing on every school day, a system that started with Adolf Fredrik's Music School in Stockholm in 1939 but has spread over the country.\nUnited Kingdom.\nA cappella has gained attention in the UK in recent years, with many groups forming at British universities by students seeking an alternative singing pursuit to traditional choral and chapel singing. This movement has been bolstered by organisations such as The Voice Festival UK and the integration of the United Kingdom into the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella.\nWestern collegiate.\nIt is not clear exactly where collegiate a cappella began. The Rensselyrics of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (formerly known as the RPI Glee Club), established in 1873 is perhaps the oldest known collegiate a cappella group. The longest continuously singing group is probably The Whiffenpoofs of Yale University, which was formed in 1909 and once included Cole Porter as a member. Collegiate a cappella groups grew throughout the 20th century. Some notable historical groups formed along the way include Colgate University's The Colgate 13 (1942), Dartmouth College's Aires (1946), Harvard University's Krokodiloes (1946), Cornell University's Cayuga's Waiters (1949) and The Hangovers (1968), the University of Maine Maine Steiners (1958), the Columbia University Kingsmen (1949), the http:// of Brown University (1949), and the University of Rochester YellowJackets (1956).\nAll-women a cappella groups followed shortly, frequently as a parody of the men's groups: the Smiffenpoofs of Smith College (1936), the Night Owls of Vassar College (1942), The Shwiffs of Connecticut College (The She-Whiffenpoofs, 1944), and The Chattertocks of Brown University (1951). A cappella groups exploded in popularity beginning in the 1990s, fueled in part by a change in style popularized by the Tufts University Beelzebubs and the Boston University Dear Abbeys. The new style used voices to emulate modern rock instruments, including vocal percussion/\"beatboxing\". Some larger universities now have multiple groups. Groups often join one another in on-campus concerts, such as the Georgetown Chimes' Cherry Tree Massacre, a 3-weekend a cappella festival held each February since 1975, where over a hundred collegiate groups have appeared, as well as International Quartet Champions The Boston Common and the contemporary commercial a cappella group Rockapella. Co-ed groups have produced many up-and-coming and major artists, including John Legend, an alumnus of the Counterparts at the University of Pennsylvania, Sara Bareilles, an alumna of Awaken A Cappella at University of California, Los Angeles, Mindy Kaling, an alumna of the Rockapellas at Dartmouth College, and Mira Sorvino, an alumna of the Harvard-Radcliffe Veritones of Harvard University.\nJewish-interest groups such as Queens College's Tizmoret, Tufts University's Shir Appeal, University of Chicago's Rhythm and Jews, Binghamton University's Kaskeset, Ohio State University's Meshuganotes, Rutgers University's Kol Halayla, New York University's Ani V'Ata, University of California, Los Angeles's Jewkbox, and Yale University's Magevet are also gaining popularity across the U.S.\nIncreased interest in modern a cappella (particularly collegiate a cappella) can be seen in the growth of awards such as the Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards (overseen by the Contemporary A Cappella Society) and competitions such as the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella for college groups and the Harmony Sweepstakes for all groups. In December 2009, a new television competition series called \"The Sing-Off\" aired on NBC. The show featured eight a cappella groups from the United States and Puerto Rico vying for the prize of $100,000 and a recording contract with Epic Records/Sony Music. The show was judged by Ben Folds, Shawn Stockman, and Nicole Scherzinger and was won by an all-male group from Puerto Rico called Nota. The show returned for a second, third, fourth, and fifth season, won by Committed, Pentatonix, Home Free, and The Melodores from Vanderbilt University respectively.\nEach year, hundreds of collegiate a cappella groups submit their strongest songs in a competition to be on The Best of College A Cappella (BOCA), an album compilation of tracks from the best college a cappella groups around the world. The album is produced by Varsity Vocals\u00a0\u2013which also produces the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella\u00a0\u2013 and Deke Sharon.). According to ethnomusicologist Joshua S. Dunchan, \"BOCA carries considerable cache and respect within the field despite the appearance of other compilations in part, perhaps, because of its longevity and the prestige of the individuals behind it.\"\nCollegiate a cappella groups may also submit their tracks to Voices Only, a two-disc series released at the beginning of each school year. A Voices Only album has been released every year since 2005.\nIn addition, from 2014 to 2019, female-identifying a cappella groups had the opportunity to send their strongest song tracks to the Women's A Cappella Association (WACA) for its annual best of women's a cappella album. WACA released an album every year from 2014 to 2019, featuring female-identifying groups from across the United States. The Women's A Cappella Association hosted seven annual festivals in California before ending operations in 2019.\nSouth Asian.\nSouth Asian a cappella features a fusion of music from the Indian subcontinent, which places it in the category of South Asian fusion music. A cappella is gaining popularity among South Asians with the emergence of primarily Hindi-English college groups. The first South Asian a cappella group was Penn Masala, an all-male group founded in 1996 at the University of Pennsylvania. The first co-ed South Asian a cappella was Anokha, from the University of Maryland, formed in 2001. The first South Asian A Cappella competition was \"Anahat,\" hosted by the Indus student organization at UC Berkeley. Maize Mirchi, the co-ed a cappella group from the University of Michigan became the first South Asian group to advance to ICCA finals in 2023.\nThe South Asian a cappella competitive circuit is governed by the Association of South-Asian A Cappella (ASA), a non-profit organization formed in 2016. The competitive circuit consists of qualifier \"bid\" competitions all over the United States, as well as the national championship, All-American Awaaz. The first winner of the championship title was Swaram A Cappella at Texas A&amp;M University, who won 1st place at All-American Awaaz in 2017 in New York City as well as in 2018 in Chicago. Dhamakapella currently holds the record for most All-American Awaaz championships, winning three consecutive championships in 2022, 2023, and 2024.\nEmulating instruments.\nIn addition to singing words, some a cappella singers also emulate instrumentation by reproducing instrumental sounds with their vocal cords and mouth, often pitched using specialised pitch pipes. One of the earliest 20th century practitioners of this method were The Mills Brothers whose early recordings of the 1930s clearly stated on the label that all instrumentation was done vocally. More recently, \"Twilight Zone\" by 2 Unlimited was sung a cappella to the instrumentation on the comedy television series \"Tompkins Square\". Another famous example of emulating instrumentation instead of singing the words is the theme song for \"The New Addams Family\" series on Fox Family Channel (now Freeform). Groups such as Vocal Sampling and Undivided emulate Latin rhythms a cappella. In the 1960s, the Swingle Singers used their voices to emulate musical instruments to Baroque and Classical music. Vocal artist Bobby McFerrin is famous for his instrumental emulation. A cappella group Naturally Seven recreates entire songs using vocal tones for every instrument.\nBeatboxing, more accurately known as vocal percussion, is a technique used in a cappella music popularized by the hip-hop community, where rap is often performed a cappella. The advent of vocal percussion has become prevalent in modern arrangements. \nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2414", "revid": "48296011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2414", "title": "Arrangement", "text": "Musical adaptation of a previous work\nIn music, an arrangement is a musical adaptation of an existing composition. Differences from the original composition may include reharmonization, melodic paraphrasing, orchestration, or formal development. Arranging differs from orchestration in that the latter process is limited to the assignment of notes to instruments for performance by an orchestra, concert band, or other musical ensemble. Arranging \"involves adding compositional techniques, such as new thematic material for introductions, transitions, or modulations, and endings. Arranging is the art of giving an existing melody musical variety\". In jazz, a memorized (unwritten) arrangement of a new or pre-existing composition is known as a \"head arrangement\".\nClassical music.\nArrangement and transcriptions of classical and serious music go back to the early history of classical music.\nEighteenth century.\nJ. S. Bach frequently made arrangements of his own and other composers' pieces. One example is the arrangement that he made of the Prelude from his Partita No.\" \"3 for solo violin, BWV\" \"1006. \nBach transformed this solo piece into an orchestral Sinfonia that introduces his Cantata BWV29. \"The initial violin composition was in E\" \"major but both arranged versions are transposed down to D, the better to accommodate the wind instruments\". \n\"The transformation of material conceived for a single string instrument into a fully orchestrated concerto-type movement is so successful that it is unlikely that anyone hearing the latter for the first time would suspect the existence of the former\".\nNineteenth and twentieth centuries.\nPiano music.\nIn particular, music written for the piano has frequently undergone this treatment, as it has been arranged for orchestra, chamber ensemble, or concert band. Beethoven made an arrangement of his Piano Sonata No.\" \"9 for string quartet. Conversely, he also arranged his \"Grosse Fuge\" (one of his late string quartets) for piano duet. The American composer George Gershwin, due to his own lack of expertise in orchestration, had his \"Rhapsody in Blue\" arranged and orchestrated by Ferde Grof\u00e9.\nErik Satie wrote his three \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\" for solo piano in 1888. \nEight years later, Debussy arranged two of them, exploiting the range of instrumental timbres available in a late 19th-century orchestra. \"It was Debussy whose 1896 orchestrations of the Gymnop\u00e9dies put their composer on the map.\" \n\"Pictures at an Exhibition\", a suite of ten piano pieces by Modest Mussorgsky, has been arranged over twenty times, notably by Maurice Ravel. Ravel's arrangement demonstrates an \"ability to create unexpected, memorable orchestral sonorities\". In the second movement, \"Gnomus\", Mussorgsky's original piano piece simply repeats the following passage: Ravel initially orchestrates it as follows: \nRepeating the passage, Ravel provides a fresh orchestration \"this time with the celesta (replacing the woodwinds) accompanied by string glissandos on the fingerboard\". \nSongs.\nA number of Franz Schubert's songs, originally for voice with piano accompaniment, were arranged by other composers. For example, his \"highly charged\" and \"graphic\" song \"Erlk\u00f6nig\" (\"The Erl King\") has a piano introduction that conveys \"unflagging energy\" from the start. \nThe arrangement of this song by Hector Berlioz uses strings to convey faithfully the driving urgency and threatening atmosphere of the original. \nBerlioz adds colour in bars\" \"6\u20138 through the addition of woodwind, horns, and a timpani. With typical flamboyance, Berlioz adds spice to the harmony in bar\" \"6 with an E\" \"flat in the horn part, creating a half-diminished seventh chord which is not in Schubert's original piano part.\nThere are subtle differences between this and the arrangement of the song by Franz Liszt. The upper string sound is thicker, with violins and violas playing the fierce repeated octaves in unison and bassoons compensating for this by doubling the cellos and basses. There are no timpani, but trumpets and horns add a small jolt to the rhythm of the opening bar, reinforcing the bare octaves of the strings by playing on the second main beat. \nUnlike Berlioz, Liszt does not alter the harmony, but changes the emphasis somewhat in bar\" \"6, with the note A in the oboes and clarinets grating against rather than blending with the G in the strings.\n\"Schubert has come in for his fair share of transcriptions and arrangements. Most, like Liszt's transcriptions of the Lieder or Berlioz's orchestration for \"Erlk\u00f6nig\", tell us more about the arranger than about the original composer, but they can be diverting so long as they are in no way a replacement for the original\".\nGustav Mahler's \"Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen\" (\"Songs of a Wayfarer\") were originally written for voice with piano accompaniment. The composer's later arrangement of the piano part shows a typical ear for clarity and transparency in rewriting for an ensemble. Below is the original piano version of the closing bars of the second song, \"Gieng heit' Morgen \u00fcber's Feld\". \nThe orchestration shows Mahler's attention to detail in bringing out differentiated orchestral colours supplied by woodwind, strings and horn. He uses a harp to convey the original arpeggios supplied by the left hand of the piano part. He also extracts a descending chromatic melodic line, implied by the left hand in bars\" \"2\u20134 (above), and gives it to the horn. \nPopular music.\nPopular music recordings often include parts for brass horn sections, bowed strings, and other instruments that were added by arrangers and not composed by the original songwriters. Some pop arrangers even add sections using full orchestra, though this is less common due to the expense involved. Popular music arrangements may also be considered to include new releases of existing songs with a new musical treatment. These changes can include alterations to tempo, meter, key, instrumentation, and other musical elements.\nWell known examples include Joe Cocker's version of the Beatles' \"With a Little Help from My Friends\", Cream's \"Crossroads\", and Ike and Tina Turner's version of Creedence Clearwater Revival's \"Proud Mary\". The American group Vanilla Fudge and the British group Yes based their early careers on radical rearrangements of contemporary hits. Bonnie Pointer performed disco and Motown-styled versions of \"Heaven Must Have Sent You\". Remixes, such as in dance music, can also be considered arrangements. Gene Kelly once remarked that the most important people in the MGM music department were the arrangers.\nJazz.\nArrangements for small jazz combos are usually informal, minimal, and uncredited. Larger ensembles have generally had greater requirements for notated arrangements, though Count Basie's early big band is known for its many \"head\" arrangements, so called because they were worked out by the players themselves, memorized (\"in the player's \"head\"\"), and never written down. Most arrangements for big bands, however, were written down and credited to a specific arranger, as with arrangements by Sammy Nestico and Neal Hefti for Count Basie's later big bands.\nDon Redman made innovations in jazz arranging as a part of Fletcher Henderson's orchestra in the 1920s. Redman's arrangements introduced a more intricate melodic presentation and \"soli\" performances for various sections of the big band. Benny Carter became Henderson's primary arranger in the early 1930s, becoming known for his arranging abilities in addition to his previous recognition as a performer. Beginning in 1938, Billy Strayhorn became an arranger of great renown for the Duke Ellington orchestra. Jelly Roll Morton is sometimes considered the earliest jazz arranger. While he toured around the years 1912 to 1915, he wrote down parts to enable \"pickup bands\" to perform his compositions.\nBig-band arrangements are informally called \"charts\". In the swing era they were usually either arrangements of popular songs or they were entirely new compositions. Duke Ellington's and Billy Strayhorn's arrangements for the Duke Ellington big band were usually new compositions, and some of Eddie Sauter's arrangements for the Benny Goodman band and Artie Shaw's arrangements for his own band were new compositions as well. It became more common to arrange sketchy jazz combo compositions for big band after the bop era.\nAfter 1950, the big bands declined in number. However, several bands continued and arrangers provided renowned arrangements. Gil Evans wrote a number of large-ensemble arrangements in the late 1950s and early 1960s intended for recording sessions only. Other arrangers of note include Vic Schoen, Pete Rugolo, Oliver Nelson, Johnny Richards, Billy May, Thad Jones, Maria Schneider, Bob Brookmeyer, Lou Marini, Nelson Riddle, Ralph Burns, Billy Byers, Gordon Jenkins, Ray Conniff, Henry Mancini, Ray Reach, Vince Mendoza, and Claus Ogerman.\nIn the 21st century, the big-band arrangement has made a modest comeback. Gordon Goodwin, Roy Hargrove, and Christian McBride have all rolled out new big bands with both original compositions and new arrangements of standard tunes.\nFor instrumental groups.\nStrings.\nThe string section is a body of instruments composed of various bowed stringed instruments. By the 19th century orchestral music in Europe had standardized the string section into the following homogeneous instrumental groups: first violins, second violins (the same instrument as the first violins, but typically playing an accompaniment or harmony part to the first violins, and often at a lower pitch range), violas, cellos, and double basses. The string section in a multi-sectioned orchestra is sometimes referred to as the \"string choir\".\nThe harp is also a stringed instrument, but is not a member of nor homogeneous with the violin family, and is not considered part of the string choir. Samuel Adler classifies the harp as a plucked string instrument in the same category as the guitar (acoustic or electric), mandolin, banjo, or zither. Like the harp, these instruments do not belong to the violin family and are not homogeneous with the string choir. In modern arranging these instruments are considered part of the rhythm section. The electric bass and upright string bass\u2014depending on the circumstance\u2014can be treated by the arranger as either string section or rhythm section instruments.\nA group of instruments in which each member plays a unique part\u2014rather than playing in unison with other like instruments\u2014is referred to as a chamber ensemble. A chamber ensemble made up entirely of strings of the violin family is referred to by its size. A string trio consists of three players, a string quartet four, a string quintet five, and so on.\nIn most circumstances the string section is treated by the arranger as one homogeneous unit and its members are required to play preconceived material rather than improvise.\nA string section can be utilized on its own (this is referred to as a string orchestra) or in conjunction with any of the other instrumental sections. More than one string orchestra can be utilized.\nA standard string section (vln., vln 2., vla., vcl, cb.) with each section playing unison allows the arranger to create a five-part texture. Often an arranger will divide each violin section in half or thirds to achieve a denser texture. It is possible to carry this division to its logical extreme in which each member of the string section plays his or her own unique part.\nSize of the string section.\nArtistic, budgetary and logistical concerns, including the size of the orchestra pit or hall will determine the size and instrumentation of a string section. The Broadway musical \"West Side Story\", in 1957, was booked into the Winter Garden theater; composer Leonard Bernstein disliked the playing of \"house\" viola players he would have to use there, and so he chose to leave them out of the show's instrumentation; a benefit was the creation of more space in the pit for an expanded percussion section.\nGeorge Martin, producer and arranger for the Beatles, warns arrangers about the intonation problems when only two like instruments play in unison: \"After a string quartet, I do not think there is a satisfactory sound for strings until one has at least three players on each line ... as a rule two stringed instruments together create a slight 'beat' which does not give a smooth sound.\" Different music directors may use different numbers of string players and different balances between the sections to create different musical effects.\nWhile any combination and number of string instruments is possible in a section, a traditional string section sound is achieved with a violin-heavy balance of instruments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2416", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2416", "title": "Athanasian Creed", "text": "Christian statement of belief focused on Trinitarian doctrine and Christology\nThe Athanasian Creed\u2014also called the Quicunque Vult (or Quicumque Vult), which is both its Latin name and its opening words, meaning \"Whosoever wishes\"\u2014is a Christian statement of belief focused on Trinitarian doctrine and Christology. Used by Christian churches since the early sixth century, it was the first creed to explicitly state the equality of the three hypostases of the Trinity. It differs from the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed and the Apostles' Creed in that it includes anathemas condemning those who disagree with its statements, as does the original Nicene Creed.\nWidely accepted in Western Christianity, including by the Roman Catholic Church, Lutheran Churches (it is part of the Lutheran confessions set out in the \"Book of Concord\"), Anglican Churches, Reformed Churches, and ancient liturgical churches, the Athanasian Creed has been used in public worship less frequently, with exception of Trinity Sunday. However, part of it can be found as an \"Authorized Affirmation of Faith\" in the main volume of the \"Common Worship\" liturgy of the Church of England published in 2000. Despite falling out of liturgical use, the creed's influence on current Protestant understanding of trinitarian doctrine is clear.\nDesigned to distinguish Nicene Christianity from Arianism, the Athanasian Creed traditionally was recited at the Sunday Office of Prime in the Western Church. It has not been commonly used in the Eastern Church.\nOrigin.\nThere is a possible allusion to the Creed in Gregory of Nazianzen's (c.\u2009329 \u2013 25 January 390),) Oration in praise of Athanasius:\n\"For, when all the rest who sympathised with us were divided into three parties, and many were faltering in their conception of the Son, and still more in that of the Holy Ghost, (a point on which to be only slightly in error was to be orthodox) and few indeed were sound upon both points, he was the first and only one, or with the concurrence of but a few, to venture to confess in writing, with entire clearness and distinctness, the Unity of Godhead and Essence of the Three Persons, and thus to attain in later days, under the influence of inspiration, to the same faith in regard to the Holy Ghost, as had been bestowed at an earlier time on most of the Fathers in regard to the Son. This confession, a truly royal and magnificent gift, he presented to the Emperor, opposing to the unwritten innovation, a written account of the orthodox faith, so that an emperor might be overcome by an emperor, reason by reason, treatise by treatise.\" (Oration 21, p.\u00a033)\nA medieval account credited Athanasius of Alexandria, the famous defender of Nicene theology, as the author of the Creed. According to that account, Athanasius composed it during his exile in Rome and presented it to Pope Julius I as a witness to his orthodoxy. The traditional attribution of the Creed to Athanasius was first called into question in 1642 by the Dutch Protestant theologian Gerhard Johann Vossius.\nIt has since been widely accepted by modern scholars that the creed was not authored by Athanasius, that it was not originally called a creed at all and that Athanasius's name was not originally attached to it. Athanasius's name seems to have become attached to the creed as a sign of its strong declaration of Trinitarian faith. The reasoning for rejecting Athanasius as the author usually relies on a combination of the following:\nThe use of the creed in a sermon by Caesarius of Arles, as well as a theological resemblance to works by Vincent of L\u00e9rins, point to Southern Gaul as its origin. The most likely time frame is in the late fifth or early sixth century AD, at least 100 years after Athanasius lived. The Christian theology of the creed is firmly rooted in the Augustinian tradition and uses the exact terminology of Augustine's \"On the Trinity\", published 415 AD. In the late 19th century, there was a great deal of speculation about who might have authored the creed, with suggestions including Ambrose of Milan, Venantius Fortunatus and Hilary of Poitiers.\nThe 1940 discovery of a lost work by Vincent of L\u00e9rins, which bears a striking similarity to much of the language of the Athanasian Creed, has led many to conclude that the creed originated with Vincent or his students. For example, in the authoritative modern monograph about the creed, J. N. D. Kelly asserts that Vincent of L\u00e9rins was not its author but that it may have come from the same milieu, the area of L\u00e9rins in southern Gaul.\nThe oldest surviving manuscripts of the Athanasian Creed date from the late 8th century.\nContent.\nThe Athanasian Creed is usually divided into two sections: lines 1\u201328 address the doctrine of the Trinity, and lines 29\u201344 address the doctrine of Christology. Enumerating the three persons of the Trinity (Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit), the first section of the creed ascribes the divine attributes to each individually. Thus, each person of the Trinity is described as uncreated (\"increatus\"), limitless (\"Immensus\"), eternal (\"\u00e6ternus\"), and omnipotent (\"omnipotens\").\nWhile ascribing the divine attributes and divinity to each person of the Trinity, thus avoiding subordinationism, the first half of the Athanasian Creed also stresses the unity of the three persons in the one Godhead, thus avoiding a theology of tritheism.\nThe text of the Athanasian Creed is as follows:\nThe Christology of the second section is more detailed than that of the Nicene Creed and reflects the teaching of the First Council of Ephesus in 431, and the creed of the Council of Chalcedon in 451. The Athanasian Creed uses the term \"substantia\" (a Latin translation of the Nicene \"ousia\": 'being' or 'substance') with respect to the relation of the Son to the Father according to his divine nature, but it also says that the Son is \"substantia\" of his mother Mary according to his human nature.\nThe Creed's wording thus excludes Sabellianism and Arianism and the Christological heresies of Nestorianism and Eutychianism. A need for a clear confession against Arianism arose in Western Europe when the Ostrogoths and Visigoths, who had Arian beliefs, invaded at the beginning of the 5th century.\nThe final section of this Creed also moved beyond the Nicene and Apostles' Creeds in making negative statements about the people's fate: \"They that have done good shall go into life everlasting: and they that have done evil into everlasting fire.\" That caused considerable debate in England in the mid-19th century, centred on the teaching of Frederick Denison Maurice.\nUses.\nComposed of 44 rhythmic lines, the Athanasian Creed appears to have been intended as a liturgical document, the original purpose of the creed being for it to be spoken or sung as a part of worship. The creed itself uses the language of public worship by speaking of the worship of God rather than the language of belief (\"Now this is the catholic faith: We worship one God\"). In the medieval Catholic Church, the creed was recited following the Sunday sermon or at the Sunday Office of Prime. The creed was often set to music and used in the place of a Psalm.\nProtestantism.\nEarly Protestants inherited the late medieval devotion to the Athanasian Creed, and it is considered to be authoritative in many Protestant churches. The statements of Protestant belief (confessional documents) of various Reformers commend the Athanasian Creed to their followers, including the Augsburg Confession, the Formula of Concord, the Second Helvetic Confession, the Belgic Confession, the Bohemian Confession and the Thirty-nine Articles.\nA metric version, \"Quicumque vult\", with a musical setting, was published in \"The Whole Booke of Psalmes\" printed by John Day in 1562. Among modern Lutheran and Reformed churches adherence to the Athanasian Creed is prescribed by the earlier confessional documents, but the creed does not receive much attention outside occasional use, especially on Trinity Sunday.\nIn Reformed circles, it is included, for example, in the Christian Reformed Churches of Australia's 1991 Book of Forms. It is sometimes recited in liturgies of the Canadian Reformed Churches and in the Protestant Reformed Churches. The Four additional ancient creeds that they adhere to would be Apostles, Athanasian, Creed of Chalcedon, and Nicene Creed.\nThe text of an abbreviated form\u2014based on the 1990s Christian Reformed Church's translation, arranged as a three-part responsive creed for congregational use\u2014is as follows:\nWe worship one God in trinity and the trinity in unity.&lt;br&gt;\nThe person of the Father is a distinct person,&lt;br&gt;\nthe person of the Son is another,&lt;br&gt;\nand that of the Holy Spirit still another.&lt;br&gt;\nBut the divinity of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is one. Their glory equal; their majesty co-eternal.&lt;br&gt;\nWhat quality the Father has,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Son has,&lt;br&gt;\nand the Holy Spirit has.&lt;br&gt;\nThe Father is uncreated,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Son is uncreated,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Holy Spirit is uncreated.&lt;br&gt;\nThe Father is immeasurable,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Son is immeasurable,&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nthe Holy Spirit is immeasurable.&lt;br&gt;\nThe Father is eternal,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Son is eternal,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Holy Spirit is eternal.&lt;br&gt;\nAnd yet there are not three eternal beings. There is but one eternal being. So too there are not three uncreated or immeasurable beings. There is but one uncreated and immeasurable being.&lt;br&gt;\nThe Father is almighty,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Son is almighty,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Holy Spirit is almighty.&lt;br&gt;\nYet there are not three almighty beings.&lt;br&gt;\nThere is but one almighty being.&lt;br&gt;\nThus the Father is God,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Son is God,&lt;br&gt;\nthe Holy Spirit is God.&lt;br&gt;\nYet there are not three gods.&lt;br&gt;\nThere is but one God.\nIn the successive Books of Common Prayer of the reformed Church of England, from 1549 to 1662, its recitation was provided for on 19 occasions each year, a practice that continued until the 19th century, when vigorous controversy regarding its statement about 'eternal damnation' saw its use gradually decline. It remains one of the three Creeds approved in the Thirty-Nine Articles, and it is printed in several current Anglican prayer books, such as \"A Prayer Book for Australia\" (1995). As with Roman Catholic practice, its use is now generally only on Trinity Sunday or its octave. An Anglican devotional manual published by The Church Union, \"A Manual of Catholic Devotion: For Members of the Church of England\", includes the Athanasian Creed with the prayers for Mattins, with the note: \"Said on certain feasts at Mattins instead of the Apostles' Creed\".\nThe Episcopal Church, based in the United States, has never provided for its use in worship, but added it to its Book of Common Prayer for the first time in 1979, where it is included in small print in a reference section, \"Historical Documents of the Church\". The Anglo-Catholic devotional manual Saint Augustine's Prayer Book, first published in 1947 and revised in 1967, includes the Athanasian Creed under \"Devotions to the Holy Trinity\".\nLutheranism.\nIn Lutheranism, the Athanasian Creed is, along with the Apostles' and the Nicene Creed, one of the three ecumenical creeds and is placed at the beginning of the 1580 Book of Concord, the historic collection of authoritative doctrinal statements (confessions) of the Lutheran Church. It is still used in the liturgy on Trinity Sunday.\nCatholicism.\nIn Roman Catholic churches, it was traditionally said at Prime on Sundays when the Office was of the Sunday. The 1911 reforms reduced that to Sundays after Epiphany and Pentecost and on Trinity Sunday, except when a commemoration of a double feast or a day within an Octave occurred. The 1960 reforms further reduced its use to once a year, on Trinity Sunday.\nIt has been effectively dropped from the Catholic liturgy since the Second Vatican Council. It is maintained in the rite of exorcism of the Roman Rite. Opus Dei members recite it on the third Sunday of every month. Consistent with its presence in Anglican prayer books, it is preserved in , the official breviary approved for use in the personal ordinariates for former Anglicans.\nA common visualization of the first half of the Creed is the Shield of the Trinity.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2417", "revid": "50745270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2417", "title": "Alicante", "text": "Municipality in Valencian Community, Spain\nAlicante (, , ; ; ; officially: / ) is a resort city and municipality in the Valencian Community, Spain. It is the capital of the province of Alicante and a historic Mediterranean port. With a population of 358,608 as of 2024, it is the 2nd-largest city in the Valencian Community and the 10th-largest in Spain.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the city echoes the Arabic name \"Laqant\" (), \"al-Laqant\" (\u0627\u0644\u0644\u064e\u0651\u0642\u064e\u0646\u0652\u062a) or \"Al-qant\" (), which in turn reflects the Latin \"Lucentum\" and Greek root \"Leuk\u00e9\" (or \"Leuka\"), meaning \"white\".\nHistory.\nThe area around Alicante has been inhabited for over 7,000 years. The first tribes of hunter-gatherers moved gradually from Central Europe between 5000 and 3000 BC. Some of the earlier settlements were made on the slopes of Mount Benacantil. By 1000 BC, Greek and Phoenician traders had begun to visit the eastern coast of Spain, establishing small trading ports and introducing the native Iberian tribes to the alphabet, iron, and the pottery wheel. The Carthaginian general Hamilcar Barca established the fortified settlement of \"Akra Leuk\u00e9\" (Greek: , meaning \"White Mountain\" or \"White Point\"), in the mid-230s BC, which is generally presumed to have been on the site of modern Alicante.\nAlthough the Carthaginians conquered much of the land around Alicante, the Romans eventually ruled Hispania Tarraconensis for over 700 years. By the 5th century AD, Rome was in decline, and the Roman predecessor town of Alicante, known as \"Lucentum\" (Latin), was more or less under the control of the Visigothic warlord Theudimer and thereafter under Visigothic rule from 400 to 700 A.D. The Goths did not put up much resistance to the Arab conquest of \"Medina Laqant\" at the beginning of the 8th century. The Moors ruled southern and eastern Spain until the 13th century \"Reconquista\" (Reconquest). Alicante was conquered again in 1247 for the Castilian king Alfonso X, but later was recovered to the Crown of Aragon in 1296 with King James II of Aragon. It gained the status of Royal Village (\"Vila Reial\") with representation in the medieval Valencian Parliament (\"Corts Valencianes\").\nAfter several decades of being the battlefield where the Crown of Castile and the Crown of Aragon clashed, Alicante became a major Mediterranean trading station exporting rice, wine, olive oil, oranges, and wool. The local Jewish community was expelled in 1492, and later, between 1609 and 1614, King Felipe III expelled thousands of Moriscos who had remained in Valencia after the Reconquista. This act cost the region dearly; with so many skilled artisans and agricultural labourers gone, the feudal nobility found itself sliding into bankruptcy.\nConditions worsened in the early 18th century; after the War of the Spanish Succession, Alicante went into a long, slow decline, surviving through the 18th and 19th centuries by making shoes and growing agricultural produce such as oranges and almonds, and thanks to its fisheries. The end of the 19th century witnessed a sharp recovery of the local economy with increasing international trade and the growth of the city harbour leading to increased exports of several products (particularly during World War I when Spain was a neutral country).\nDuring the early 20th century, Alicante was a minor capital that took profit from the benefit of Spain's neutrality during World War I, and it provided new opportunities for local industry and agriculture. The Rif War in the 1920s saw numerous \"alicantinos\" drafted to fight in the long and bloody campaigns in the former Spanish protectorate (northern Morocco) against the Rif rebels. The political unrest of the late 1920s led to the victory of Republican candidates in local council elections throughout the country, and the abdication of King Alfonso XIII. The proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic was much celebrated in the city on 14 April 1931. The Spanish Civil War broke out on 17 July 1936. Alicante was the last city loyal to the Republican government to be occupied by General Franco's troops on 1 April 1939, and its harbour saw the last Republican government officials fleeing the country. Vicious air bombings were targeted on Alicante during the three years of civil conflict, most notably the bombing by the Italian \"Aviazione Legionaria\" of the Mercado on 25 May 1938 in which more than 300 civilians perished.\nThe port of Alicante was the site of the heroic episode of the British ship \"SS Stanbrook\" in 1939 at the end of the Spanish Civil War. Her captain Archibald Dickson decided to rescue thousands of Spanish Republicans families during the night of 28 March 1939 under the bombing of the Nazis.\nFrom 1954 onward, many \"pied-noirs\" settled in the city (as many as 30,000, although other sources decrease the amount tenfold). Alicante had fostered strong links with Oran in the past, and a notable share of the population of the latter city during the French colonial period had ancestry in the province of Alicante. The immigration process accelerated after the independence of Algeria in 1962.\nThe late 1950s and early 1960s saw the onset of a lasting transformation of the city by the tourist industry. Large buildings and complexes rose in nearby Albufereta, e.g. El Barco, and Playa de San Juan de Alicante, with the benign climate being the biggest draw to attract prospective buyers and tourists who kept the hotels reasonably busy. New construction benefited the whole economy, as the development of the tourism sector also spawned new businesses such as restaurants, bars, and other tourist-oriented enterprises. Also, the old airfield at Rabasa was closed and air traffic moved to the new El Altet Airport, which made a more convenient and modern facility for charter flights bringing tourists from northern European countries.\nWhen Franco died in 1975, his successor Juan Carlos I played his part as the living symbol of the transition of Spain to a democratic constitutional monarchy. The governments of regional communities were given constitutional status as \"nationalities\", and their governments were given more autonomy, including that of the Valencian region, the \"Generalitat Valenciana\".\nThe Port of Alicante has been reinventing itself since the industrial decline the city suffered in the 1980s (with most mercantile traffic lost to Valencia's harbour). In recent years, the Port Authority has established it as one of the most important ports in Spain for cruises, with 72 calls to port made by cruise ships in 2007 bringing some 80,000 passengers and 30,000 crew to the city each year. The moves to develop the port for more tourism have been welcomed by the city and its residents, but the latest plans to develop an industrial estate in the port have caused great controversy.\nGeography.\nAlicante is located in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula, on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Some orographic features rise over the largely flat terrain where the city is built on including the Cabo de la Huerta, the Serra Grossa, the Tosal and the Benacantil hills.\nLocated in an arid territory, Alicante lacks any meaningful permanent water stream. There are however several stream beds correspondent to intermittent \"ramblas\". There was a swamp area in the northeast of the municipality, \"l'Albufereta\", yet it was dried up in 1928.\nThe municipality has two exclaves in the mainland: Monnegre (between the municipalities of San Vicente del Raspeig, Mutxamel, Busot and Jijona), and Cabe\u00e7\u00f3 d'Or; the latter comprises part of the namesake Cabe\u00e7\u00f3 d'Or mountain (including the summit, 1209 metres above sea level). The small island of Tabarca, 8 nautical miles to the south of the city, also belongs to the municipality.\nThe foot of the main staircase of the City Hall Building (\"Ayuntamiento\") is the zero point (\"cota cero\"), used as the point of reference for measuring the height above or below sea level of any point in Spain, due to the marginal tidal variations of the Mediterranean sea at Alicante.\nClimate.\nAlicante has mild winter temperatures, hot and sultry summers, and little rain, concentrated in equinoctial periods. Like the rest of the Province of Alicante itself, which has a range of dry climate types, the city has a hot semi-arid climate (\"BSh\") according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. It is one of the driest cities in Europe. Daily variations in temperature are generally small because of the stabilising influence of the sea, although occasional periods of westerly wind can produce temperature changes of or more. Seasonal temperature variations are also relatively small, meaning that winters are mild and summers are hot. During the summer, due to the evaporation of warm Mediterranean waters, air humidity levels are high, making the day and night stuffy for much of the season. These high humidity levels increase the heat index.\nThe average rainfall is per year. The cold drop means that September and October are the wettest months. Rarely, the rainfall can be torrential, reaching over in a 24-hour period, leading to severe flooding. Because of this irregularity, only 35 rainy days are observed on average per year, and the annual number of sunshine hours is more than 3,000.\nThe record maximum temperature of was observed on 13 August 2022. The record minimum temperature of was recorded on 12 February 1956. The worst flooding in the city's modern history occurred on 30 September 1997 when of rain fell within six hours. Temperatures below are very rare; the last recorded snowfall occurred in 1926. Alicante enjoys one of the sunniest and warmest winter daytime temperatures in mainland Europe. Alicante also recorded the highest temperature ever recorded in peninsular Spain and one of the highest in Europe for a month of January, which was .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Alicante is 358,608 as of 2024, and 768,194 in the metropolitan area \"Alicante-Elche\" as of 2016. the foreign-born population of the city is 96,826, equal to 27% of the total population, most of them immigrants who have arrived in the previous 20 years. Besides which, there is an estimation of additional thousands coming from countries outside the EU (mostly from the African continent) that are under illegal alien status and therefore are not accounted for in official population figures.\nAdministration.\nLuis Barcala of the People's Party has been the mayor of Alicante since 19 April 2018. He became mayor after the resignation of Gabriel Ech\u00e1varri, when the councillor Nerea Belmonte defected from Guanyar Alacant and refused to support the Socialist Party replacement candidate Eva Montesinos.\nGabriel Ech\u00e1varri of the Socialist Party (PSOE) was the mayor of the city from 13 June 2015 until April 2018, following the municipal elections on 24 May 2015. He was supported by the votes from his group (6), plus those from leftist parties Guanyar Alacant (6) and Comprom\u00eds (3), as well as from the centre-right party Ciudadanos (6). The People's Party (\"Partido Popular\", PP), with only 8 elected seats, lost the majority. On April he resigned due to various judicial issues and was temporarily substituted by the councillor Eva Montesinos.\nIn the previous municipal elections of May 2011, Sonia Castedo of People's Party won the elections with an absolute majority, but resigned in December 2014 due to her involvement in several corruption scandals, at present being under investigation. Her fellow party member Miguel Valor went on to become mayor up until Ech\u00e1varri's election.\nEconomy.\nUntil the Great Recession, Alicante was one of the fastest-growing cities in Spain. The boom depended partly on tourism directed to the beaches of the Costa Blanca and particularly on the second residence-construction boom which started in the 1960s and revived again by the late 1990s. Services and public administration also play a major role in the city's economy. The construction boom has raised many environmental concerns and both the local autonomous government and city council are under scrutiny by the European Union. The construction surge was the subject of hot debates among politicians and citizens alike. The latest of many public battles concerns the plans of the Port Authority of Alicante to construct an industrial estate on reclaimed land in front of the city's coastal strip, in breach of local, national, and European regulations. (See Port of Alicante for details).\nThe city serves as the headquarters of the European Union Intellectual Property Office and a sizeable population of European public workers live there.\nThe campus of the University of Alicante lies in San Vicente del Raspeig, bordering the city of Alicante to the north. More than 25,000 students attend the university.\nBetween 2005 and 2012 Ciudad de la Luz (\"Ciutat de la Llum\"), one of the largest film studios in Europe, had its base in Alicante. The studio shot Spanish and international movies such as \"Asterix at the Olympic Games\" by Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Forestier and Thomas Langmann, and \"Manolete\" by Menno Meyjes. It was shut down in 2012 for violating European competition law.\nTransport.\nAlicante Airport outranks the Valencia Airport, being the busiest airport in the Valencian Community, and among the busiest airports in Spain after Madrid, Barcelona, Palma de Mallorca and M\u00e1laga. It is connected with Madrid and Barcelona by frequent Iberia and Vueling flights, and with many Western European cities through carriers such as Ryanair, EasyJet and Jet2. There are also regular flights to Algeria.\nAlicante railway station is used by Cercan\u00edas Murcia/Alicante commuter rail services linking Alicante with suburbs and Murcia. Long-range Renfe trains run frequently to Madrid, Barcelona, and Valencia. In 2013, the Madrid\u2013Levante high-speed rail network was extended to Alicante station, allowing AVE high-speed rail services to link to Madrid via Villena AV, Albacete-Los Llanos and Cuenca-Fernando Z\u00f3bel.\nAlicante Metropolitan-Tram connects different parts within the city, its metropolitan area and with outlying settlements along Costa Blanca as well. As of 2020[ [update]], electric tram-trains run up to Benidorm, and diesel trains go further to D\u00e9nia.\nThe city has regular ferry services to the Balearic Islands and Algeria. The city is strongly fortified, with a spacious harbour.\nMain sights.\nAmongst the most notable features of the city are the Castle of Santa B\u00e1rbara and the port of Alicante. The latter was the subject of bitter controversy in 2006\u20132007 as residents battled, successfully, to keep it from being changed into an industrial estate.\nThe Santa B\u00e1rbara castle is situated on Mount Benacantil, overlooking the city. The tower (\"La Torreta\") at the top, is the oldest part of the castle, while part of the lowest zone and the walls were constructed later in the 18th century.\nThe promenade \"Explanada de Espa\u00f1a\", lined by palm trees, is paved with 6.5 million marble floor tiles creating a wavy form. The Promenade extends from the Port of Alicante to the Gran V\u00eda and ends at the famous statue by Mark Hersch. For the people of Alicante, the promenade is the meeting place for the traditional Spanish \"paseo\", or stroll along the waterfront in the evenings, and a venue for outdoor musical concerts. At the end of the promenade is a monument by the artist Ba\u00f1uls of the 19th century.\n\"Barrio de la Santa Cruz\" is a colourful quarter of the old city, situated southwest of Santa B\u00e1rbara castle. Its small houses climb up the hill leading to the walls and the castle, through narrow streets decorated with flags and tubs of flowers.\n\"L'Ereta Park\" is situated on the foothills of Mount Benacantil. It runs from the Santa B\u00e1rbara castle down to the old part of Alicante and consists of several levels, routes, decks, and rest stops which offer a panoramic view overlooking the city.\n\"El Palmeral Park\" is one of the favourite parks of Alicante's citizens. It includes walking trails, children's playgrounds, ponds and brooks, picnic tables, and an auditorium for concerts.\nJust a few kilometres from Alicante, on the Mediterranean Sea, lies Tabarca island. What was once a haven for Barbary pirates is now a tourist attraction.\nOther sights include:\nThere are a dozen museums in Alicante. On exhibition at the Archaeological Museum of Alicante (MARQ) are local artifacts dating from 100,000 years ago until the early 20th century. The collection is divided into different rooms representing three divisions of archaeological methodology: ground, urban and underwater archaeology, with dioramas, audiovisual and interactive zones. The archaeological museum won the European Museum of the Year Award in 2004. Gravina Museum of Fine Arts presents several paintings and sculptures from the 16th century to the 19th century. Asegurada Museum of Contemporary Art houses a major collection of twentieth-century art, composed mainly of works donated by Eusebio Sempere.\nFestivals.\nThe most important festival, the \"Bonfires of Saint John\" (\"Hogueras de San Juan\" / \"Fogueres de Sant Joan\"), takes place during the summer solstice. This is followed a week later by five nights of firework and pyrotechnic contests between companies on the urban beach \"Playa del Postiguet\". Another well-known festival is \"Moors and Christians\" (\"Moros y Cristianos\") in Altozano or \"San Blas\" district. Overall, the city boasts a year-round nightlife for the enjoyment of tourists, residents, and a large student population of the University of Alicante. The nightlife social scene tends to shift to nearby Playa de San Juan during the summer months.\nEvery summer in Alicante, a two-month-long programme of music, theatre and dance is staged in the Paseo del Puerto.\nSport.\nFor the 2023/24 season Alicante has two football clubs in the top 4 levels of Spanish football; H\u00e9rcules CF and CF Intercity. For the 2023/24 season H\u00e9rcules compete in Segunda Federaci\u00f3n, the 4th level and are well known as they played in La Liga (the Spanish Premier Division) during the 1996/1997 season and again in 2010/2011. They have had many famous players such as David Trezeguet, Royston Drenthe and Nelson Valdez. H\u00e9rcules are also known for their victory over Barcelona in 1997 which led to Real Madrid winning the league. Home games are played at the 30,000-capacity Jos\u00e9 Rico P\u00e9rez Stadium.\nThe city's other club, Alicante CF, who played in the Third Division, was dissolved in 2014 due to economic problems. They were replaced the same year by newly formed club CFI Alicante.\nBasketball club (HLA Alicante) Lucentum Alicante participates in the Spanish basketball league. It plays in the Centro de Tecnificaci\u00f3n de Alicante.\nAlicante serves as headquarters and the starting point of the Volvo Ocean Race, a yacht race around the world. The latest race sailed in January 2023.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAlicante is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2418", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2418", "title": "August 4", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearAugust 4 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2419", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2419", "title": "Alloys", "text": ""}
{"id": "2421", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2421", "title": "Albrecht Achilles", "text": "Albrecht Achilles may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "2422", "revid": "45718847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2422", "title": "Ann Widdecombe", "text": "British politician and media personality (born 1947)\nAnn Noreen Widdecombe (born 4 October 1947) is a British politician and television personality who has been Reform UK's Immigration and Justice spokesperson since 2023. Originally a member of the Conservative Party, she was Member of Parliament (MP) for Maidstone and The Weald, and the former Maidstone constituency, from 1987 to 2010. She was a member of the Brexit Party from 2019 until it was renamed Reform UK in 2021, and served as Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for South West England from 2019 to 2020; she rejoined Reform UK in 2023.\nBorn in Bath, Somerset, Widdecombe read Latin at the University of Birmingham and later studied philosophy, politics and economics at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. She is a religious convert from Anglicanism to Roman Catholicism, and was a member of the Conservative Christian Fellowship. She served as Minister of State for Employment from 1994 to 1995 and Minister of State for Prisons from 1995 to 1997. She later served in the Shadow Cabinet of William Hague as Shadow Secretary of State for Health from 1998 to 1999 and Shadow Home Secretary from 1999 to 2001. She was appointed to the Privy Council in 1997.\nWiddecombe stood down from the House of Commons at the 2010 general election. Since 2002, she has made numerous television and radio appearances, including as a television presenter. A prominent Eurosceptic, in 2016 she supported the Vote Leave campaign to withdraw the United Kingdom from the European Union (EU). Widdecombe returned to politics as the lead candidate for the Brexit Party in South West England at the 2019 European Parliament election, winning the seat in line with results nationally, serving until the country left the EU on 31 January 2020. In the general election of December 2019 \u2013 as with all other candidates for the Commons fielded by the Brexit Party \u2013 she did not win the seat she contested (Plymouth Sutton and Devonport), but retained her deposit and came third.\nIdeologically, Widdecombe identifies herself as a social conservative and stresses the importance of traditional values and conservatism. As a member of the House of Commons, she opposed the legality of abortion, opposed granting LGBT people legal rights such as the same age of consent as heterosexuals, and opposed the repeal of Section 28. She supported reintroduction of the death penalty for murder, though more narrowly applied than previously. She is opposed to all forms of assisted dying. She has a history of supporting rigorous laws on animal protection and opposition to fox hunting.\nEarly life.\nAnn Noreen Widdecombe was born in Bath, Somerset, the daughter of Rita Noreen (\"n\u00e9e\" Plummer; 1911\u20132007) and Ministry of Defence civil servant James Murray Widdecombe. Widdecombe's maternal grandfather, James Henry Plummer, was born to a Catholic family of English descent in Crosshaven, County Cork, Ireland in 1874.\nShe attended the Royal Naval School in Singapore, and La Sainte Union Convent School in Bath. She then read Latin at the University of Birmingham and later attended Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, to read philosophy, politics and economics. In 1971, she was the secretary of the Oxford Union for one term, and became its treasurer for one term in 1972. \nWhile studying at Oxford, she lived next door to Mary Archer, Edwina Currie, and Gyles Brandreth's wife Mich\u00e8le Brown. She worked for Unilever (1973\u201375) and then as an administrator at the University of London (1975\u201387) before entering Parliament.\nPolitical career.\nIn 1974, Widdecombe was personal assistant to Michael Ancram in the February and October general elections of that year. From 1976 to 1978, Widdecombe was a councillor on Runnymede District Council in Surrey.\nShe contested the seat of Burnley in Lancashire in the 1979 general election and then, against David Owen, the Plymouth Devonport seat in the 1983 general election. In 1983 she, with Lady Olga Maitland and Virginia Bottomley, co-founded Women and Families for Defence, a group founded in opposition to the anti-nuclear Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp.\nWiddecombe was first elected to the House of Commons, for the Conservatives, in the 1987 general election as member for the constituency of Maidstone (which became Maidstone and The Weald in 1997).\nIn government.\nWiddecombe joined Prime Minister John Major's government as Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security in 1990. In 1993, she was moved to the Department of Employment, and she was promoted to Minister of State the following year. In 1995, she joined the Home Office as Minister of State for Prisons and visited every prison in the UK.\nIn 1996, Widdecombe, as prisons minister, defended the Government's policy to shackle pregnant prisoners with handcuffs and chains when in hospital receiving prenatal care. Widdecombe told the Commons that the restrictions were needed to prevent prisoners from escaping the hospital. \"Some MPs may like to think that a pregnant woman would not or could not escape. Unfortunately this is not true. The fact is that hospitals are not secure places in which to keep prisoners, and since 1990, 20 women have escaped from hospitals\". Jack Straw, Labour's Home Affairs spokesman at the time, said it was \"degrading and unnecessary\" for a woman to be shackled at any stage.\nShadow Cabinet.\nIn May 1997, in the context of an inquiry into a series of prison escapes, Widdecombe remarked of former Home Secretary Michael Howard, under whom she had served, that there was \"something of the night about him\".\nThis much-quoted comment is thought to have contributed to the failure of Howard's 1997 campaign for the Conservative Party leadership, a sentiment shared by both Howard himself and Widdecombe. It led to him being caricatured as a vampire, in part due to his Romanian ancestry. Howard became the official party leader in 2003, and Widdecombe then stated, \"I explained fully what my objections were in 1997 and I do not retract anything I said then. But ... we have to look to the future and not the past.\"\nAfter the Conservative landslide defeat at the 1997 general election, she served as Shadow Health Secretary between 1998 and 1999 and later as Shadow Home Secretary from 1999 to 2001 under the leadership of William Hague.\nLeadership contest and backbenches.\nDuring the 2001 Conservative leadership election, she could not find sufficient support amongst Conservative MPs for her leadership candidacy. She first supported Michael Ancram, who was eliminated in the first round, and then Kenneth Clarke, who lost in the final round. She afterwards declined to serve in Iain Duncan Smith's Shadow Cabinet (although she indicated on the television programme \"When Louis Met...\", prior to the leadership contest, that she wished to retire to the backbenches anyway).\nIn 2001, when Michael Portillo was running for leader of the Conservative Party, Widdecombe described him and his allies as \"backbiters\" due to his alleged destabilising influence under Hague. She went on to say that, should he be appointed leader, she would never give him her allegiance. This was amidst a homophobic campaign led by socially conservative critics of Portillo.\nIn the 2005 leadership election, she initially supported Kenneth Clarke again. Once he was eliminated, she turned support towards Liam Fox. Following Fox's subsequent elimination, she took time to reflect before finally declaring for David Davis. She expressed reservations over the eventual winner David Cameron, feeling that he did not, like the other candidates, have a proven track record, and she was later a leading figure in parliamentary opposition to his A-List policy. At the October 2006 Conservative Conference, she was Chief Dragon in a political version of the television programme \"Dragons' Den\", in which A-list candidates were invited to put forward a policy proposal, which was then torn apart by her team of Rachel Elnaugh, Oliver Letwin and Michael Brown.\nIn an interview with \"Metro\" in September 2006 she stated that if Parliament were of a normal length, it was likely she would retire at the next general election. She confirmed her intention to stand down to \"The Observer\"'s Pendennis diary in September 2007, and again in October 2007 after Prime Minister Gordon Brown quashed speculation of an autumn 2007 general election.\nIn November 2006, she moved into the house of an Islington Labour Councillor to experience life on a council estate, her response to her experience being \"Five years ago I made a speech in the House of Commons about the forgotten decents. I have spent the last week on estates in the Islington area finding out that they are still forgotten.\"\nIn 2007 Widdecombe was one of the 98 MPs who voted to keep their expense details secret. When the expenses claims were leaked, however, Widdecombe was described by \"The Daily Telegraph\" as one of the \"saints\" amongst all MPs.\nIn May 2009, following the resignation of Michael Martin as Speaker of the House of Commons, it was reported that Widdecombe was gathering support for election as interim Speaker until the next general election. On 11 June 2009, she confirmed her bid to be the Speaker, but came last in the second ballot and was eliminated.\nWiddecombe retired from politics at the 2010 general election. It was rumoured that she would be a Conservative candidate for Police and Crime Commissioner in 2012, but she refused. She since spoke about her opposition to the Coalition Government and her surprise at not being given a peerage by David Cameron.\nIn 2016, she supported Brexit during the 2016 EU referendum and, following the resignation of David Cameron, endorsed Andrea Leadsom in her candidacy for election for the leadership of the governing Conservative Party.\nReturn to politics \u2013 Brexit Party.\nIn 2019 she returned to politics as a candidate for the Brexit Party in the European parliament elections in South West England, which were held on 23 May, though she maintained that she would still vote for the Conservatives in the local elections that took place three weeks before. She was expelled by the Conservative Party immediately after her announcement. Widdecombe had considered joining the Brexit Party in March 2019, but joined later, in May.\nWiddecombe said that her decision to stand resulted from the Government's failure to deliver Britain's departure from the EU on schedule. \"Both major parties need a seismic shock,\" she said, \"to see the extent of public disgust.\" She subsequently won her seat.\nWiddecombe became a member of the European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE).\nWiddecombe stood as a candidate for Plymouth Sutton and Devonport in the 2019 UK general election, coming a distant third but just retaining her deposit with 5.5% of the vote. Nigel Farage said that she was told by the Conservative Party that she would be part of their Brexit negotiations if she stood down as a candidate.\nPolitical views.\nSocial issues.\nAs an MP, Widdecombe expressed socially conservative views, including opposition to abortion; it was understood during her time in frontline politics that she would not become Health Secretary as long as this involved responsibility for abortions. Although a committed Christian, she characterised the issue as one of life and death on which her view had been the same when she was agnostic and was a member of the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children while studying at Oxford. During Parliament, Widdecombe was a member of the Pro-Life All Party Parliamentary Group, which met with SPUC over concerns the organisation's more strident approach to abortion policy could alienate Protestant and atheist supporters.\nShe converted from the Church of England (CoE) to the Roman Catholic Church following the CoE decision to ordain women as priests.\nShe is an opponent of assisted dying in any form, saying that any such legislation would fail to \"protect the mentally ill, disabled and the frail elderly\". She further commented: \"You cannot get to my age without having seen loved ones suffer [...] or having seen dear friends die in pain. And, yes, I too have thought 'We wouldn't do this to an animal'. But that emotional indignation has also to be extended to those whom any euthanasia law would threaten.\"\nLGBT rights.\nAlthough not an MP at the time, Widdecombe did voice support for the partial decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1967 in England and Wales. After that, Widdecombe consistently opposed further reforms while in Parliament. Out of the 17 parliamentary votes between 1998 and 2008 considered by the Public Whip website to concern equal rights for homosexuals, Widdecombe took the opposing position in 15 cases, not being present at the other two votes. In 1999, Widdecombe stated that \"I do not think that [homosexuality] can be promoted as an equally valid lifestyle to [heterosexual] marriage, but I would say the same about irregular heterosexual arrangements.\"\nShe has consistently argued against an equal age of consent for same-sex relationships, voting against a 1994 act (which would have reduced the age of consent for some male-male sexual activity from 21 to 18), and in 1998 (arguing against a further reduction from 18 to 16, which later occurred in 2000). On the latter act, she wrote in \"The Mail on Sunday\" that \"one of the sundry horrors for which this Government is likely to be remembered will be that it gave its imprimatur to sodomy at 16\", She later said in 2000: \"I do not believe that issues of equality should override the imperatives of protecting the young.\" In 2003, Widdecombe opposed the repeal of Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988. In 2012, Widdecombe voiced support in the \"Daily Express\" for the practise of conversion therapy, which claims to change the orientation of homosexuals.\nWiddecombe has also expressed her opposition to same-sex marriage, introduced by David Cameron's government in 2014, arguing that \"the state must have a preferred model\" which is \"a union that is generally open to procreation\". She also opposes gender self-identification for transgender people. In 2020, she expressed her opposition to same-sex dancing on \"Strictly Come Dancing\", saying: \"I don't think it is what viewers of \"Strictly\", especially families, are looking for. But that's up to the audience and the programme.\"\nCriminal justice.\nIn her speech at the 2000 Conservative conference, she called for a zero tolerance policy of prosecution, with the punishment of \u00a3100 fines for users of cannabis. This was well received by rank-and-file Conservative delegates.\nOver the years, Widdecombe has expressed her support for a reintroduction of the death penalty, which was abolished in the UK in 1965. She notably spoke of her support for its reintroduction for the worst cases of murder in the aftermath of the murder of two 10-year-old girls from Soham, Cambridgeshire, in August 2002, arguing that in the five years up to 1970 when the death penalty was suspended, the national murder rate had more than doubled.\nEnvironmental and science issues.\nShe is a committed animal lover and one of the several Conservative MPs to have consistently voted for the ban on the hunting of foxes. Widdecombe was among more than 20 high-profile people who signed a letter to Members of Parliament in 2015 to oppose David Cameron's plan to amend the Hunting Act 2004.\nIn 2007, she wrote that she did not want to belittle the issue of climate change, but was sceptical of the claims that specific actions would prevent catastrophe. In 2008, she wrote that her doubts had been \"crystalised\" by Nigel Lawson's book \"An Appeal to Reason\"; in 2014, she likened Lawson's difficulty in getting the book published to the book-burnings in Nazi Germany. Later in 2008, Widdecombe claimed that the \"science of climate change is robustly disputed\", then, in 2009, that \"There is no climate change, hasn't anybody looked out of their window recently?\" She was one of the five MPs who voted against the Climate Change Act 2008.\nThe previous year, she voted to support a parliamentary motion in favour of homeopathy, disagreeing with the Science and Technology Committee's Report on the subject.\nControversies.\nIn 2009, she partially defended Carol Thatcher's use of the racial slur 'golliwog' on \"Any Questions?\", saying: \"There is a generation to whom a golliwog is merely a toy, a generation which was much endeared by its golliwogs which grew up with them on jam jars ... and there is a generation, a new generation for whom that word is deeply offensive and one does have to make I think some allowance for the fact.\" In December 2019, WhatsApp conversations between her and Brexit Party activists were leaked to the \"Plymouth Herald\" which showed Widdecombe using the term amid rumours party campaign funding was being diverted away from Plymouth ahead of the general election of that year. Widdecombe said: \"Yes, I threw all my toys of the pram. Bears and gollywogs flying everywhere!!\"\nIn 2019 Widdecombe defended the comments she made in a 2012 article that supported \"gay conversion\" therapy. She told Sky News that science may yet \"provide an answer\" to the question of whether people can \"switch sexuality\". Following Widdecombe's apparent endorsement of conversion therapy, at least one venue, the Landmark theatre in Ilfracombe, Devon, cancelled a performance of her one-woman show.\nWiddecombe and two other Brexit Party figures were criticised for previous appearances on the David Icke-affiliated \"Richie Allen Show\", which has been accused of promoting Holocaust denial and antisemitic conspiracy theories about the Rothschild family. Widdecombe appeared three times between August 2017 and April 2019 and was described as an \"old friend of the show\" by the host during one appearance. Widdecombe told \"Jewish Chronicle\" that she agreed to appear to discuss Brexit, and that she \"had never heard of the \"Richie Allen Show\" until I agreed to go on\" and distanced herself from its antisemitic content by, among other things, pointing to her membership of the Conservative Friends of Israel, B'nai B'rith event speeches, and her novel \"An Act of Treachery\", which she said is set during the Holocaust.\nWiddecombe was elected as a Member of the European Parliament for the Brexit Party on 23 May 2019 in the European elections. On 3 July 2019 she used her maiden speech in Strasbourg to compare Brexit to slaves revolting against their owners and to a colonised country rising up against occupying forces, a stance which was criticised by members of both the European Parliament and the British House of Commons.\nMedia work and appearances.\nIn 2002 she took part in the ITV programme \"Celebrity Fit Club\". Also in 2002 she took part in a Louis Theroux television documentary, depicting her life, both in and out of politics. In March 2004 she briefly became \"The Guardian\" newspaper's agony aunt, introduced with an Emma Brockes interview. In 2005 BBC Two showed six episodes of \"The Widdecombe Project\", an agony aunt television programme. In 2005, she appeared in a new series of \"Celebrity Fit Club\", this time as an agony aunt. Also in 2005, she presented the show \"Ann Widdecombe to the Rescue\" in which she acted as an agony aunt, dispensing advice to disputing families, couples, and others across the UK. In 2005, she appeared in a discussion programme on Five to discuss who had been England's greatest monarch since the Norman Conquest; her choice of monarch was Charles II.\nShe was the guest host of news quiz \"Have I Got News for You\" twice, in 2006 and 2007. Her first appearance as guest host, in 2006, was widely regarded as a success. Following her second appearance, Widdecombe said she would never appear on the show again because of comments made by panellist Jimmy Carr which she considered filth, though she called regular panellists Ian Hislop and Paul Merton \"the fastest wits in showbusiness\". Merton later revealed that he thought Widdecombe had been \"the worst ever presenter\" of the show, particularly on her second appearance where Merton claimed she \"thought she was Victoria Wood\".\nIn 2007 she awarded the \"University Challenge\" trophy to the winners. In the same year, she appeared in \"The Sound of Drums\", the 12th episode of the third series of the science-fiction drama \"Doctor Who\", endorsing the Master's Prime Minister campaign. In 2007 and 2008 Widdecombe fronted a television series called \"Ann Widdecombe Versus\", on ITV1, in which she spoke to various people about things related to her as an MP, with an emphasis on confronting those responsible for problems she wished to tackle. In 2007 she talked about prostitution, social benefits, and truancy. A fourth episode was screened on 18 September 2008 in which she travelled around London and Birmingham talking to girl gangs.\nIn 2009, Widdecombe appeared with Archbishop John Onaiyekan in an \"Intelligence Squared\" debate in which they defended the motion that the Catholic Church was a force for good. Arguing against the motion were Stephen Fry and Christopher Hitchens, who won the debate overall.\nIn October 2010, she appeared on BBC One's \"Strictly Come Dancing\", partnered by Anton du Beke, winning the support of some viewers despite low marks from the judges. After nine weeks of routines strongly flavoured by comedy, the couple was eliminated, in the bottom two. In 2011 Widdecombe played the Lord Mayoress in an episode of \"Sooty\".\nIn 2012, Widdecombe hosted the 30 one-hour episodes of \"Cleverdicks\", a quiz show for the Sky Atlantic channel. In April 2012 Widdecombe presented an hour-long documentary for BBC Radio 5 Live, \"Drunk Again: Ann Widdecombe Investigates\", looking at how the British attitude to alcohol consumption had changed over the previous few years. Widdecombe was in a \"Strictly Come Dancing\" special in Children in Need's 2012 appeal night. On 4 November 2012, Widdecombe guest-hosted one episode of BBC's \"Songs of Praise\" programme about singleness.\nIn October 2014, she appeared in the BBC series \"Celebrity Antiques Road Trip\" with expert Mark Stacey.\nWiddecombe took part in a four-part BBC One television series \"24 Hours in the Past\", along with Colin Jackson, Alistair McGowan, Miquita Oliver, Tyger Drew-Honey and Zoe Lucker in April and May 2015, involving experiencing life as workers in a dustyard, coachhouse, pottery, and as workhouse inmates in 1840s Britain. She took part in an episode of \"Tipping Point: Lucky Stars\" in 2016. In 2017, Widdecombe took part in ITV's \"Sugar Free Farm\".\nIn January 2018, Widdecombe participated in the Celebrity Big Brother twenty-first series; she was criticised over her comments regarding the Harvey Weinstein controversy and comments perceived to be anti-LGBT to her fellow housemates, most notably to drag queen Courtney Act (Shane Jenek). She finished the competition in second place, behind Jenek.\nIn 2019 Widdecombe appeared on the new celebrity version of \"The Crystal Maze\", where alongside Sunetra Sarker, Wes Nelson, Matthew Wright and Nikki Sanderson, she won money for Stand Up to Cancer.\nIn 2020 Widdecombe travelled to Norway for three days to visit Halden Prison, for the documentary \"The World's Most Luxurious Prison\".\nStage acting career.\nFollowing her retirement, Widdecombe made her stage debut, on 9 December 2011, at the Orchard Theatre, Dartford in the Christmas pantomime \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", alongside \"Strictly Come Dancing\" judge Craig Revel Horwood. In April 2012, she had a ten-minute non-singing cameo part in Gaetano Donizetti's comic opera \"La Fille du Regiment\", playing the Duchesse de Crackentorp. Widdecombe reprised her pantomime performance, again with Horwood, at the Swan Theatre, High Wycombe in December 2012.\nWiddecombe stepped in at short notice to play the Evil Queen in \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", which was published by the Brothers Grimm in 1812, at Bridlington Spa in December 2016. She replaced injured Lorraine Chase. This was Widdecombe's first appearance as a pantomime 'baddie'; a role she told the press she had always hoped for.\nIn December 2017 Widdecombe played the Empress of China in the pantomime \"Aladdin\" at the Marina Theatre in Lowestoft.\nPersonal life and family.\nUntil her retirement following the 2010 general election, Widdecombe divided her time between her two homes\u00a0\u2013 one in London and one in the countryside village of Sutton Valence, Kent, in her constituency. She sold both upon retiring at the next general election. She shared her home in London with her widowed mother, Rita Widdecombe, until Rita's death, on 25 April 2007, aged 95. In March 2008, she bought a house in Haytor Vale, on Dartmoor in Devon, where she retired. Her brother, Malcolm (1937\u20132010), who was an Anglican canon in Bristol, retired in May 2009 and died in October 2010. Her nephew, Roger Widdecombe, is an Anglican priest. She has never married nor had any children. In November 2007 on BBC Radio 4 she described how a journalist once produced a profile on her with the assumption that she had had at least \"one sexual relationship\", to which Widdecombe replied: \"Be careful, that's the way you get sued\". When interviewer Jenni Murray asked if she had ever had a sexual relationship, Widdecombe laughed \"it's nobody else's business\".\nA 2001 report in \"The Guardian\" said that she had had a three-year romance while studying at the University of Oxford; Widdecombe confirmed this in January 2018 on the UK reality TV show \"Big Brother\", explaining that she had ended the romance in order to prioritise her career.\nWiddecombe has a fondness for cats and many other animals such as foxes; a section of her website, the \"Widdyweb\", is about the pet cats she has lived with. Widdecombe adopted two goats at the Buttercups Goat Sanctuary in Boughton Monchelsea near Maidstone. In an interview, Widdecombe talked about her appreciation of music, despite describing herself as \"pretty well tone-deaf\".\nOutside politics she writes novels, and a weekly column for the \"Daily Express\".\nIn January 2011 Widdecombe was President of the North of England Education Conference in Blackpool, and gave a speech there supporting selective education and opposing the ban on new grammar schools being built. She also became a patron of The Grace Charity for M.E.\nIn April 2012 Widdecombe said that she was writing her autobiography, which she described as \"rude about all and sundry, but an amount of truth is always necessary\". Her autobiography \"Strictly Ann: The Autobiography\", was published in 2013, and was variously described as \"forthright\", \"candid\", even \"rude\".\nWiddecombe is a patron of the charity Safe Haven for Donkeys in the Holy Land (SHADH) and in 2014 visited the SHADH Donkey Sanctuary in the West Bank.\nReligious views.\nWiddecombe became an Anglican in her 30s, after a period of being an agnostic following her departure from religious schooling. She converted to Catholicism in 1993 after leaving the Church of England, explaining to reporters from the \"New Statesman\":\nI left the Church of England because there was a huge bundle of straw. The ordination of women was the last straw, but it was only one of many. For years I had been disillusioned by the Church of England's compromising on everything. The Catholic Church doesn't care if something is unpopular.\nIn October 2006, she pledged to boycott British Airways for suspending a worker who refused to hide her Christian cross, until the company reversed the suspension.\nIn 2010, Widdecombe turned down the offer to be Britain's next ambassador to the Holy See, being prevented from accepting by suffering a detached retina. She was made a Dame of the Order of St. Gregory the Great by Pope Benedict XVI for services to politics and public life on 31 January 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2425", "revid": "33923920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2425", "title": "Aurangzeb", "text": "Mughal emperor from 1658 to 1707\nAlamgir I (Muhi al-Din Muhammad; 3 November 1618 \u2013 3 March 1707), commonly known by the title Aurangzeb, was the sixth Mughal emperor, reigning from 1658 until his death in 1707. Under his reign, the Mughal Empire reached its greatest extent, with territory spanning nearly the entirety of the Indian subcontinent.\nAurangzeb and the Mughals belonged to a branch of the Timurid dynasty. He held administrative and military posts under his father Shah Jahan (r.\u20091628\u00a0\u2013\u00a01658) and gained recognition as an accomplished military commander. Aurangzeb served as the viceroy of the Deccan in 1636\u20131637 and the governor of Gujarat in 1645\u20131647. He jointly administered the provinces of Multan and Sindh in 1648\u20131652 and continued expeditions into the neighboring Safavid territories. In September 1657, Shah Jahan nominated his eldest and liberalist son Dara Shikoh as his successor, a move repudiated by Aurangzeb, who proclaimed himself emperor in February 1658. In April 1658, Aurangzeb defeated the allied army of Shikoh and the Kingdom of Marwar at the Battle of Dharmat. Aurangzeb's decisive victory at the Battle of Samugarh in May 1658 cemented his sovereignty and his suzerainty was acknowledged throughout the Empire. After Shah Jahan recovered from illness in July 1658, Aurangzeb declared him incompetent to rule and imprisoned his father in the Agra Fort.\nAurangzeb's reign is characterized by a period of rapid military expansion, with several dynasties and states being overthrown by the Mughals. The Mughals also surpassed Qing China as the world's largest economy and biggest manufacturing power. The Mughal military gradually improved and became one of the strongest armies in the world. A staunch Muslim, Aurangzeb is credited with the construction of numerous mosques and patronizing works of Arabic calligraphy. He successfully imposed the \"Fatawa-i Alamgiri\" as the principal regulating body of the empire and prohibited religiously forbidden activities in Islam. Although Aurangzeb suppressed several local revolts, he maintained cordial relations with foreign governments.\nHis empire was also one of the largest in Indian history. However, his emperorship has a complicated legacy. His critics, citing his actions against the non-Muslims and his conservative view of Islam, argue that he abandoned the legacy of pluralism and tolerance of the earlier Mughal emperors. Others, however, reject these assertions, arguing that he opposed bigotry against Hindus, Sikhs and Shia Muslims and that he employed significantly more Hindus in his imperial bureaucracy than his predecessors.\nEarly life.\nAurangzeb was born in Dahod on 3 November 1618. His father was Emperor Shah Jahan (r.\u20091628\u00a0\u2013\u00a01658), who hailed from the Mughal house of the Timurid dynasty, which in turn was part of the Barlas tribe of Turco-Mongol origins. The latter was descended from Emir Timur (r.\u20091370\u00a0\u2013\u00a01405), the founder of the Timurid Empire. Aurangzeb's mother Mumtaz Mahal was the daughter of the Persian nobleman Asaf Khan, who was the youngest son of vizier Mirza Ghiyas and grandson of vizier Mohammad-Sharif. Aurangzeb was born during the reign of his patrilineal grandfather Jahangir (r.\u20091605\u00a0\u2013\u00a01627), the fourth emperor of the Mughal Empire.\nIn June 1626, after an unsuccessful rebellion by his father, eight-year-old Aurangzeb and his brother Dara Shikoh were sent to the Mughal court in Lahore as hostages of their grandfather Jahangir and his wife, Nur Jahan, as part of their father's pardon deal. After Jahangir died in 1627, Shah Jahan emerged victorious in the ensuing war of succession to the Mughal throne. Aurangzeb and his brother were consequently reunited with Shah Jahan in Agra in 1628. Aurangzeb's daily allowance was fixed at 500 rupees.\nAs a Mughal prince, Aurangzeb received an education covering subjects like combat, military strategy, and administration. His curriculum also included areas like Islamic studies, Turkic and Persian literature. Aurangzeb grew up fluent in the Hindustani language. He was also fluent in his ancestral language of Chagatai Turkic, but similar to his predecessors, he preferred to use Persian. He had mastered the Quran and the hadith.\nOn 28 May 1633, a war elephant stampeded through the Mughal imperial encampment. Aurangzeb rode against the elephant and threw his spear at its head. He was unhorsed but escaped death. For his courage, Aurangzeb's father conferred on him the title of \"Bahadur\" (brave) and presented him with gifts. When chided for his recklessness, Aurangzeb replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the fight had ended fatally for me it would not have been a matter of shame. Death drops the curtain even on emperors; it is no dishonor. The shame lay in what my brothers did!\nHistorians have interpreted this as an unjust taunt with cowardice against his brothers. Shuja had also faced the elephant and wounded it with his spear. Dara had been too far away to come to their assistance.\nThree days later Aurangzeb turned fifteen. Shah Jahan weighed him and presented him 5,000 Mohars, the elephant Sudhakar, along with other presents worth Rs. 200,000. His bravery against the elephant was documented in Persian and Urdu verses.\nCareer as prince.\nIn December 1634, he was assigned to his first post with the rank of ten thousand horse and four thousand troopers, also was allowed to use the royal prerogative of red tent. Aurangzeb was nominally in charge of the force sent to Bundelkhand with the intent of subduing the rebellious ruler of Orchha, Jhujhar Singh, who had attacked another territory in defiance of Shah Jahan's policy and was refusing to atone for his actions. By arrangement, Aurangzeb stayed in the rear, away from the fighting, and took the advice of his generals as the Mughal Army gathered and commenced the siege of Orchha in 1635. The campaign was successful and Singh was removed from power.\nFirst Deccan governorate (1636\u20131644).\nAurangzeb was appointed viceroy of the Deccan in 1636. After Shah Jahan's vassals had been devastated by the alarming expansion of Ahmednagar during the reign of the Nizam Shahi boy-prince Murtaza Shah III, the emperor dispatched Aurangzeb, who in 1636 brought the Nizam Shahi dynasty to an end. The Mughal provinces of Deccan at that time were Khandesh, Berar, Telangana and Daulatabad. The entire region with 64 forts, were in charge of Aurangzeb, while ten more forts had yet to be conquered by the Mughals. In 1637, Aurangzeb married the Safavid princess Dilras Banu, posthumously known as Rabia-ud-Daurani. She was his first wife and chief consort as well as his favourite. He also had an infatuation with a slave girl, Hira Bai, whose death at a young age greatly affected him. In his old age, he was under the charms of his concubine, Udaipuri Mahal. The latter had formerly been a companion to Dara Shukoh.\nIn the same year, 1637, Aurangzeb was placed in charge of annexing the small Rajput kingdom of Baglana, which he did with ease. In 1638, Aurangzeb married Nawab Bai, later known as Rahmat al-Nisa. That same year, Aurangzeb dispatched an army to subdue the Portuguese coastal fortress of Daman, however his forces met stubborn resistance and were eventually repulsed at the end of a long siege. At some point, Aurangzeb married Aurangabadi Mahal, who was a Circassian or Georgian.\nAurangzeb arrived in Agra on 2 May 1644 to see his sister Jahanara who was severely burnt in an accident two months prior. \nShah Jahan was outraged to see Aurangzeb enter the interior palace compound in military attire and immediately dismissed him from his position of viceroy of the Deccan; Aurangzeb was also no longer allowed to use red tents or to associate himself with the official military standard of the Mughal emperor. Other sources state that Aurangzeb was dismissed from his position because Aurangzeb left the life of luxury and became a \"faqir\". \nAurangzeb's first viceroyalty of the Deccan lasted eight years from 14 July 1636 to 28 May 1644 before his dismissal.\nGovernor of Gujarat (1645\u20131647).\nIn 1645, he was barred from the court for seven months. It is reported that he mentioned his grief about this to fellow Mughal commanders. Thereafter, Shah Jahan appointed him governor of Gujarat. His rule in Gujarat was marked with religious disputes but he was rewarded for bringing stability. In September 1646, Shah Jahan called Aurangzeb off from Gujrat assigning the charge to Shaista Khan. On 20 January 1647, he met the emperor at Lahore, where he was promoted to the chief commander of Balkh and Badakhshan.\nGovernor of Balkh (1647\u20131648).\nIn 1647, Shah Jahan moved Aurangzeb from Gujarat to be governor of Balkh, replacing a younger son, Murad Baksh, who had proved ineffective there. The area was under attack from Uzbek and Turkmen tribes. The Mughal artillery and muskets were matched by the skirmishing skills of their opponents which led to a stalemate. Aurangzeb discovered that his army could not live off the land, which was devastated by war. It is recorded that during the battle against the Uzbeks during this campaign, Aurangzeb dismounted from his elephant ride to recite prayer to the surprise of the opposing force commander.\nWith the onset of winter, he and his father had to make an unsatisfactory deal with the Uzbeks. They had to give away territory in exchange for nominal recognition of Mughal sovereignty. The Mughal force suffered still further with attacks by Uzbeks and other tribesmen as it retreated through the snow to Kabul. By the end of this two-year campaign, into which Aurangzeb had been plunged at a late stage, a vast sum of money had been expended for little gain.\nGovernor of Multan and Sindh (1648\u20131652).\nFurther unsuccessful military involvements followed, as Aurangzeb was appointed governor of Multan and Sindh. His efforts in 1649 and 1652 to dislodge the Safavids at Kandahar which they had recently retaken after a decade of Mughal control, both ended in failure as winter approached. The logistical problems of supplying an army at the extremity of the empire, combined with the poor quality of armaments and the intransigence of the opposition have been cited by John Richards as the reasons for failure. A third attempt in 1653, led by Dara Shikoh, met with the same outcome.\nSecond Deccan governorate (1653\u20131658).\nOn 17 July 1652, Aurangzeb became viceroy of the Deccan again after he was replaced by Dara Shukoh in the attempt to recapture Kandahar. Aurangbad's two \"jagirs\" (land grants) were moved there as a consequence of his return. The Deccan was a relatively impoverished area, this caused him to lose out financially. The area required grants were required from Malwa and Gujarat in order to maintain the administration. The situation caused ill-feeling between him and his father Shah Jahan who insisted that things could be improved if Aurangzeb made efforts to develop cultivation.\nAurangzeb appointed Murshid Quli Khan to extend to the Deccan the \"zabt\" revenue system used in northern India. Murshid Quli Khan organised a survey of agricultural land and a tax assessment on what it produced. To increase revenue, Murshid Quli Khan granted loans for seed, livestock, and irrigation infrastructure. This led the Deccan region to return to prosperity.\nAurangzeb proposed to resolve financial difficulties by attacking the dynastic occupants of Golconda (the Qutb Shahis) and Bijapur (the Adil Shahis). This proposal would also extend Mughal influence by accruing more lands. Aurangzeb advanced against the Sultan of Bijapur and besieged Bidar. The \"Kiladar\" (governor or captain) of the fortified city, Sidi Marjan, was mortally wounded when a gunpowder magazine exploded. After twenty-seven days of fighting, Bidar was captured by the Mughals and Aurangzeb continued his advance. Aurangzeb suspected Dara had exerted influence on his father. He believed that he was on the verge of victory in both instances, and was frustrated that Shah Jahan chose then to settle for negotiations with the opposing forces rather than pushing for complete victory.\nWar of succession.\nThe four sons of Shah Jahan all held governorships during their father's reign. The emperor favoured the eldest, Dara Shikoh. This had caused resentment among the younger three, who sought at various times to strengthen alliances between themselves and against Dara. There was no Mughal tradition of primogeniture, the systematic passing of rule, upon an emperor's death, to his eldest son. Instead it was customary for sons to overthrow their father and for brothers to war to the death among themselves.\nHistorian Satish Chandra says that \"In the ultimate resort, connections among the powerful military leaders, and military strength and capacity [were] the real arbiters\". The contest for power was primarily between Dara Shikoh and Aurangzeb because, although all four sons had demonstrated competence in their official roles, it was around these two that the supporting cast of officials and other influential people mostly circulated. There were ideological differences\u00a0\u2013 Dara was an intellectual and a religious liberal in the mould of Akbar, while Aurangzeb was much more conservative\u00a0\u2013\u00a0but, as historians Barbara D. Metcalf and Thomas R. Metcalf say, \"To focus on divergent philosophies neglects the fact that Dara was a poor general and leader. It also ignores the fact that factional lines in the succession dispute were not, by and large, shaped by ideology.\"\nMarc Gaborieau, professor of Indian studies at l'\u00c9cole des Hautes \u00c9tudes en Sciences Sociales, explains that \"The loyalties of [officials and their armed contingents] seem to have been motivated more by their own interests, the closeness of the family relation and above all the charisma of the pretenders than by ideological divides.\" Muslims and Hindus did not divide along religious lines in their support for one pretender or the other nor, according to Chandra, is there much evidence to support the belief that Jahanara and other members of the royal family were split in their support. Jahanara, certainly, interceded at various times on behalf of all of the princes and was well-regarded by Aurangzeb even though she shared the religious outlook of Dara.\nIn 1656, a general under Qutb Shahi dynasty named Musa Khan led an army of 12,000 musketeers to attack Aurangzeb, who was besieging Golconda Fort. Later in the same campaign, Aurangzeb, in turn, rode against an army consisting of 8,000 horsemen and 20,000 Karnataki musketeers.\nAfter making clear his desire for his son Dara to take over after him, Shah Jahan fell ill with strangury in 1657. He was kept in seclusion and cared for by Dara in the newly built city of Shahjahanabad (Old Delhi). Rumours spread that Shah Jahan had died, which led to concerns among his younger sons. These younger sons took military actions seemingly in response, but it is not known whether these preparations were made in the mistaken belief that the rumours of death of Shah Jahan were true and that Dara might be hiding it for political gain, or whether the challengers were taking advantage of the situation.\nShah Shuja in Bengal, where he had been governor since 1637 crowned himself King at RajMahal. He brought his cavalry, artillery and river flotilla upriver towards Agra. Near Varanasi his forces confronted a defending army sent from Delhi under the command of Prince Sulaiman Shukoh, son of Dara Shukoh, and Raja Jai Singh.\nMurad did the same in his governorship of Gujarat and Aurangzeb did so in the Deccan.\nAfter regaining some of his health, Shah Jahan moved to Agra and Dara urged him to send forces to challenge Shah Shuja and Murad, who had declared themselves rulers in their respective territories. While Shah Shuja was defeated at Banares in February 1658, the army sent to deal with Murad discovered to their surprise that he and Aurangzeb had combined their forces, the two brothers having agreed to partition the empire once they had gained control of it.\nThe two armies clashed at Dharmat in April 1658, with Aurangzeb being the victor. Shuja was chased through Bihar. The victory of Aurangzeb proved this to be a poor decision by Dara Shikoh, who now had a defeated force on one front and a successful force unnecessarily pre-occupied on another. Realising that his recalled Bihar forces would not arrive at Agra in time to resist the emboldened Aurangzeb's advance, Dara scrambled to form alliances in order but found that Aurangzeb had already courted key potential candidates.\nWhen Dara's disparate, hastily assembled army clashed with Aurangzeb's well-disciplined, battle-hardened force at the battle of Samugarh in late May, neither Dara's men nor his generalship were any match for Aurangzeb. Dara had also become over-confident in his own abilities and, by ignoring advice not to lead in battle while his father was alive, he cemented the idea that he had usurped the throne. \"After the defeat of Dara, Shah Jahan was imprisoned in the fort of Agra where he spent eight long years under the care of his favourite daughter Jahanara.\"\nAurangzeb then broke his arrangement with Murad Baksh, which probably had been his intention all along. Instead of looking to partition the empire between himself and Murad, he had his brother arrested and imprisoned at Gwalior Fort. Murad was executed on 4 December 1661, ostensibly for the murder of the \"diwan\" of Gujarat. The allegation was encouraged by Aurangzeb, who caused the \"diwan's\" son to seek retribution for the death under the principles of Sharia law.\nMeanwhile, Dara gathered his forces, and moved to the Punjab. The army sent against Shuja was trapped in the east, its generals Jai Singh and Dilir Khan submitted to Aurangzeb, but Dara's son, Suleiman Shikoh, escaped. Aurangzeb offered Shah Shuja the governorship of Bengal. This move had the effect of isolating Dara Shikoh and causing more troops to defect to Aurangzeb. Shah Shuja, who had declared himself emperor in Bengal began to annex more territory and this prompted Aurangzeb to march from Punjab with a new and large army that fought during the battle of Khajwa, where Shah Shuja and his chain-mail armoured war elephants were routed by the forces loyal to Aurangzeb. Shah Shuja then fled to Arakan (in present-day Burma), where he was executed by the local rulers.\nWith Shuja and Murad disposed of, and with his father immured in Agra, Aurangzeb pursued Dara Shikoh, chasing him across the north-western bounds of the empire. Aurangzeb claimed that Dara was no longer a Muslim and accused him of poisoning the Mughal Grand Vizier Saadullah Khan. After a series of battles, defeats and retreats, Dara was betrayed by one of his generals, who arrested and bound him. In 1658, Aurangzeb arranged his formal coronation in Delhi.\nOn 10 August 1659, Dara was executed on grounds of apostasy and his head was sent to Shah Jahan. This was the first prominent execution of Aurangzeb based on accusations of being influenced by Hinduism, however some sources argue it was done for political reasons. Aurangzeb had his allied brother Prince Murad Baksh held for murder, judged and then executed. Aurangzeb was accused of poisoning his imprisoned nephew Sulaiman Shikoh. Having secured his position, Aurangzeb confined his frail father at the Agra Fort but did not mistreat him. Shah Jahan was cared for by Jahanara and died in 1666.\nReign.\nFull title.\nThe epithet Aurangzeb means 'Ornament of the Throne'. His chosen title Alamgir translates to Conqueror of the World.\nAurangzeb's full imperial title was:\n\"Al-Sultan al-Azam wal Khaqan al-Mukarram Hazrat Abul Muzaffar Muhy-ud-Din Muhammad Aurangzeb Bahadur Alamgir I\",\n\"Badshah Ghazi\",\n\"Shahanshah-e-Sultanat-ul-Hindiya Wal Mughaliya\".\nAurangzeb had also been attributed various other titles including \"Caliph of The Merciful\", \"Monarch of Islam\", and \"Living Custodian of God\".\nBureaucracy.\nAurangzeb's imperial bureaucracy employed significantly more Hindus than that of his predecessors.\nBetween 1679 and 1707, the number of Hindu officials in the Mughal administration rose by half to 31.6% due to an increased recruitment of Marathas for the purpose of Deccan campaign. In the second half of his rule, the Marathas outnumbered Rajputs in his administration. Nevertheless, he tried to decrease the number of non-Muslim nobles in his court and encouraged high ranking Hindu officials to convert to Islam.\nEconomy.\nUnder his reign, the Mughal Empire contributed to the world's GDP by nearly 25%, surpassing Qing China, making it the world's largest economy and biggest manufacturing power, more than the entirety of Western Europe, and signaled proto-industrialization.\nReligious policy.\nAurangzeb was an orthodox Muslim ruler. Subsequent to the policies of his three predecessors, he endeavored to make Islam a dominant force in his reign. However these efforts brought him into conflict with the forces that were opposed to this revival. Aurangzeb was a follower of the Mujaddidi Order and a disciple of the son of the Punjabi saint, Ahmad Sirhindi. He sought to establish Islamic rule as instructed and inspired by him.\nSheikh Muhammad Ikram stated that after returning from Kashmir, Aurangzeb issued order in 1663, to ban the practice of Sati, a Hindu practice to burn a widow whenever her husband died. Ikram recorded that Aurangzeb issued the decree:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;in all lands under Mughal control, never again should the officials allow a woman to be burnt.\nAlthough Aurangzeb's orders could be evaded with payment of bribes to officials, adds Ikram, later European travellers record that \"sati\" was not much practised in Mughal empire, and that Sati was \"very rare, except it be some Rajah's wives, that the Indian women burn at all\" by the end of Aurangzeb's reign.\nHistorian Katherine Brown has noted that \"The very name of Aurangzeb seems to act in the popular imagination as a signifier of politico-religious bigotry and repression, regardless of historical accuracy.\" The subject has also resonated in modern times with popularly accepted claims that he intended to destroy the Bamiyan Buddhas. As a political and religious conservative, Aurangzeb chose not to follow the secular-religious viewpoints of his predecessors after his ascension. He made no mention of the Persian concept of kinship, the Farr-i-Aizadi, and based his rule on the Quranic concept of kingship.\nShah Jahan had already moved away from the liberalism of Akbar, although in a token manner rather than with the intent of suppressing Hinduism, and Aurangzeb took the change still further. Though the approach to faith of Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan was more syncretic than Babur, the founder of the empire, Aurangzeb's position is not so obvious.\nHis emphasis on sharia competed, or was directly in conflict, with his insistence that \"zawabit\" or secular decrees could supersede sharia. The chief qazi refusing to crown him in 1659, Aurangzeb had a political need to present himself as a \"defender of the sharia\" due to popular opposition to his actions against his father and brothers. Despite claims of sweeping edicts and policies, contradictory accounts exist. Historian Katherine Brown has argued that Aurangzeb never imposed a complete ban on music. He sought to codify Hanafi law by the work of several hundred jurists, called Fatawa 'Alamgiri. It is possible the War of Succession and continued incursions combined with Shah Jahan's spending made cultural expenditure impossible.\nHe learnt that at Multan, Thatta, and particularly at Varanasi, Hindu Brahmins belonging to \"established schools\" were teaching \"false books\" and had attracted numerous Hindus and Muslims. He ordered the subahdars of these provinces to demolish the schools and the temples of non-Muslims. From this order Eaton notes the Mughal court was keen to stamp out \"a certain kind of teaching\" although it is unknown exactly what teachings or books the order references.\nAurangzeb ordered subahdars to punish Muslims who dressed like non-Muslims. The executions of the antinomian Sufi mystic Sarmad Kashani and the ninth Sikh Guru Tegh Bahadur bear testimony to Aurangzeb's religious policy; the former was beheaded on multiple accounts of heresy, the latter, according to Sikhs, because he objected to Aurangzeb's forced conversions. Aurangzeb had also banned the celebration of the Zoroastrian festival of Nauroz along with other un-Islamic ceremonies, and encouraged conversions to Islam; instances of persecution against particular Muslim factions were also reported.\nYohanan Friedmann has reported that according to many modern historians and thinkers, the puritanical thought of Ahmad Sirhindi inspired the religious orthodoxy policy of Aurangzeb.\nTaxation policy.\nShortly after coming to power, Aurangzeb remitted more than 80 long-standing taxes affecting all of his subjects.\nIn 1679, Aurangzeb chose to reimpose \"jizya\", a military tax on non-Muslim subjects in lieu of military service, after an abatement for a span of a hundred years, in what was critiqued by many Hindu rulers, family members of Aurangzeb, and Mughal court officials. The specific amount varied with the socioeconomic status of a subject and tax-collection was often waived for regions hit by calamities. Rajput and Maratha state officials, Brahmins, women, children, elders, the handicapped, the unemployed, the ill, and the insane were all perpetually exempted.\nThe collectors were mandated to be Muslims. A majority of modern scholars reject that religious bigotry influenced the imposition; rather, realpolitik \u2013 economic constraints as a result of multiple ongoing battles and establishment of credence with the orthodox ulemas \u2013 are held to be primary agents.\nAurangzeb enforced a higher tax burden on Hindu merchants at the rate of 5%, as against 2.5% on Muslim merchants, which led to considerable dislike of Aurangzeb's economic policies, a sharp turn from Akbar's uniform tax code. According to Marc Jason Gilbert, Aurangzeb ordered the jizya fees to be paid in person, in front of a tax collector, where the non Muslims were to recite a verse in the Quran that referred to their inferior status as non-Muslims. This decision led to protests and lamentations among the masses as well as Hindu court officials. In order to meet state expenditures, Aurangzeb had ordered increases in land taxes. The burden of which fell heavily upon the Hindu Jats. The reimposition of the jizya encouraged Hindus to flee to areas under East India Company jurisdiction, under which policies of religious sufferance and pretermissions of religious taxes prevailed.\nAurangzeb issued land grants and provided funds for the maintenance of shrines of worship but also often ordered their destruction. Modern historians reject the thought-school of colonial and nationalist historians about these destructions being guided by religious zealotry. Rather, the association of temples with sovereignty, power and authority is emphasized upon.\nWhile constructing mosques was considered an act of royal duty to subjects, there are also several \"firmans\" in Aurangzeb's name supporting temples, \"maths\", Chishti shrines, and gurudwaras, including the Mahakaleshwar temple of Ujjain, a gurudwara at Dehradun, Balaji temple of Chitrakoot, Umananda Temple of Guwahati and the Shatrunjaya Jain temples, among others.\nContemporary court chronicles mention hundreds of temples that were demolished by Aurangzeb or his chieftains upon his order. In September 1669, he ordered the destruction of Vishvanath Temple at Varanasi, which was established by Raja Man Singh, whose grandson Jai Singh was believed to have facilitated Shivaji's escape. After the Jat rebellion in Mathura (early 1670), which killed the patron of the town mosque, Aurangzeb suppressed the rebels and ordered for the city's Kesava Deo temple to be demolished, and replaced with an \"Eidgah\".\nIn 1672\u201373, Aurangzeb ordered the resumption of all grants held by Hindus throughout the empire. This was not followed absolutely in regions such as Gujarat, where lands granted in in'am to Charans were not affected. In around 1679, he ordered the destruction of several prominent temples, including those of Khandela, Udaipur, Chittor, and Jodhpur, which were patronized by rebels.\nIn an order specific to Benaras, Aurangzeb invokes Sharia to declare that Hindus will be granted state protection and temples won't be razed (but prohibits construction of any new temple); other orders to similar effect can be located. Eaton notes numerous new temples were built in other areas of the empire during this time. Richard Eaton, upon a critical evaluation of primary sources, counts 15 temples to have been destroyed during Aurangzeb's reign.\nAdministrative reforms.\nAurangzeb received tribute from all over the Indian subcontinent, using this wealth to establish bases and fortifications in India, particularly in the Carnatic, Deccan, Bengal and Lahore.\nRevenue.\nAurangzeb's exchequer raised a record \u00a3100\u00a0million in annual revenue through various sources like taxes, customs and land revenue, \"et al.\" from 24 provinces. He had an annual yearly revenue of $450 million, more than ten times that of his contemporary Louis XIV of France.\nCoins.\nAurangzeb felt that verses from the \"Quran\" should not be stamped on coins, as done in former times, because they were constantly touched by the hands and feet of people. His coins had the name of the mint city and the year of issue on one face, and, the following couplet on other:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;King Aurangzib '\u0100lamgir Stamped coins, in the world, like the bright full moon.\nLaw.\nIn 1689, the second Maratha Chhatrapati (King) Sambhaji was executed by Aurangzeb. In a sham trial, he was found guilty of murder and violence, atrocities against the Muslims of Burhanpur and Bahadurpur in Berar by Marathas under his command.\nIn 1675, the Sikh leader Guru Tegh Bahadur was arrested on orders by Aurangzeb, found guilty of blasphemy by a Qadi's court and executed.\nThe 32nd Da'i al-Mutlaq (Absolute Missionary) of the Dawoodi Bohra sect of Musta'l\u012b Islam Syedna Qutubkhan Qutubuddin was executed by Aurangzeb, then governor of Gujarat, for heresy; on 27 Jumadil Akhir 1056 AH (1648 AD), Ahmedabad, India.\nMilitary.\nIt is reported that Aurangzeb always inspected his cavalry contingents every day, while testing his cutlasses sheep carcass, brought before him without the entrails and neatly bound up, in one strike.\nIn 1663, during his visit to Ladakh, Aurangzeb established direct control over that part of the empire and loyal subjects such as Deldan Namgyal agreed to pledge tribute and loyalty. Deldan Namgyal is also known to have constructed a Grand Mosque in Leh, which he dedicated to Mughal rule.\nIn 1664, Aurangzeb appointed Shaista Khan subedar (governor) of Bengal. Shaista Khan eliminated Portuguese and Arakanese pirates from the region, and in 1666 recaptured the port of Chittagong from the Arakanese king, Sanda Thudhamma. Chittagong remained a key port throughout Mughal rule.\nIn 1685, Aurangzeb dispatched his son, Muhammad Azam Shah, with a force of nearly 50,000 men to capture Bijapur Fort and defeat Sikandar Adil Shah (the ruler of Bijapur) who refused to be a vassal. The Mughals could not make any advancements upon Bijapur Fort, mainly because of the superior usage of cannon batteries on both sides. Outraged by the stalemate Aurangzeb himself arrived on 4 September 1686 and commanded the siege of Bijapur; after eight days of fighting, the Mughals were victorious.\nOnly one remaining ruler, Abul Hasan Qutb Shah (the Qutbshahi ruler of Golconda), refused to surrender. He and his servicemen fortified themselves at Golconda and fiercely protected the Kollur Mine, which was then probably the world's most productive diamond mine, and an important economic asset. In 1687, Aurangzeb led his grand Mughal army against the Deccan Qutbshahi fortress during the siege of Golconda. The Qutbshahis had constructed massive fortifications throughout successive generations on a granite hill over 400\u00a0ft high with an enormous eight-mile long wall enclosing the city. The main gates of Golconda had the ability to repulse any war elephant attack.\nAlthough the Qutbshahis maintained the impregnability of their walls, at night Aurangzeb and his infantry erected complex scaffolding that allowed them to scale the high walls. During the eight-month siege the Mughals faced many hardships including the death of their experienced commander Kilich Khan Bahadur. Eventually, Aurangzeb and his forces managed to penetrate the walls by capturing a gate, and their entry into the fort led Abul Hasan Qutb Shah to surrender. He died after twelve years of Mughal imprisonment.\nMughal cannon making skills advanced during the 17th century. One of the most impressive Mughal cannons is known as the Zafarbaksh, which is a very rare \"composite cannon\", that required skills in both wrought-iron forge welding and bronze-casting technologies and the in-depth knowledge of the qualities of both metals. The \"Ibrahim Rauza\" was a famed cannon, which was well known for its multi-barrels. Fran\u00e7ois Bernier, the personal physician to Aurangzeb, observed Mughal gun-carriages each drawn by two horses, an improvement over the bullock-drawn gun-carriages used elsewhere in India.\nDuring the rule of Aurangzeb, in 1703, the Mughal commander at Coromandel, Daud Khan Panni spent 10,500 coins to purchase 30 to 50 war elephants from Ceylon.\nArt and culture.\nAurangzeb was noted for his religious piety; he memorized the entire Quran, studied hadiths and stringently observed the rituals of Islam, and \"transcribe[d] copies of the Quran.\"\nAurangzeb had a more austere nature than his predecessors, and greatly reduced imperial patronage of the figurative Mughal miniature.\nCalligraphy.\nThe Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb is known to have patronised works of Islamic calligraphy; the demand for Quran manuscripts in the \"naskh\" style peaked during his reign. Having been instructed by Syed Ali Tabrizi, Aurangzeb was himself a talented calligrapher in \"naskh\", evidenced by Quran manuscripts that he created.\nArchitecture.\nAurangzeb was not as involved in architecture as his father. Under Aurangzeb's rule, the position of the Mughal Emperor as chief architectural patron began to diminish. However, Aurangzeb did endow some significant structures. Catherine Asher terms his architectural period as an \"Islamization\" of Mughal architecture. One of the earliest constructions after his accession was a small marble mosque known as the Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque), built for his personal use in the Red Fort complex of Delhi. He later ordered the construction of the Badshahi Mosque in Lahore, which is today one of the largest mosques in the Indian subcontinent. The mosque he constructed in Srinagar is still the largest in Kashmir. Aurangzeb had a palace constructed for himself in Aurangabad, which was extant till a few years ago.\nMost of Aurangzeb's building activity revolved around mosques, but secular structures were not neglected. The Mubarak Manzil in Agra served as his riverside residence after his victory at Samugarh. The Bibi Ka Maqbara in Aurangabad, the mausoleum of Rabia-ud-Daurani, was constructed by his eldest son Azam Shah upon Aurangzeb's decree. Its architecture displays clear inspiration from the Taj Mahal. Aurangzeb also provided and repaired urban structures like fortifications (for example a wall around Aurangabad, many of whose gates still survive), bridges, caravanserais, and gardens.\nAurangzeb was more heavily involved in the repair and maintenance of previously existing structures. The most important of these were mosques, both Mughal and pre-Mughal, which he repaired more of than any of his predecessors. He patronised the \"dargahs\" of Sufi saints such as Bakhtiyar Kaki, and strived to maintain royal tombs.\nTextiles.\nThe textile industry in the Mughal Empire emerged very firmly during the reign of the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb and was particularly well noted by Francois Bernier, a French physician of the Mughal Emperor. Francois Bernier writes how \"Karkanahs\", or workshops for the artisans, particularly in textiles flourished by \"employing hundreds of embroiderers, who were superintended by a master\". He further writes how \"Artisans manufacture of silk, fine brocade, and other fine muslins, of which are made turbans, robes of gold flowers, and tunics worn by females, so delicately fine as to wear out in one night, and cost even more if they were well embroidered with fine needlework\".\nHe also explains the different techniques employed to produce such complicated textiles as \"Himru\" (whose name is Persian for \"brocade\"), \"Paithani\" (whose pattern is identical on both sides), \"Mushru\" (satin weave) and how \"Kalamkari\", in which fabrics are painted or block-printed, was a technique that originally came from Persia. Francois Bernier provided some of the first, impressive descriptions of the designs and the soft, delicate texture of Pashmina shawls also known as \"Kani\", which were very valued for their warmth and comfort among the Mughals, and how these textiles and shawls eventually began to find their way to France and England.\nForeign relations.\nAurangzeb sent diplomatic missions to Mecca in 1659 and 1662, with money and gifts for the Sharif. He also sent alms in 1666 and 1672 to be distributed in Mecca and Medina. Historian Naimur Rahman Farooqi writes that, \"By 1694, Aurangzeb's ardour for the Sharifs of Mecca had begun to wane; their greed and rapacity had thoroughly disillusioned the Emperor ... Aurangzeb expressed his disgust at the unethical behavior of the Sharif who appropriated all the money sent to the Hijaz for his own use, thus depriving the needy and the poor.\" According to English traveller named John Fryar, Aurangzeb considered that despite his enormous power on land, it was cheaper to establish a reciprocal relation with the naval forces of the Portuguese empire, to secure the sea interest of ships in Mughal territory, so he did not built large naval forces.\nRelations with Aceh.\nFor decades, the Malabari Mappila Muslims which representing the Mughal empire are already patronized Aceh Sultanate. Aurangzeb, and his brother, Dara Shikoh, participated with Aceh trade and Aurangzeb himself also exchanging presents with the Sultan of Aceh in 1641. In that year, it is recorded the daughter of Iskandar Muda, Sultanah Safiatuddin, has presented Aurangzeb with eight elephants.\nWhen the VOC, or Dutch East India Company trying to disrupt the trade in Aceh to make their own Malaka trade lucrative, Aurangzeb threatened the Dutch with retaliation against any losses in Gujarat due to Dutch intervention. This effort were caused due to VOC realization that Muslim tradings were damaging to the VOC. The Firman issued by Aurangzeb caused the VOC to back down and allowed Indian sailors to pass into Aceh, Perak, and Kedah, without any restrictions.\nRelations with the Uzbek.\nSubhan Quli Khan, Balkh's Uzbek ruler was the first to recognise him in 1658 and requested for a general alliance, he worked alongside the new Mughal Emperor since 1647, when Aurangzeb was the Subedar of Balkh.\nRelations with the Safavid dynasty.\nSafavid Iran and the Mughal Empire had long clashed over Kandahar, an outpost on the distant frontier of their two empires. Control of the city swung back and forth. Aurangzeb led two unsuccessful campaigns to recapture it 1649 and 1652. Mughal attempts died down after 1653 amidst internal rivalries.\nUpon ascending the throne, Aurangzeb was eager to obtain diplomatic recognition from the Safavids to bolster the legitimacy of his rule. Abbas II of Persia sent an embassy in 1661. Aurangzeb received the ambassador warmly and they exchanged gifts. A return embassy sent by Aurangzeb to Persia in 1664 was poorly treated. Tensions over Kandahar rose again. There were cross border raids, but hostilities subsided after Abbas II's death in 1666.\nAurangzeb's rebellious son, Prince Akbar, sought refuge with Suleiman I of Persia. Suleiman rescued him from the Imam of Musqat, but refused to assist him in any military adventures against Aurangzeb.\nRelations with the French.\nIn 1667, the French East India Company ambassadors Le Gouz and Bebert presented Louis XIV's letter which urged the protection of French merchants from various rebels in the Deccan. In response to the letter, Aurangzeb issued a \"firman\" allowing the French to open a factory in Surat.\nRelations with the Sultanate of Maldives.\nIn the 1660s, the Sultan of the Maldives, Ibrahim Iskandar I, requested help from Aurangzeb's representative, the Faujdar of Balasore. The Sultan wished to gain his support in possible future expulsions of Dutch and English trading ships, as he was concerned with how they might impact the economy of the Maldives. However, as Aurangzeb did not possess a powerful navy and had no interest in providing support to Ibrahim in a possible future war with the Dutch or English, the request came to nothing.\nRelations with the Ottoman Empire.\nLike his father, Aurangzeb was not willing to acknowledge the Ottoman claim to the caliphate. He often supported the Ottoman Empire's enemies, extending cordial welcome to two rebel Governors of Basra, and granting them and their families a high status in the imperial service. Sultan Suleiman II's friendly postures were ignored by Aurangzeb. The Sultan urged Aurangzeb to wage holy war against Christians. However, Aurangzeb were granted as patron of Sharif of Mecca, and sending the Sherif at that time with richly laden mission, which at that time were under the jurisdiction of Ottoman.\nRelations with the English and the Anglo-Mughal War.\nIn 1686, the East India Company, which had unsuccessfully tried to obtain a \"firman\" that would grant them regular trading privileges throughout the Mughal Empire, initiated the Anglo-Mughal War. This war ended in disaster for the English after Aurangzeb in 1689 dispatched a large fleet from Janjira that blockaded Bombay. The ships, commanded by Sidi Yaqub, were manned by Indians and Mappilas. In 1690, realising the war was not going favourably for them, the Company sent envoys to Aurangzeb's camp to plead for a pardon. The company's envoys prostrated themselves before the emperor, agreed pay a large indemnity, and promise to refrain from such actions in the future.\nIn September 1695, English pirate Henry Every conducted one of the most profitable pirate raids in history with his capture of a Grand Mughal grab convoy near Surat. The Indian ships had been returning home from their annual pilgrimage to Mecca when the pirate struck, capturing the \"Ganj-i-Sawai\", reportedly the largest ship in the Muslim fleet, and its escorts in the process. When news of the capture reached the mainland, a livid Aurangzeb nearly ordered an armed attack against the English-governed city of Bombay, though he finally agreed to compromise after the Company promised to pay financial reparations, estimated at \u00a3600,000 by the Mughal authorities.\nMeanwhile, Aurangzeb shut down four of the English East India Company's factories, imprisoned the workers and captains (who were nearly lynched by a rioting mob), and threatened to put an end to all English trading in India until Every was captured. The Lords Justices of England offered a bounty for Every's apprehension, leading to the first worldwide manhunt in recorded history. However, Every successfully eluded capture.\nIn 1702, Aurangzeb sent Daud Khan Panni, the Mughal Empire's Subhedar of the Carnatic region, to besiege and blockade Fort St. George for more than three months. The governor of the fort Thomas Pitt was instructed by the East India Company to sue for peace.\nRelations with the Ethiopian Empire.\nEthiopian Emperor Fasilides dispatched an embassy to India in 1664\u201365 to congratulate Aurangzeb upon his accession to the throne of the Mughal Empire. The delegation reportedly presented several valuable offerings to the Mughal Emperor, such as slaves, ivory, horses, a set of intricately adorned silver pocket pistols, a zebra and various other exotic gifts. Fran\u00e7ois Bernier, describes the presents as consisting of:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;:\"twenty-five choice slaves, nine or ten of whom were of a tender age and in a state to be made eunuchs [...]; fifteen horses, esteemed equal to those of Arabia, and a species of mule, whose skin I have seen: no tiger is so beautifully marked, and no alacha [a piece of cloth] of the Indies, or stripped silken stuff, is more finely and variously streaked; a couple of elephant's teeth [i. e. tusks], of a size so prodigious that it required, it seems, the utmost exertion of a strong man to lift either of them from the ground; and lastly, the horn of an ox, filled with civet, which was indeed enormously large, for I measured the mouth of it at Delhy, and found that it exceeded half a foot in diameter\"\nRelations with the Tibetans, Uyghurs, and Dzungars.\nAfter 1679, the Tibetans invaded Ladakh, which was in the Mughal sphere of influence. Aurangzeb intervened on Ladakh's behalf in 1683, but his troops retreated before Dzungar reinforcements arrived to bolster the Tibetan position. At the same time, however, a letter was sent from the governor of Kashmir claiming the Mughals had defeated the Dalai Lama and conquered all of Tibet, a cause for celebration in Aurangzeb's court.\nAurangzeb received an embassy from Muhammad Amin Khan of Chagatai Moghulistan in 1690, seeking assistance in driving out \"Qirkhiz infidels\" (meaning the Buddhist Dzungars), who \"had acquired dominance over the country\".\nRelations with the Czardom of Russia.\nRussian Czar Peter the Great requested Aurangzeb to open Russo-Mughal trade relations in the late 17th century. In 1696 Aurangzeb received his envoy, Semyon Malenkiy, and allowed him to conduct free trade. After staying for six years in India, and visiting Surat, Burhanpur, Agra, Delhi and other cities, Russian merchants returned to Moscow with valuable Indian goods.\nRebellions.\nTraditional and newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, Rajputs, Hindu Jats, Pashtuns, and Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or opposition, gave them both recognition and military experience.\nJat rebellion.\nIn 1669, Hindu Jats began to organise a rebellion that is believed to have been caused by the re-imposition of \"jizya\" and destruction of Hindu temples in Mathura. The Jats were led by Gokula, a rebel landholder from Tilpat. By the year 1670 20,000 Jat rebels were quelled and the Mughal Army took control of Tilpat, Gokula's personal fortune amounted to 93,000 gold coins and hundreds of thousands of silver coins.\nGokula was caught and executed. But the Jats once again attempted rebellion. Raja Ram Jat, in order to avenge his father Gokula's death, plundered Akbar's tomb of its gold, silver and fine carpets, opened Akbar's grave and dragged his bones and burned them in retaliation. Jats also shot off the tops of the minarets on the gateway to Akbar's Tomb and melted down two silver doors from the Taj Mahal. Aurangzeb appointed Mohammad Bidar Bakht as commander to crush the Jat rebellion. On 4 July 1688, Raja Ram Jat was captured and beheaded. His head was sent to Aurangzeb as proof of his beheading.\nAfter Aurangeb's death, Jats under Badan Singh established their independent state of Bharatpur.\nDue to the Jat rebellion, the temples of Pushtimarg, Gaudiya, and Radha vallabh Vaishnavs in Braj were abandoned and their icons were taken to different regions or into hiding.\nMughal\u2013Maratha Wars.\nIn 1657, while Aurangzeb attacked Golconda and Bijapur in the Deccan, the Hindu Maratha warrior, Shivaji, used guerrilla tactics to take control of three Adil Shahi forts formerly under his father's command. With these victories, Shivaji assumed de facto leadership of many independent Maratha clans. The Marathas harried the flanks of the warring Adil Shahis, gaining weapons, forts, and territory. Shivaji's small and ill-equipped army survived an all out Adil Shahi attack, and Shivaji personally killed the Adil Shahi general, Afzal Khan. With this event, the Marathas transformed into a powerful military force, capturing more and more Adil Shahi territories. Shivaji went on to neutralise Mughal power in the region.\nIn 1659, Aurangzeb sent his trusted general and maternal uncle Shaista Khan, the Wali in Golconda to recover forts lost to the Maratha rebels. Shaista Khan drove into Maratha territory and took up residence in Pune. But in a daring raid on the governor's palace in Pune during a midnight wedding celebration, led by Shivaji himself, the Marathas killed Shaista Khan's son and Shivaji maimed Shaista Khan by cutting off three fingers of his hand. Shaista Khan, however, survived and was re-appointed the administrator of Bengal going on to become a key commander in the war against the Ahoms.\nAurangzeb next sent general Raja Jai Singh to vanquish the Marathas. Jai Singh besieged the fort of Purandar and fought off all attempts to relieve it. Foreseeing defeat, Shivaji agreed to terms. Jai Singh persuaded Shivaji to visit Aurangzeb at Agra, giving him a personal guarantee of safety. Their meeting at the Mughal court did not go well, however. Shivaji felt slighted at the way he was received, and insulted Aurangzeb by refusing imperial service. For this affront he was detained, but managed to effect a daring escape.\nAfter Shivaji's escape, hostilities with the Mughals ebbed. He wrote a letter in April 1667 offering his submission again, along with the induction of his son into imperial service.\nAurangzeb ignored this letter, forcing Shivaji to enlist the help of Jaswant Singh of Marwar to communicate with the emperor. After Muazzam and Jaswant Singh recommended Shivaji to Aurangzeb, his submission was accepted and he was conferred the title of \u201cRaja\". Although Aurangzeb did not restore his right over the forts.\nSambhaji was also restored as a Mughal mansabdar with 5,000 horses. At that time Shivaji sent Sambhaji and General Prataprao Gujar, to serve with Prince Mu'azzam, the Mughal viceroy in Aurangabad. Sambhaji was also granted territory in Berar for revenue collection. Aurangzeb also permitted Shivaji to attack Bijapur, ruled by the decaying Adil Shahi dynasty; the weakened Sultan Ali Adil Shah II sued for peace and granted the rights of \"sardeshmukhi\" and \"chauthai\" to Shivaji.\nAurangzeb's third son Akbar left the Mughal court along with a few Muslim Mansabdar supporters and joined Muslim rebels in the Deccan. Aurangzeb in response moved his court to Aurangabad and took over command of the Deccan campaign. The rebels were defeated and Akbar fled south to seek refuge with Sambhaji, Shivaji's successor. More battles ensued, and Akbar fled to Persia and never returned.\nIn 1689, Aurangzeb's forces captured and executed Sambhaji. His successor Rajaram, later Rajaram's widow Tarabai and their Maratha forces fought individual battles against the forces of the Mughal Empire. Territory changed hands repeatedly during the years (1689\u20131707) of interminable warfare. As there was no central authority among the Marathas, Aurangzeb was forced to contest every inch of territory, at great cost in lives and money.\nEven as Aurangzeb drove west, deep into Maratha territory\u00a0\u2013 notably conquering Satara\u00a0\u2013 the Marathas expanded eastwards into Mughal lands\u00a0\u2013 Malwa and Hyderabad. The Marathas also expanded further South into Southern India defeating the independent local rulers there capturing Jinji in Tamil Nadu. Aurangzeb waged continuous war in the Deccan for more than two decades with no resolution. He thus lost about a fifth of his army fighting rebellions led by the Marathas in Deccan India. He travelled a long distance to the Deccan to conquer the Marathas and eventually died at the age of 88, still fighting the Marathas.\nAurangzeb's shift from conventional warfare to anti-insurgency in the Deccan region shifted the paradigm of Mughal military thought. There were conflicts between Marathas and Mughals in Pune, Jinji, Malwa and Vadodara. The Mughal Empire's port city of Surat was sacked twice by the Marathas during the reign of Aurangzeb and the valuable port was in ruins.\nAhom campaign.\nIn 1660 Mir Jumla II, the viceroy of Bengal, was ordered to recover the lost territories.\nThe Mughals set out in November 1661. Within weeks they occupied the capital of Kuch Behar, which they annexed. Leaving a detachment to garrison it, the Mughal army began to retake their territories in Assam. Mir Jumla II advanced on Garhgaon, the capital of the Ahom kingdom, and reached it on 17 March 1662. The ruler, Raja Sutamla, had fled before his approach. The Mughals captured 82 elephants, 300,000 rupees in cash, 1000 ships, and 173 stores of rice.\nOn his way back to Dacca, in March 1663, Mir Jumla II died of natural causes.\nThe battle of Saraighat was the last battle in the last major attempt by the Mughals to extend their empire into Assam. Though the Mughals managed to regain Guwahati briefly after a later Borphukan deserted it, the Ahoms wrested control in the battle of Itakhuli in 1682 and maintained it till the end of their rule.\nSatnami opposition.\nIn May 1672, the Satnami sect, obeying the commands of an old toothless woman (according to Mughal accounts), organised a revolt in the agricultural heartlands of the Mughal Empire. The Satnamis were known to have shaved off their heads and even eyebrows and had temples in many regions of Northern India. They began a large-scale rebellion 75 miles southwest of Delhi.\nThe Satnamis believed they were invulnerable to Mughal bullets and believed they could multiply in any region they entered. The Satnamis initiated their march upon Delhi and overran small-scale Mughal infantry units.\nAurangzeb responded by organising a Mughal army of 10,000 troops, artillery, and a detachment of his imperial guards. Aurangzeb wrote Islamic prayers and drew designs that were sewn into the army's flags. His army crushed the Satnami rebellion.\nSikh opposition.\nThe ninth Sikh Guru, Guru Tegh Bahadur, like his predecessors was opposed to forced conversion of the local population as he considered it wrong. Approached by Kashmiri Pandits to help them retain their faith and avoid forced religious conversions, Guru Tegh Bahadur sent a message to the emperor that if he could convert Teg Bagadur to Islam, every Hindu will become a Muslim. In response, Aurangzeb ordered arrest of the Guru. He was then brought to Delhi and tortured so as to convert him. On his refusal to convert, he was beheaded in 1675. In 1789, Gurudwara Sis Ganj Sahib was built in Delhi at the place where Guru Tegh Bahadur was beheaded.\nIn response, Guru Tegh Bahadur's son and successor, Guru Gobind Singh, further militarised his followers, starting with the establishment of Khalsa in 1699, eight years before Aurangzeb's death. In 1705, Guru Gobind Singh sent a letter entitled \"Zafarnamah\", which accused Aurangzeb of cruelty and betraying Islam. Guru Gobind Singh's formation of Khalsa in 1699 led to the establishment of the Sikh Confederacy and later Sikh Empire.\nPashtun opposition.\nThe Pashtun revolt in 1672 under the leadership of the warrior poet Khushal Khan Khattak of Kabul, was triggered when soldiers under the orders of the Mughal Governor Amir Khan allegedly molested a Parachi woman affiliated with the Safi in modern-day Kunar Province of Afghanistan. The Safi tribes retaliated against the soldiers. This attack provoked a reprisal, which triggered a general revolt of most of tribes. Attempting to reassert his authority, Amir Khan led a large Mughal Army to the Khyber Pass, where the army was surrounded by tribesmen and routed, with only four men, including the Governor, managing to escape.Aurangzeb's incursions into the Pashtun areas were described by Khushal Khan Khattak as \"Black is the Mughal's heart towards all of us Pathans\". Aurangzeb employed the scorched earth policy, sending soldiers who massacred, looted and burnt many villages. Aurangzeb also proceeded to use bribery to turn the Pashtun tribes against each other, with the aim that they would distract a unified Pashtun challenge to Mughal authority, and the impact of this was to leave a lasting legacy of mistrust among the tribes.\nAfter that the revolt spread, with the Mughals suffering a near total collapse of their authority in the Pashtun belt. The closure of the important Attock-Kabul trade route along the Grand Trunk road was particularly disastrous. By 1674, the situation had deteriorated to a point where Aurangzeb camped at Attock to personally take charge. Switching to diplomacy and bribery along with force of arms, the Mughals eventually split the rebels and partially suppressed the revolt, although they never managed to wield effective authority outside the main trade route.\nRathore rebellion.\nDescribed as the \"Rathore rebellion\" (1679\u20131707), the conflict between Rajputs of Marwar and the Mughals started after the death of Jaswant Singh of Marwar, due to Aurangzeb's attempt to interfere in the succession of Marwar.\nOn 23 July 1679, Aurangzeb made attempts to divide Marwar into two Rathore principalities, one held by Inder Singh Rathore and other by Ajit Singh. Aurangzeb also proposed that Ajit Singh should be raised as a Muslim and offered Jodhpur in return. The resistance to Mughal interference was started by the Rajput nobles under Durgadas Rathore and erupted into an all-out war between the Mughal empire and Rajputs of Marwar supported by Mewar Rajputs. It lasted for almost thirty years. The rebellion reached a climax after the death of Aurangzeb on 3 March 1707 and the capture of Jodhpur by the Rathores on 12 March 1707.\nDeath.\nBy 1689, the conquest of Golconda and Mughal victories in the south expanded the Mughal Empire to 4\u00a0million square kilometres, with a population estimated to be over 158\u00a0million. However, this supremacy was short-lived. Historian Jos Gommans says that \"...\u00a0the highpoint of imperial centralisation under emperor Aurangzeb coincided with the start of the imperial downfall.\"\nAurangzeb constructed a small marble mosque known as the Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque) in the Red Fort complex in Delhi. However, his constant warfare, especially with the Marathas, drove his empire to the brink of bankruptcy just as much as the wasteful personal spending and opulence of his predecessors.\nThe Indologist Stanley Wolpert says that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The conquest of the Deccan, to which Aurangzeb devoted the last twenty-six years of his life, was in many ways a Pyrrhic victory, costing an estimated hundred thousand lives a year during its last decade of fruitless, chess-game warfare ... The expense in gold and rupees can hardly be imagined or accurately estimated. Alamgir's moving capital alone-a city of tents thirty miles in circumference, two hundred and fifty bazaars, with half a million camp followers, fifty thousand camels, and thirty thousand elephants, all of whom had to be fed, stripped peninsular India of any and all of its surplus grain and wealth ... Not only famine, but bubonic plague arose\u00a0... Even Alamgir had ceased to understand the purpose for it all by ... 1705. The emperor was nearing ninety by then ... \"I came alone and I go as a stranger. I do not know who I am, nor what I have been doing,\" the dying old man confessed to his son in February 1707.\nEven when ill and dying, Aurangzeb made sure that the populace knew he was still alive, for if they had thought otherwise then the turmoil of another war of succession was likely. He died at his military camp in Bhingar near Ahmednagar on 3 March 1707 at the age of 88, having outlived many of his children. He had only 300 rupees with him which were later given to charity as per his instructions and he prior to his death requested not to spend extravagantly on his funeral but to keep it simple. His modest open-air grave in Khuldabad, Aurangabad, Maharashtra expresses his deep devotion to his Islamic beliefs. It is sited in the courtyard of the shrine of the Sufi saint Shaikh Burhan-u'd-din Gharib, who was a disciple of Nizamuddin Auliya of Delhi.\nBrown writes that after his death, \"a string of weak emperors, wars of succession, and coups by noblemen heralded the irrevocable weakening of Mughal power\". She notes that the populist but \"fairly old-fashioned\" explanation for the decline is that there was a reaction to Aurangzeb's oppression. Although Aurangzeb died without appointing a successor, he instructed his three sons to divide the empire among themselves. His sons failed to reach a satisfactory agreement and fought against each other in a war of succession. Aurangzeb's immediate successor was his third son Azam Shah, who was defeated and killed in June 1707 at the battle of Jajau by the army of Bahadur Shah I, the second son of Aurangzeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I came a stranger into this world, and a stranger I depart. I know nothing of myself, what I am, and for what I am destined. The instant which passed in power, has left only sorrow behind it. I have not been the guardian and protector of the empire.\u2014\u200a\nBoth because of Aurangzeb's over-extension and because of Bahadur Shah's weak military and leadership qualities, entered a period of terminal decline. Immediately after Bahadur Shah occupied the throne, the Maratha Empire\u00a0\u2013 which Aurangzeb had held at bay, inflicting high human and monetary costs even on his own empire \u2013 consolidated and launched effective invasions of Mughal territory, seizing power from the weak emperor. Within decades of Aurangzeb's death, the Mughal Emperor had little power beyond the walls of Delhi.\nAssessments and legacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Aurangzeb [was] uncomparably his father\u2019s superior: a wiser man, a juster king, a more intelligent and benevolent ruler.\u2014\u200a\nAurangzeb's rule has been the subject of both praise and controversy. During his lifetime, victories in the south expanded the Mughal Empire to 4 million square kilometres, and he ruled over a population estimated to be over 158 million subjects. His critics argue that his ruthlessness and religious bigotry made him unsuitable to rule the mixed population of his empire. Some critics assert that the persecution of Shias, Sufis and non-Muslims to impose practices of orthodox Islamic state, such as imposition of sharia and \"jizya\" religious tax on non-Muslims, doubling of custom duties on Hindus while abolishing it for Muslims, executions of Muslims and non-Muslims alike, and destruction of temples eventually led to numerous rebellions. G. N. Moin Shakir and Sarma Festschrift argue that he often used political opposition as pretext for religious persecution, and that, as a result, groups of Jats, Marathas, Sikhs, Satnamis and Pashtuns rose against him.\nMultiple interpretations of Aurangzeb's life and reign over the years by critics have led to a very complicated legacy. Some argue that his policies abandoned his predecessors' legacy of pluralism and religious tolerance, citing his introduction of the \"jizya\" tax and other policies based on Islamic ethics; his demolition of Hindu temples; the executions of his elder brother Dara Shikoh, King Sambhaji of Maratha and Sikh Guru Tegh Bahadur and the prohibition and supervision of behaviour and activities that are forbidden in Islam such as gambling, fornication, and consumption of alcohol and narcotics. At the same time, some historians question the historical authenticity of the claims of his critics, arguing that his destruction of temples has been exaggerated, he paid for temple maintenance, and in the latter half of his reign employed significantly more Hindus, especially Marathas, in his imperial bureaucracy than his predecessors and opposed bigotry against Hindus and Shia Muslims in imperial service.\nMuhammad Al-Munajjid has argued that the opinions from Islamic scholarly community towards Aurangzeb were positive because of the emperor's general attitude and actions, such as abolishing Bid'ah celebrations, musics, and the customs of bowing and kissing the ground which were done by his predecessors, practically adhering to the practice of Salafi while still held to Hanafite creed. Apparently this view of Aurangzeb were influenced by Muhammad Saleh Kamboh, who acted as his teacher.\nIn Pakistan, author Haroon Khalid writes that, \"Aurangzeb is presented as a hero who fought and expanded the frontiers of the Islamic empire\" and \"is imagined to be a true believer who removed corrupt practices from religion and the court, and once again purified the empire.\" The academic Munis Faruqui also opines that the \"Pakistani state and its allies in the religious and political establishments include him in the pantheon of premodern Muslim heroes, especially lauding him for his militarism, personal piety, and seeming willingness to accommodate Islamic morality within state goals.\"\nMuhammad Iqbal, considered the spiritual founder of Pakistan, admired Aurangzeb. Iqbal Singh Sevea, in his book on the political philosophy of the thinker, says that \"Iqbal considered that the life and activities of Aurangzeb constituted the starting point of Muslim nationality in India\". Maulana Shabbir Ahmad Usmani, in his funeral oration, hailed M.A. Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, to be the greatest Muslim since Aurangzeb. Pakistani-American academic Akbar Ahmed described President Zia-ul-Haq, known for his Islamization drive, as \"conceptually ... a spiritual descendent of Aurangzeb\" because Zia had an orthodox, legalistic view of Islam.\nMuhammad Sayyid Tantawy, a grand mufti of Egypt, once called Aurangzeb as \"A remnant of the Rightly-Guided Rashidun Caliphs\", as appreciation of Aurangzeb commitment to Islam teaching.\nBeyond the individual appreciations, Aurangzeb is seminal to Pakistan's national self-consciousness, as historian Ayesha Jalal, while referring to the Pakistani textbooks controversy, mentions M. D. Zafar's \"A Text Book of Pakistan Studies\" where we can read that, under Aurangzeb, \"Pakistan spirit gathered in strength\", while his death \"weakened the Pakistan spirit.\" Another historian from Pakistan, Mubarak Ali, also looking at the textbooks, and while noting that Akbar \"is conveniently ignored and not mentioned in any school textbook from class one to matriculation\", contrasts him with Aurangzeb, who \"appears in different textbooks of Social Studies and Urdu language as an orthodox and pious Muslim copying the Holy Quran and sewing caps for his livelihood.\" This image of Aurangzeb is not limited to Pakistan's official historiography.\nAs of 2015, about 177 towns and villages of India have been named after Aurangzeb. Historian Audrey Truschke points out that Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP), Hindutva proponents and some others outside Hindutva ideology regard Aurangzeb as Muslim zealot in India. Jawaharlal Nehru wrote that, due to his reversal of the cultural and religious syncretism of the previous Mughal emperors, Aurangzeb acted \"more as a Moslem than an Indian ruler\". Mahatma Gandhi was of the view that there was greater degree of freedom under Mughal rule than the British rule and asks that \"in Aurangzeb's time a Shivaji could flourish. Has one hundred and fifty years of the British rule produced any Pratap and Shivaji?\"\nLiteratures.\nAurangzeb has prominently featured in the following books\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2427", "revid": "32122377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2427", "title": "Alexandrine", "text": "Line of poetic meter comprising 12 syllables\nAlexandrine is a name used for several distinct types of verse line with related metrical structures, most of which are ultimately derived from the classical French alexandrine. The line's name derives from its use in the Medieval French \"Roman d'Alexandre\" of 1170, although it had already been used several decades earlier in \"Le P\u00e8lerinage de Charlemagne\". The foundation of most alexandrines consists of two hemistichs (half-lines) of six syllables each, separated by a caesura (a metrical pause or word break, which may or may not be realized as a stronger syntactic break):\n o o o o o o | o o o o o o\n o=any syllable; |=caesura\nHowever, no tradition remains this simple. Each applies additional constraints (such as obligatory stress or nonstress on certain syllables) and options (such as a permitted or required additional syllable at the end of one or both hemistichs). Thus a line that is metrical in one tradition may be unmetrical in another.\nWhere the alexandrine has been adopted, it has frequently served as the heroic verse form of that language or culture, English being a notable exception.\nScope of the term.\nThe term \"alexandrine\" may be used with greater or lesser rigour. Peureux suggests that only French syllabic verse with a 6+6 structure is, strictly speaking, an alexandrine. Preminger \"et al\". allow a broader scope: \"Strictly speaking, the term 'alexandrine' is appropriate to French syllabic meters, and it may be applied to other metrical systems only where they too espouse syllabism as their principle, introduce phrasal accentuation, or rigorously observe the medial caesura, as in French.\" Common usage within the literatures of European languages is broader still, embracing lines syllabic, accentual-syllabic, and (inevitably) stationed ambivalently between the two; lines of 12, 13, or even 14 syllables; lines with obligatory, predominant, and optional caesurae.\nFrench.\nAlthough alexandrines occurred in French verse as early as the 12th century, they were slightly looser rhythmically, and vied with the \"d\u00e9casyllabe\" and \"octosyllabe\" for cultural prominence and use in various genres. \"The alexandrine came into its own in the middle of the sixteenth century with the poets of the Pl\u00e9iade and was firmly established in the seventeenth century.\" It became the preferred line for the prestigious genres of epic and tragedy. The structure of the classical French alexandrine is\n o o o o o S | o o o o o S (e)\n S=stressed syllable; (e)=optional \"mute e\"\nClassical alexandrines are always rhymed, often in couplets alternating masculine rhymes and feminine rhymes, though other configurations (such as quatrains and sonnets) are also common.\nVictor Hugo began the process of loosening the strict two-hemistich structure. While retaining the medial caesura, he often reduced it to a mere word-break, creating a three-part line (\"alexandrin ternaire\") with this structure:\n o o o S | o o \u00a6 o S | o o o S (e)\n |=strong caesura; \u00a6=word break\nThe Symbolists further weakened the classical structure, sometimes eliminating any or all of these caesurae. However, at no point did the newer line \"replace\" the older; rather, they were used concurrently, often in the same poem. This loosening process eventually led to \"vers lib\u00e9r\u00e9\" and finally to \"vers libre\".\nEnglish.\nIn English verse, \"alexandrine\" is typically used to mean \"iambic hexameter\":\n \n /=\"ictus\", a strong syllabic position; \u00d7=\"nonictus\"\n \u00a6=often a mandatory or predominant caesura, but depends upon the author\nWhereas the French alexandrine is syllabic, the English is accentual-syllabic; and the central caesura (a defining feature of the French) is not always rigidly preserved in English.\nThough English alexandrines have occasionally provided the sole metrical line for a poem, for example in lyric poems by Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey and Sir Philip Sidney, and in two notable long poems, Michael Drayton's \"Poly-Olbion\" and Robert Browning's \"Fifine at the Fair\", they have more often featured alongside other lines. During the Middle Ages they typically occurred with heptameters (seven-beat lines), both exhibiting metrical looseness. Around the mid-16th century stricter alexandrines were popular as the first line of poulter's measure couplets, fourteeners (strict iambic heptameters) providing the second line.\nThe strict English alexandrine may be exemplified by a passage from \"Poly-Olbion\", which features a rare caesural enjambment (symbolized codice_1) in the first line:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em\"&gt;\nYe sacred Bards, that to \u00a6 your harps' melodious strings\nSung th'ancient Heroes' deeds (the monuments of Kings)\nAnd in your dreadful verse ingrav'd the prophecies,\nThe ag\u00e8d world's descents, and genealogies; (lines 31-34)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe Faerie Queene by Edmund Spenser, with its stanzas of eight iambic pentameter lines followed by one alexandrine, exemplifies what came to be its chief role: as a somewhat infrequent variant line in an otherwise iambic pentameter context. Alexandrines provide occasional variation in the blank verse of William Shakespeare and his contemporaries (but rarely; they constitute only about 1% of Shakespeare's blank verse). John Dryden and his contemporaries and followers likewise occasionally employed them as the second (rarely the first) line of heroic couplets, or even more distinctively as the third line of a triplet. In his \"Essay on Criticism\", Alexander Pope denounced (and parodied) the excessive and unskillful use of this practice:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em\"&gt;\nThen at the last and only couplet fraught\nWith some unmeaning thing they call a thought,\nA needless Alexandrine ends the song,\nThat, like a wounded snake, drags its slow length along. (lines 354-357)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nOther languages.\nSpanish.\nThe Spanish \"verso alejandrino\" is a line of 7+7 syllables, probably developed in imitation of the French alexandrine. Its structure is:\n o o o o o S o | o o o o o S o\nIt was used beginning about 1200 for \"mester de clerec\u00eda\" (clerical verse), typically occurring in the \"cuaderna v\u00eda\", a stanza of four \"alejandrinos\" all with a single end-rhyme.\nThe \"alejandrino\" was most prominent during the 13th and 14th centuries, after which time it was eclipsed by the metrically more flexible \"arte mayor\". Juan Ruiz's Book of Good Love is one of the best-known examples of \"cuaderna v\u00eda\", though other verse forms also appear in the work.\nDutch.\nThe mid-16th-century poet Jan van der Noot pioneered syllabic Dutch alexandrines on the French model, but within a few decades Dutch alexandrines had been transformed into strict iambic hexameters with a caesura after the third foot. From the Low Countries the accentual-syllabic alexandrine spread to other continental literatures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Daniel Heinsius\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014Translated by Leofranc Holford-Strevens\nGerman.\nSimilarly, in early 17th-century Germany, Georg Rudolf Weckherlin advocated for an alexandrine with free rhythms, reflecting French practice; whereas Martin Opitz advocated for a strict accentual-syllabic iambic alexandrine in imitation of contemporary Dutch practice \u2014 and German poets followed Opitz. The alexandrine (strictly iambic with a consistent medial caesura) became the dominant long line of the German baroque.\nPolish.\nUnlike many similar lines, the Polish alexandrine developed not from French verse but from Latin, specifically, the 13-syllable goliardic line:\n Latin goliardic: o o o s S s s | o o o s S s\n Polish alexandrine: o o o o o S s | o o o s S s\n s=unstressed syllable\nThough looser instances of this (nominally) 13-syllable line were occasionally used in Polish literature, it was Miko\u0142aj Rej and Jan Kochanowski who, in the 16th century, introduced the syllabically strict line as a vehicle for major works.\nCzech.\nThe Czech alexandrine is a comparatively recent development, based on the French alexandrine and introduced by Karel Hynek M\u00e1cha in the 19th century. Its structure forms a halfway point between features usual in syllabic and in accentual-syllabic verse, being more highly constrained than most syllabic verse, and less so than most accentual-syllabic verse. Moreover, it equally encourages the very different rhythms of iambic hexameter and dactylic tetrameter to emerge by preserving the constants of both measures:\n iambic hexameter: s S s S s S | s S s S s S (s)\n dactylic tetrameter: S s s S s s | S s s S s s (s)\n Czech alexandrine: o o s S s o | o o s S s o (s)\nHungarian.\nHungarian metrical verse may be written either syllabically (the older and more traditional style, known as \"national\") or quantitatively. One of the national lines has a 6+6 structure:\n o o o o o o | o o o o o o\nAlthough deriving from native folk versification, it is possible that this line, and the related 6-syllable line, were influenced by Latin or Romance examples. When employed in 4-line or 8-line stanzas and rhyming in couplets, this is called the Hungarian alexandrine; it is the Hungarian heroic verse form. Beginning with the 16th-century verse of B\u00e1lint Balassi, this became the dominant Hungarian verse form.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2428", "revid": "2016858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2428", "title": "Analog computer", "text": "Computation machine that uses continuously varying data technology\nAn analog computer or analogue computer is a type of computation machine (computer) that uses physical phenomena such as electrical, mechanical, or hydraulic quantities behaving according to the mathematical principles in question (\"analog signals\") to model the problem being solved. In contrast, digital computers represent varying quantities symbolically and by discrete values of both time and amplitude (digital signals).\nAnalog computers can have a very wide range of complexity. Slide rules and nomograms are the simplest, while naval gunfire control computers and large hybrid digital/analog computers were among the most complicated. Complex mechanisms for process control and protective relays used analog computation to perform control and protective functions. The common property of all of them is that they don't use algorithms to determine the fashion of how the computer works. They rather use a structure analogous to the system to be solved (a so called analogon, model or analogy) which is also eponymous to the term analog computer, because they represent a model.\nAnalog computers were widely used in scientific and industrial applications even after the advent of digital computers, because at the time they were typically much faster, but they started to become obsolete as early as the 1950s and 1960s, although they remained in use in some specific applications, such as aircraft flight simulators, the flight computer in aircraft, and for teaching control systems in universities. Perhaps the most relatable example of analog computers are mechanical watches where the continuous and periodic rotation of interlinked gears drives the second, minute and hour needles in the clock. More complex applications, such as aircraft flight simulators and synthetic-aperture radar, remained the domain of analog computing (and hybrid computing) well into the 1980s, since digital computers were insufficient for the task.\nTimeline of analog computers.\nPrecursors.\nThis is a list of examples of early computation devices considered precursors of the modern computers. Some of them may even have been dubbed 'computers' by the press, though they may fail to fit modern definitions.\nThe Antikythera mechanism, a type of device used to determine the positions of heavenly bodies known as an orrery, was described as an early mechanical analog computer by British physicist, information scientist, and historian of science Derek J. de Solla Price. It was discovered in 1901, in the Antikythera wreck off the Greek island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete, and has been dated to c.\u2009150~100 BC, during the Hellenistic period. Devices of a level of complexity comparable to that of the Antikythera mechanism would not reappear until a thousand years later.\nMany mechanical aids to calculation and measurement were constructed for astronomical and navigation use.\nThe planisphere was first described by Ptolemy in the 2nd century AD. The astrolabe was invented in the Hellenistic world in either the 1st or 2nd centuries BC and is often attributed to Hipparchus. A combination of the planisphere and dioptra, the astrolabe was effectively an analog computer capable of working out several different kinds of problems in spherical astronomy.\nThe sector, a calculating instrument used for solving problems in proportion, trigonometry, multiplication and division, and for various functions, such as squares and cube roots, was developed in the late 16th century and found application in gunnery, surveying and navigation.\nThe planimeter was a manual instrument to calculate the area of a closed figure by tracing over it with a mechanical linkage.\nThe slide rule was invented around 1620\u20131630, shortly after the publication of the concept of the logarithm. It is a hand-operated analog computer for doing multiplication and division. As slide rule development progressed, added scales provided reciprocals, squares and square roots, cubes and cube roots, as well as transcendental functions such as logarithms and exponentials, circular and hyperbolic trigonometry and other functions. Aviation is one of the few fields where slide rules are still in widespread use, particularly for solving time\u2013distance problems in light aircraft.\nIn 1831\u20131835, mathematician and engineer Giovanni Plana devised a perpetual-calendar machine, which, through a system of pulleys and cylinders, could predict the perpetual calendar for every year from AD\u00a00 (that is, 1\u00a0BC) to AD\u00a04000, keeping track of leap years and varying day length.\nThe tide-predicting machine invented by Sir William Thomson in 1872 was of great utility to navigation in shallow waters. It used a system of pulleys and wires to automatically calculate predicted tide levels for a set period at a particular location.\nThe differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration, used wheel-and-disc mechanisms to perform the integration. In 1876 James Thomson had already discussed the possible construction of such calculators, but he had been stymied by the limited output torque of the ball-and-disk integrators. Several systems followed, notably those of Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo, who built various analog machines for solving real and complex roots of polynomials; and Michelson and Stratton, whose Harmonic Analyser performed Fourier analysis, but using an array of 80 springs rather than Kelvin integrators. This work led to the mathematical understanding of the Gibbs phenomenon of overshoot in Fourier representation near discontinuities. In a differential analyzer, the output of one integrator drove the input of the next integrator, or a graphing output. The torque amplifier was the advance that allowed these machines to work. Starting in the 1920s, Vannevar Bush and others developed mechanical differential analyzers.\nModern era.\nThe Dumaresq was a mechanical calculating device invented around 1902 by Lieutenant John Dumaresq of the Royal Navy. It was an analog computer that related vital variables of the fire control problem to the movement of one's own ship and that of a target ship. It was often used with other devices, such as a Vickers range clock to generate range and deflection data so the gun sights of the ship could be continuously set. A number of versions of the Dumaresq were produced of increasing complexity as development proceeded.\nBy 1912, Arthur Pollen had developed an electrically driven mechanical analog computer for fire-control systems, based on the differential analyser. It was used by the Imperial Russian Navy in World War I.\nStarting in 1929, AC network analyzers were constructed to solve calculation problems related to electrical power systems that were too large to solve with numerical methods at the time. These were essentially scale models of the electrical properties of the full-size system. Since network analyzers could handle problems too large for analytic methods or hand computation, they were also used to solve problems in nuclear physics and in the design of structures. More than 50 large network analyzers were built by the end of the 1950s.\nWorld War II era gun directors, gun data computers, and bomb sights used mechanical analog computers. In 1942 Helmut H\u00f6lzer built a fully electronic analog computer at Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center as an embedded control system (\"mixing device\") to calculate V-2 rocket trajectories from the accelerations and orientations (measured by gyroscopes) and to stabilize and guide the missile. Mechanical analog computers were very important in gun fire control in World War II, the Korean War and well past the Vietnam War; they were made in significant numbers.\nIn the period 1930\u20131945 in the Netherlands, Johan van Veen developed an analogue computer to calculate and predict tidal currents when the geometry of the channels are changed. Around 1950, this idea was developed into the Deltar, a hydraulic analogy computer supporting the closure of estuaries in the southwest of the Netherlands (the Delta Works).\nThe FERMIAC was an analog computer invented by physicist Enrico Fermi in 1947 to aid in his studies of neutron transport. Project Cyclone was an analog computer developed by Reeves in 1950 for the analysis and design of dynamic systems. Project Typhoon was an analog computer developed by RCA in 1952. It consisted of over 4,000 electron tubes and used 100 dials and 6,000 plug-in connectors to program. The MONIAC Computer was a hydraulic analogy of a national economy first unveiled in 1949.\nComputer Engineering Associates was spun out of Caltech in 1950 to provide commercial services using the \"Direct Analogy Electric Analog Computer\" (\"the largest and most impressive general-purpose analyzer facility for the solution of field problems\") developed there by Gilbert D. McCann, Charles H. Wilts, and Bart Locanthi.\nEducational analog computers illustrated the principles of analog calculation. The Heathkit EC-1, a $199 educational analog computer, was made by the Heath Company, US c.\u20091960. It was programmed using patch cords that connected nine operational amplifiers and other components. General Electric also marketed an \"educational\" analog computer kit of a simple design in the early 1960s consisting of two transistor tone generators and three potentiometers wired such that the frequency of the oscillator was nulled when the potentiometer dials were positioned by hand to satisfy an equation. The relative resistance of the potentiometer was then equivalent to the formula of the equation being solved. Multiplication or division could be performed, depending on which dials were inputs and which was the output. Accuracy and resolution was limited and a simple slide rule was more accurate. However, the unit did demonstrate the basic principle.\nAnalog computer designs were published in electronics magazines. One example is the PEAC (Practical Electronics analogue computer), published in \"Practical Electronics\" in the January 1968 edition. Another more modern hybrid computer design was published in \"Everyday Practical Electronics\" in 2002. An example described in the EPE hybrid computer was the flight of a VTOL aircraft such as the Harrier jump jet. The altitude and speed of the aircraft were calculated by the analog part of the computer and sent to a PC via a digital microprocessor and displayed on the PC screen.\nIn industrial process control, analog loop controllers were used to automatically regulate temperature, flow, pressure, or other process conditions. The technology of these controllers ranged from purely mechanical integrators, through vacuum-tube and solid-state devices, to emulation of analog controllers by microprocessors.\nElectronic analog computers.\nThe similarity between linear mechanical components, such as springs and dashpots (viscous-fluid dampers), and electrical components, such as capacitors, inductors, and resistors is striking in terms of mathematics. They can be modeled using equations of the same form.\nHowever, the difference between these systems is what makes analog computing useful. Complex systems often are not amenable to pen-and-paper analysis, and require some form of testing or simulation. Complex mechanical systems, such as suspensions for racing cars, are expensive to fabricate and hard to modify. And taking precise mechanical measurements during high-speed tests adds further difficulty.\nBy contrast, it is very inexpensive to build an electrical equivalent of a complex mechanical system, to simulate its behavior. Engineers arrange a few operational amplifiers (op amps) and some passive linear components to form a circuit that follows the same equations as the mechanical system being simulated. All measurements can be taken directly with an oscilloscope. In the circuit, the (simulated) stiffness of the spring, for instance, can be changed by adjusting the parameters of an integrator. The electrical system is an analogy to the physical system, hence the name, but it is much less expensive than a mechanical prototype, much easier to modify, and generally safer.\nThe electronic circuit can also be made to run faster or slower than the physical system being simulated. Experienced users of electronic analog computers said that they offered a comparatively intimate control and understanding of the problem, relative to digital simulations.\nElectronic analog computers are especially well-suited to representing situations described by differential equations. Historically, they were often used when a system of differential equations proved very difficult to solve by traditional means. As a simple example, the dynamics of a spring-mass system can be described by the equation formula_1, with formula_2 as the vertical position of a mass formula_3, formula_4 the damping coefficient, formula_5 the spring constant and formula_6 the gravity of Earth. For analog computing, the equation is programmed as formula_7. The equivalent analog circuit consists of two integrators for the state variables formula_8 (speed) and formula_2 (position), one inverter, and three potentiometers.\nElectronic analog computers have drawbacks: the value of the circuit's supply voltage limits the range over which the variables may vary (since the value of a variable is represented by a voltage on a particular wire). Therefore, each problem must be scaled so its parameters and dimensions can be represented using voltages that the circuit can supply \u2014e.g., the expected magnitudes of the velocity and the position of a spring pendulum. Improperly scaled variables can have their values \"clamped\" by the limits of the supply voltage. Or if scaled too small, they can suffer from higher noise levels. Either problem can cause the circuit to produce an incorrect simulation of the physical system. (Modern digital simulations are much more robust to widely varying values of their variables, but are still not entirely immune to these concerns: floating-point digital calculations support a huge dynamic range, but can suffer from imprecision if tiny differences of huge values lead to numerical instability.)\nThe precision of the analog computer readout was limited chiefly by the precision of the readout equipment used, generally three or four significant figures. (Modern digital simulations are much better in this area. Digital arbitrary-precision arithmetic can provide any desired degree of precision.) However, in most cases the precision of an analog computer is absolutely sufficient given the uncertainty of the model characteristics and its technical parameters.\nMany small computers dedicated to specific computations are still part of industrial regulation equipment, but from the 1950s to the 1970s, general-purpose analog computers were the only systems fast enough for real time simulation of dynamic systems, especially in the aircraft, military and aerospace field.\nIn the 1960s, the major manufacturer was Electronic Associates of Princeton, New Jersey, with its 231R Analog Computer (vacuum tubes, 20 integrators) and subsequently its EAI 8800 Analog Computer (solid state operational amplifiers, 64 integrators). Its challenger was Applied Dynamics of Ann Arbor, Michigan.\nAlthough the basic technology for analog computers is usually operational amplifiers (also called \"continuous current amplifiers\" because they have no low frequency limitation), in the 1960s an attempt was made in the French ANALAC computer to use an alternative technology: medium frequency carrier and non dissipative reversible circuits.\nIn the 1970s, every large company and administration concerned with problems in dynamics had an analog computing center, such as:\nConstruction.\nAn analog computing machine consists of several main components:\nOn the patch panel, various connections and routes can be set and switched to configure the machine and determine signal flows. This allows users to flexibly configure and reconfigure the analog computing system to perform specific tasks.\nPatch panels are used to control data flows, connect and disconnect connections between various blocks of the system, including signal sources, amplifiers, filters, and other components. They provide convenience and flexibility in configuring and experimenting with analog computations.\nPatch panels can be presented as a physical panel with connectors or, in more modern systems, as a software interface that allows virtual management of signal connections and routes.\nOutput devices in analog machines can vary depending on the specific goals of the system. For example, they could be graphical indicators, oscilloscopes, graphic recording devices, TV connection module, voltmeter, etc. These devices allow for the visualization of analog signals and the representation of the results of measurements or mathematical operations.\nThese are just general blocks that can be found in a typical analog computing machine. The actual configuration and components may vary depending on the specific implementation and the intended use of the machine.\nAnalog\u2013digital hybrids.\nAnalog computing devices are fast; digital computing devices are more versatile and accurate. The idea behind an analog-digital hybrid is to combine the two processes for the best efficiency. An example of such hybrid elementary device is the hybrid multiplier, where one input is an analog signal, the other input is a digital signal and the output is analog. It acts as an analog potentiometer, upgradable digitally. This kind of hybrid technique is mainly used for fast dedicated real time computation when computing time is very critical, as signal processing for radars and generally for controllers in embedded systems.\nIn the early 1970s, analog computer manufacturers tried to tie together their analog computers with a digital computers to get the advantages of the two techniques. In such systems, the digital computer controlled the analog computer, providing initial set-up, initiating multiple analog runs, and automatically feeding and collecting data. The digital computer may also participate to the calculation itself using analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters.\nThe largest manufacturer of hybrid computers was Electronic Associates. Their hybrid computer model 8900 was made of a digital computer and one or more analog consoles. These systems were mainly dedicated to large projects such as the Apollo program and Space Shuttle at NASA, or Ariane in Europe, especially during the integration step where at the beginning everything is simulated, and progressively real components replace their simulated parts.\nOnly one company was known as offering general commercial computing services on its hybrid computers, CISI of France, in the 1970s.\nThe best reference in this field is the 100,000 simulation runs for each certification of the automatic landing systems of Airbus and Concorde aircraft.\nAfter 1980, purely digital computers progressed more and more rapidly and were fast enough to compete with analog computers.\nOne key to the speed of analog computers was their fully parallel computation, but this was also a limitation. The more equations required for a problem, the more analog components were needed, even when the problem wasn't time critical. \"Programming\" a problem meant interconnecting the analog operators; even with a removable wiring panel this was not very versatile.\nImplementations.\nMechanical analog computers.\nThroughout history, many types of mechanical analog computers have been invented. These ranged from simple devices (like planimeters) to complex fire-control systems that guided WWII naval guns.\nPractical mechanical analog computers of any significant complexity used rotating shafts to carry variables from one mechanism to another. Cables and pulleys were used in a Fourier synthesizer, a tide-predicting machine, which summed the individual harmonic components. Another category, not nearly as well known, used rotating shafts only for input and output, with precision racks and pinions. The racks were connected to linkages that performed the computation. At least one U.S. Naval sonar fire control computer of the later 1950s, made by Librascope, was of this type, as was the principal computer in the Mk.\u00a056 Gun Fire Control System.\nThese computers often employed precision miter-gear differentials (pairs of bevel gears arranged to produce the sum or difference of two shaft rotations) to transmit variables between computing elements. The Ford Instrument Mark I Fire Control Computer, for example, contained approximately 160 miter-gear differentials.\nIntegration with respect to another variable was done by a rotating disc driven by one variable. Output came from a pick-off device (such as a wheel) positioned at a radius on the disc proportional to the second variable. (A carrier with a pair of steel balls supported by small rollers worked especially well. A roller, its axis parallel to the disc's surface, provided the output. It was held against the pair of balls by a spring.)\nArbitrary functions of one variable were provided by cams, with gearing to convert follower movement to shaft rotation.\nFunctions of two variables were provided by three-dimensional cams. In one good design, one of the variables rotated the cam. A hemispherical follower moved its carrier on a pivot axis parallel to that of the cam's rotating axis. Pivoting motion was the output. The second variable moved the follower along the axis of the cam. One practical application was ballistics in gunnery.\nCoordinate conversion from polar to rectangular was done by a mechanical resolver (called a \"component solver\" in US Navy fire control computers). Two discs on a common axis positioned a sliding block with pin (stubby shaft) on it. One disc was a face cam, and a follower on the block in the face cam's groove set the radius. The other disc, closer to the pin, contained a straight slot in which the block moved. The input angle rotated the latter disc (the face cam disc, for an unchanging radius, rotated with the other (angle) disc; a differential and a few gears did this correction).\nReferring to the mechanism's frame, the location of the pin corresponded to the tip of the vector represented by the angle and magnitude inputs. Mounted on that pin was a square block.\nRectilinear-coordinate outputs (both sine and cosine, typically) came from two slotted plates, each slot fitting on the block just mentioned. The plates moved in straight lines, the movement of one plate at right angles to that of the other. The slots were at right angles to the direction of movement. Each plate, by itself, was like a Scotch yoke, known to steam engine enthusiasts.\nDuring World War II, a similar mechanism converted rectilinear to polar coordinates, but it was not particularly successful and was eliminated in a significant redesign (USN, Mk.\u00a01 to Mk.\u00a01A).\nMultiplication was done by mechanisms based on the geometry of similar right triangles. Using the trigonometric terms for a right triangle, specifically opposite, adjacent, and hypotenuse, the adjacent side was fixed by construction. One variable changed the magnitude of the opposite side. In many cases, this variable changed sign; the hypotenuse could coincide with the adjacent side (a zero input), or move beyond the adjacent side, representing a sign change.\nTypically, a pinion-operated rack moving parallel to the (trig.-defined) opposite side would position a slide with a slot coincident with the hypotenuse. A pivot on the rack let the slide's angle change freely. At the other end of the slide (the angle, in trig. terms), a block on a pin fixed to the frame defined the vertex between the hypotenuse and the adjacent side.\nAt any distance along the adjacent side, a line perpendicular to it intersects the hypotenuse at a particular point. The distance between that point and the adjacent side is some fraction that is the product of \"1\" the distance from the vertex, and \"2\" the magnitude of the opposite side.\nThe second input variable in this type of multiplier positions a slotted plate perpendicular to the adjacent side. That slot contains a block, and that block's position in its slot is determined by another block right next to it. The latter slides along the hypotenuse, so the two blocks are positioned at a distance from the (trig.) adjacent side by an amount proportional to the product.\nTo provide the product as an output, a third element, another slotted plate, also moves parallel to the (trig.) opposite side of the theoretical triangle. As usual, the slot is perpendicular to the direction of movement. A block in its slot, pivoted to the hypotenuse block positions it.\nA special type of integrator, used at a point where only moderate accuracy was needed, was based on a steel ball, instead of a disc. It had two inputs, one to rotate the ball, and the other to define the angle of the ball's rotating axis. That axis was always in a plane that contained the axes of two movement pick-off rollers, quite similar to the mechanism of a rolling-ball computer mouse (in that mechanism, the pick-off rollers were roughly the same diameter as the ball). The pick-off roller axes were at right angles.\nA pair of rollers \"above\" and \"below\" the pick-off plane were mounted in rotating holders that were geared together. That gearing was driven by the angle input, and established the rotating axis of the ball. The other input rotated the \"bottom\" roller to make the ball rotate.\nEssentially, the whole mechanism, called a component integrator, was a variable-speed drive with one motion input and two outputs, as well as an angle input. The angle input varied the ratio (and direction) of coupling between the \"motion\" input and the outputs according to the sine and cosine of the input angle.\nAlthough they did not accomplish any computation, electromechanical position servos (aka. torque amplifiers) were essential in mechanical analog computers of the \"rotating-shaft\" type for providing operating torque to the inputs of subsequent computing mechanisms, as well as driving output data-transmission devices such as large torque-transmitter synchros in naval computers.\nOther readout mechanisms, not directly part of the computation, included internal odometer-like counters with interpolating drum dials for indicating internal variables, and mechanical multi-turn limit stops.\nConsidering that accurately controlled rotational speed in analog fire-control computers was a basic element of their accuracy, there was a motor with its average speed controlled by a balance wheel, hairspring, jeweled-bearing differential, a twin-lobe cam, and spring-loaded contacts (ship's AC power frequency was not necessarily accurate, nor dependable enough, when these computers were designed).\nElectronic analog computers.\nElectronic analog computers typically have front panels with numerous jacks (single-contact sockets) that permit patch cords (flexible wires with plugs at both ends) to create the interconnections that define the problem setup. In addition, there are precision high-resolution potentiometers (variable resistors) for setting up (and, when needed, varying) scale factors. In addition, there is usually a zero-center analog pointer-type meter for modest-accuracy voltage measurement. Stable, accurate voltage sources provide known magnitudes.\nTypical electronic analog computers contain anywhere from a few to a hundred or more operational amplifiers (\"op amps\"), named because they perform mathematical operations. Op amps are a particular type of feedback amplifier with very high gain and stable input (low and stable offset). They are always used with precision feedback components that, in operation, all but cancel out the currents arriving from input components. The majority of op amps in a representative setup are summing amplifiers, which add and subtract analog voltages, providing the result at their output jacks. As well, op amps with capacitor feedback are usually included in a setup; they integrate the sum of their inputs with respect to time.\nIntegrating with respect to another variable is the nearly exclusive province of mechanical analog integrators; it is almost never done in electronic analog computers. However, given that a problem solution does not change with time, time can serve as one of the variables.\nOther computing elements include analog multipliers, nonlinear function generators, and analog comparators.\nElectrical elements such as inductors and capacitors used in electrical analog computers had to be carefully manufactured to reduce non-ideal effects. For example, in the construction of AC power network analyzers, one motive for using higher frequencies for the calculator (instead of the actual power frequency) was that higher-quality inductors could be more easily made. Many general-purpose analog computers avoided the use of inductors entirely, re-casting the problem in a form that could be solved using only resistive and capacitive elements, since high-quality capacitors are relatively easy to make.\nThe use of electrical properties in analog computers means that calculations are normally performed in real time (or faster), at a speed determined mostly by the frequency response of the operational amplifiers and other computing elements. In the history of electronic analog computers, there were some special high-speed types.\nNonlinear functions and calculations can be constructed to a limited precision (three or four digits) by designing function generators\u2014special circuits of various combinations of resistors and diodes to provide the nonlinearity. Typically, as the input voltage increases, progressively more diodes conduct.\nWhen compensated for temperature, the forward voltage drop of a transistor's base-emitter junction can provide a usably accurate logarithmic or exponential function. Op amps scale the output voltage so that it is usable with the rest of the computer.\nAny physical process that models some computation can be interpreted as an analog computer. Some examples, invented for the purpose of illustrating the concept of analog computation, include using a bundle of spaghetti as a model of sorting numbers; a board, a set of nails, and a rubber band as a model of finding the convex hull of a set of points; and strings tied together as a model of finding the shortest path in a network. These are all described in Dewdney (1984).\nComponents.\nAnalog computers often have a complicated framework, but they have, at their core, a set of key components that perform the calculations. The operator manipulates these through the computer's framework.\nKey hydraulic components might include pipes, valves and containers.\nKey mechanical components might include rotating shafts for carrying data within the computer, miter gear differentials, disc/ball/roller integrators, cams (2-D and 3-D), mechanical resolvers and multipliers, and torque servos.\nKey electrical/electronic components might include:\nThe core mathematical operations used in an electric analog computer are:\nIn some analog computer designs, multiplication is much preferred to division. Division is carried out with a multiplier in the feedback path of an Operational Amplifier.\nDifferentiation with respect to time is not frequently used, and in practice is avoided by redefining the problem when possible. It corresponds in the frequency domain to a high-pass filter, which means that high-frequency noise is amplified; differentiation also risks instability.\nLimitations.\nIn general, analog computers are limited by non-ideal effects. An analog signal is composed of four basic components: DC and AC magnitudes, frequency, and phase. The real limits of range on these characteristics limit analog computers. Some of these limits include the operational amplifier offset, finite gain, and frequency response, noise floor, non-linearities, temperature coefficient, and parasitic effects within semiconductor devices. For commercially available electronic components, ranges of these aspects of input and output signals are always figures of merit.\nDecline.\nIn the 1950s to 1970s, digital computers based on first vacuum tubes, transistors, integrated circuits and then micro-processors became more economical and precise. This led digital computers to largely replace analog computers. Even so, some research in analog computation is still being done. A few universities still use analog computers to teach control system theory. The American company Comdyna manufactured small analog computers. At Indiana University Bloomington, Jonathan Mills has developed the Extended Analog Computer based on sampling voltages in a foam sheet. At the Harvard Robotics Laboratory, analog computation is a research topic. Lyric Semiconductor's error correction circuits use analog probabilistic signals. Slide rules are still used as flight computers in flight training.\nResurgence.\nWith the development of very-large-scale integration (VLSI) technology, Yannis Tsividis' group at Columbia University has been revisiting analog/hybrid computers design in standard CMOS process. Two VLSI chips have been developed, an 80th-order analog computer (250\u00a0nm) by Glenn Cowan in 2005 and a 4th-order hybrid computer (65\u00a0nm) developed by Ning Guo in 2015, both targeting at energy-efficient ODE/PDE applications. Glenn's chip contains 16 macros, in which there are 25 analog computing blocks, namely integrators, multipliers, fanouts, few nonlinear blocks. Ning's chip contains one macro block, in which there are 26 computing blocks including integrators, multipliers, fanouts, ADCs, SRAMs and DACs. Arbitrary nonlinear function generation is made possible by the ADC+SRAM+DAC chain, where the SRAM block stores the nonlinear function data. The experiments from the related publications revealed that VLSI analog/hybrid computers demonstrated about 1\u20132 orders magnitude of advantage in both solution time and energy while achieving accuracy within 5%, which points to the promise of using analog/hybrid computing techniques in the area of energy-efficient approximate computing. In 2016, a team of researchers developed a compiler to solve differential equations using analog circuits.\nAnalog computers are also used in neuromorphic computing, and in 2021 a group of researchers have shown that a specific type of artificial neural network called a spiking neural network was able to work with analog neuromorphic computers.\nIn 2021, the German company anabrid GmbH began to produce THE ANALOG THING (abbreviated THAT), a small low-cost analog computer mainly for educational and scientific use. The company is also constructing analog mainframes and hybrid computers.\nPractical examples.\nThese are examples of analog computers that have been constructed or practically used:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAnalog (audio) synthesizers can also be viewed as a form of analog computer, and their technology was originally based in part on electronic analog computer technology. The ARP 2600's Ring Modulator was actually a moderate-accuracy analog multiplier.\nThe Simulation Council (or Simulations Council) was an association of analog computer users in US. It is now known as The Society for Modeling and Simulation International. The Simulation Council newsletters from 1952 to 1963 are available online and show the concerns and technologies at the time, and the common use of analog computers for missilry.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2429", "revid": "46212660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2429", "title": "Audio", "text": "Audio most commonly refers to sound, as it is transmitted in signal form. It may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "2431", "revid": "45535389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2431", "title": "Minute and second of arc", "text": "Units for measuring angles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA minute of arc, arcminute (abbreviated as arcmin), arc minute, or minute arc, denoted by the symbol \u2032, is a unit of angular measurement equal to of a degree. Since one degree is of a turn, or complete rotation, one arcminute is of a turn. The nautical mile (nmi) was originally defined as the arc length of a minute of latitude on a spherical Earth, so the actual Earth's circumference is very near . A minute of arc is of a radian.\nA second of arc, arcsecond (abbreviated as arcsec), or arc second, denoted by the symbol \u2033, is a unit of angular measurement equal to of a minute of arc, of a degree, of a turn, and (about ) of a radian.\nThese units originated in Babylonian astronomy as sexagesimal (base 60) subdivisions of the degree; they are used in fields that involve very small angles, such as astronomy, optometry, ophthalmology, optics, navigation, land surveying, and marksmanship.\nTo express even smaller angles, standard SI prefixes can be employed; the milliarcsecond (mas) and microarcsecond (\u03bcas), for instance, are commonly used in astronomy. For a two-dimensional area, such as on (the surface of) a sphere, \"square arcminutes\" or \"seconds\" may be used.\nSymbols and abbreviations.\nThe prime symbol \u2032 (U+2032) designates the arcminute, though a single quote ' (U+0027) is commonly used where only ASCII characters are permitted. One arcminute is thus written as 1\u2032. It is also abbreviated as arcmin or amin.\nSimilarly, double prime \u2033 (U+2033) designates the arcsecond, though a double quote \" (U+0022) is commonly used where only ASCII characters are permitted. One arcsecond is thus written as 1\u2033. It is also abbreviated as arcsec or asec.\nIn celestial navigation, seconds of arc are rarely used in calculations, the preference usually being for degrees, minutes, and decimals of a minute, for example, written as 42\u00b0 25.32\u2032 or 42\u00b0 25.322\u2032. This notation has been carried over into marine GPS and aviation GPS receivers, which normally display latitude and longitude in the latter format by default.\nCommon examples.\nIn general, by simple trigonometry, it can be derived that the angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; subtended by an object of diameter or length &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; at a distance &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is given by the following expression:\n formula_1\nOne arcminute () is the approximate distance two contours can be separated, and still be distinguished, by a person with 20/20 vision. The average apparent diameter of the full Moon is about , or .\nOne arcsecond () is the angle subtended by:\nAlso notable examples of size in arcseconds are:\nOne milliarcsecond () is about the size of a half dollar (), seen from a distance equal to that between the Washington Monument and the Eiffel Tower (around ).\nOne microarcsecond is about the size of a period at the end of a sentence in the Apollo mission manuals left on the Moon as seen from Earth.\nOne nanoarcsecond is about the size of a nickel () on the surface of Neptune as observed from Earth.\nHistory.\nThe concepts of degrees, minutes, and seconds\u2014as they relate to the measure of both angles and time\u2014derive from Babylonian astronomy and time-keeping. Influenced by the Sumerians, the ancient Babylonians divided the Sun's perceived motion across the sky over the course of one full day into 360 degrees. Each degree was subdivided into 60 minutes and each minute into 60 seconds. Thus, one Babylonian degree was equal to four minutes in modern terminology, one Babylonian minute to four modern seconds, and one Babylonian second to (approximately 0.067) of a modern second.\nUses.\nAstronomy.\nSince antiquity, the arcminute and arcsecond have been used in astronomy: in the ecliptic coordinate system as latitude (\u03b2) and longitude (\u03bb); in the horizon system as altitude (Alt) and azimuth (Az); and in the equatorial coordinate system as declination (\u03b4). All are measured in degrees, arcminutes, and arcseconds. The principal exception is right ascension (RA) in equatorial coordinates, which is measured in time units of hours, minutes, and seconds.\nContrary to what one might assume, minutes and seconds of arc do not directly relate to minutes and seconds of time, in either the rotational frame of the Earth around its own axis (day), or the Earth's rotational frame around the Sun (year). The Earth's rotational rate around its own axis is 15 minutes of arc per minute of time (360 degrees / 24 hours in day); the Earth's rotational rate around the Sun (not entirely constant) is roughly 24 minutes of time per minute of arc (from 24 hours in day), which tracks the annual progression of the Zodiac. Both of these factor in what astronomical objects you can see from surface telescopes (time of year) and when you can best see them (time of day), but neither are in unit correspondence. For simplicity, the explanations given assume a degree/day in the Earth's annual rotation around the Sun, which is off by roughly 1%. The same ratios hold for seconds, due to the consistent factor of 60 on both sides.\nThe arcsecond is also often used to describe small astronomical angles such as the angular diameters of planets (e.g. the angular diameter of Venus which varies between 10\u2033 and 60\u2033); the proper motion of stars; the separation of components of binary star systems; and parallax, the small change of position of a star or Solar System body as the Earth revolves about the Sun. These small angles may also be written in milliarcseconds (mas), or thousandths of an arcsecond. The unit of distance called the parsec, abbreviated from the parallax angle of one arc second, was developed for such parallax measurements. The distance from the Sun to a celestial object is the reciprocal of the angle, measured in arcseconds, of the object's apparent movement caused by parallax.\nThe European Space Agency's astrometric satellite Gaia, launched in 2013, can approximate star positions to 7 microarcseconds (\u03bcas).\nApart from the Sun, the star with the largest angular diameter from Earth is R Doradus, a red giant with a diameter of 0.05\u2033. Because of the effects of atmospheric blurring, ground-based telescopes will smear the image of a star to an angular diameter of about 0.5\u2033; in poor conditions. this increases to 1.5\u2033 or even more. The dwarf planet Pluto has proven difficult to resolve because its angular diameter is about 0.1\u2033. Techniques exist for improving seeing on the ground. Adaptive optics, for example, can produce images around 0.05\u2033 on a 10\u00a0m class telescope.\nSpace telescopes are not affected by the Earth's atmosphere but are diffraction limited. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope can reach an angular size of stars down to about 0.1\u2033.\nCartography.\nMinutes (\u2032) and seconds (\u2033) of arc are also used in cartography and navigation. At sea level. one minute of arc along the equator equals exactly one geographical mile (not to be confused with international mile or statute mile) along the Earth's equator or approximately . A second of arc, one sixtieth of this amount, is roughly . The exact distance varies along meridian arcs or any other great circle arcs because the figure of the Earth is slightly oblate (bulges a third of a percent at the equator).\nPositions are traditionally given using degrees, minutes, and seconds of arcs for latitude, the arc north or south of the equator, and for longitude, the arc east or west of the Prime Meridian. Any position on or above the Earth's reference ellipsoid can be precisely given with this method. However, when it is inconvenient to use base-60 for minutes and seconds, positions are frequently expressed as decimal fractional degrees to an equal amount of precision. Degrees given to three decimal places ( of a degree) have about the precision of degrees-minutes-seconds ( of a degree) and specify locations within about . For navigational purposes positions are given in degrees and decimal minutes, for instance, the Needles Lighthouse is at 50\u00b039\u203244.2\u2033N 1\u00b035\u203230.5\u2033W.\nProperty cadastral surveying.\nRelated to cartography, property boundary surveying using the metes and bounds system and cadastral surveying relies on fractions of a degree to describe property lines' angles in reference to cardinal directions. A boundary \"mete\" is described with a beginning reference point, the cardinal direction North or South followed by an angle less than 90 degrees and a second cardinal direction, and a linear distance. The boundary runs the specified linear distance from the beginning point, the direction of the distance being determined by rotating the first cardinal direction the specified angle toward the second cardinal direction. For example, \"North\u00a065\u00b0\u00a039\u2032 18\u2033 West\u00a085.69\u00a0feet\" would describe a line running from the starting point 85.69 feet in a direction 65\u00b0 39\u2032 18\u2033 (or 65.655\u00b0) away from north toward the west.\nFirearms.\nThe arcminute is commonly found in the firearms industry and literature, particularly concerning the precision of rifles, though the industry refers to it as minute of angle (MOA). It is especially popular as a unit of measurement with shooters familiar with the imperial measurement system because 1\u00a0MOA subtends a circle with a diameter of 1.047 inches (which is often rounded to just 1 inch) at 100 yards ( at or 2.908\u00a0cm at 100\u00a0m), a traditional distance on American target ranges. The subtension is linear with the distance, for example, at 500 yards, 1\u00a0MOA subtends 5.235 inches and, at 1,000 yards, 1\u00a0MOA subtends 10.47 inches. Since many modern telescopic sights are adjustable in half (), quarter () or eighth () MOA increments, also known as \"clicks\", zeroing and adjustments are made by counting 2, 4 and 8 clicks per MOA respectively.\nFor example, if the point of impact is 3 inches high and 1.5 inches left of the point of aim at 100 yards (which for instance could be measured by using a spotting scope with a calibrated reticle, or a target delineated for such purposes), the scope needs to be adjusted 3 MOA down, and 1.5 MOA right. Such adjustments are trivial when the scope's adjustment dials have a MOA scale printed on them, and even figuring the right number of clicks is relatively easy on scopes that \"click\" in fractions of MOA. This makes zeroing and adjustments much easier:\nAnother common system of measurement in firearm scopes is the milliradian (mrad). Zeroing an mrad based scope is easy for users familiar with base ten systems. The most common adjustment value in mrad based scopes is \u00a0mrad (which approximates &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 MOA).\nOne thing to be aware of is that some MOA scopes, including some higher-end models, are calibrated such that an adjustment of 1 MOA on the scope knobs corresponds to exactly 1 inch of impact adjustment on a target at 100 yards, rather than the mathematically correct 1.047 inches. This is commonly known as the Shooter's MOA (SMOA) or Inches Per Hundred Yards (IPHY). While the difference between one true MOA and one SMOA is less than half of an inch even at 1,000 yards, this error compounds significantly on longer range shots that may require adjustment upwards of 20\u201330 MOA to compensate for the bullet drop. If a shot requires an adjustment of 20 MOA or more, the difference between true MOA and SMOA will add up to 1 inch or more. In competitive target shooting, this might mean the difference between a hit and a miss.\nThe physical group size equivalent to \"m\" minutes of arc can be calculated as follows: group size = tan()\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0distance. In the example previously given, for 1 minute of arc, and substituting 3,600\u00a0inches for 100 yards, 3,600 tan() \u2248 1.047\u00a0inches. In metric units, 1 MOA at 100 metres \u2248 2.908 centimetres.\nSometimes, a precision-oriented firearm's performance will be measured in MOA. This simply means that under ideal conditions (i.e. no wind, high-grade ammo, clean barrel, and a stable mounting platform such as a vise or a benchrest used to eliminate shooter error), the gun is capable of producing a group of shots whose center points (center-to-center) fit into a circle, the average diameter of circles in several groups can be subtended by that amount of arc. For example, a \"1 MOA rifle\" should be capable, under ideal conditions, of repeatably shooting 1-inch groups at 100 yards. Most higher-end rifles are warrantied by their manufacturer to shoot under a given MOA threshold (typically 1 MOA or better) with specific ammunition and no error on the shooter's part. For example, Remington's M24 Sniper Weapon System is required to shoot 0.8 MOA or better, or be rejected from sale by quality control.\nRifle manufacturers and gun magazines often refer to this capability as \"sub-MOA\", meaning a gun consistently shooting groups under 1 MOA. This means that a single group of 3 to 5 shots at 100 yards, or the average of several groups, will measure less than 1 MOA between the two furthest shots in the group, i.e. all shots fall within 1 MOA. If larger samples are taken (i.e., more shots per group) then group size typically increases, however this will ultimately average out. If a rifle was truly a 1 MOA rifle, it would be just as likely that two consecutive shots land exactly on top of each other as that they land 1 MOA apart. For 5-shot groups, based on 95% confidence, a rifle that normally shoots 1 MOA can be expected to shoot groups between 0.58 MOA and 1.47 MOA, although the majority of these groups will be under 1 MOA. What this means in practice is if a rifle that shoots 1-inch groups on average at 100 yards shoots a group measuring 0.7 inches followed by a group that is 1.3 inches, this is not statistically abnormal.\nThe metric system counterpart of the MOA is the milliradian (mrad or 'mil'), being equal to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20441000 of the target range, laid out on a circle that has the observer as centre and the target range as radius. The number of milliradians on a full such circle therefore always is equal to 2 \u00d7 \u03c0 \u00d7 1000, regardless the target range. Therefore, 1 MOA \u2248 0.2909\u00a0mrad. This means that an object spanning 1\u00a0mrad on the reticle is at a range that is in metres equal to the object's linear size in millimetres (e.g. an object of 100\u00a0mm subtending 1 mrad is 100 metres away). So, there is no conversion factor required, contrary to the MOA system. A reticle with markings (hashes or dots) spaced with a one mrad apart (or a fraction of a mrad) are collectively called a mrad reticle. If the markings are round they are called mil-dots.\nIn the table below, conversions from mrad to metric values are exact (e.g. 0.1\u00a0mrad equals exactly 10\u00a0mm at 100 metres), while conversions of minutes of arc to both metric and imperial values are approximate.\nHuman vision.\nIn humans, 20/20 vision is the ability to resolve a spatial pattern separated by a visual angle of one minute of arc, from a distance of twenty feet. A 20/20 letter subtends 5 minutes of arc total.\nMaterials.\nThe deviation from parallelism between two surfaces, for instance in optical engineering, is usually measured in arcminutes or arcseconds.\nIn addition, arcseconds are sometimes used in rocking curve (\u03c9-scan) x ray diffraction measurements of high-quality epitaxial thin films.\nManufacturing.\nSome measurement devices make use of arcminutes and arcseconds to measure angles when the object being measured is too small for direct visual inspection. For instance, a toolmaker's optical comparator will often include an option to measure in \"minutes and seconds\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2432", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2432", "title": "Albert Archilles", "text": ""}
{"id": "2433", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2433", "title": "Alberto Giacometti", "text": "Swiss sculptor and painter (1901\u20131966)\nAlberto Giacometti (, , ; 10 October 1901 \u2013 11 January 1966) was a Swiss sculptor, painter, draftsman and printmaker, who was one of the most important sculptors of the 20th century. His work was particularly influenced by artistic styles such as Cubism and Surrealism. Philosophical questions about the human condition, as well as existential and phenomenological debates played a significant role in his work.\nBeginning in 1922, he lived and worked mainly in Paris but regularly visited his hometown Borgonovo to see his family and work on his art. Around 1935, he gave up on his Surrealist influences to pursue a more deepened analysis of figurative compositions.\nGiacometti wrote texts for periodicals and exhibition catalogues and recorded his thoughts and memories in notebooks and diaries. His critical nature led to self-doubt about his own work and his self-perceived inability to do justice to his own artistic vision. His insecurities nevertheless remained a powerful motivating artistic force throughout his entire life.\nBetween 1938 and 1944 Giacometti's sculptures had a maximum height of seven centimeters (2.75 inches). Their small size reflected the actual distance between the artist's position and his model. In this context he self-critically stated: \"But wanting to create from memory what I had seen, to my terror the sculptures became smaller and smaller\".\nAfter World War II, Giacometti created his most famous sculptures: his extremely tall and slender figurines. These sculptures were subject to his individual viewing experience\u2014between an imaginary yet real, a tangible yet inaccessible space.\nIn Giacometti's whole body of work, his painting constitutes only a small part. After 1957, however, his figurative paintings were equally as present as his sculptures. The almost monochrome paintings of his late work do not refer to any other artistic styles of modernity.\nEarly life.\nGiacometti was born in Borgonovo, Switzerland, the eldest of four children of Giovanni Giacometti, a well-known post-Impressionist painter, and Annetta Giacometti-Stampa. He was a descendant of Protestant refugees escaping the inquisition. Coming from an artistic background, he was interested in art from an early age and was encouraged by his father and godfather.\nAlberto attended the Geneva School of Fine Arts. His brothers Diego (1902\u20131985) and Bruno (1907\u20132012) would go on to become artists and architects as well. Additionally, his cousin Zaccaria Giacometti, later professor of constitutional law and chancellor of the University of Zurich, grew up together with them, having been orphaned at the age of 12 in 1905.\nCareer.\nIn 1922, he moved to Paris to study under the sculptor Antoine Bourdelle, an associate of Rodin. It was there that Giacometti experimented with Cubism and Surrealism and came to be regarded as one of the leading Surrealist sculptors. Among his associates were Mir\u00f3, Max Ernst, Picasso, Bror Hjorth, and Balthus.\nBetween 1936 and 1940, Giacometti concentrated his sculpting on the human head, focusing on the sitter's gaze. He preferred models he was close to\u2014his sister and the artist Isabel Rawsthorne (then known as Isabel Delmer). This was followed by a phase in which his statues of Isabel became stretched out; her limbs elongated.\nObsessed with creating his sculptures exactly as he envisioned through his unique view of reality, he often carved until they were as thin as nails and reduced to the size of a pack of cigarettes, much to his consternation. A friend of his once said that if Giacometti decided to sculpt you, \"he would make your head look like the blade of a knife\".\nDuring World War II, Giacometti took refuge in Switzerland. There, in 1946, he met Annette Arm, a secretary for the Red Cross. They married in 1949.\nAfter his marriage his tiny sculptures became larger, but the larger they grew, the thinner they became. For the remainder of Giacometti's life, Annette was his main female model. His paintings underwent a parallel procedure. The figures appear isolated and severely attenuated, as the result of continuous reworking.\nHe frequently revisited his subjects: one of his favourite models was his younger brother Diego, with whom he shared his studio in Paris.\nLater years.\nIn 1958 Giacometti was asked to create a monumental sculpture for the Chase Manhattan Bank building in New York, which was beginning construction. Although he had for many years \"harbored an ambition to create work for a public square\", he \"had never set foot in New York, and knew nothing about life in a rapidly evolving metropolis. Nor had he ever laid eyes on an actual skyscraper\", according to his biographer James Lord. Giacometti's work on the project resulted in the four figures of standing women\u2014his largest sculptures\u2014entitled \"Grande femme debout\" I through IV (1960). The commission was never completed, however, because Giacometti was unsatisfied by the relationship between the sculpture and the site, and abandoned the project.\nIn 1962, Giacometti was awarded the grand prize for sculpture at the Venice Biennale, and the award brought with it worldwide fame.\nEven when he had achieved popularity and his work was in demand, he still reworked models, often destroying them or setting them aside to be returned to years later. The prints produced by Giacometti are often overlooked but the catalogue raisonn\u00e9, \"Giacometti \u2013 The Complete Graphics and 15 Drawings by Herbert Lust\" (Tudor 1970), comments on their impact and gives details of the number of copies of each print. Some of his most important images were in editions of only 30 and many were described as rare in 1970.\nIn his later years Giacometti's works were shown in a number of large exhibitions throughout Europe. Riding a wave of international popularity, and despite his declining health, he traveled to the United States in 1965 for an exhibition of his works at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. As his last work he prepared the text for the book \"Paris sans fin\", a sequence of 150 lithographs containing memories of all the places where he had lived.\nArtistic analysis.\nRegarding Giacometti's sculptural technique and according to the Metropolitan Museum of Art: \"The rough, eroded, heavily worked surfaces of Three Men Walking (II), 1949, typify his technique. Reduced, as they are, to their very core, these figures evoke lone trees in winter that have lost their foliage. Within this style, Giacometti would rarely deviate from the three themes that preoccupied him\u2014the walking man; the standing, nude woman; and the bust\u2014or all three, combined in various groupings\".\"\"\nIn a letter to Pierre Matisse, Giacometti wrote: \"Figures were never a compact mass but like a transparent construction\". In the letter, Giacometti writes about how he looked back at the realist, classical busts of his youth with nostalgia, and tells the story of the existential crisis which precipitated the style he became known for.\n\"[I rediscovered] the wish to make compositions with figures. For this I had to make (quickly I thought; in passing), one or two studies from nature, just enough to understand the construction of a head, of a whole figure, and in 1935 I took a model. This study should take, I thought, two weeks and then I could realize my compositions...I worked with the model all day from 1935 to 1940...Nothing was as I imagined. A head, became for me an object completely unknown and without dimensions.\"\nSince Giacometti achieved exquisite realism with facility when he was executing busts in his early adolescence, Giacometti's difficulty in re-approaching the figure as an adult is generally understood as a sign of existential struggle for meaning, rather than as a technical deficit.\nGiacometti was a key player in the Surrealist art movement, but his work resists easy categorization. Some describe it as formalist, others argue it is expressionist or otherwise having to do with what Deleuze calls \"blocs of sensation\" (as in Deleuze's analysis of Francis Bacon). Even after his excommunication from the Surrealist group, while the intention of his sculpting was usually imitation, the end products were an expression of his emotional response to the subject. He attempted to create renditions of his models the way he saw them, and the way he thought they ought to be seen. He once said that he was sculpting not the human figure but \"the shadow that is cast\".\nPhilosopher William Barrett, in \"Irrational Man: A Study in Existential Philosophy\" (1962), says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothingness has, in fact, become one of the chief themes in modern art and literature, whether it is directly named as such or merely drifts through the work as the ambiance in which the human figures live, move, and have their being. We are reminded of the elongated and attenuated figures of the sculptor Giacometti, figures that seem to be invaded by the surrounding void.\u2014\u200a\nA 2011\u20132012 exhibition at the Pinacoth\u00e8que de Paris focused on showing how Giacometti was inspired by Etruscan art.\n\"Walking Man\" and other human figures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll the sculptures of today, like those of the past, will end one day in pieces...So it is important to fashion one's work carefully in its smallest recess and charge every particle of matter with life.\nAlberto Giacometti, https:// by Raoul-Jean Moulin (Methuen, 1964)\nGiacometti is best known for the bronze sculptures of tall, thin human figures, made in the years 1945 to 1960. Giacometti was influenced by the impressions he took from the people hurrying in the big city. People in motion he saw as \"a succession of moments of stillness\".\nThe emaciated figures are often interpreted as an expression of the existential fear, insignificance and loneliness of mankind. The mood of fear in the period of the 1940s and the Cold War is reflected in this figure.\u00a0It feels sad, lonely and difficult to relate to.\nDeath.\nGiacometti died in 1966 of heart disease (pericarditis) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at the Kantonsspital in Chur, Switzerland. His body was returned to his birthplace in Borgonovo, where he was interred close to his parents.\nWith no children, Annette Giacometti became the sole holder of his property rights. She worked to collect a full listing of authenticated works by her late husband, gathering documentation on the location and manufacture of his works and working to fight the rising number of counterfeited works. When she died in 1993, the Fondation Giacometti was set up by the French state.\nIn May 2007 the executor of his widow's estate, former French foreign minister Roland Dumas, was convicted of illegally selling Giacometti's works to a top auctioneer, Jacques Tajan, who was also convicted. Both were ordered to pay \u20ac850,000 to the https://.\nLegacy.\nExhibitions.\nGiacometti's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions including the High Museum of Art, Atlanta (1970); Centre Pompidou, Paris (2007\u20132008); Pushkin Museum, Moscow \"The Studio of Alberto Giacometti: Collection of the Fondation Alberto et Annette Giacometti\" (2008); Kunsthal Rotterdam (2008); Fondation Beyeler, Basel (2009); Buenos Aires (2012); Kunsthalle Hamburg (2013); Pera Museum, Istanbul (2015); Tate Modern, London (2017); Vancouver Art Gallery, \"Alberto Giacometti: A Line Through Time\" (2019); National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin (2022).\nThe National Portrait Gallery, London's first solo exhibition of Giacometti's work, \"Pure Presence\" opened to five star reviews on 13 October 2015 (to 10 January 2016, in honour of the fiftieth anniversary of the artist's death).\nFrom April 2019, the Prado Museum in Madrid, has been highlighting Giacometti in an exhibition.\nPublic collections.\nGiacometti's work is displayed in numerous public collections, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArt foundations.\nThe Fondation Alberto et Annette Giacometti, having received a bequest from Alberto Giacometti's widow Annette, holds a collection of circa 5,000 works, frequently displayed around the world through exhibitions and long-term loans. A public interest institution, the Foundation was created in 2003 and aims at promoting, disseminating, preserving and protecting Alberto Giacometti's work.\nThe Alberto-Giacometti-Stiftung established in Z\u00fcrich in 1965, holds a smaller collection of works acquired from the collection of the Pittsburgh industrialist G. David Thompson.\nNotable sales.\nAccording to record Giacometti has sold the two most expensive sculptures in history.\nIn November 2000 a Giacometti bronze, \"Grande Femme Debout I\", sold for $14.3 million. \"Grande Femme Debout II\" was bought by the Gagosian Gallery for $27.4 million at Christie's auction in New York City on 6 May 2008.\n\"L'Homme qui marche I\", a life-sized bronze sculpture of a man, became one of the most expensive works of art, and at the time was the most expensive sculpture ever sold at auction. It was in February 2010, when it sold for \u00a365 million (US$104.3 million) at Sotheby's, London. \"Grande t\u00eate mince\", a large bronze bust, sold for $53.3 million just three months later.\n\"L'Homme au doigt\" (\"Pointing Man\") sold for $126 million (\u00a381,314,455.32), or $141.3 million with fees, in Christie's May 2015, \"Looking Forward to the Past\" sale in New York City. The work had been in the same private collection for 45 years. As of now it is the most expensive sculpture sold at auction.\nAfter being showcased on the BBC programme \"Fake or Fortune\", a plaster sculpture, titled \"Gazing Head\", sold in 2019 for half a million pounds.\nIn April 2021, Giacometti's small-scale bronze sculpture, Nu debout II (1953), was sold from a Japanese private collection and went for \u00a31.5 million ($2 million), against an estimate of \u00a3800,000 ($1.1 million).\nOther legacy.\nGiacometti created the monument on the grave of Gerda Taro at P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery.\nAccording to a lecture by Michael Peppiatt at Cambridge University on 8 July 2010, Giacometti, who had a friendship with author/playwright Samuel Beckett, created a tree for the set of a 1961 Paris production of \"Waiting for Godot\".\nGiacometti and his sculpture \"L'Homme qui marche I\" appear on the former 100 Swiss franc banknote.\nIn 2001 he was included in the \"\" exhibition held at the National Portrait Gallery, London.\nGiacometti's sculptural style has featured in advertisements for various financial institutions, starting in 1987 with the \"Shoes\" ad for Royal Bank of Scotland directed by Gerry Anderson.\nThe 2017 movie \"Final Portrait\" retells the story of his friendship with the biographer James Lord. Giacometti is played by Geoffrey Rush.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2439", "revid": "42776343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2439", "title": "Anthem", "text": "Song of celebration used as a symbol for a specific group\nAn anthem is a musical composition of celebration, usually used as a symbol for a distinct group, particularly the national anthems of countries. Originally, and in music theory and religious contexts, it also refers more particularly to short sacred choral work (still frequently seen in Sacred Harp and other types of shape note singing) and still more particularly to a specific form of liturgical music. In this sense, its use began c.\u20091550 in English-speaking churches; it uses English language words, in contrast to the originally Roman Catholic 'motet' which sets a Latin text.\nEtymology.\n\"Anthem\" is derived from the Greek (\"ant\u00edph\u014dna\") via Old English . Both words originally referred to antiphons, a call-and-response style of the singing. The adjectival form is \"anthemic\".\nHistory.\nAnthems were originally a form of liturgical music. In the Church of England, the rubric appoints them to follow the third collect at morning and evening prayer. Several anthems are included in the British coronation service. The words are selected from Holy Scripture or in some cases from the Liturgy and the music is generally more elaborate and varied than that of psalm or hymn tunes. Being written for a trained choir rather than the congregation, the Anglican anthem is analogous to the motet of the Catholic and Lutheran Churches but represents an essentially English musical form. Anthems may be described as \"verse\", \"full\", or \"full with verse\", depending on whether they are intended for soloists, the full choir, or both. Another way of describing an anthem is that it is a piece of music written specifically to fit a certain accompanying text, and it is often difficult to make any other text fit that same melodic arrangement. It also often changes melody and/or meter, frequently multiple times within a single song, and is sung straight through from start to finish, without repeating the melody for following verses like a normal song (although certain sections may be repeated when marked). An example of an anthem with multiple meter shifts, fuguing, and repeated sections is \"Claremont\", or \"Vital Spark of Heav'nly Flame\". Another well known example is William Billing's \"Easter Anthem\", also known as \"The Lord Is Risen Indeed!\" after the opening lines. This anthem is still one of the more popular songs in the Sacred Harp tune book.\nThe anthem developed as a replacement for the Catholic \"votive antiphon\" commonly sung as an appendix to the main office to the Blessed Virgin Mary or other saints.\nNotable composers of liturgical anthems: historic context.\nDuring the Elizabethan period, notable anthems were composed by Thomas Tallis, William Byrd, Tye, and Farrant but they were not mentioned in the Book of Common Prayer until 1662 when the famous rubric \"In quires and places where they sing here followeth the Anthem\" first appears. Early anthems tended to be simple and homophonic in texture, so that the words could be clearly heard. During the 17th century, notable anthems were composed by Orlando Gibbons, Henry Purcell, and John Blow, with the verse anthem becoming the dominant musical form of the Restoration. In the 18th century, famed anthems were composed by Croft, Boyce, James Kent, James Nares, Benjamin Cooke, and Samuel Arnold. In the 19th century, Samuel Sebastian Wesley wrote anthems influenced by contemporary oratorio which stretch to several movements and last twenty minutes or longer. Later in the century, Charles Villiers Stanford used symphonic techniques to produce a more concise and unified structure. Many anthems have been written since then, generally by specialists in organ music rather than composers, and often in a conservative style. Major composers have usually written anthems in response to commissions and for special occasions: for instance Edward Elgar's 1912 \"Great is the Lord\" and 1914 \"Give unto the Lord\" (both with orchestral accompaniment); Benjamin Britten's 1943 \"Rejoice in the Lamb\" (a modern example of a multi-movement anthem, today heard mainly as a concert piece); and, on a much smaller scale, Ralph Vaughan Williams's 1952 \"O Taste and See\" written for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. With the relaxation of the rule, in England at least, that anthems should only be in English, the repertoire has been greatly enhanced by the addition of many works from the Latin repertoire.\nTypes.\nThe word \"anthem\" is commonly used to describe any celebratory song or composition for a distinct group, as in national anthems. Further, some songs are artistically styled as anthems, whether or not they are used as such, including Marilyn Manson's \"Irresponsible Hate Anthem\", Silverchair's \"Anthem for the Year 2000\", and Toto's \"Child's Anthem\".\nNational anthem.\nA national anthem (also state anthem, national hymn, national song, etc.) is generally a patriotic musical composition that evokes and eulogizes the history, traditions, and struggles of a country's people, recognized either by that state's government as the official national song, or by convention through use by the people. The majority of national anthems are marches or hymns in style. The countries of Latin America, Central Asia, and Europe tend towards more ornate and operatic pieces, while those in the Middle East, Oceania, Africa, and the Caribbean use a simpler fanfare. Some countries that are devolved into multiple constituent states have their own official musical compositions for them (such as with the United Kingdom, Russian Federation, and the former Soviet Union); their constituencies' songs are sometimes referred to as national anthems even though they are not sovereign states.\nFlag anthem.\nA flag anthem is generally a patriotic musical composition that extols and praises a flag, typically one of a country, in which case it is sometimes called a national flag anthem. It is often either sung or performed during or immediately before the raising or lowering of a flag during a ceremony. Most countries use their respective national anthems or some other patriotic song for this purpose. However, some countries, particularly in South America, use a separate flag anthem for such purposes. Not all countries have flag anthems. Some used them in the past but no longer do so, such as Iran, China, and South Africa. Flag anthems can be officially codified in law, or unofficially recognized by custom and convention. In some countries, the flag anthem may be just another song, and in others, it may be an official symbol of the state akin to a second national anthem, such as in Taiwan.\nSports anthem.\nMany pop songs are used as sports anthems, notably including Queen's \"We Are the Champions\" and \"We Will Rock You\", and some sporting events have their own anthems, most notably including UEFA Champions League.\nCorporate anthem.\nSince the 20th century, corporations' senior management have written and performed corporate anthems in an attempt to motivate workers and explain company values. They are most often screened during private conferences, intended only to be heard by workers and sometimes company sponsors.\nIn 1937, IBM released a collection of 100 \"happy songs\" for IBM corporate gatherings. Each song borrowed tunes from existing music, with lyrics altered to fit the goals and personages of IBM. For example, an ode to IBM president Thomas J. Watson was sung to the tune of Auld Lang Syne:T. J. Watson - you're our leader fine, the greatest in the land, \nWe sing your praises from our hearts - we're here to shake your hand. \nYou're I. B. M.'s bright guiding star throughout the hemispheres, \nNo matter what the future brings, we all will persevere.In 1971, Japanese jazz singer Martha Miyake the Polydor Orchestra performed the \"Song of Fujitsu\". The song, intended as a karaoke sing-along, failed to entice employees because not many of them could read sheet music.\nDuring a conference in January 1984, Apple screened \"We Are Apple (Leading the Way)\" to celebrate the rollout of Macintosh 128K. It was screened during a corporate presentation, intended to be viewed only by authorized Apple dealers and retailers. \nIn 2003, the University of Warwick reported the lack of efficacy and potential for ridicule:While sing-along marching songs, as used by Wal Mart, [\"sic\"] induce positive feeling and happiness, so help control employee behaviour, songs are also used subversively to provide resistance to work. In fact, many \u2018official\u2019 songs are received with cynicism by employees, or even result in embarrassment.\nAlthough songs or music can help branding and team building, a number of company songs, especially those in the style of Gospel anthems, such as \u2018Ahh Fujitsu\u2019, inspire dysfunction amongst employees...\nWithout control over the placement and timing of anthems, company music runs the risk of ridicule. For example, KPMG\u2019s anthemic, but now cringe worthy, [\"sic\"] \u2018Vision of Global strategy\u2019 was copied in mp3 format by employees, remixed, and distributed on the net.On February 24, 2005, at Seattle Convention Center's Starbucks Licensed Stores Awards, Starbucks senior management surprised the audience by coming out in \"rock 'n' roll costumes\" with inflatable insturments to perform a parody of Jefferson Starship\u2019s 1985 \"We Built This City\", as \"We Built This Starbucks\". When the audience failed to dance, the emcee \"berated them\", and the employees \"half-heartedly got up and just stood there\". Although footage iof the event s presumed to be lost, a recording was uploaded to YouTube in 2018, which alleged that a souvenir CD with the MP3 was gifted to attendees. \nShared anthems.\nAlthough anthems are used to distinguish states and territories, there are instances of shared anthems. \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\" became a pan-African liberation anthem and was later adopted as the national anthem of five countries in Africa including Zambia, Tanzania, Namibia and Zimbabwe after independence. Zimbabwe and Namibia have since adopted new national anthems. Since 1997, the South African national anthem has been a hybrid song combining new English lyrics with extracts of \"Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika\" and the former state anthem \"Die Stem van Suid-Afrika\".\nFor North and South Korea, the folk song \"Arirang\" is considered a shared anthem for both countries. For example, it was played when the two Koreas marched together during the 2018 Winter Olympics.\n\"Hymn to Liberty\" is the longest national anthem in the world by length of text. In 1865, the first three stanzas and later the first two officially became the national anthem of Greece and later also that of the Republic of Cyprus.\n\"Forged from the Love of Liberty\" was composed as the national anthem for the short-lived West Indies Federation (1958\u20131962) and was adopted by Trinidad and Tobago when it became independent in 1962.\n\"Esta \u00c9 a Nossa P\u00e1tria Amada\" is the national anthem of Guinea-Bissau and was also the national anthem of Cape Verde until 1996.\n\"Oben am jungen Rhein\", the national anthem of Liechtenstein, is set to the tune of \"God Save the King/Queen\". Other anthems that have used the same melody include \"Heil dir im Siegerkranz\" (Germany), \"Kongesangen\" (Norway), \"My Country, 'Tis of Thee\" (United States), \"Rufst du, mein Vaterland\" (Switzerland), \"E Ola Ke Alii Ke Akua\" (Hawai\u02bbi), and \"The Prayer of Russians\".\nThe Estonian anthem \"Mu isamaa, mu \u00f5nn ja r\u00f5\u00f5m\" is set to a melody composed in 1848 by Fredrik (Friedrich) Pacius which is also that of the national anthem of Finland: \" (\" in Swedish). It is also considered to be the ethnic anthem for the Livonian people with lyrics \"Min iz\u0101m\u014d, min sindim\u014d\" (\"My Fatherland, my native land\").\n\"Hey, Slavs\" is dedicated to Slavic peoples. Its first lyrics were written in 1834 under the title \"Hey, Slovaks\" (\"Hej, Slov\u00e1ci\") by Samuel Tom\u00e1\u0161ik and it has since served as the ethnic anthem of the Pan-Slavic movement, the organizational anthem of the Sokol physical education and political movement, the national anthem of Yugoslavia and the transitional anthem of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. The song is also considered to be the second, unofficial anthem of the Slovaks. Its melody is based on Mazurek D\u0105browskiego, which has also been the anthem of Poland since 1926, but the Yugoslav variation is much slower and more accentuated.\nBetween 1991 and 1994 \"De\u0219teapt\u0103-te, rom\u00e2ne!\" was the national anthem of both Romania (which adopted it in 1990) and Moldova, but in the case of the latter it was replaced by the current Moldovan national anthem, \"Limba noastr\u0103\". Between 1975 and 1977, the national anthem of Romania \"E scris pe tricolor Unire\" shared the same melody as the national anthem of Albania \"Himni i Flamurit\", which is the melody of a Romanian patriotic song \"Pe-al nostru steag e scris Unire\".\nThe modern national anthem of Germany, \"Das Lied der Deutschen\", uses the same tune as the 19th- and early 20th-century Austro-Hungarian imperial anthem \"Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser\".\nThe \"Hymn of the Soviet Union\", was used until its dissolution in 1991, and was given new words and adopted by the Russian Federation in 2000 to replace an instrumental national anthem that had been introduced in 1990.\n\"Bro Gozh ma Zado\u00f9\", the regional anthem of Brittany and, \"Bro Goth Agan Tasow\", the Cornish regional anthem, are sung to the same tune as that of the Welsh de-facto national anthem \"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau\", with similar words.\nFor parts of states.\nSome countries, such as the former Soviet Union, Spain, and the United Kingdom, among others, are held to be unions of several \"nations\" by various definitions. Each of the different \"nations\" may have their own anthem and these songs may or may not be officially recognized; these compositions are typically referred to as regional anthems though may be known by other names as well (e.g. \"state songs\" in the United States).\nAustria.\nIn Austria, the situation is similar to that in Germany. The regional anthem of Upper Austria, the \"Hoamatgsang\" (), is notable as the only (official) German-language anthem written and sung entirely in dialect.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium, Wallonia uses \"Le Chant des Wallons\" and Flanders uses \"De Vlaamse Leeuw\".\nBrazil.\nMost of the Brazilian states have official anthems. Minas Gerais uses an adapted version of the traditional Italian song \"Vieni sul mar\" as its unofficial anthem. During the Vargas Era (1937\u20131945) all regional symbols including anthems were banned, but they were legalized again by the Eurico Gaspar Dutra government.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, having been the independent Dominion of Newfoundland before 1949, also has its own regional anthem from its days as a dominion and colony of the UK, the \"Ode to Newfoundland\". It was the only Canadian province with its own anthem until 2010, when Prince Edward Island adopted the 1908 song \"The Island Hymn\" as its provincial anthem.\nCzechoslovakia.\nCzechoslovakia had a national anthem composed of two parts, the first verses of the Czech and Slovak anthems. After the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the anthem split as well, but Slovakia added an extra verse.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, many of the L\u00e4nder (states) have their own anthems, some of which predate the unification of Germany in 1871. A prominent example is the Hymn of Bavaria, which also has the status of an official anthem (and thus enjoys legal protection). There are also several unofficial regional anthems, like the \"Badnerlied\" and the \"Niedersachsenlied\".\nIndia.\nSome of the states and union territories of India have officially adopted their own state anthem for use during state government functions.\nJapan.\nAs of 2025, forty-four of the forty-seven prefectures of Japan have one or more official prefectural songs.\nThe only prefectures that do not have a prefectural song are Osaka, Hiroshima and \u014cita. However, all except \u014cita have unofficial prefectural songs, and all three have official prefectural sports songs. It is sometimes believed that Hy\u014dgo does not have an official prefectural song, but the song was adopted in 1947.\nIn many prefectures, an official , or , is played alongside the raising of the prefectural flag at government-hosted events. In addition to the official prefectural song, several other songs that symbolize the prefecture\u2014such as sports-themed songs or image songs representing the local identity\u2014have often been adopted.\nRegarding official prefectural songs, there are a variety of cases: some songs trace their origins to \"sh\u014dka\" (school songs) used in education during the mid-Meiji period; others were created after the end of World War II under encouragement from the General Headquarters of the Allied Forces (GHQ/SCAP); still others were composed in or after the 1980s. However, the most common pattern\u2014seen in prefectures like Toyama and Aichi\u2014is songs that were established in conjunction with the National Sports Festival, just like their prefectural flags.\nSome songs, such as Nagano Prefecture's , are so well-known that it is considered natural for residents to be able to sing them. However, there are also many examples where even local residents are not very familiar with their prefecture's song. Prefectural songs are mainly performed at events hosted by the prefectural government or during the National Sports Festival, but in some cases, they are also used as internal chimes to signal the start and end of work at prefectural offices, or as telephone hold music or ringtone melodies.\nIn Japan, many municipalities (cities, towns, and villages) under each prefecture also have their own official . In addition, many of the special wards of Tokyo and the administrative wards of government-designated cities have established their own .\nMalaysia.\nAll the individual states of Malaysia have their own anthems.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, after the national anthem was established in 1854, most of the states of the federation adopted their own regional anthems, which often emphasize heroes, virtues or particular landscapes. In particular, the regional anthem of Zacatecas, the \"Marcha de Zacatecas\", is one of the more well-known of Mexico's various regional anthems.\nSerbia and Montenegro.\nIn 2004 and 2005 respectively, the Montenegrin and Serbian regions of Serbia and Montenegro adopted their own regional anthems. When the two regions both became independent sovereign states in mid-2006, their regional anthems became their national anthems.\nSoviet Union.\nFourteen of the fifteen constituent states of the Soviet Union had their own official song which was used at events connected to that region, and also written and sung in that region's own language. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic used the Soviet Union's national anthem as its regional anthem (\"The Internationale\" from 1917 to 1944 and the \"National Anthem of the Soviet Union\" from 1944 to 1990) until 1990, the last of the Soviet constituent states to do so. After the Soviet Union disbanded in the early 1990s, some of its former constituent states, now sovereign nations in their own right, retained the melodies of their old Soviet-era regional anthems until replacing them or, in some cases, still use them today.\nUnlike most national anthems, few of which were composed by renowned composers, the Soviet Union's various regional anthems were composed by some of the best Soviet composers, including world-renowned Gustav Ernesaks (Estonia), Aram Khachaturian (Armenia), Otar Taktakishvili (Georgia), and Uzeyir Hajibeyov (Azerbaijan).\nThe lyrics present great similarities, all having mentions to Vladimir Lenin (and most, in their initial versions, to Joseph Stalin, the Armenian and Uzbek anthems being exceptions), to the guiding role of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and to the brotherhood of the Soviet peoples, including a specific reference to the friendship of the Russian people (the Estonian, Georgian and Karelo-Finnish anthems were apparently an exception to this last rule).\nSome of the Soviet regional anthems' melodies can be sung in the Soviet Union anthem lyrics (Ukrainian and Belarus are the most fitted in this case).\nMost of these regional anthems were replaced with new national ones during or after the dissolution of the Soviet Union; Belarus, Kazakhstan (until 2006), Tajikistan, Turkmenistan (until 1997), and Uzbekistan kept the melodies, but with different lyrics. Russia itself had abandoned the Soviet hymn, replacing it with a tune by Glinka. However, with Vladimir Putin coming to power, the old Soviet tune was restored, with new lyrics written to it.\nLike the hammer and sickle and red star, the public performance of the anthems of the Soviet Union's various regional anthems the national anthem of the Soviet Union itself are considered as occupation symbols as well as symbols of totalitarianism and state terror by several countries formerly either members of or occupied by the Soviet Union. Accordingly, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, and Ukraine have banned those anthems amongst other things deemed to be symbols of fascism, socialism, communism, and the Soviet Union and its republics. In Poland, dissemination of items which are \u201cmedia of fascist, communist, or other totalitarian symbolism\u201d was criminalized in 1997. However, in 2011 the Constitutional Tribunal found this sanction to be unconstitutional. In contrast to this treatment of the \"symbolism\", promotion of fascist, communist and other totalitarian \"ideology\" remains illegal. Those laws do not apply to the anthems of Russia, Belarus, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Tajikistan which used the melody with different lyrics.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, the situation is similar to that in Austria and Germany. Unlike the national anthem, most of the anthems of the autonomous communities have words. All are official. Three prominent examples are \"Els Segadors\" of Catalonia, \"Eusko Abendaren Ereserkia\" of the Basque Country, and \"Os Pinos\" of Galicia, all written and sung in the local languages.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom's national anthem is \"God Save the King\" but its constituent countries and Crown Dependencies also have their own equivalent songs which have varying degrees of official recognition. England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland each have anthems which are played at occasions such as sports matches and official events.\nThe Isle of Man, a Crown dependency, uses \"God Save the King\" as a Royal anthem, but also has its own local anthem, \"O Land of Our Birth\" (Manx: \"O Halloo Nyn Ghooie\").\nUnited States.\nAlthough the United States has \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" as its official national anthem, all except two of its constituent states and territories also have their own regional anthem (referred to by most US states as a \"state song\"), along with Washington, DC. The two exceptions are New Jersey, which has never had an official state song, and Maryland, which rescinded\n\"Maryland, My Maryland\" in 2021 due to its racist language and has yet to adopt a replacement.\nThe state songs are selected by each state legislature, and/or state governor, as a symbol (or emblem) of that particular US state.\nSome US states have more than one official state song, and may refer to some of their official songs by other names; for example, Arkansas officially has two state songs, plus a state anthem, and a state historical song. Tennessee has the most state songs, with 12 official state songs and an official bicentennial rap.\nArizona has a song that was written specifically as a state anthem in 1915, as well as the 1981 country hit \"Arizona\", which it adopted as the alternate state anthem in 1982.\nTwo individuals, Stephen Foster, and John Denver, have written or co-written two state songs. Foster's two state songs, \"Old Folks at Home\" (better known as \"Swanee Ribber\" or \"Suwannee River\"), adopted by Florida, and \"My Old Kentucky Home\" are among the best-known songs in the US On March 12, 2007, the Colorado Senate passed a resolution to make Denver's trademark 1972 hit \"Rocky Mountain High\" one of the state's two official state songs, sharing duties with its predecessor, \"Where the Columbines Grow\". On March 7, 2014, the West Virginia Legislature approved a resolution to make Denver's \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\" one of four official state songs of West Virginia. Governor Earl Ray Tomblin signed the resolution into law on March 8, 2014.\nAdditionally, Woody Guthrie wrote or co-wrote two state \"folk songs\" \u2013 Roll On, Columbia, Roll On and Oklahoma Hills \u2013 but they have separate status from the official state \"songs\" of Washington and Oklahoma, respectively. Other well-known state songs include \"Yankee Doodle\", \"You Are My Sunshine\", \"Rocky Top\", and \"Home on the Range\"; a number of others are popular standards, including \"Oklahoma\" (from the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical), Hoagy Carmichael's \"Georgia on My Mind\", \"Tennessee Waltz\", \"Missouri Waltz\", and \"On the Banks of the Wabash, Far Away\". Many of the others are much less well-known, especially outside the state.\nNew Jersey has no official state song, while Virginia's previous state song, \"Carry Me Back to Old Virginny\", adopted in 1940, was later rescinded in 1997 due to its racist language by the Virginia General Assembly. In 2015, \"Our Great Virginia\" was made the new state song of Virginia.\nIowa (\"The Song of Iowa\") uses the tune from the song \"O Tannenbaum\" as the melody to its official state song.\nYugoslavia.\nIn Yugoslavia, each of the country's constituent states (except for Bosnia and Herzegovina) had the right to have its own anthem, but only the Croatian one actually did so initially, later joined by the Slovene one on the brink of the breakup of Yugoslavia. Before 1989, Macedonia did not officially use a regional anthem, even though one was proclaimed during the World War II by the Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia (ASNOM).\nInternational organizations.\nLarger entities also sometimes have anthems, in some cases known as 'international anthems'. \"Lullaby\" is the official anthem of UNICEF composed by Steve Barakatt. \"The Internationale\" is the organizational anthem of various socialist movements. Before March 1944, it was also the anthem of the Soviet Union and the Comintern. ASEAN Way is the official anthem of ASEAN. The tune of the \"Ode to Joy\" from Beethoven's Symphony No. 9 is the official anthem of the European Union and of the Council of Europe. Let's All Unite and Celebrate is the official anthem of the African Union (\"Let Us All Unite and Celebrate Together\").\nThe Olympic Movement also has its own organizational anthem. Esperanto speakers at meetings often use the song \"La Espero\" as their linguistic anthem. The first South Asian Anthem by poet-diplomat Abhay K may inspire SAARC to come up with an official SAARC Anthem.\n\"Ireland's Call\" was commissioned as the sporting anthem of both the Ireland national rugby union team and the Ireland national rugby league team, which are composed of players from both jurisdictions on the island of Ireland, in response to dissatisfaction among Northern Ireland unionists with the use of the Irish national anthem. \"Ireland's Call\" has since been used by some other all-island bodies.\nAn international anthem also unifies a group of organizations sharing the same appellation such as the International Anthem of the Royal Golf Clubs composed by Steve Barakatt. Same applies to the European Broadcasting Union: the prelude of Te Deum in D Major by Marc-Antoine Charpentier is played before each official Eurovision and Euroradio broadcast. The prelude's first bars are heavily associated with the Eurovision Song Contest.\nGlobal anthem.\nVarious artists have created \"Earth anthems\" for the entire planet, typically extolling the ideas of planetary consciousness. Though UNESCO have praised the idea of a global anthem, the United Nations has never adopted an official song.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2440", "revid": "36761066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2440", "title": "Albrecht Altdorfer", "text": "German artist (c. 1480 \u2013 1538)\nAlbrecht Altdorfer (c.\u20091480 \u2013 12 February 1538) was a German painter, engraver and architect of the Renaissance working in Regensburg, Bavaria. Along with Lucas Cranach the Elder and Wolf Huber he is regarded to be the main representative of the Danube School, setting biblical and historical subjects against landscape backgrounds of expressive colours. He is remarkable as one of the first artists to take an interest in landscape as an independent subject. As an artist also making small intricate engravings he is seen to belong to the Nuremberg Little Masters.\nBiography.\nAltdorfer was born in Regensburg or Altdorf around 1480.\nHe acquired an interest in art from his father, Ulrich Altdorfer, who was a painter and miniaturist. At the start of his career, he won public attention by creating small, intimate modestly scaled works in unconventional media and with eccentric subject matter. He settled in the free imperial city of Regensburg, a town located on the Danube River in 1505, eventually becoming the town architect and a town councillor. His first signed works date to c.\u20091506, including engravings and drawings such as the \"Stygmata of St. Francis\" and \"St. Jerome\". His models were niellos and copper engravings from the workshops of Jacopo de Barbari and Albrecht D\u00fcrer.\nAround 1511 or earlier, he travelled down the river and south into the Alps, where the scenery moved him so deeply that he became the first landscape painter in the modern sense, making him the leader of the Danube School, a circle that pioneered landscape as an independent genre, in southern Germany. From 1513 he was at the service of Maximilian I in Innsbruck, where he received several commissions from the imperial court. During the turmoil of the Protestant Reformation, he dedicated mostly to architecture; paintings of the period, showing his increasing attention to architecture, include the \"Nativity of the Virgin\".\nIn 1529, he executed \"The Battle of Alexander at Issus\" for Duke William IV of Bavaria. In the 1520s he returned to Regensburg as a wealthy man, and became a member of the city's council. He was also responsible for the fortifications of Regensburg.\nIn that period his works are influenced by artists such as Giorgione and Lucas Cranach, as shown by his \"Crucifixion\". In 1535, he was in Vienna. He died at Regensburg in 1538.\nThe remains of Altdorfer's surviving work comprises 55 panels, 120 drawings, 125 woodcuts, 78 engravings, 36 etchings, 24 paintings on parchment, and fragments from a mural for the bathhouse of the Kaiserhof in Regensburg. This production extends at least over the period 1504\u20131537. He signed and dated each one of his works.\nPainting.\nAltdorfer was the pioneer painter of pure landscape, making them the subject of the painting, as well as compositions dominated by their landscape; these comprise much of his oeuvre. He believed that the human figure should not disrupt nature, but rather participate in it or imitate its natural processes. Taking and developing the landscape style of Lucas Cranach the Elder, he shows the hilly landscape of the Danube valley with thick forests of drooping and crumbling firs and larches hung with moss, and often dramatic colouring from a rising or setting sun. His \"Landscape with Footbridge\" (National Gallery, London) of 1518\u20131520 is claimed to be the first pure landscape in oil. In this painting, Altdorfer places a large tree that is cut off by the margins at the center of the landscape, making it the central axis and focus within the piece. Some viewers perceive anthropomorphic stylisation\u2014the tree supposedly exhibiting human qualities such as the drapery of its limbs. He also made many fine finished drawings, mostly landscapes, in pen and watercolour such as the \"Landscape with the Woodcutter\" in 1522. The drawing opens at ground level on a clearing surrounding an enormous tree that is placed in the center, dominating the picture. Some see the tree pose and gesticulate as if it was human, splaying its branches out in every corner. Halfway up the tree trunk, hangs a gabled shrine. At the time, a shrine like this might shelter an image of the Crucifixion or the Virgin Mary, but since it is turned away from the viewer, we are not sure what it truly is. At the bottom of the tree, a tiny figure of a seated man, crossed legged, holds a knife and axe, declaring his status in society/occupation.\nAlso, he often painted scenes of historical and biblical subjects, set in atmospheric landscapes. His best religious scenes are intense, with their glistening lights and glowing colours sometimes verging on the expressionistic. They often depict moments of intimacy between Christ and his mother, or various saints. His sacral masterpiece and one of the most famous religious works of art of the later Middle Ages is \"The Legend of St. Sebastian\" and \"The Passion of Christ\" of the so-called \"Sebastian Altar\" in \"St. Florian's Priory\" (\"Stift Sankt Florian\") near Linz, Upper Austria. When closed the altarpiece displayed the four panels of the legend of St. Sebastian's Martyrdom, while the opened wings displayed the Stations of the Cross. Today the altarpiece is dismantled and the predellas depicting the two final scenes, \"Entombment\" and \"Resurrection\" were sold to Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna in 1923 and 1930. Both these paintings share a similar formal structure that consists of an open landscape that is seen beyond and through the opening of a dark grotto. The date of completion on the resurrection panel is 1518.\nAltdorfer often distorts perspective to subtle effect. His donor figures are often painted completely out of scale with the main scene, as in paintings of the previous centuries. He also painted some portraits; overall his painted oeuvre was not large. In his later works, Altdorfer moved more towards mannerism and began to depict the human form to the conformity of the Italian model, as well as dominate the picture with frank colors.\nPaintings in Munich.\nHis rather atypical \"Battle of Issus\" (or of \"Alexander\") of 1529 was commissioned by William IV, Duke of Bavaria as part of a series of eight historical battle scenes destined to hang in the Residenz in Munich. Albrecht Altdorfer's depiction of the moment in 333 BCE when Alexander the Great routed Darius III for supremacy in Asia Minor is vast in ambition, sweeping in scope, vivid in imagery, rich in symbols, and obviously heroic\u2014the Iliad of painting, as literary critic Friedrich Schlegel suggested In the painting, a swarming cast of thousands of soldiers surround the central action: Alexander on his white steed, leading two rows of charging cavalrymen, dashes after a fleeing Darius, who looks anxiously over his shoulder from a chariot. The opposing armies are distinguished by the colors of their uniforms: Darius' army in red and Alexander's in blue. The upper half of \"The Battle of Alexander\" expands with unreal rapidity into an arcing panorama comprehending vast coiling tracts of globe and sky. The victory also lies on the planar surface; The sun outshone the moon just as the Imperial and allied army successfully repel the Turks.\nBy making the mass number of soldiers blend within the landscape/painting, it shows that he believed that the usage and depiction of landscape was just as significant as a historical event, such as a war. He renounced the office of \"Mayor of Regensburg\" to accept the commission. Few of his other paintings resemble this apocalyptic scene of two huge armies dominated by an extravagant landscape seen from a very high viewpoint, which looks south over the whole Mediterranean from modern Turkey to include the island of Cyprus and the mouths of the Nile and the Red Sea (behind the isthmus to the left) on the other side. However his style here is a development of that of a number of miniatures of battle-scenes he had done much earlier for Maximilian I in his illuminated manuscript \"Triumphal Procession\" in 1512\u201314. It is thought to be the earliest painting to show the curvature of the Earth from a great height.\nThe \"Battle\" is now in the Alte Pinakothek, which has the best collection of Altdorfer's paintings, including also his small \"St. George and the Dragon\" (1510), in oil on parchment, where the two figures are tiny and almost submerged in the lush, dense forest that towers over them. Altdorfer seems to exaggerate the measurements of the forest in comparison to the figures: the leaves appear to be larger than the horse, showing the significance of nature and landscape. He also emphasizes line within the work, by displaying the upward growth of the forest with the vertical and diagonal lines of the trunks. There is a small opening of the forest on the lower right hand corner that provides a rest for your eyes. It serves to create depth within the painting and is the only place you can see the characters. The human form is completely absorbed by the thickness of the forest. Fantastic light effects provide a sense of mystery and dissolve the outline of objects. Without the contrast of light, the figures would blend in with its surrounding environment. Altdorfer's figures are invariably the complement of his romantic landscapes; for them he borrowed Albrecht D\u00fcrer's inventive iconography, but the panoramic setting is personal and has nothing to do with the fantasy landscapes of the Netherlands A \"\" (1526) set outside an Italianate skyscraper of a palace shows his interest in architecture. Another small oil on parchment, \"Danube Landscape with Castle W\u00f6rth\" (c. 1520) is one of the earliest accurate topographical paintings of a particular building in its setting, of a type that was to become a clich\u00e9 in later centuries.\nPrintmaking.\nAltdorfer was a significant printmaker, with numerous engravings and about ninety-three woodcuts. These included some for the \"Triumphs of Maximilian\", where he followed the overall style presumably set by Hans Burgkmair, although he was able to escape somewhat from this in his depictions of the more disorderly baggage-train, still coming through a mountain landscape. However most of his best prints are etchings, many of landscapes; in these he was able most easily to use his drawing style. He was one of the most successful early etchers, and was unusual for his generation of German printmakers in doing no book illustrations. He often combined etching and engraving techniques in a single plate, and produced about 122 intaglio prints altogether. Many of Altdorfer's prints are quite small in size, and he is considered to be of the main members of the group of artists known as the Little Masters. Arthur Mayger Hind considers his graphical work to be somewhat lacking in technical skill but with an \"intimate personal touch\", and notes his characteristic feeling for landscape.\nPublic life.\nAs the superintendent of the municipal buildings Altdorfer had overseen the construction of several commercial structures, such as a slaughterhouse and a building for wine storage, possibly even designing them. He was considered to be an outstanding politician of his day. In 1517 he was a member of the \"Ausseren Rates\", the council on external affairs, and in this capacity was involved in the expulsion of the Jews, the destruction of the synagogue and in its place the construction of a church and shrine to the Sch\u00f6ne Maria that occurred in 1519. Altdorfer made etchings of the interior of the synagogue and designed a woodcut of the cult image of the Sch\u00f6ne Maria. In 1529\u20131530 he was also charged with reinforcing certain city fortifications in response to the Turkish threat.\nAlbrecht's brother, Erhard Altdorfer, was also a painter and printmaker in woodcut and engraving, and a pupil of Lucas Cranach the Elder.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2441", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2441", "title": "House of Ascania", "text": "German noble family originating from the 11th century, prominent in Saxony and Brandenburg\nThe House of Ascania is an Old Saxon high noble family historically documented since the 11th century. It is also known as the House of Anhalt, which refers to its longest-held possession. Their ancestral seats, Ballenstedt, Anhalt, Aschersleben, and Bernburg, are located in the present-day Anhalt region in Saxony-Anhalt. The ruins of Anhalt Castle are situated in the Harz Mountains northeast of Harzgerode. The name \"Askanier\" derives from the Latinization of their seat at Aschersleben. Since the late 17th century, only the Anhalt branch has survived. Albert the Bear became Duke of Saxony in 1138 and, with the control of the Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1150, the first Margrave in the formerly Slavic settlement area. In 1180, eastern parts of the Stem Duchy of Saxony passed to the Askanier Bernhard of Saxony. As Dukes of Saxe-Wittenberg, the family received hereditary electoral dignity in 1356. The family ruled Anhalt-Dessau, Anhalt-Bernburg, Anhalt-K\u00f6then, Anhalt-Zerbst, Anhalt-Pl\u00f6tzkau, and Anhalt-Aschersleben. Alexius Friedrich Christian of Anhalt-Bernburg was the first of the Anhalt princes to gain the title of Duke in April 1806. The ducal title was adopted in Anhalt-K\u00f6then and Anhalt-Dessau in 1807. Since 1863, only the Dessau line has existed, with Aribert of Anhalt abdicating in 1918 due to the November Revolution in the Duchy of Anhalt. Since 1963, Eduard, Prince of Anhalt has been the head of the family.\nHistory Overview.\nFrom the Beginnings to Before 1212.\nThe Askanier are documented as Counts of Ballenstedt, originating from an area now part of the Harz district in Saxony-Anhalt. From the outset, the family held possessions in the present-day districts of Salzlandkreis and Anhalt-Bitterfeld. Ballenstedt, Aschersleben, and ultimately Anhalt Castle were the most significant ancestral seats, with Ballenstedt as the eponymous seat in the 11th and 12th centuries. These possessions, along with further holdings in present-day Anhalt, led to the emergence of several Anhalt principalities in the 13th century. Due to numerous land divisions, concentrated ownership in a single hand was the exception over the centuries.\nThe earliest known Askanier, Esico of Ballenstedt, is reported in older literature to have built Anhalt Castle. The ruins of Anhalt Castle are located on a spur of the Great Hausberg on the right bank of the Selke. The origins and earlier history of the Ballenstedt family are unknown.\nThe family name, derived from Anhalt Castle, is still used by members of the house today. The term \"Askanier\" became a common designation for the Counts of Aschersleben starting in the 14th century. The Margraves of Brandenburg, Dukes of Saxony, and all other lines are also referred to as Askanier.\nFamily history often begins in literature with an Askanier whose name is unknown. Traditionally, this figure is still referred to as Adalbert, though it is agreed that the name is merely speculative based on his grandson. He was married to Hidda, a daughter of Hodo I, Margrave of the Ostmark. Their children are typically listed as Esico, Theoderich, Ludolf, Uta, and Hazecha.\nEsico of Ballenstedt is the first named ancestor and exercised comital rights. He is mentioned in contemporary documents, such as a diploma issued by Emperor Conrad II on October 26, 1036, at the Pfalz Tilleda (\"comitatu Esiconis\", translated as \"in the county of Esico\"). His clan was based in the eastern Saxon Schwabengau, which is why they are classified in the Sachsenspiegel as part of the Swabian ancient nobility. The Schwabengau (Suavia) was a county located east of Quedlinburg.\nThe primary source for the genealogy of the early Askanier is the chronicle of the Annalista Saxo, written in the mid-12th century. According to it, Esico was maternally a grandson of Margrave Hodo (\u2020 993) and inherited several allodial estates in the Schwabengau and Serimuntgau after the death of his uncle Siegfried (\u2020 c. 1030). The name of Esico's father is unknown; only in much later genealogies was he assigned the name Adalbert (I), as the Saxon annalist names the Count Adalbert (II), murdered around 1080, as Esico's son. On the present-day Schlossberg of Ballenstedt, Esico established the collegiate church \"St. Pancratius und Abundus\", consecrated in 1046 in the presence of King Henry III. He was advocate of the monasteries Nienburg and Hagenrode.\nAdalbert II of Ballenstedt, son of Esico and his wife Matilda, was a count in the Nordth\u00fcringgau and is mentioned in connection with the Nizizi and Serimunt counties. It is presumed that his mother was the daughter of Duke Herman of Swabia. He married Adelheid, daughter and heiress presumptive of Count Otto I of Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde, Margrave of Meissen, and had two sons, Otto the Rich and Siegfried. Adalbert was killed around 1080 by Egeno II of Konradsburg. While speculations about the motive exist, the reasons remain unclear. A seal depicting Adalbert exists, representing the earliest known stylized depiction of an Askanier.\nThe Saxon annalist referred to Esico, Adalbert II, and Otto the Rich as \"Counts of Ballenstedt,\" but this title is historically verified only for Otto (\"Ottoni comiti de Ballenstide\") in 1106. Thus, it is confirmed that he named himself after Ballenstedt Castle in the eastern Harz. Otto was briefly Duke of Saxony in 1112. He married Eilika, daughter of Duke Magnus of Saxony. Through this, he acquired Billung allodial estates and later received the Duchy of Saxony from the emperor. The count died in 1123 and was buried in Ballenstedt. His widow Eilika lived in Halle and Bernburg after his death. Otto the Rich and his son Albert the Bear converted the Ballenstedt collegiate church into a Benedictine monastery in 1123. His brother Siegfried was Count of Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde and Palatine of the Rhine.\nAlbert the Bear was the first significant family member and the most prominent Askanier in the Middle Ages. A contemporary and rival of Henry the Lion (Welfs) and Conrad the Great (Wettins), he significantly advanced the German settlement of Slavic border marks and founded the Margraviate of Brandenburg on the territory of the former Nordmark. He briefly served as Duke of Saxony before becoming Margrave of Brandenburg, establishing his family's power in the Saxon eastern marches. His extensive territorial possessions were divided among his sons Otto, Herman, Bernhard, and Adalbert. This created the four main Askanier branches at the time: Brandenburg (until 1320), Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde (until 1486), Saxe-Wittenberg (until 1422), Saxe-Lauenburg (until 1689), and Anhalt (to the present). Albert is referred to as a Count of Aschersleben, indicating that the title \"Counts of Aschersleben\" emerged in the 12th century. He was first documented as \"comes Asscherslovensis\" on August 8, 1147, during a court session he presided over. Whether Albert used this title himself is unclear, but he referred to himself as Margrave of Brandenburg in a document dated October 3, 1157 (\"Adelbertus dei gratia marchio in Brandenborch\"). The epithet \"the Bear\" was used in contemporary sources. Albert the Bear died in November 1170 and was almost certainly buried in the Ballenstedt house monastery. The bear is the heraldic animal of Anhalt. His son Bernhard used various Latin variants of Count of Aschersleben and later Duke of Saxony. The Gelnhausen Charter of 1180 included the division of the Stem Duchy of Saxony. In this arrangement, Bernhard was enfeoffed with the eastern part, which continued to bear the name Saxony. He received the ducal title the following year after the Erfurt Reichstag.\nFrom 1212 to before 1603.\nAfter the death of Bernhard III, Duke of Saxony, in February 1212 in Bernburg, his eldest son Henry received the Anhalt house estates between the Lower Harz and the lower Mulde River, while his brother Albert inherited the Duchy of Saxony. Their father Bernhard III inherited the County of Aschersleben from Adalbert, who had no male heirs. Although Albert held a higher title, Henry's possessions were securely in the family's hands. Part of the County of Anhalt was also allodial property. The division of 1212 marks the beginning of Anhalt's independent development, with Henry I as its first ruler. It is likely that he controlled a relatively cohesive area around Aschersleben, Ballenstedt, and Anhalt Castle, with a narrow connection to larger eastern complexes around Bernburg, K\u00f6then, W\u00f6rbzig, Dessau, and W\u00f6rlitz, extending to the right bank of the Elbe around Coswig. Henry I of Anhalt appeared as Count of Askanien (\"comes Aschariae\") in a document issued on November 4, 1213. \"Ascharia\" is a term used by the document's issuer. Henry I was also the first to be called Prince in or of Anhalt (\"comes Ascharie et princeps in Anahalt\") and was also Count of Aschersleben. The prince was considered cruel, as he mistreated Abbot Gernot at Nienburg. In the early 14th century, family members used Anhalt as their designation, regardless of whether they held Anhalt Castle.\nIn the 13th century, the Anhaltiner were among the elite in their region, i.e., the Anhalt area. However, their significance declined sharply in the 14th and 15th centuries, as evidenced by their reduced imperial political influence and marriage alliances. Like other imperial princes, the Askanier benefited from the \"Statutum in favorem principum\", enacted in 1231 at the Worms Hoftag, which regulated the sovereign rights of princes. The first formation of lines in the present-day Anhalt region occurred through the land division of 1252 among the sons of Henry I of Anhalt. Henry II founded the Aschersleben line, Bernhard I the Bernburg line, and Siegfried I the K\u00f6then line. Alongside K\u00f6then, Dessau and Coswig were part of this Principality. Dessau later gained significance as a residence. Ballenstedt belonged to Anhalt-Aschersleben and gave the Askanier their name as Counts of Ballenstedt. The family ruled the Principality of Anhalt-Aschersleben until 1315. The Askanier acquired the lordship of Zerbst in 1307 from the lords of Barby, which was last administered by Anhalt-K\u00f6then; the Principality of Anhalt-Zerbst was established in 1396.\nAnhalt-K\u00f6then was divided among the sons of John II, son of Albert II of Anhalt-Zerbst. The brothers Sigmund I, Albert III, and Waldemar III initially ruled jointly. Waldemar III died soon after, and in 1396, the Sigmundian line (Zerbst) and Albertine line (K\u00f6then) emerged. Sigmund I received the land on the right bank of the Elbe, while Albert III received the land on the left bank. Albert III's sons Waldemar IV, Adolf I, and Albert IV had significant disputes with their cousin George I of Anhalt-Zerbst regarding possessions. The possessions were later redistributed. The Sigmundian line eventually gained partial ownership of the Albertine line, which ended at the beginning of the 16th century. The Bernburg branch expired in 1468, and its possessions passed to the Sigmundian line.\nThe Sigmundian line split again in 1474 into the older Dessau line (Anhalt-Dessau; Ernestine-Dessau branch) and the so-called older K\u00f6then line (Anhalt-K\u00f6then), here used to refer to the Waldemarian-K\u00f6then branch. The death date of George I is used, though some sources cite the earlier division by him in 1471. The latter line expired with Wolfgang of Anhalt-K\u00f6then in 1566, and the possessions had already passed to the older Dessau line in 1562. Wolfgang was the son of Waldemar VI of Anhalt-K\u00f6then and grandson of George I. The older K\u00f6then line acquired part of the Zerbst lands in 1508, which also passed to the older Dessau line. Around 1500, the Magdeburg Archbishop attempted to subordinate the principality to his own sphere of influence, which would have meant the loss of imperial immediacy. Through the Imperial Reform starting in 1500, imperial circles were created in the Holy Roman Empire. The principalities were part of the Upper Saxon Circle. Wolfgang of Anhalt-K\u00f6then introduced the Reformation in 1525 and was a leading figure among Protestant princes. He signed the Augsburg Confession in 1530, was a co-founder of the Schmalkaldic League in 1531, and participated in the Schmalkaldic War in 1546.\nIn the mid-16th century, progressive legislation modernized administration. The older Dessau line split in 1546 into the Zerbst, Dessau, and Pl\u00f6tzkau branches. John V received the Zerbst lands, Joachim Dessau, and George III Pl\u00f6tzkau.\nSince Wolfgang of Anhalt-K\u00f6then (\u2020 1566) from the older K\u00f6then line died childless, his lands passed to Joachim Ernst of Anhalt, son of John IV and part of the older Dessau line. Joachim Ernst unified all possessions in 1570 and moved his seat of government to Dessau.\nFrom 1603 to the present.\nIn 1603, another division created the younger lines of Anhalt-Dessau, Anhalt-Bernburg, Anhalt-K\u00f6then, and Anhalt-Zerbst. John George I became Prince of Anhalt-Dessau and received the town, office, and castle of Dessau with Schloss Lippene, the towns of Raguhn and Je\u00dfnitz, and the offices of W\u00f6rlitz, Sandersleben, and Freckleben. Christian I ruled Anhalt-Bernburg with the town, office, and castle of Bernburg, Pl\u00f6tzkau, Hoym, Ballenstedt, Harzgerode, and G\u00fcntersberge. Rudolph founded the Anhalt-Zerbst line and held the town, office, and castle of Zerbst with Kermen, Lindau, Ro\u00dflau, and Coswig. Louis I established the Anhalt-K\u00f6then branch and received the town, office, and castle of K\u00f6then with Brambach, Wulfen, Nienburg, and the marks of Jeser, Baalberge, Warmsdorf with Kolbigh, and the Vorwerk Diebzig. August initially renounced land ownership for a settlement but, after renegotiations in 1611, received Pl\u00f6tzkau from the Bernburg share, though without sovereign rights.\nThe division of possessions was significant only within the overall principality. Externally, the principality spoke with one voice, remaining undivided. Anhalt-Pl\u00f6tzkau existed until the mid-17th century and then passed to Anhalt-Bernburg. Anhalt-K\u00f6then expired in 1665. The Anhalt-Pl\u00f6tzkau line inherited this possession and renamed itself Anhalt-K\u00f6then.\nEmperor Francis II granted the Prince of Anhalt-Bernburg the right to be called \"Duke\" in 1806. In 1807, Anhalt-Dessau and Anhalt-K\u00f6then were also elevated to duchies by Napoleon Bonaparte. The Zerbst branch died out in 1793, the K\u00f6then line in 1847, and the Bernburg line in 1863. Thus, in 1863, the Duchy of Anhalt (Anhalt-Dessau line) was formed with Dessau as its residence, remaining the sole ruling territory until the abdication in 1918.\nLess significant lines included Anhalt-K\u00f6then-Pless (1755 to mid-19th century), Anhalt-Bernburg-Schaumburg (1707\u20131812), and Anhalt-Harzgerode (1635\u20131709).\nAfter the Askanier's abdication, Ballenstedt Castle remained the family's residence. Joachim Ernst, the last duke, married Elisabeth Strickrodt in March 1927; the marriage was dissolved in 1929. In October 1929, he married Edda-Charlotte von Stephani-Marwitz, producing the children Marie Antoinette, Anna Luise, Leopold Friedrich, Edda, and Eduard. Joachim Ernst was arrested by the Nazis in January 1944 and held for three months in Dachau near Munich. In September 1945, he was arrested by Soviet occupation forces and taken to NKVD special camp Nr. 2 near Weimar, where he died in February 1947. His rehabilitation by the Russian state occurred in 1992. From 1947, his son Leopold Friedrich was head of the house, and since 1963, his son Eduard has been.\nThe House of Anhalt today.\nSince 1963, Eduard has served as the head of the family. Born in 1941 in Ballenstedt, he succeeded his older brother Leopold Friedrich, who died in a traffic accident. Both are sons of Joachim Ernst, who was the last duke, still a minor in 1918. The family uses the traditional nobiliary particle \"Highness,\" applied to both the head and other family members. Eduard, Prince of Anhalt, is the last male Askanier; the family will become extinct in the male line upon his death. The current head of the family and his three daughters are the only legitimate descendants of the Askanier in the agnatic line. Two morganatic lines, the Counts of Westarp and of Waldersee, descend from non-house-law-compliant marriages of two Anhalt princes. Eduard, Prince of Anhalt, is related to the British King Charles III and had initial contact with the Windsors in 1947 when his mother was invited to Buckingham Palace in London. Familial ties exist through his great-uncle Aribert of Anhalt, who was married to a granddaughter of Queen Victoria.\nIn January 2010, the head of the house issued the \"Dessau Declaration,\" amending the house law to introduce female succession. Thus, his eldest daughter, Julia Katharina, is designated as the future head of the House of Anhalt. This is a novelty within the German high nobility. Due to the unconventional nature of absolute primogeniture allowing a female successor, the non-noble marriage of the designated heiress, and questions about whether monarchical house laws can be amended after the monarchy's abolition, this decision is controversial among conservative representatives of so-called noble associations, and the daughters' descendants are not yet included in the Gotha Genealogical Handbook.\nHeads of the House of Anhalt\nRule in Anhalt.\nAnhalt-Aschersleben.\nThe allodial estates of the Ascanians between the Harz and Elbe remained with the Anhalt line after the 1212 division. Henry II. was the son of Henry I. of Anhalt and founded the Anhalt-Aschersleben line in 1252. He received the territories of Aschersleben, Gernrode, Hecklingen, Ermsleben, and W\u00f6rbzig. The Anhalt-Aschersleben region also included Ballenstedt and Anhalt Castle. The Ascanians originated from this area. The principality passed to the Diocese of Halberstadt in 1315, and with it, to the Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1648. The Bishop of Halberstadt enfeoffed Bernhard II. of Anhalt-Bernburg in December 1316, transferring Anhalt-Aschersleben as a fief to Anhalt-Bernburg.\nPrincipality of Anhalt-Bernburg.\nBernhard I. (* 1218; \u2020 1287) was born as the son of Henry I. of Anhalt and founded the old Bernburg line. Prince Bernhard III. of Anhalt was the first in 1320 to call himself \"comes Ascanie\". Nineteenth-century historiography then applied this term to all members of the family of the Counts of Ballenstedt and Aschersleben since the 11th century. After the death of Bernhard VI in 1468, George I. of Anhalt-Zerbst inherited the possessions. A castle complex in Bernburg is mentioned in 961 and 1138, though the former date is uncertain. Under Wolfgang of Anhalt-K\u00f6then, the Wolfgangsbau was constructed at Bernburg Castle in 1538/1539, located at the site of the former hillfort.\nChristian I. of Anhalt-Bernburg became the governor of the Upper Palatinate in 1595 in the service of Elector Frederick IV. of the Palatinate and resided in Amberg. He represented Frederick IV at the founding of the Protestant Union. In 1619, he had significant influence in the election of his employer Frederick V. of the Palatinate as King of Bohemia.\nEmperor Francis II. elevated Prince Alexius Frederick Christian to Duke in April 1806. Anhalt-Bernburg passed to Leopold IV of Anhalt-Dessau after the reign of Alexander Charles (* 1805; \u2020 1863).\nPrincipality of Anhalt-K\u00f6then.\nSiegfried I. (\u2020 1298) was the son of Henry I of Anhalt and received K\u00f6then; his territory was to the right of the Saale and partly to the right of the Elbe. In 1272, he founded the Augustinian nunnery at Coswig, whose collegiate church was St. Nicolai. In older literature, the Anhalt-K\u00f6then line is sometimes referred to as the old Zerbst line. Siegfried's sons were Albert I., Henry, Siegfried II, and Hermann.\nThe Anhalt-K\u00f6then line adopted the ducal title from 1807. Henry (* 1778; \u2020 1847) was the last Duke of Anhalt-K\u00f6then. The land passed to the lines of Anhalt-Bernburg (administered by Anhalt-Dessau) and Anhalt-Dessau. No division occurred due to the anticipated extinction of the Bernburg line and the subsequent inheritance by Anhalt-Dessau.\nPrincipality of Anhalt-Zerbst.\nThe possessions were administered jointly with K\u00f6then and Dessau before 1396. John VI. publicly introduced the Lutheran confession in 1644, and Calvinist preachers were subsequently replaced. In May 1681, the foundation stone was laid for the main part of Zerbst Castle. The Zerbst line ceased in 1793, and the possessions passed to the other brothers in 1797. The K\u00f6then line ended in 1847, and K\u00f6then was unified with Dessau in 1853. After the Bernburg line also became extinct in 1863, the Duchy of Anhalt was formed under Leopold IV (\u2020 1871). Anhalt-Zerbst acquired the Lordship of Jever through inheritance in 1667.\nUntil 1797, Ro\u00dflau was a Quedlinburg fief held by the Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst, then passed to Anhalt-K\u00f6then, where it formed the \"New K\u00f6then\" part, and finally to Anhalt-Dessau in 1847.\nPrincipality of Anhalt-Dessau.\nA separate cadet line of the princely house in Dessau emerged in 1474. Ernest (\u2020 1516) was born as the son of George I. of Anhalt-Zerbst and founded the Ernestine-Dessau line (Anhalt-Dessau). His brother Sigismund III. died in 1487 and was also a Prince of Anhalt-Dessau. The construction of the Dessau Palace is generally believed to have begun around 1530.\nIn 1660, John George II. succeeded his father John Casimir as regent. Under his rule, Gro\u00dfalsleben was added to the possessions. For his wife Henriette Catherine from the House of Orange-Nassau, Oranienbaum Palace was built east of Dessau from 1681. John George II was a brother-in-law of Elector Frederick William of Brandenburg.\nLeopold III created the W\u00f6rlitz Park, an English landscape garden.\nAnhalt-Harzgerode.\nAnhalt-Harzgerode emerged in 1635 from the division of Anhalt-Bernburg and reverted to it in 1709.\nDuchy of Anhalt.\nThe Zerbst line ceased in 1793, and its possessions passed to the other brothers in 1797. The K\u00f6then line ended in 1847, and K\u00f6then was unified with Dessau in 1853. When the Bernburg line became extinct in 1863, the Duchy of Anhalt was established under Duke Leopold IV Frederick (\u2020 1871). From this year, he held the title Duke of Anhalt, no longer Duke of Anhalt-Dessau.\nIn the federal resolution of June 14, 1866, the Duchy of Anhalt sided with Prussia, joined the North German Confederation in 1867, and the German Empire in 1871. The state parliament consisted of 36 deputies. The Duke appointed 2 deputies, 8 represented the highest-taxed landowners, 2 the highest-taxed merchants and industrialists, 14 represented the cities, and 10 represented rural areas.\nThe Duchy existed until the November Revolution in 1918, when workers and soldiers in Anhalt demonstrated and demanded change, which occurred peacefully. The Social Democrats called for the abdication of the ducal family. Prince Regent Aribert of Anhalt declared the abdication of the Ascanians on November 12, 1918, on behalf of the minor Duke Joachim Ernst.\nOn December 30, 1918, Aribert of Anhalt established the Joachim-Ernst Foundation, renamed the Dessau-W\u00f6rlitz Cultural Foundation in 1947. The foundation manages most of the Dessau-W\u00f6rlitz Garden Realm with several landscape parks.\nRule Outside of Anhalt.\nThe Anhalters also ruled outside their ancestral lands. At the beginning of the family history, the Ascanians were significant in the Margraviate of Brandenburg and the Duchy of Saxony.\nMargraviate of Brandenburg.\nThe noble family shaped the history of Brandenburg, as it is credited with the Formation of the Margraviate of Brandenburg. When the Slavic prince Pribislav died in 1150, his widow Petrissa handed over the land of the Hevelli around Brandenburg Castle to Albrecht the Bear, Count of Ballenstedt. In 1157, Albrecht definitively took possession of Brandenburg. He participated in Lothair of Supplinburg's Italian campaign in 1132/1133, where Lothair was crowned emperor by Pope Innocent II. In gratitude, Albrecht received the Nordmark, which later gave him power over the Margraviate of Brandenburg. Despite Albrecht's rule over the Margraviate of Brandenburg, only three visits by the margrave (1150, 1157, and 1170) have been documented in the mark. Otto I. (\u2020 1184) became the new Margrave of Brandenburg in 1170, and his descendants expanded the territory through an expansionist eastern policy. In connection with the Ascanians, a founding myth also emerged.\nAt the beginning of the 14th century, the mark extended to the later Prussian Province of Brandenburg and even into Pomerania. With Henry II the Child, the Brandenburg line became extinct in 1320. Emperor Louis IV of the House of Wittelsbach, an uncle of Henry II, reclaimed Brandenburg as a lapsed fief and granted it to his son Louis V in 1323, concluding the Brandenburg Interregnum. In 1348, a pretender known as the False Waldemar was enfeoffed with the Margraviate of Brandenburg.\nDuchy of Saxony.\nThe old Duchy of Saxony was transferred to Henry the Lion of the House of Welf in 1143. It was divided into the three provinces of Westphalia, Angria, and Eastphalia and lay mostly in the area of present-day Lower Saxony, Westphalia, and the western part of Saxony-Anhalt. The Ascanians briefly held the title of Duke of Saxony with Otto the Rich in 1112 and Albrecht the Bear from 1138 to 1142. Albrecht's mother, Eilika of Saxony, was the daughter of the Saxon Duke Magnus Billung of Saxony. This fact supported a claim to Saxony, just as the Welfs could present their own arguments. Thus, the family can also be considered a Saxon noble house.\nThe title of Duke of Saxony passed in 1180, after the deposition of Henry the Lion at the Diet of Gelnhausen, documented in the Gelnhausen Charter of April 13, 1180, to Bernhard III. of Saxony, the youngest son of Albrecht the Bear. However, he received only the eastern part, excluding Westphalia and Angria, which went to the Archbishop of Cologne Philipp I. von Heinsberg. Bernhard also held the counties of Aschersleben and Ballenstedt as well as Anhalt Castle, the ancestral lands. In the retained eastern part of the Duchy, he could only exercise actual power in parts of it. Bernhard divided his territories among his sons: the elder son Albert I. (\u2020 1261) received the Saxon Duchy, while the younger son Henry I. (\u2020 1252) received the Anhalt ancestral lands.\nAlbert II., son of Albert I, and the sons of his brother John I. conducted a division of the Ascanian Duchy of Saxony in 1296. Saxony-Wittenberg went to Albrecht II, and John II., Albrecht III, and Eric I. received Saxony-Lauenburg. The Saxony-Wittenberg line was significant, receiving the hereditary electoral dignity in 1356 through the Golden Bull. However, it became extinct in 1422, and Saxony-Wittenberg (\"Electoral Saxony\") was granted to the Wettins, causing the Ascanians to lose their status as electors.\nSaxony-Lauenburg.\nThe branch of John II., Duke of Saxe-Lauenburg in Bergedorf, now near Hamburg, and M\u00f6lln, ended in 1401 with his grandson Eric III.. Eric IV. received his lands, being Duke of Saxe-Lauenburg in Lauenburg and Ratzeburg. He thus held all the possessions and was a descendant of Eric I., who was Duke of Saxe-Lauenburg in Lauenburg and, after his brother Albrecht III's death in 1308, also in Ratzeburg. The Saxe-Lauenburg line ended with Julius Francis in 1689. The Welfs (from the neighboring Principality of L\u00fcneburg line) succeeded them.\nWeimar-Orlam\u00fcnde.\nSiegfried I became the first Ascanian Count of Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde in 1112 after Ulrich II, Margrave of Carniola from the Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde house. He was the son of Adalbert II of Ballenstedt and his wife Adelaide, a daughter of Otto I, Margrave of Meissen . Albert I the Bear received the County of Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde in 1140. Hermann I (\u2020 1176) continued the Weimar-Orlam\u00fcnde line. Following the inheritance division of 1264/65, Hermann III received the area around Orlam\u00fcnde, and Otto III received the area around Weimar.\nOrlam\u00fcnde was sold to the Wettins on April 25, 1344. By 1467, the Ascanians no longer held any possessions, as the Wettins took over everything.\nPrincipality of L\u00fcneburg.\nAfter the older House of L\u00fcneburg died out with William II of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg in 1369, the L\u00fcneburg War of Succession began in 1370. In the same year, the Principality of L\u00fcneburg was granted to Albrecht and Wenceslaus I of the Saxony-Wittemberg line by decree of Emperor Charles IV. Albrecht was the maternal grandson of William II of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, while Wenceslaus I was Albrecht's uncle. The Ascanians were replaced in 1388 by Albrecht's stepsons from the House of Welf.\nThe rulers of the Principality of L\u00fcneburg\nRulers of the House of Ascania.\nHouse of Ascania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Partitions of the House of Ascania\nNotable figures.\nCatherine the Great.\nThe most famous Ascanian in modern times was the Russian Empress Catherine the Great (* 1729; \u2020 1796), previously named Sophie Auguste Friederike. Her father, Christian August of Anhalt-Zerbst-Dornburg, served as a high-ranking military officer in Prussian service, so she grew up primarily in Szczecin Castle, not Zerbst. In 1745, she married Karl Peter Ulrich of Schleswig-Holstein-Gottorp, the future Russian Emperor Peter III. On this occasion, she converted to Russian Orthodoxy and took the name Yekaterina Alexeyevna in honor of Catherine I. After orchestrating her husband's deposition in 1762, during which he was murdered, she assumed sole rule over Russia, governing for 34 years. Her governing style is associated with enlightened absolutism; she also maintained contact with Voltaire, Cesare Beccaria, and Denis Diderot.\nThe Zerbst sub-branch of Anhalt-Zerbst-Dornburg was founded by her grandfather John Louis I, which inherited the main Anhalt-Zerbst line again in 1742. \nSenior members of the House of Anhalt.\nThe senior members managed the overall affairs of the Anhalt house per the 1603 division agreement.\nAscanian Abbesses.\nThe Ascanians also held advocacy and protection rights over the monasteries of Nienburg/Saale and Gernrode. They later maintained a close connection with the Abbey of Gernrode. Abbess Sophia of Anhalt was the sister of Henry I, who received the family estates in 1212. The Gernrode abbesses, as imperial princesses of the Holy Roman Empire, held a seat at the Imperial Diets.\nResearch activities.\nSince the 16th century, court historians of the Anhalt and Saxe-Lauenburg family branches sought to trace their patrons' descent. The \"Historie des F\u00fcrstenthums Anhalt\" by Johann Christoph Bekmann was published in 1710. Samuel Lenz released \"Samuelis Lentzii Becmannvs Envcleatvs, Svppletvs Et Continvatvs, Oder: Historisch-Genealogische F\u00fcrstellung des Hochf\u00fcrstlichen Hauses Anhalt\" in 1757. Philipp Ernst Bertram and Johann Christoph Krause authored the \"Geschichte des Hauses und F\u00fcrstenthums Anhalt\", published in 1780 and 1782. The Anhalt court archivist Otto von Heinemann published the \"Codex diplomaticus Anhaltinus\" starting in 1867, a collection of documents from 936 to 1400. In 1912 and 1913, the ducal archivist Hermann W\u00e4schke published the three-volume \"Anhaltische Geschichte\", a comprehensive history of Anhalt that became a standard work. W\u00e4schke was appointed archive director and head of the Ducal House and State Archives in Zerbst in 1901. He also founded the Zerbst Historical Society, serving as its chairman for 23 years.\nThe Historical Commission for Saxony-Anhalt has established a permanent working group on Anhalt history. The Association for Anhalt Regional Studies, based in K\u00f6then, has published a journal on Anhalt history since 1993. The Ducal Anhalt House Order of Albert the Bear, whose Grand Master is Eduard, Prince of Anhalt, honored historian Lutz Partenheimer in 2016 by admitting him as a knight to the house order. This recognition was for his research on Albert the Bear, the formation of the Margraviate of Brandenburg, and the House of Anhalt.\nArmorial.\nThe original arms of the house of Ascania, from their ancestors the Saxon counts of Ballenstedt, were \"\"Barry of ten sable and or\".\nThe Ascanian margrave Albert the Bear was invested with the Saxon ducal title in 1138; when he succeeded the Welf's Henry the Lion, who was deposed by Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. In 1180, Albert's son Bernhard, Count of Anhalt received the remaining Saxon territories around Wittenberg and Lauenburg, and the ducal title. Legend, so unlikely to be true, goes that when he rode in front of the emperor, at the occasion of his investiture, he carried a shield with his escutcheon of the Ballenstedt coat of arms (\"barry sable and or\"). Barbarossa took the rue wreath he wore against the heat of the sun from his head, hanging it over Bernhard's shield and thus creating the Saxonian \"crancelin vert\" (\"Barry of ten sable and or, a crancelin vert\"\"). A more likely explanation is that it probably symbolized the waiver of the Lauenburg lands.\nWhen upon German reunification the Free State of Saxony was re-established, the coat of arms was formally confirmed in 1991.\nThe chivalric order was the House Order of Albert the Bear (German: \"Hausorden Albrechts des B\u00e4ren\" or \"Der Herzoglich Anhaltische Hausorden Albrechts des B\u00e4ren\") which was founded in 1836 as a joint House Order by three dukes of Anhalt from separate branches of the family: Henry, Duke of Anhalt-K\u00f6then, Leopold IV, Duke of Anhalt-Dessau, and Alexander Karl, Duke of Anhalt-Bernburg.\nThe namesake of the order, Albert the Bear, was the first Margrave of Brandenburg from the House of Ascania. The origin of his nickname \"the Bear\" is unknown.\nName bearers through adult adoption.\nIn addition to those born into the Ascanian family, there are a significant number of individuals adopted as adults who bear the name. The number of adopted individuals and their family members with the same surname far exceeds that of born Ascanians. Among the adoptees, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric, Prince of Anhalt, adopted in 1980 in Germany by Marie-Auguste, Princess of Anhalt, is particularly notable. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric, Prince of Anhalt, has adopted six adults in Los Angeles, who thereby bear the name Prince of Anhalt. The head of the Ascanian family, Eduard, Prince of Anhalt, generally rejects such adult adoptions and does not consider the adoptees part of the family.\nAdult adoption in Germany differs from the adoption of a minor in that, per \u00a7 1770(1) of the BGB, only a kinship relationship with the adopting person is established, not with their family. Typically, the kinship with biological parents remains intact. In the U.S. state of California, adult adoption is straightforward, and, as in Germany, a personal relationship between the parties is required.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2443", "revid": "50624807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2443", "title": "Acceleration", "text": "Rate of change of velocity\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn mechanics, acceleration is the rate of change of the velocity of an object with respect to time. Acceleration is one of several components of kinematics, the study of motion. Accelerations are vector quantities (in that they have magnitude and direction). The orientation of an object's acceleration is given by the orientation of the \"net\" force acting on that object. The magnitude of an object's acceleration, as described by Newton's second law, is the combined effect of two causes:\nThe SI unit for acceleration is metre per second squared (m\u22c5s\u22122, formula_1).\nFor example, when a vehicle starts from a (zero velocity, in an inertial frame of reference) and travels in a straight line at increasing speeds, it is accelerating in the direction of travel. If the vehicle turns, an acceleration occurs toward the new direction and changes its motion vector. The acceleration of the vehicle in its current direction of motion is called a linear acceleration (or tangential acceleration during circular motions), the reaction to which the passengers on board experience as a force pushing them back into their seats. When changing direction, the effecting acceleration is called radial or normal acceleration (or centripetal acceleration during circular motions), the reaction to which the passengers experience as a centrifugal force. If the speed of the vehicle decreases, this is an acceleration in the opposite direction of the velocity vector, sometimes called deceleration or retardation, and passengers experience the reaction to deceleration as an inertial force pushing them forward. Such deceleration is often achieved by retrorocket burning in spacecraft. Both acceleration and deceleration are treated the same, as they are both changes in velocity. Each of these accelerations (tangential, radial, deceleration) is felt by passengers until their relative (differential) velocity is neutralised in reference to the acceleration due to change in speed.\nDefinition and properties.\nAverage acceleration.\nAn object's average acceleration over a period of time is its change in velocity, formula_2, divided by the duration of the period, formula_3. Mathematically,\nformula_4\nInstantaneous acceleration.\nInstantaneous acceleration, meanwhile, is the limit of the average acceleration over an infinitesimal interval of time. In the terms of calculus, instantaneous acceleration is the derivative of the velocity vector with respect to time:\nformula_5\nAs acceleration is defined as the derivative of velocity, v, with respect to time t and velocity is defined as the derivative of position, x, with respect to time, acceleration can be thought of as the second derivative of x with respect to t:\nformula_6\nBy the fundamental theorem of calculus, it can be seen that the integral of the acceleration function \"a\"(\"t\") is the velocity function \"v\"(\"t\"); that is, the area under the curve of an acceleration vs. time (a vs. t) graph corresponds to the change of velocity.\nformula_7\nLikewise, the integral of the jerk function \"j\"(\"t\"), the derivative of the acceleration function, can be used to find the change of acceleration at a certain time:\nformula_8\nUnits.\nAcceleration has the dimensions of velocity (L/T) divided by time, i.e. L T\u22122. The SI unit of acceleration is the metre per second squared (m s\u22122); or \"metre per second per second\", as the velocity in metres per second changes by the acceleration value, every second.\nOther forms.\nAn object moving in a circular motion\u2014such as a satellite orbiting the Earth\u2014is accelerating due to the change of direction of motion, although its speed may be constant. In this case it is said to be undergoing \"centripetal\" (directed towards the center) acceleration.\nProper acceleration, the acceleration of a body relative to a free-fall condition, is measured by an instrument called an accelerometer.\nIn classical mechanics, for a body with constant mass, the (vector) acceleration of the body's center of mass is proportional to the net force vector (i.e. sum of all forces) acting on it (Newton's second law):\nformula_9\nwhere F is the net force acting on the body, m is the mass of the body, and a is the center-of-mass acceleration. As speeds approach the speed of light, relativistic effects become increasingly large.\nTangential and centripetal acceleration.\nThe velocity of a particle moving on a curved path as a function of time can be written as:\nformula_10\nwith \"v\" equal to the speed of travel along the path, and\nformula_11\na unit vector tangent to the path pointing in the direction of motion at the chosen moment in time. Taking into account both the changing speed \"v\" and the changing direction of u\"t\", the acceleration of a particle moving on a curved path can be written using the chain rule of differentiation for the product of two functions of time as:\nformula_12\nwhere un is the unit (inward) normal vector to the particle's trajectory (also called \"the principal normal\"), and r is its instantaneous radius of curvature based upon the osculating circle at time t. The components\nformula_13\nare called the tangential acceleration and the normal or radial acceleration (or centripetal acceleration in circular motion, see also circular motion and centripetal force), respectively.\nGeometrical analysis of three-dimensional space curves, which explains tangent, (principal) normal and binormal, is described by the Frenet\u2013Serret formulas.\nSpecial cases.\nUniform acceleration.\n\"Uniform\" or \"constant\" acceleration is a type of motion in which the velocity of an object changes by an equal amount in every equal time period.\nA frequently cited example of uniform acceleration is that of an object in free fall in a uniform gravitational field. The acceleration of a falling body in the absence of resistances to motion is dependent only on the gravitational field strength g (also called \"acceleration due to gravity\"). By Newton's second law the force formula_14 acting on a body is given by:\nformula_15\nBecause of the simple analytic properties of the case of constant acceleration, there are simple formulas relating the displacement, initial and time-dependent velocities, and acceleration to the time elapsed:\nformula_16\nwhere\nIn particular, the motion can be resolved into two orthogonal parts, one of constant velocity and the other according to the above equations. As Galileo showed, the net result is parabolic motion, which describes, e.g., the trajectory of a projectile in vacuum near the surface of Earth.\nCircular motion.\nIn uniform circular motion, that is moving with constant \"speed\" along a circular path, a particle experiences an acceleration resulting from the change of the direction of the velocity vector, while its magnitude remains constant. The derivative of the location of a point on a curve with respect to time, i.e. its velocity, turns out to be always exactly tangential to the curve, respectively orthogonal to the radius in this point. Since in uniform motion the velocity in the tangential direction does not change, the acceleration must be in radial direction, pointing to the center of the circle. This acceleration constantly changes the direction of the velocity to be tangent in the neighbouring point, thereby rotating the velocity vector along the circle.\nExpressing centripetal acceleration vector in polar components, where formula_33 is a vector from the centre of the circle to the particle with magnitude equal to this distance, and considering the orientation of the acceleration towards the center, yields\nformula_34\nAs usual in rotations, the speed formula_25 of a particle may be expressed as an \"angular speed\" with respect to a point at the distance formula_26 as\nformula_37\nThus formula_38\nThis acceleration and the mass of the particle determine the necessary centripetal force, directed \"toward\" the centre of the circle, as the net force acting on this particle to keep it in this uniform circular motion. The so-called 'centrifugal force', appearing to act outward on the body, is a so-called pseudo force experienced in the frame of reference of the body in circular motion, due to the body's linear momentum, a vector tangent to the circle of motion.\nIn a nonuniform circular motion, i.e., the speed along the curved path is changing, the acceleration has a non-zero component tangential to the curve, and is not confined to the principal normal, which directs to the center of the osculating circle, that determines the radius formula_26 for the centripetal acceleration. The tangential component is given by the angular acceleration formula_40, i.e., the rate of change formula_41 of the angular speed formula_28 times the radius formula_26. That is,\nformula_44\nThe sign of the tangential component of the acceleration is determined by the sign of the angular acceleration (formula_40), and the tangent is always directed at right angles to the radius vector.\nCoordinate systems.\nIn multi-dimensional Cartesian coordinate systems, acceleration is broken up into components that correspond with each dimensional axis of the coordinate system. In a two-dimensional system, where there is an x-axis and a y-axis, corresponding acceleration components are defined as\nformula_46\nThe two-dimensional acceleration vector is then defined as formula_47. The magnitude of this vector is found by the distance formula as\nformula_48\nIn three-dimensional systems where there is an additional z-axis, the corresponding acceleration component is defined as\nformula_49\nThe three-dimensional acceleration vector is defined as formula_50 with its magnitude being determined by\nformula_51\nRelation to relativity.\nSpecial relativity.\nThe special theory of relativity describes the behaviour of objects travelling relative to other objects at speeds approaching that of light in vacuum. Newtonian mechanics is exactly revealed to be an approximation to reality, valid to great accuracy at lower speeds. As the relevant speeds increase toward the speed of light, acceleration no longer follows classical equations.\nAs speeds approach that of light, the acceleration produced by a given force decreases, becoming infinitesimally small as light speed is approached; an object with mass can approach this speed asymptotically, but never reach it.\nGeneral relativity.\nUnless the state of motion of an object is known, it is impossible to distinguish whether an observed force is due to gravity or to acceleration\u2014gravity and inertial acceleration have identical effects. Albert Einstein called this the equivalence principle, and said that only observers who feel no force at all\u2014including the force of gravity\u2014are justified in concluding that they are not accelerating.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2444", "revid": "42819207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2444", "title": "Conservation and restoration of cultural property", "text": "Process of protecting cultural property\nThe conservation and restoration of cultural property focuses on protection and care of cultural property (tangible cultural heritage), including artworks, architecture, archaeology, and museum collections. Conservation activities include preventive conservation, examination, documentation, research, treatment, and education. This field is closely allied with conservation science, curators and registrars.\nDefinition.\nConservation of cultural property involves protection and restoration using \"any methods that prove effective in keeping that property in as close to its original condition as possible for as long as possible.\" Conservation of cultural heritage is often associated with art collections and museums and involves collection care and management through tracking, examination, documentation, exhibition, storage, preventive conservation, and restoration.\nThe scope has widened from art conservation, involving protection and care of artwork and architecture, to conservation of cultural heritage, also including protection and care of a broad set of other cultural and historical works. Conservation of cultural heritage can be described as a type of ethical stewardship.\nIt may broadly be divided into:\nConservation of cultural property applies simple ethical guidelines:\nOften there are compromises between preserving appearance, maintaining original design and material properties, and ability to reverse changes. Reversibility is now emphasized so as to reduce problems with future treatment, investigation, and use.\nIn order for conservators to decide upon an appropriate conservation strategy and apply their professional expertise accordingly, they must take into account views of the stakeholder, the values, artist's intent, meaning of the work, and the physical needs of the material.\nCesare Brandi in his \"Theory of Restoration\", describes restoration as \"the methodological moment in which the work of art is appreciated in its material form and in its historical and aesthetic duality, with a view to transmitting it to the future\".\nHistory and science.\nKey dates.\nSome consider the tradition of conservation of cultural heritage in Europe to have begun in 1565 with the restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes, but more ancient examples include the work of Cassiodorus.\nBrief history.\nThe care of cultural heritage has a long history, one that was primarily aimed at fixing and mending objects for their continued use and aesthetic enjoyment. Until the early 20th century, artists were normally the ones called upon to repair damaged artworks. During the 19th century, however, the fields of science and art became increasingly intertwined as scientists such as Michael Faraday began to study the damaging effects of the environment to works of art. Louis Pasteur carried out scientific analysis on paint as well. However, perhaps the first organized attempt to apply a theoretical framework to the conservation of cultural heritage came with the founding in the United Kingdom of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in 1877. The society was founded by William Morris and Philip Webb, both of whom were deeply influenced by the writings of John Ruskin. During the same period, a French movement with similar aims was being developed under the direction of Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc, an architect and theorist, famous for his restorations of medieval buildings.\nConservation of cultural heritage as a distinct field of study initially developed in Germany, where in 1888 Friedrich Rathgen became the first chemist to be employed by a Museum, the Koniglichen Museen, Berlin (Royal Museums of Berlin). He not only developed a scientific approach to the care of objects in the collections, but disseminated this approach by publishing a Handbook of Conservation in 1898. The early development of conservation of cultural heritage in any area of the world is usually linked to the creation of positions for chemists within museums. In British archaeology, key research and technical experimentation in conservation was undertaken by women such as Ione Gedye both in the field and in archaeological collections, particularly those of the Institute of Archaeology, London.\nIn the United Kingdom, pioneering research into painting materials and conservation, ceramics, and stone conservation was conducted by Arthur Pillans Laurie, academic chemist and Principal of Heriot-Watt University from 1900. Laurie's interests were fostered by William Holman Hunt. In 1924 the chemist Harold Plenderleith began to work at the British Museum with Alexander Scott in the recently created Research Laboratory, although he was actually employed by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in the early years. Plenderleith's appointment may be said to have given birth to the conservation \"profession\" in the UK, although there had been craftsmen in many museums and in the commercial art world for generations. This department was created by the museum to address the deteriorating condition of objects in the collection, damages which were a result of their being stored in the London Underground tunnels during the First World War. The creation of this department moved the focus for the development of conservation theory and practice from Germany to Britain, and made the latter a prime force in this fledgling field. In 1956 Plenderleith wrote a significant handbook called The Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art, which supplanted Rathgen's earlier tome and set new standards for the development of art and conservation science.\nIn the United States, the development of conservation of cultural heritage can be traced to the Fogg Art Museum, and Edward Waldo Forbes, its director from 1909 to 1944. He encouraged technical investigation, and was Chairman of the Advisory Committee for the first technical journal, Technical Studies in the Field of the Fine Arts, published by the Fogg from 1932 to 1942. Importantly he also brought onto the museum staff chemists. Rutherford John Gettens was the first of such in the US to be permanently employed by an art museum. He worked with George L. Stout, the founder and first editor of Technical Studies. Gettens and Stout co-authored Painting Materials: A Short Encyclopaedia in 1942, reprinted in 1966. This compendium is still cited regularly. Only a few dates and descriptions in Gettens' and Stout's book are now outdated.\nGeorge T. Oliver, of Oliver Brothers Art Restoration and Art Conservation-Boston\n(Est. 1850 in New York City) invented the vacuum hot table for relining paintings in 1920s; he filed a patent for the table in 1937. Taylor's prototype table, which he designed and constructed, is still in operation. Oliver Brothers is believed to be the first and the oldest continuously operating art restoration company in the United States.\nThe focus of conservation development then accelerated in Britain and America, and it was in Britain that the first International Conservation Organisations developed. The International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works (IIC) was incorporated under British law in 1950 as \"a permanent organization to co-ordinate and improve the knowledge, methods, and working standards needed to protect and preserve precious materials of all kinds.\" The rapid growth of conservation professional organizations, publications, journals, newsletters, both internationally and in localities, has spearheaded the development of the conservation profession, both practically and theoretically. Art historians and theorists such as Cesare Brandi have also played a significant role in developing conservation science theory. In recent years ethical concerns have been at the forefront of developments in conservation. Most significantly has been the idea of preventive conservation. This concept is based in part on the pioneering work by Garry Thomson CBE, and his book \"Museum Environment\", first published in 1978. Thomson was associated with the National Gallery in London; it was here that he established a set of guidelines or environmental controls for the best conditions in which objects could be stored and displayed within the museum environment. Although his exact guidelines are no longer rigidly followed, they did inspire this field of conservation.\nConservation laboratories.\nConservators routinely use chemical and scientific analysis for the examination and treatment of cultural works. The modern conservation laboratory uses equipment such as microscopes, spectrometers, and various x-ray regime instruments to better understand objects and their components. The data thus collected helps in deciding the conservation treatments to be provided to the object.\nEthics.\nThe conservator's work is guided by ethical standards. These take the form of applied ethics. Ethical standards have been established across the world, and national and international ethical guidelines have been written. One such example is:\nConservation OnLine provides resources on ethical issues in conservation, including examples of codes of ethics and guidelines for professional conduct in conservation and allied fields; and charters and treaties pertaining to ethical issues involving the preservation of cultural property.\nAs well as standards of practice conservators deal with wider ethical concerns, such as the debates as to whether all art is worth preserving.\nKeeping up with the international contemporary scenario, recent concerns with sustainability in conservation have emerged. The common understanding that \"the care of an artifact should not come at the undue expense of the environment\" is generally well accepted within the community and is already contemplated in guidelines of diverse institutions related to the field.\nPractice.\nPreventive conservation.\nMany cultural works are sensitive to environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity and exposure to visible light and ultraviolet radiation. These works must be protected in controlled environments where such variables are maintained within a range of damage-limiting levels. For example, watercolour paintings usually require shielding from sunlight to prevent fading of pigments.\nCollections care is an important element of museum policy. It is an essential responsibility of members of the museum profession to create and maintain a protective environment for the collections in their care, whether in store, on display, or in transit. A museum should carefully monitor the condition of collections to determine when an artifact requires conservation work and the services of a qualified conservator.\nInterventive conservation and restoration.\nA teaching programme of interventive conservation was established in the UK at the Institute of Archaeology by Ione Gedye, which is still teaching interventive conservators today.\nA principal aim of a cultural conservator is to reduce the rate of deterioration of an object. Both non-interventive and interventive methodologies may be employed in pursuit of this goal. Interventive conservation refers to any direct interaction between the conservator and the material fabric of the object. Interventive actions are carried out for a variety of reasons, including aesthetic choices, stabilization needs for structural integrity, or cultural requirements for intangible continuity. Examples of interventive treatments include the removal of discolored varnish from a painting, the application of wax to a sculpture, and the washing and rebinding of a book. Ethical standards within the field require that the conservator fully justify interventive actions and carry out documentation before, during, and after the treatment.\nOne of the guiding principles of conservation of cultural heritage has traditionally been the idea of reversibility, that all interventions with the object should be fully reversible and that the object should be able to be returned to the state in which it was prior to the conservator's intervention. Although this concept remains a guiding principle of the profession, it has been widely critiqued within the conservation profession and is now considered by many to be \"a fuzzy concept.\" Another important principle of conservation is that all alterations should be well documented and should be clearly distinguishable from the original object.\nAn example of a highly publicized interventive conservation effort would be the conservation work conducted on the Sistine Chapel.\nSustainable conservation.\nRecognising that conservation practices should not harm the environment, harm people, or contribute to global warming, the conservation-restoration profession has more recently focused on practices that reduce waste, reduce energy costs, and minimise the use of toxic or harmful solvents. A number of research projects, working groups, and other initiatives have explored how conservation can become a more environmentally sustainable profession. https:// apply both to work within cultural institutions (e.g. museums, art galleries, archives, libraries, research centres and historic sites) as well as to businesses and private studios.\nChoice of materials.\nConservators and restorers use a wide variety of materials - in conservation treatments, and those used to safely transport, display and store cultural heritage items. These materials can include solvents, papers and boards, fabrics, adhesives and consolidants, plastics and foams, wood products, and many others. Stability and longevity are two important factors conservators consider when selecting materials; sustainability is becoming an increasingly important third. Examples of sustainable material choices and practices include:\nThese decisions are not always straightforward - for example, installing deionised or distilled water filters in laboratories reduces waste associated with purchasing bottled products, but increases energy consumption. Similarly, locally made papers and boards may reduce inherent carbon miles but they may be made with pulp sourced from old growth forests.\nAnother dilemma is that many conservation-grade materials are chosen because they do not biodegrade. For example, when selecting a plastic with which to make storage enclosures, conservators prefer to use relatively long-lived plastics because they have better ageing properties - they are less likely to become yellow, leach plasticisers, or lose structural integrity and crumble (examples include polyethylene, polypropylene, and polyester). These plastics will also take longer to degrade in landfill.\nEnergy use.\nMany conservators and cultural organisations have sought to reduce the energy costs associated with controlling indoor storage and display environments (temperature, relative humidity, air filtration, and lighting levels) as well as those associated with the transport of cultural heritage items for exhibitions and loans.\nIn general, lowering the temperature reduces the rate at which damaging chemical reactions occur within materials. For example, storing cellulose acetate film at 10\u00a0\u00b0C instead of 21\u00a0\u00b0C is estimated to increase its usable life by over 100 years. Controlling the relative humidity of air helps to reduce hydrolysis reactions and minimises cracking, distortion and other physical changes in hygroscopic materials. Changes in temperature will also bring about changes in relative humidity. Therefore, the conservation profession has placed great importance on controlling indoor environments. Temperature and humidity can be controlled through passive means (e.g. insulation, building design) or active means (air conditioning). Active controls typically require much higher energy use. Energy use increases with specificity - e.g. in will require more energy to maintain a quantity of air to a narrow temperature range (20-22\u00a0\u00b0C) than to a broad range (18-25\u00a0\u00b0C). In the past, conservation recommendations have often called for very tight, inflexible temperature and relative humidity set points. In other cases, conservators have recommended strict environmental conditions for buildings that could not reasonably be expected to achieve them, due to the quality of build, local environmental conditions (e.g. recommending temperate conditions for a building located in the tropics) or the financial circumstances of the organisation. This has been an area of particular debate for cultural heritage organisations who lend and borrow cultural items to each other - often, the lender will specify strict environmental conditions as part of the loan agreement, which may be very expensive for the borrowing organisation to achieve, or impossible.\nThe energy costs associated with cold storage and digital storage are also gaining more attention. Cold storage is a very effective strategy to preserve at-risk collections such as cellulose nitrate and cellulose acetate film, which can deteriorate beyond use within decades at ambient conditions. Digital storage costs are rising for both born-digital cultural heritage (photographs, audiovisual, time-based media) and to store digital preservation and access copies of cultural heritage. Digital storage capacity is a major factor in the complexity of preserving digital heritage such as video games, social media, messaging services, and email.\nOther areas where energy use can be reduced within conservation and restoration include:\nSustainability in the practices of conservation laboratories.\nIn the routine work of conservation laboratories, a series of practices can be implemented with a view to management that favors ethical sustainability criteria, as well as actions such as pragmatic responses to climate emergencies.\nIt is fundamentally that we strive to make practices such as the following commonplace:\nCountry by country look.\nUnited States.\nHeritage Preservation, in partnership with the Institute of Museum and Library Services, a U.S. federal agency, produced The Heritage Health Index. The results of this work was the report \"A Public Trust at Risk: The Heritage Health Index Report on the State of America's Collections\", which was published in December 2005 and concluded that immediate action is needed to prevent the loss of 190 million artifacts that are in need of conservation treatment. The report made four recommendations:\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn October 2006, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, a governmental department, authored a document: \"Understanding the Future: Priorities for England's Museums\". This document was based on several years of consultation aimed to lay out the government's priorities for museums in the 21st century.\nThe document listed the following as priorities for the next decade:\nThe conservation profession response to this report was on the whole less than favourable, the Institute of Conservation (ICON) published their response under the title \"A Failure of Vision\". It had the following to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No sector can look with confidence to the future if its key asset is worked harder and harder across an ever broadening range of objectives while the inputs required to sustain it are neglected.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is of major concern to us that the only part of this section which makes any acknowledgement of the need for greater resourcing is the part which refers to acquisitions. The original consultation paper made quite extensive reference to the importance of collections, the role of new technologies, and cultural property issues, but this appears to have been whittled away in the present document.\nConcluding: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When asked by the Commons Culture Media and Sport elect Committee CMS committee what he would like to see as a priority in the DCMS document arising from the 'Understanding the Future' consultation, Mr MacGregor responded 'I would like to see added there the need to conserve and research the collections, so that the collections can really play the role across the whole of the United Kingdom that they should.'\nSo would we.\nFurther to this the ICON website summary report lists the following specific recommendations:\nIn November 2008, the UK-based think tank Demos published an influential pamphlet entitled \"It's a material world: caring for the public realm\", in which they argue for integrating the public directly into efforts to conserve material culture, particularly that which is in the public, their argument, as stated on page 16, demonstrates their belief that society can benefit from conservation as a paradigm as well as a profession:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;conservators provide a paradigm not just for fixing things when they are broken, but for a wider social ethos of care, where we individually and collectively take responsibility and action.\nTraining.\nTraining in conservation of cultural heritage for many years took the form of an apprenticeship, whereby an apprentice slowly developed the necessary skills to undertake their job. For some specializations within conservation this is still the case. However, it is more common in the field of conservation today that the training required to become a practicing conservator comes from a recognized university course in conservation of cultural heritage.\nThe university can rarely provide all the necessary training in first hand experience that an apprenticeship can, and therefore in addition to graduate level training the profession also tends towards encouraging conservation students to spend time as an intern.\nConservation of cultural heritage is an interdisciplinary field as conservators have backgrounds in the fine arts, sciences (including chemistry, biology, and materials science), and closely related disciplines, such as art history, archaeology, and anthropology. They also have design, fabrication, artistic, and other special skills necessary for the practical application of that knowledge.\nWithin the various schools that teach conservation of cultural heritage, the approach differs according to the educational and vocational system within the country, and the focus of the school itself. This is acknowledged by the American Institute for Conservation who advise \"Specific admission requirements differ and potential candidates are encouraged to contact the programs directly for details on prerequisites, application procedures, and program curriculum\".\nIn France, training for heritage conservation is taught by four schools : \u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure d'art d'Avignon, L'\u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure des Beaux-Arts Tours, Angers, Le Mans, L'Universit\u00e9 Paris 1 Panth\u00e9on-Sorbonne, Institut national du patrimoine.\nAssociations and professional organizations.\nSocieties devoted to the care of cultural heritage have been in existence around the world for many years. One early example is the founding in 1877 of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in Britain to protect the built heritage, this society continues to be active today. The 14th Dalai Lama and the Tibetan people work to preserve their cultural heritage with organizations including the Tibetan Institute of Performing Arts and an international network of eight Tibet Houses.\nThe built heritage was at the forefront of the growth of member based organizations in the United States. Preservation Virginia, founded in Richmond in 1889 as the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities, was the United States' first statewide historic preservation group.\nToday, professional conservators join and take part in the activities of numerous conservation associations and professional organizations with the wider field, and within their area of specialization. In Europe, E.C.C.O. European Confederation of Conservator-Restorers Organisations was established in 1991 by 14 European Conservator-Restorers' Organisations. Currently representing close to 6.000 professionals within 23 countries and 26 members organisations, including one international body (IADA), E.C.C.O. embodies the field of preservation of cultural heritage, both movable and immovable.\nThese organizations exist to \"support the conservation professionals who preserve our cultural heritage\".\nThis involves upholding professional standards, promoting research and publications, providing educational opportunities, and fostering the exchange of knowledge among cultural conservators, allied professionals, and the public.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2446", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2446", "title": "Appalachian Dulcimer", "text": ""}
{"id": "2447", "revid": "1320104974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2447", "title": "Anton Chekhov", "text": "Russian dramatist and author (1860\u20131904)\nAnton Pavlovich Chekhov (; Russian: , ; 29\u00a0January 1860 \u2013 15 July 1904) was a Russian playwright and short-story writer, widely considered to be one of the greatest writers of all time. His career as a playwright produced four classics, and his best short stories are held in high esteem by writers and critics. Along with Henrik Ibsen and August Strindberg, Chekhov is often referred to as one of the three seminal figures in the birth of early modernism in the theatre. Chekhov was a physician by profession. \"Medicine is my lawful wife,\" he once said, \"and literature is my mistress.\"\nChekhov renounced the theatre after the reception of \"The Seagull\" in 1896, but the play was revived to acclaim in 1898 by Konstantin Stanislavski's Moscow Art Theatre, which subsequently also produced Chekhov's \"Uncle Vanya\" and premiered his last two plays, \"Three Sisters\" and \"The Cherry Orchard\". These four works present a challenge to the acting ensemble as well as to audiences, because in place of conventional action Chekhov offers a \"theatre of mood\" and a \"submerged life in the text.\" The plays that Chekhov wrote were not complex, and created a somewhat haunting atmosphere for the audience.\nChekhov began writing stories to earn money, but as his artistic ambition grew, he made formal innovations that influenced the evolution of the modern short story. He made no apologies for the difficulties this posed to readers, insisting that the role of an artist was to ask questions, not to answer them.\nBiography.\nChildhood.\nAnton Pavlovich Chekhov was born on the feast day of St. Anthony the Great (17 January Old Style) 29 January 1860 in Taganrog, a commercial port city on the Sea of Azov \u2013 on Politseyskaya (Police) street, later renamed Chekhova street \u2013 in southern Russia. He was the third of six surviving children; he had two older brothers, Alexander and Nikolai, and three younger siblings, Ivan, Maria, and Mikhail. His father, Pavel Yegorovich Chekhov, the son of a former serf and his wife, was from the village Olkhovatka (Voronezh Governorate) and ran a grocery store. He was a director of the parish choir, a devout Orthodox Christian, and a physically abusive father. Pavel Chekhov has been seen by some historians as the model for his son's many portraits of hypocrisy. Chekhov's mother, Yevgeniya (Morozova), was an excellent storyteller who entertained the children with tales of her travels all over Russia with her cloth-merchant father. \"Our talents we got from our father,\" Chekhov recalled, \"but our soul from our mother.\" \nYoung Chekhov attended the Greek School in Taganrog and The Taganrog Boys Gymnasium (since renamed the Chekhov Gymnasium). There he was held back for a year at fifteen for failing an examination in Ancient Greek. He sang at the Greek Orthodox monastery in Taganrog and in his father's choirs. In a letter of 1892, he used the word \"suffering\" to describe his childhood and recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When my brothers and I used to stand in the middle of the church and sing the trio \"May my prayer be exalted\", or \"The Archangel's Voice\", everyone looked at us with emotion and envied our parents, but we at that moment felt like little convicts.\nLater, in his adulthood, Chekhov criticized his brother Alexander's treatment of his wife and children by reminding him of their father Pavel's tyranny: \"Let me ask you to recall that it was despotism and lying that ruined your mother's youth. Despotism and lying so mutilated our childhood that it's sickening and frightening to think about it. Remember the horror and disgust we felt in those times when Father threw a tantrum at dinner over too much salt in the soup and called Mother a fool.\"\nIn 1876, Chekhov's father Pavel was declared bankrupt after overextending his finances building a new house, having been cheated by a contractor named Mironov. To avoid debtor's prison he fled to Moscow, where his two eldest sons, Alexander and Nikolai, were attending university. The family lived in poverty in Moscow. Chekhov's mother was physically and emotionally broken by the experience. \nChekhov was left behind to sell the family's possessions and finish his education. He remained in Taganrog for three more years, boarding with a man by the name of Selivanov who, like Lopakhin in \"The Cherry Orchard\", had bailed out the family for the price of their house. Chekhov had to pay for his own education, which he managed by private tutoring, catching and selling goldfinches, and selling short sketches to the newspapers, among other jobs. He sent every ruble he could spare to his family in Moscow, along with humorous letters to cheer them up. \nAs a teenager Chekhov fell in love with the Taganrog Theatre. He attended the theatre on a regular basis and became enchanted and inspired by productions of vaudevilles, Italian operas and popular comedies.\nDuring that time, Chekhov read widely and analytically, including the works of Cervantes, Turgenev, Goncharov, and Schopenhauer, and wrote a full-length comic drama, \"Fatherless\", which his brother Alexander dismissed as \"an inexcusable though innocent fabrication.\" Chekhov also experienced a series of love affairs, one with the wife of a teacher. In 1879, Chekhov completed his schooling in Taganrog and moved in with his family in Moscow, having gained admission to the medical school at I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University.\nEarly writings.\nChekhov then assumed responsibility for the whole family. To support them and to pay his tuition fees, he wrote daily short, humorous sketches and vignettes of contemporary Russian life, many under pseudonyms such as \"Antosha Chekhonte\" (\u0410\u043d\u0442\u043e\u0448\u0430 \u0427\u0435\u0445\u043e\u043d\u0442\u0435) and \"Man Without Spleen\" (\u0427\u0435\u043b\u043e\u0432\u0435\u043a \u0431\u0435\u0437 \u0441\u0435\u043b\u0435\u0437\u0435\u043d\u043a\u0438). His prodigious output gradually earned him a reputation as a satirical chronicler of Russian street life, and by 1882 he was writing for \"Oskolki\" (\"Fragments\"), owned by Nikolai Leykin, one of the leading publishers of the time. Chekhov's tone at this stage was harsher than that familiar from his mature fiction.\nIn 1884, Chekhov qualified as a physician, which he considered his principal profession though he made little money from it and treated the poor free of charge.\nIn 1884 and 1885, Chekhov found himself coughing blood, and in 1886 the attacks worsened, but he would not admit his tuberculosis to his family or his friends. He confessed to Leykin, \"I am afraid to submit myself to be sounded by my colleagues.\" He continued writing for weekly periodicals, earning enough money to move the family into progressively better accommodations.\nEarly in 1886 he was invited to write for one of the most popular papers in St. Petersburg, \"Novoye Vremya\" (\"New Times\"), owned and edited by the millionaire magnate Alexey Suvorin, who paid a rate per line double Leykin's and allowed Chekhov three times the space. Suvorin was to become a lifelong friend, perhaps Chekhov's closest.\nBefore long, Chekhov was attracting literary as well as popular attention. The sixty-four-year-old Dmitry Grigorovich, a celebrated Russian writer of the day, wrote to Chekhov after reading his short story \"The Huntsman\" that \"You have \"real\" talent, a talent that places you in the front rank among writers in the new generation.\" He went on to advise Chekhov to slow down, write less, and concentrate on literary quality.\nChekhov replied that the letter had struck him \"like a thunderbolt\" and confessed, \"I have written my stories the way reporters write up their notes about fires\u2014mechanically, half-consciously, caring nothing about either the reader or myself.\" The admission may have done Chekhov a disservice, since early manuscripts reveal that he often wrote with extreme care, continually revising. Grigorovich's advice nevertheless inspired a more serious, artistic ambition in the twenty-six-year-old. In 1888, with a little string-pulling by Grigorovich, the short story collection \"At Dusk\" (\"V Sumerkakh\") won Chekhov the coveted Pushkin Prize \"for the best literary production distinguished by high artistic worth.\"\nTurning points.\nIn 1887, exhausted from overwork and ill health, Chekhov took a trip to Ukraine, which reawakened him to the beauty of the steppe. On his return, he began the novella-length short story \"The Steppe\", which he called \"something rather odd and much too original\", and which was eventually published in \"Severny Vestnik\" (\"The Northern Herald\"). In a narrative that drifts with the thought processes of the characters, Chekhov evokes a chaise journey across the steppe through the eyes of a young boy sent to live away from home, and his companions, a priest and a merchant. \"The Steppe\" has been called a \"dictionary of Chekhov's poetics\", and it represented a significant advance for Chekhov, exhibiting much of the quality of his mature fiction and winning him publication in a literary journal rather than a newspaper.\nIn autumn 1887, a theatre manager named Korsh commissioned Chekhov to write a play, the result being \"Ivanov\", written in a fortnight and produced that November. Though Chekhov found the experience \"sickening\" and painted a comic portrait of the chaotic production in a letter to his brother Alexander, the play was a hit and was praised, to Chekhov's bemusement, as a work of originality. \nAlthough Chekhov did not fully realise it at the time, Chekhov's plays, such as \"The Seagull\" (written in 1895), \"Uncle Vanya\" (written in 1897), \"The Three Sisters\" (written in 1900), and \"The Cherry Orchard\" (written in 1903) served as a revolutionary backbone to what is common sense to the medium of acting to this day: an effort to recreate and express the realism of how people truly act and speak with each other. This realistic manifestation of the human condition may engender in audiences reflection upon what it means to be human.\nThis philosophy of approaching the art of acting has stood not only steadfast, but as the cornerstone of acting for much of the 20th century to this day. Mikhail Chekhov considered \"Ivanov\" a key moment in his brother's intellectual development and literary career. From this period comes an observation of Chekhov's that has become known as \"Chekhov's gun\", a dramatic principle that requires that every element in a narrative be necessary and irreplaceable, and that everything else be removed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Remove everything that has no relevance to the story. If you say in the first chapter that there is a rifle hanging on the wall, in the second or third chapter it absolutely must go off. If it's not going to be fired, it shouldn't be hanging there.\nThe death of Chekhov's brother Nikolai from tuberculosis in 1889 influenced \"A Dreary Story\", finished that September, about a man who confronts the end of a life that he realises has been without purpose. Mikhail Chekhov recorded his brother's depression and restlessness after Nikolai's death. Mikhail was researching prisons at that time as part of his law studies. Anton Chekhov, in a search for purpose in his own life, himself soon became obsessed with the issue of prison reform.\nSakhalin.\nIn 1890, Chekhov undertook an arduous journey by train, horse-drawn carriage, and river steamer across Siberia to the Russian Far East and the \"katorga\", or penal colony, on Sakhalin Island, north of Japan. He spent three months there interviewing thousands of convicts and settlers for a census. The letters Chekhov wrote during the two-and-a-half-month journey to Sakhalin are considered to be among his best. His remarks to his sister about Tomsk were to become notorious.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tomsk is a very dull town. To judge from the drunkards whose acquaintance I have made, and from the intellectual people who have come to the hotel to pay their respects to me, the inhabitants are very dull, too.\nChekhov witnessed much on Sakhalin that shocked and angered him, including floggings, embezzlement of supplies, and forced prostitution of women. He wrote, \"There were times I felt that I saw before me the extreme limits of man's degradation.\" He was particularly moved by the plight of the children living in the penal colony with their parents. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the Amur steamer going to Sakhalin, there was a convict who had murdered his wife and wore fetters on his legs. His daughter, a little girl of six, was with him. I noticed wherever the convict moved the little girl scrambled after him, holding on to his fetters. At night the child slept with the convicts and soldiers all in a heap together.\nChekhov later concluded that charity was not the answer, but that the government had a duty to finance humane treatment of the convicts. His findings were published in 1893 and 1894 as \"Ostrov Sakhalin\" (\"The Island of Sakhalin\"), a work of social science, not literature. Chekhov found literary expression for the \"Hell of Sakhalin\" in his long short story \"\", the last section of which is set on Sakhalin, where the murderer Yakov loads coal in the night while longing for home. Chekhov's writing on Sakhalin, especially the traditions and habits of the Gilyak people, is the subject of a sustained meditation and analysis in Haruki Murakami's novel \"1Q84\". It is also the subject of a poem by the Nobel Prize winner Seamus Heaney, \"Chekhov on Sakhalin\" (collected in the volume \"Station Island\"). Rebecca Gould has compared Chekhov's book on Sakhalin to Katherine Mansfield's \"Urewera Notebook\" (1907). In 2013, the Wellcome Trust-funded play 'A Russian Doctor', performed by Andrew Dawson and researched by Professor Jonathan Cole, explored Chekhov's experiences on Sakhalin Island.\nMelikhovo.\nMikhail Chekhov, a member of the household at Melikhovo, described the extent of his brother's medical commitments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChekhov's expenditure on drugs was considerable, but the greatest cost was making journeys of several hours to visit the sick, which reduced his time for writing. However, Chekhov's work as a doctor enriched his writing by bringing him into intimate contact with all sections of Russian society: for example, he witnessed at first hand the peasants' unhealthy and cramped living conditions, which he recalled in his short story \"Peasants\". Chekhov visited the upper classes as well, recording in his notebook: \"Aristocrats? The same ugly bodies and physical uncleanliness, the same toothless old age and disgusting death, as with market-women.\" In 1893/1894 he worked as a Zemstvo doctor in Zvenigorod, which has numerous sanatoriums and rest homes. A local hospital is named after him.\nIn 1894, Chekhov began writing his play \"The Seagull\" in a lodge he had built in the orchard at Melikhovo. In the two years since he had moved to the estate, he had refurbished the house, taken up agriculture and horticulture, tended the orchard and the pond, and planted many trees, which, according to Mikhail, he \"looked after\u00a0... as though they were his children. Like Colonel Vershinin in his \"Three Sisters\", as he looked at them he dreamed of what they would be like in three or four hundred years.\"\nThe first night of \"The Seagull\", at the Alexandrinsky Theatre in St. Petersburg on 17 October 1896, was a fiasco, as the play was booed by the audience, stinging Chekhov into renouncing the theatre. But the play so impressed the theatre director Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko that he convinced his colleague Konstantin Stanislavski to direct a new production for the innovative Moscow Art Theatre in 1898. Stanislavski's attention to psychological realism and ensemble playing coaxed the buried subtleties from the text, and restored Chekhov's interest in playwriting. The Art Theatre commissioned more plays from Chekhov and the following year staged \"Uncle Vanya\", which Chekhov had completed in 1896. In the last decades of his life he became an atheist.\nYalta.\nIn March 1897, Chekhov suffered a major haemorrhage of the lungs while on a visit to Moscow. With great difficulty he was persuaded to enter a clinic, where doctors diagnosed tuberculosis on the upper part of his lungs and ordered a change in his manner of life.\nAfter his father's death in 1898, Chekhov bought a plot of land on the outskirts of Yalta and built a villa (The White Dacha), into which he moved with his mother and sister the following year. Though he planted trees and flowers, kept dogs and tame cranes, and received guests such as Leo Tolstoy and Maxim Gorky, Chekhov was always relieved to leave his \"hot Siberia\" for Moscow or travels abroad. He vowed to move to Taganrog as soon as a water supply was installed there. In Yalta he completed two more plays for the Art Theatre, composing with greater difficulty than in the days when he \"wrote serenely, the way I eat pancakes now\". He took a year each over \"Three Sisters\" and \"The Cherry Orchard\".\nOn 25 May 1901, Chekhov married Olga Knipper quietly, owing to his horror of weddings. She was a former prot\u00e9g\u00e9e and sometime lover of Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko whom he had first met at rehearsals for \"The Seagull\". Up to that point, Chekhov, known as \"Russia's most elusive literary bachelor\", had preferred passing liaisons and visits to brothels over commitment. He had once written to Suvorin:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By all means I will be married if you wish it. But on these conditions: everything must be as it has been hitherto\u2014that is, she must live in Moscow while I live in the country, and I will come and see her... I promise to be an excellent husband, but give me a wife who, like the moon, won't appear in my sky every day.\nThe letter proved prophetic of Chekhov's marital arrangements with Olga: he lived largely at Yalta, she in Moscow, pursuing her acting career. In 1902, Olga suffered a miscarriage; and Donald Rayfield has offered evidence, based on the couple's letters, that conception occurred when Chekhov and Olga were apart, although other Russian scholars have rejected that claim. The literary legacy of this long-distance marriage is a correspondence that preserves gems of theatre history, including shared complaints about Stanislavski's directing methods and Chekhov's advice to Olga about performing in his plays.\nIn Yalta, Chekhov wrote one of his most famous stories, \"The Lady with the Dog\" (also translated from the Russian as \"Lady with Lapdog\"), which depicts what at first seems a casual liaison between a cynical married man and an unhappy married woman who meet while holidaying in Yalta. Neither expects anything lasting from the encounter. Unexpectedly though, they gradually fall deeply in love and end up risking scandal and the security of their family lives. The story masterfully captures their feelings for each other, the inner transformation undergone by the disillusioned male protagonist as a result of falling deeply in love, and their inability to resolve the matter by either letting go of their families or of each other.\nDeath.\nIn May 1903, Chekhov visited Moscow; the prominent lawyer Vasily Maklakov visited him almost every day. Maklakov signed Chekhov's will. By May 1904, Chekhov was terminally ill with tuberculosis. Mikhail Chekhov recalled that \"everyone who saw him secretly thought the end was not far off, but the nearer [he] was to the end, the less he seemed to realise it\". On 3 June, he set off with Olga for the German spa town of Badenweiler in the Black Forest in Germany, from where he wrote outwardly jovial letters to his sister Masha, describing the food and surroundings, and assuring her and his mother that he was getting better. In his last letter, he complained about the way German women dressed. Chekhov died on 15 July 1904 at the age of 44 after a long fight with tuberculosis, the same disease that killed his brother.\nChekhov's death has become one of \"the great set pieces of literary history\"\u2014retold, embroidered, and fictionalized many times since, notably in the 1987 short story \"Errand\" by Raymond Carver. In 1908, Olga wrote this account of her husband's last moments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anton sat up unusually straight and said loudly and clearly (although he knew almost no German): \"Ich sterbe\" ('I'm dying'). The doctor calmed him, took a syringe, gave him an injection of camphor, and ordered champagne. Anton took a full glass, examined it, smiled at me and said: 'It's a long time since I drank champagne.' He drained it and lay quietly on his left side, and I just had time to run to him and lean across the bed and call to him, but he had stopped breathing and was sleeping peacefully as a child\u00a0...\nChekhov's body was transported to Moscow in a refrigerated railway-car meant for oysters, a detail that offended Gorky. Some of the thousands of mourners followed the funeral procession of a General Keller by mistake, to the accompaniment of a military band. Chekhov was buried next to his father at the Novodevichy Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nA few months before he died, Chekhov told the writer Ivan Bunin that he thought people might go on reading his writings for seven years. \"Why seven?\", asked Bunin. \"Well, seven and a half\", Chekhov replied. \"That's not bad. I've got six years to live.\"\nChekhov's posthumous reputation greatly exceeded his expectations. The ovations for the play \"The Cherry Orchard\" in the year of his death served to demonstrate the Russian public's acclaim for the writer, which placed him second in literary celebrity only to Tolstoy, who outlived him by six years. Tolstoy was an early admirer of Chekhov's short stories and had a series that he deemed \"first quality\" and \"second quality\" bound into a book. In the first category were: \"Children\", \"The Chorus Girl\", \"A Play\", \"Home\", \"Misery\", \"The Runaway\", \"In Court\", \"Vanka\", \"Ladies\", \"A Malefactor\", \"The Boys\", \"Darkness\", \"Sleepy\", \"The Helpmate\", and \"The Darling\"; in the second: \"A Transgression\", \"Sorrow\", \"The Witch\", \"Verochka\", \"In a Strange Land\", \"The Cook's Wedding\", \"A Tedious Business\", \"An Upheaval\", \"Oh! The Public!\", \"The Mask\", \"A Woman's Luck\", \"Nerves\", \"The Wedding\", \"A Defenceless Creature\", and \"Peasant Wives.\"\nChekhov's work also found praise from several of Russia's most influential radical political thinkers. If anyone doubted the gloom and miserable poverty of Russia in the 1880s, the anarchist theorist Peter Kropotkin responded, \"read only Chekhov's novels!\" Raymond Tallis further recounts that Vladimir Lenin believed his reading of the short story Ward No. 6 \"made him a revolutionary\". Upon finishing the story, Lenin is said to have remarked: \"I absolutely had the feeling that I was shut up in Ward 6 myself!\"\nIn Chekhov's lifetime, British and Irish critics generally did not find his work pleasing; E. J. Dillon thought \"the effect on the reader of Chekhov's tales was repulsion at the gallery of human waste represented by his fickle, spineless, drifting people\" and R. E. C. Long said \"Chekhov's characters were repugnant, and that Chekhov revelled in stripping the last rags of dignity from the human soul\". After his death, Chekhov was reappraised. Constance Garnett's translations won him an English-language readership and the admiration of writers such as James Joyce, Virginia Woolf, and Katherine Mansfield, whose story \"The Child Who Was Tired\" is similar to Chekhov's \"Sleepy\". The Russian critic D. S. Mirsky, who lived in England, explained Chekhov's popularity in that country by his \"unusually complete rejection of what we may call the heroic values\". In Russia itself, Chekhov's drama fell out of fashion after the revolution, but it was later incorporated into the Soviet canon. The character of Lopakhin, for example, was reinvented as a hero of the new order, rising from a modest background so as eventually to possess the gentry's estates.\nDespite Chekhov's reputation as a playwright, William Boyd asserts that his short stories represent the greater achievement. Raymond Carver, who wrote the short story \"Errand\" about Chekhov's death, believed that Chekhov was the greatest of all short story writers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chekhov's stories are as wonderful (and necessary) now as when they first appeared. It is not only the immense number of stories he wrote\u2014for few, if any, writers have ever done more\u2014it is the awesome frequency with which he produced masterpieces, stories that shrive us as well as delight and move us, that lay bare our emotions in ways only true art can accomplish.\nAccording to literary critic Daniel S. Burt, Chekhov was one of the greatest and most influential writers of all time.\nStyle.\nOne of the first non-Russians to praise Chekhov's plays was George Bernard Shaw, who subtitled his \"Heartbreak House\" \"A Fantasia in the Russian Manner on English Themes\", and pointed out similarities between the predicament of the British landed class and that of their Russian counterparts as depicted by Chekhov: \"the same nice people, the same utter futility\".\nErnest Hemingway, another writer influenced by Chekhov, was more grudging: \"Chekhov wrote about six good stories. But he was an amateur writer.\" Comparing Chekhov to Tolstoy, Vladimir Nabokov wrote, \"I do love Chekhov dearly. I fail, however, to rationalize my feeling for him: I can easily do so in regard to the greater artist, Tolstoy, with the flash of this or that unforgettable passage [\u2026], but when I imagine Chekhov with the same detachment all I can make out is a medley of dreadful prosaisms, ready-made epithets, repetitions, doctors, unconvincing vamps, and so forth; yet it is \"his\" works which I would take on a trip to another planet.\" Nabokov called \"The Lady with the Dog\" \"one of the greatest stories ever written\" in its depiction of a problematic relationship, and described Chekhov as writing \"the way one person relates to another the most important things in his life, slowly and yet without a break, in a slightly subdued voice\".\nFor the writer William Boyd, Chekhov's historical accomplishment was to abandon what William Gerhardie called the \"event plot\" for something more \"blurred, interrupted, mauled or otherwise tampered with by life\".\nVirginia Woolf mused on the unique quality of a Chekhov story in \"The Common Reader\" (1925):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But is it the end, we ask? We have rather the feeling that we have overrun our signals; or it is as if a tune had stopped short without the expected chords to close it. These stories are inconclusive, we say, and proceed to frame a criticism based upon the assumption that stories ought to conclude in a way that we recognise. In so doing we raise the question of our own fitness as readers. Where the tune is familiar and the end emphatic\u2014lovers united, villains discomfited, intrigues exposed\u2014as it is in most Victorian fiction, we can scarcely go wrong, but where the tune is unfamiliar and the end a note of interrogation or merely the information that they went on talking, as it is in Tchekov, we need a very daring and alert sense of literature to make us hear the tune, and in particular those last notes which complete the harmony.\nMichael Goldman has said of the elusive quality of Chekhov's comedies: \"Having learned that Chekhov is comic\u00a0... Chekhov is comic in a very special, paradoxical way. His plays depend, as comedy does, on the vitality of the actors to make pleasurable what would otherwise be painfully awkward\u2014inappropriate speeches, missed connections, \"faux pas\", stumbles, childishness\u2014but as part of a deeper pathos; the stumbles are not pratfalls but an energized, graceful dissolution of purpose.\"\nInfluence on dramatic arts.\nIn the United States, Chekhov's reputation began its rise slightly later, partly through the influence of Stanislavski's system of acting, with its notion of subtext: \"Chekhov often expressed his thought not in speeches\", wrote Stanislavski, \"but in pauses or between the lines or in replies consisting of a single word\u00a0... the characters often feel and think things not expressed in the lines they speak.\" The Group Theatre, in particular, developed the subtextual approach to drama, influencing generations of American playwrights, screenwriters, and actors, including Clifford Odets, Elia Kazan and, in particular, Lee Strasberg. In turn, Strasberg's Actors Studio and the \"Method\" acting approach influenced many actors, including Marlon Brando and Robert De Niro, though by then the Chekhov tradition may have been distorted by a preoccupation with realism. In 1981, the playwright Tennessee Williams adapted \"The Seagull\" as \"The Notebook of Trigorin\". One of Anton's nephews, Michael Chekhov, would also contribute heavily to modern theatre, particularly through his unique acting methods which developed Stanislavski's ideas further.\nAlan Twigg, the chief editor and publisher of the Canadian book review magazine \"B.C. BookWorld\" wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One can argue Anton Chekhov is the second-most popular writer on the planet. Only Shakespeare outranks Chekhov in terms of movie adaptations of their work, according to the movie database IMDb.\u00a0... We generally know less about Chekhov than we know about mysterious Shakespeare.\nChekhov has also influenced the work of Japanese playwrights including Shimizu Kunio, Y\u014dji Sakate, and Ai Nagai. Critics have noted similarities in how Chekhov and Shimizu use a mixture of light humour as well as an intense depictions of longing. Sakate adapted several of Chekhov's plays and transformed them in the general style of \"n\u014d\". Nagai also adapted Chekhov's plays, including \"Three Sisters\", and transformed his dramatic style into Nagai's style of satirical realism while emphasising the social issues depicted in the play.\nChekhov's works have been adapted for the screen, including Sidney Lumet's \"Sea Gull\" and Louis Malle's \"Vanya on 42nd Street\". Laurence Olivier's final effort as a film director was a 1970 adaptation of \"Three Sisters\" in which he also played a supporting role. His work has also served as inspiration or been referenced in numerous films. In Andrei Tarkovsky's 1975 film \"The Mirror\", characters discuss his short story \"Ward No. 6\". Woody Allen has been influenced by Chekhov and references to his works are present in many of his films including \"Love and Death\" (1975), \"Interiors\" (1978) and \"Hannah and Her Sisters\" (1986). Plays by Chekhov are also referenced in Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut's 1980 drama film \"The Last Metro\", which is set in a theatre. \"The Cherry Orchard\" has a role in the comedy film \"Henry's Crime\" (2011). A portion of a stage production of \"Three Sisters\" appears in the 2014 drama film \"Still Alice\". The 2022 Foreign Language Oscar winner, \"Drive My Car\", is centered on a production of \"Uncle Vanya\".\nSeveral of Chekhov's short stories were adapted as episodes of the 1986 Indian anthology television series \"Katha Sagar\". Another Indian television series titled \"Chekhov Ki Duniya\" aired on DD National in the 1990s, adapting different works of Chekhov.\nNuri Bilge Ceylan's Palme d'Or winner \"Winter Sleep\" was adapted from the short story \"The Wife\" by Anton Chekhov.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2448", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2448", "title": "Action Against Hunger", "text": "Global humanitarian aid organization\nAction Against Hunger () is a global humanitarian organization which originated in France and is committed to ending world hunger. The organization helps malnourished children and provides communities with access to safe water and sustainable solutions to hunger. \nAction Against Hunger worked in 56 countries around the world with more than 8,990 employees helping 28 million people in need.\nAction Against Hunger was established in 1979 by a group of French doctors, scientists, and writers. Nobel Prize-winning physicist Alfred Kastler served as the organization's first chairman. Currently, Mumbai-based businessman and philanthropist Ashwini Kakkar serves as International President of Action Against Hunger network.\nThe group initially provided assistance to Afghan refugees in Pakistan, famine-stricken Ugandan communities, and Cambodian refugees in Thailand. It expanded to address additional humanitarian concerns in Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, the Balkans, and elsewhere during the 1980s and 1990s. Action Against Hunger's Scientific Committee pioneered the therapeutic milk formula (F100), now used by all major humanitarian aid organizations to treat acute malnutrition. Early results showed that treatment with F100 has the capacity to reduce the mortality rate of severely malnourished children to below 5%, with a median hospital fatality rate quoted of 23.5%. A few years later, the therapeutic milk was repackaged as ready-to-use therapeutic foods (RUTFs), a peanut-based paste packaged like a power bar. These bars allow for the treatment of malnutrition at home and do not require any preparation or refrigeration.\nThe international network currently has headquarters in eight countries \u2013 France, Germany, Spain, the United States, Canada, Italy, India, and the UK. Its four main areas of work include nutrition, food security, water and sanitation, and advocacy.\nThe integrated approaches with various sectors of intervention are:\nIn 2022, Action Against Hunger USA is leading a USAID-funded project to address health and nutrition challenges associated with policy, advocacy, financing, and governance in communities around the world, and will work in partnership with leading organizations such as Pathfinder International, Amref Health Africa, Global Communities, Humanity &amp; Inclusion, Kupenda for the Children, and Results for Development.\nRestaurants against hunger.\nAction Against Hunger partners with leaders from the food and beverage industry to bring attention to global hunger. Each year, several campaigns are run by the network to raise funds and support the organisation's programs : Restaurants Against Hunger and Love Food Give Food.\nCountries of intervention.\nIn 2022, Action Against Hunger International Network is present in 56 countries:\nAfrica.\nBurkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Ivory Coast, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Uganda, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Chad, Zimbabwe, Zambia\nAsia.\nBangladesh, Myanmar, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, South Caucasus\nCaribbean.\nHa\u00efti\nEurope.\nTurkey, Ukraine, Moldova, Romania, Poland\nMiddle East.\nAfghanistan, Lebanon, Syria, Palestinian Occupied Territories, Yemen, Jordan, Iraq\nLatin America.\nColombia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Honduras, Venezuela\nAction Against Hunger international network.\nSince 1995 Action Against Hunger developed an international network to have a bigger global impact.\nThe Network has headquarters around the world: France, Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, India, and Italy.\nAction Against Hunger has also a West Africa Regional Office (WARO) located in Dakar, a Horn and Eastern Africa Regional Office in Nairobi, and five logistic platforms (Lyon, Paris, Barcelona, Dubai, Panama).\nThis network increases the human and financial capacities and enables specialisation per headquarter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "2452", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2452", "title": "AW", "text": "A&amp;W, AW, Aw, aW or aw may refer to:\nMedia and entertainment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
