{"id": "51307", "revid": "42389708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51307", "title": "Mikl\u00f3s Horthy", "text": "Regent of Hungary from 1920 to 1944\nMikl\u00f3s Horthy de Nagyb\u00e1nya (18 June 1868 \u2013 9 February 1957) was a Hungarian admiral and statesman who was the regent of the Kingdom of Hungary during the interwar period and most of World War II, from 1 March 1920 to 15 October 1944.\nHorthy began his career as a sub-lieutenant in the Austro-Hungarian Navy in 1896 and attained the rank of rear admiral by 1918. He participated in the Battle of the Strait of Otranto and ascended to the position of commander-in-chief of the Navy in the final year of World War I. Following mutinies, Emperor-King Charles I and IV appointed him a vice admiral and commander of the Fleet, dismissing the previous admiral. During the revolutions and interventions in Hungary from Czechoslovakia, Romania and Yugoslavia, Horthy returned to Budapest with the National Army. Subsequently, the Diet of Hungary offered him the position of Regent of Hungary, while the House of Habsburg and Hungarian monarchy was formally dethroned.\nThroughout the interwar period, Horthy led an administration characterized by national conservatism and antisemitism. Under his leadership, Hungary banned the Hungarian Communist Party and the far-right Arrow Cross Party led by Ferenc Sz\u00e1lasi, and pursued a revanchist foreign policy in response to the 1920 Treaty of Trianon. The former King of Hungary, Charles IV, attempted to return to Hungary twice before the Hungarian government yielded to Allied threats of renewed hostilities in 1921. Subsequently, Charles was escorted out of Hungary and into exile.\nIdeologically a national conservative, Horthy has sometimes been labelled as a fascist. In the late 1930s, Horthy's foreign policy led him into an alliance with Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union. With the support of Adolf Hitler, Hungary succeeded in reoccupying certain areas ceded to neighbouring countries by the Treaty of Trianon. Under Horthy's leadership, Hungary provided support to Polish refugees when Germany attacked their country in 1939 and participated in the Axis powers' invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941. Some historians view Horthy as unenthusiastic about contributing to the German war effort and the Holocaust in Hungary (out of fear that it may sabotage peace deals with Allied forces); in addition, several attempts were made to strike a secret deal with the Allies of World War II after it had become obvious that the Axis would lose the war, therefore eventually leading the Germans to invade and take control of the country in March 1944 (Operation Margarethe). However, prior to the Nazi occupation of Hungary, 63,000 Jews were murdered. In late 1944, 437,000 Jews were deported to Auschwitz II-Birkenau, where the majority were gassed on arrival. Serbian historian Zvonimir Golubovi\u0107 has claimed that not only was Horthy aware of these genocidal massacres, but had approved of them, such as those in the Novi Sad raid.\nIn October 1944, Horthy announced that Hungary had declared an armistice with the Soviets and had withdrawn from the Axis. He was forced to resign, placed under arrest by the Germans and taken to Bavaria, while the Arrow Cross Party ruled Hungary. At the end of the war, he came under the custody of American troops. After providing evidence for the Ministries Trial of war crimes in 1948, Horthy settled and lived out his remaining years in exile in Portugal. His memoirs, \"Ein Leben f\u00fcr Ungarn\" (\"A Life for Hungary\"), was first published in 1953. He has a reputation as a controversial historical figure in contemporary Hungary.\nEarly life and naval career.\nMikl\u00f3s Horthy de Nagyb\u00e1nya was born at Kenderes, to an untitled noble family; his ancestor Istv\u00e1n Horti had been ennobled by King Ferdinand II in 1635. His father, Istv\u00e1n Horthy de Nagyb\u00e1nya, was a member of the House of Magnates, the upper chamber of the Diet of Hungary, and lord of a estate. He married Hungarian noblewoman Paula Halassy de D\u00e9vav\u00e1nya in 1857. Mikl\u00f3s was the fourth of their eight children, who were raised as Protestants in the Reformed Church of Hungary.\nAged 14, Horthy joined the Austro-Hungarian Navy, as a cadet at the Imperial and Royal Naval Academy in Fiume. Because the official language of the naval academy was German, Horthy spoke Hungarian with a slight, but noticeable, Austro-German accent for the rest of his life. He also spoke Italian, Croatian, English, and French.\nAs a young man, Horthy traveled around the world and was a diplomat for Austria-Hungary in the Ottoman Empire and other countries. Horthy married Magdolna Purgly de J\u00f3sz\u00e1shely in Arad in 1901. They had four children: Magdolna (1902), Paula (1903), Istv\u00e1n (1904), and Mikl\u00f3s (1907). From 1911 until 1914, he was a naval aide-de-camp to Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria, for whom he had great respect.\nAt the beginning of World War I, Horthy commanded the pre-dreadnought battleship . In 1915, he earned a reputation for boldness while commanding the new light cruiser . He planned the 1917 attack on the Otranto Barrage, which resulted in the Battle of the Strait of Otranto, the largest naval engagement of the war in the Adriatic Sea. A consolidated British, French, and Italian fleet met the Austro-Hungarian force. Despite the numerical superiority of the Allied fleet, the Austrian force emerged victorious from the battle. The Austrian fleet remained relatively unscathed; however, Horthy was wounded. After the Cattaro mutiny of February 1918, Emperor Charles I of Austria selected Horthy over many more senior commanders as the new Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Fleet in March 1918. In June, Horthy planned another attack on Otranto, and in a departure from the cautious strategy of his predecessors, he committed the empire's battleships to the mission. While sailing through the night, the dreadnought met Italian MAS torpedo boats and was sunk, causing Horthy to abort the mission. He managed to preserve the rest of the empire's fleet until he was ordered by Emperor Charles to surrender it to the new State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs (the predecessor of Yugoslavia) on 31 October.\nThe end of the war saw Hungary turn into a landlocked nation, and with that, the new government had little need for Horthy's naval expertise. He retired with his family to his private estate at Kenderes.\nInterwar period, 1919\u20131939.\nHistorians agree on the conservatism of interwar Hungary. Historian Istv\u00e1n De\u00e1k states:\nBetween 1919 and 1944, Hungary was a rightist country. Forged out of a counter-revolutionary heritage, its governments advocated a \"nationalist Christian\" policy; they extolled heroism, faith, and unity; they despised the French Revolution; and they spurned the liberal and socialist ideologies of the 19th century. The governments saw Hungary as a bulwark against Bolshevism and Bolshevism's instruments: socialism, cosmopolitanism, and freemasonry. They perpetrated the rule of a small clique of aristocrats, civil servants, and army officers, and surrounded with adulation by the head of the state, the counterrevolutionary Admiral Horthy.\nCommander of the National Army.\nTwo national traumas that followed the First World War profoundly shaped the spirit and future of the Hungarian nation. The first was the loss, as dictated by the Allies of World War I, of large portions of Hungarian territory that had bordered other countries. These were lands that had belonged to Hungary (then part of Austria-Hungary) but were now ceded mainly to Czechoslovakia, Romania, Austria and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. The excisions, eventually ratified in the Treaty of Trianon of 1920, cost Hungary two-thirds of its territory and one-third of its native Hungarian speakers; this dealt the population a terrible psychological blow. The second trauma began in March 1919, when Communist leader B\u00e9la Kun seized power in the capital, Budapest, after the first proto-democratic government in Hungary faltered.\nKun and his loyalists proclaimed a Hungarian Soviet Republic and promised the restoration of Hungary's former grandeur. Instead, his efforts at reconquest failed, and Hungarians were treated to Soviet-style repression in the form of armed gangs who intimidated or murdered enemies of the regime. This period of violence came to be known as the Red Terror.\nWithin weeks of his coup, Kun's popularity plummeted. On May 30, 1919, anti-communist politicians formed a counter-revolutionary government in the southern city of Szeged, which was occupied by French forces at the time. There, Gyula K\u00e1rolyi, the prime minister of the counter-revolutionary government, asked former Admiral Horthy, still considered a war hero, to be the Minister of War in the new government and take command of a counter-revolutionary force that would be named the National Army (). Horthy consented, and he arrived in Szeged on 6 June. Soon afterward, because of orders from the Allied powers, a cabinet was reformed, and Horthy was not given a seat in it. Undaunted, Horthy managed to retain control of the National Army by detaching the army command from the War Ministry.\nAfter the Communist government collapsed and its leaders fled, French-supported Romanian forces entered Budapest on August 6, 1919. In retaliation for the Red Terror, reactionary crews exacted revenge in a two-year wave of violent repression known today as the White Terror. These reprisals were organized and carried out by officers of Horthy's National Army, particularly P\u00e1l Pr\u00f3nay, Gyula Ostenburg-Moravek and Iv\u00e1n H\u00e9jjas. Their victims were primarily communists, social democrats, and Jews. Most Hungarian Jews were not supporters of the Bolsheviks, but much of the leadership of the Hungarian Soviet Republic had been young Jewish intellectuals, and anger about the Communist revolution easily translated into anti-Semitic hostility.\nIn Budapest, Pr\u00f3nay installed his unit in the Hotel Britannia, where the group swelled to battalion size. Their program of vicious attacks continued; they planned a citywide pogrom against the Jews until Horthy found out and put a stop to it. In his diary, Pr\u00f3nay reported that Horthy:reproached me for the many Jewish corpses found in the various parts of the country, especially in the Transdanubia. This, he emphasized, gave the foreign press extra ammunition against us. He told me that we should stop harassing small Jews; instead, we should kill some big (Kun government) Jews such as Somogyi or V\u00e1zsonyi \u2013 these people deserve punishment much more... in vain, I tried to convince him that the liberal papers would be against us anyway, and it did not matter that we killed only one Jew or we killed them all.\nThe degree of Horthy's responsibility for the excesses of Pr\u00f3nay is disputed. On several occasions, Horthy reached out to stop Pr\u00f3nay from a particularly excessive burst of anti-Jewish cruelty, and the Jews of Pest went on record absolving Horthy of responsibility for the White Terror as early as the autumn of 1919, when they released a statement disavowing the Kun revolution and blaming the terror on a few units within the National Army. Horthy has never been found to have personally engaged in White Terror atrocities. According to American biographer Thomas L. Sakmyster, he \"tacitly supported the right-wing officer detachments\" who carried out the terror; Horthy called them \"my best men.\" The admiral also had practical reasons for overlooking the terror his officers wrought, since he needed the dedicated officers to help stabilize the country. Nevertheless, it was at least another year before the terror died down. In the summer of 1920, Horthy's government took measures to rein in and eventually disperse the reactionary battalions. Pr\u00f3nay managed to undermine these measures, but only for a short time. Pr\u00f3nay was put on trial for extorting a wealthy Jewish politician and for \"insulting the President of the Parliament\" by trying to cover up the extortion. Found guilty on both charges, Pr\u00f3nay was now a liability and an embarrassment. His command was revoked, and he was denounced as a common criminal on the floor of the Hungarian parliament.\nAfter serving short jail sentences, Pr\u00f3nay tried to convince Horthy to restore his battalion command. The Pr\u00f3nay Battalion lingered for a few months more under the command of a junior officer, but the government officially dissolved the unit in January 1922, and expelled its members from the army. Pr\u00f3nay entered politics as a member of the government's right-wing opposition. In the 1930s, he sought and failed to emulate the Nazis by generating a Hungarian fascist mass movement. In 1932, he was charged with incitement, sentenced to six months in prison, and stripped of his rank of lieutenant colonel. Pr\u00f3nay would support the pro-Nazi Arrow Cross and lead attacks on Jews before being captured by Soviet troops sometime during or after the Battle of Budapest of 1944\u201345, dying in captivity in 1947/48.\nPrecisely how much Horthy knew about the excesses of the White Terror is not known. Horthy himself declined to apologize for the savagery of his officer detachments, writing later, \"I have no reason to gloss over deeds of injustice and atrocities committed when an iron broom alone could sweep the country clean.\" He endorsed Edgar von Schmidt-Pauli's poetic justification of the White reprisals (\"Hell let loose on earth cannot be subdued by the beating of angels' wings\"), remarking, \"the Communists in Hungary, willing disciples of the Russian Bolshevists, had indeed let hell loose.\"\nThe International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in an internal report by delegate George Burnier, stated the following in April 1920:There are two distinct military organizations in Hungary: the national army and a kind of civil guard which was formed when the communist r\u00e9gime fell. It is the latter that has been responsible for all the reprehensible acts committed. The Government managed to regain control of these organizations only a few weeks ago. They are now well-disciplined and collaborate with the municipal police forces.This deep hostility toward Communism would be the more lasting legacy of Kun's abortive revolution. It was a conviction shared by Horthy and his country's ruling class that would help drive Hungary into a fateful alliance with Adolf Hitler.The nation of the Hungarians loved and admired Budapest, which became its polluter in the last years. Here, on the banks of the Danube, I arraign her. This city has disowned her thousand years of tradition, she has dragged the Holy Crown and the national colors in the dust, she has clothed herself in red rags. The finest of the nation she threw into dungeons or drove into exile. She laid in ruin our property and wasted our wealth. Yet the nearer we approached to this city, the more rapidly did the ice in our hearts melt. We are now ready to forgive her.\nFollowing the pressure of the Allied powers, Romanian troops finally evacuated Hungary on February 25 February 1920.\nRegent.\nOn March 1, 1920, the National Assembly of Hungary re-established the Kingdom of Hungary. It was apparent that the Allies of World War I would not accept any return of King Charles IV (the former Austro-Hungarian emperor) from exile. Instead, with National Army officers controlling the parliament building, the assembly voted to install Horthy as Regent; he defeated Count Albert Apponyi by a vote of 131 to 7.\nBishop Ottok\u00e1r Proh\u00e1szka then led a small delegation to meet Horthy, announcing, \"Hungary's Parliament has elected you Regent! Would it please you to accept the office of Regent of Hungary?\" To their astonishment, Horthy declined, unless the powers of the office were expanded. As Horthy stalled, the politicians gave in to his demands and granted him \"the general prerogatives of the king, with the exception of the right to name titles of nobility and of the patronage of the Church.\" The prerogatives he was given included the power to appoint and dismiss prime ministers, to convene and dissolve parliament, and to command the armed forces. With those sweeping powers guaranteed, Horthy took the oath of office. He was styled \"His Serene Highness the Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary\" (). In any case, the previous monarch, Charles I (Charles IV in Hungary) did try to regain his throne twice.\nThe Hungarian state was legally a kingdom, but it had no king, as the Allied powers would not have tolerated any reinstatement of the Habsburg dynasty. The country retained its parliamentary system following the dissolution of Austria-Hungary, with a prime minister appointed as head of government. As head of state, Horthy retained significant influence through his constitutional powers and the loyalty of his ministers to the crown. Although his involvement in drafting legislation was minuscule, he nevertheless had the ability to ensure that laws passed by the Hungarian parliament conformed to his political preferences.\nK\u00e1rolyi's attempts to remove Horthy.\nIn 1920 the ex-president of the First Hungarian Republic, Count Mih\u00e1ly K\u00e1rolyi began a vigorous propaganda campaign against the emerging Horthy regime from his exile in France. K\u00e1rolyi attempted to negotiate with the so called \"Little Entente\" through Edvard Bene\u0161 who as the foreign minister of Czechoslovakia played a crucial role in establishing the Little Entente. K\u00e1rolyi also reached out to the Austrian Social Democratic Chancellor, Karl Renner.\nCount K\u00e1rolyi wanted to achieve the disarmament of the Hungarian National Army and the removal of Horthy to such a degree that he even considered doing so through foreign intervention and force of arms. However, the attempt to remove Horthy had little impact: Renner and Bene\u0161 did send a memorandum to the Entente Powers, but their leaders had already decided that it would be best for Horthy to remain in power to serve as a stabilizing force after the signing of the Treaty of Trianon.\nSeeking redress for the Treaty of Trianon.\nHungarian historian \u00c1d\u00e1m Magda wrote in her study \"Versailles System and Central Europe\" (2006): \"Today we know that the bane of Central Europe was the Little Entente, military alliance of Czechoslovakia, Romania and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia), created in 1921 not for Central Europe's cooperation nor to fight German expansion, but in a wrongly perceived notion that a completely powerless Hungary must be kept down\".\nThe first decade of Horthy's reign was primarily consumed by stabilizing the Hungarian economy and political system. Horthy's chief partner in these efforts was his prime minister Istv\u00e1n Bethlen. It was commonly known that Horthy was an Anglophile, and British political and economic support played a significant role in the stabilization and consolidation of the early Horthy era in the Kingdom of Hungary.\nBethlen sought to stabilize the economy while building alliances with weaker nations that could advance Hungary's cause. That cause was, primarily, reversing the losses of the Treaty of Trianon. The humiliations of the Trianon treaty continued to occupy a central place in Hungarian foreign policy and the popular imagination. The indignant anti-Trianon slogan \"Nem, nem soha!\" (\"No, no never!\") became a ubiquitous motto of Hungarian outrage. When in 1927 the British newspaper magnate Lord Rothermere denounced the partitions ratified at Trianon in the pages of his \"Daily Mail\", an official letter of gratitude was eagerly signed by 1.2 million Hungarians.\nBut Hungary's stability was precarious, and the Great Depression derailed much of Bethlen's economic balance. Horthy replaced him with an old reactionary confederate from his Szeged days: Gyula G\u00f6mb\u00f6s. G\u00f6mb\u00f6s was an outspoken anti-Semite and a budding fascist. Although he agreed to Horthy's demands that he temper his anti-Jewish rhetoric and work amicably with Hungary's large Jewish professional class, G\u00f6mb\u00f6s's tenure began swinging Hungary's political mood powerfully rightward. John Gunther stated that Horthy,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nG\u00f6mb\u00f6s rescued the failing economy by securing trade guarantees from Germany \u2013 a strategy that positioned Germany as Hungary's primary trading partner and tied Hungary's future even more tightly to Hitler's. He also assured Hitler that Hungary would quickly become a one-party state modeled on the Nazi party control of Germany. G\u00f6mb\u00f6s died in 1936 before he realized his most extreme goals, but he left his nation headed into a firm partnership with the German dictator.\nWorld War II and the Holocaust.\nUneasy alliance.\nHungary now entered into intricate political maneuvers with the regime of Adolf Hitler, and Horthy began to play a greater and more public role in navigating Hungary along this dangerous path.\nFor Horthy, Hitler served as a bulwark against Soviet encroachment or invasion. Horthy was obsessed with the Communist threat. One American diplomat remarked that Horthy's anti-communist tirades were so common and ferocious that diplomats \"discounted it as a phobia\".\nHorthy clearly saw his country as trapped between two stronger powers, both of them dangerous; evidently, he considered Hitler to be the more manageable of the two, at least at first. Hitler was able to wield greater influence over Hungary than the Soviet Union could\u2014not only as the country's major trading partner but also because he could assist with two of Horthy's key ambitions: maintaining Hungarian sovereignty and satisfying the nationwide yearning to recover former Hungarian lands. Horthy's strategy was one of cautious, sometimes even grudging, alliances. The means by which the regent granted or resisted Hitler's demands, especially with regard to Hungarian military action and the treatment of Hungary's Jews, remain the central criteria by which his career has been judged. Horthy's relationship with Hitler was, by his own account, a tense one \u2013 largely due, he said, to his unwillingness to bend his nation's policies to the German leader's desires.\nHorthy's attitude to Hitler was ambivalent. On one hand, Hungary was an irredentist state that refused to accept the frontiers imposed by the Treaty of Trianon. Furthermore, the three states with which Hungary had territorial disputes, namely Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania, were all allies of France, so a German-Hungarian alliance seemed logical. On the other hand, Admiral Horthy was a good navalist who believed that sea power was the most important factor in war. He felt that Britain, as the world's greatest sea power, would inevitably defeat Germany should another war begin. During a meeting with Hitler in 1935, Horthy was well pleased that Hitler informed him that he wanted Germany and Hungary to partition Czechoslovakia, but Horthy went on to tell Hitler that he must be careful not to do anything that might cause an Anglo-German war because British sea power would sooner or later cause the defeat of Nazi Germany. Horthy was always torn between his belief that an alliance with Germany was the only way to revise Trianon and his belief that war against the international order could only end in defeat.\nIn August 1938, when Horthy, his wife, and some Hungarian politicians took a special train from Budapest to Germany, SA and other National Socialist formations ceremonially welcomed the delegation at the Passau train station. The train then continued to Kiel for the christening of the German cruiser \"Prinz Eugen\".\nDuring his ensuing state visit, Hitler asked Horthy for troops and mat\u00e9riel to participate in Germany's planned invasion of Czechoslovakia. In exchange, Horthy later reported, \"He gave me to understand that as a reward we should be allowed to keep the territory we had invaded.\" Horthy said he declined, insisting to Hitler that Hungary's claims on the disputed lands should be settled by peaceful means.\nThree months later, after the Munich Agreement put control of Czechoslovakia's Sudetenland in Hitler's hands, by the First Vienna Award Hungary annexed some of the south-eastern parts of Czechoslovakia. Horthy enthusiastically rode into the re-acquired territories at the head of his troops, greeted by emotional ethnic Hungarians: \"As I passed along the roads, people embraced one another, fell upon their knees, and wept with joy because liberation had come to them at last, without war, without bloodshed.\" But as \"peaceful\" as this annexation was, and as just as it may have seemed to many Hungarians, it was a dividend of Hitler's brinksmanship and threats of war, in which Hungary was now inextricably complicit. Hungary was now committed to the Axis agenda: on February 24, 1939, it joined the Anti-Comintern Pact, and on April 11, it withdrew from the League of Nations. American journalists began to refer to Hungary as \"the jackal of Europe\".\nThis combination of menace and reward drifted Hungary closer to the status of a Nazi client state. In March 1939, when Hitler took what remained of Czechoslovakia by force, Hungary was allowed to annex the Carpathian Ruthenia. After a conflict with the First Slovak Republic during the Slovak\u2013Hungarian War of 1939, Hungary gained further territories. In August 1940, Hitler intervened on Hungary's behalf once again. After the failed Hungarian-Romanian negotiations, Hungary annexed Northern Transylvania from Romania by the Second Vienna Award.\nBut despite their cooperation with the Nazi regime, Horthy and his government would be better described as \"conservative authoritarian\" than \"fascist\". Certainly, Horthy was as hostile to the home-grown fascist and ultra-nationalist movements that emerged in Hungary between the wars (particularly the Arrow Cross Party) as he was to Communism. The Arrow Cross leader, Ferenc Sz\u00e1lasi, was repeatedly imprisoned at Horthy's command.\nJohn F. Montgomery, who served in Budapest as U.S. ambassador from 1933 to 1941, openly admired this side of Horthy's character and reported the following incident in his memoir: in March 1939, Arrow Cross supporters disrupted a performance at the Budapest opera house by chanting \"Justice for Sz\u00e1lasi!\" loud enough for the regent to hear. A fight broke out, and when Montgomery went to take a closer look, he discovered that:two or three men were on the floor and he [Horthy] had another by the throat, slapping his face and shouting what I learned afterward was: \"So you would betray your country, would you?\" The Regent was alone, but he had the situation in hand... The whole incident was typical not only of the Regent's deep hatred of alien doctrine, but of the kind of man he is. Although he was around seventy-two years of age, it did not occur to him to ask for help; he went right ahead like a skipper with a mutiny on his hands.\nAnd yet, by the time of this episode, Horthy had allowed his government to give in to Nazi demands that the Hungarians enact laws restricting the lives of the country's Jews. The first Hungarian anti-Jewish Law, in 1938, limited the number of Jews in the professions, government, and commerce to twenty percent, and the second reduced it to five percent the following year; 250,000 Hungarian Jews lost their jobs as a result. A \"Third Jewish Law\" of August 1941 prohibited Jews from marrying non-Jews and defined anyone having two Jewish grandparents as \"racially Jewish\". A Jewish man who had non-marital sex with a \"decent non-Jewish woman resident in Hungary\" could be sentenced to three years in prison.\nHorthy's personal views on Jews and their role in Hungarian society are the subject of some debate. In an October 1940 letter to Prime Minister Count P\u00e1l Teleki, Horthy echoed a widespread national sentiment: that Jews enjoyed too much success in commerce, the professions, and industry\u2014success that needed to be curtailed:As regards the Jewish problem, I have been an anti-Semite throughout my life. I have never had contact with Jews. I have considered it intolerable that here in Hungary everything, every factory, bank, large fortune, business, theatre, press, commerce, etc. should be in Jewish hands, and that the Jew should be the image reflected of Hungary, especially abroad. Since, however, one of the most important tasks of the government is to raise the standard of living, i.e., we have to acquire wealth, it is impossible, in a year or two, to replace the Jews, who have everything in their hands, and to replace them with incompetent, unworthy, mostly big-mouthed elements, for we should become bankrupt. This requires a generation at least.\nWar.\nThe Kingdom of Hungary was gradually drawn into the war itself. In 1939 and 1940, Hungarian volunteers were sent to Finland's Winter War, but did not have time to partake in the fighting before the end of the war. In April 1941, Hungary became, in effect, a member of the Axis. Hungary permitted Hitler to send troops across Hungarian territory for the invasion of Yugoslavia and ultimately sent its own troops to claim its share of the dismembered Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Prime Minister P\u00e1l Teleki, horrified that he had failed to prevent this collusion with the Nazis, despite the fact that he had signed a non-aggression pact with Yugoslavia in December 1940, committed suicide.\nIn June 1941, the Hungarian government finally yielded to Hitler's demands that the nation contribute to the Axis war effort. On June 27, Hungary became part of Operation Barbarossa and declared war on the Soviet Union. The Hungarians sent in troops and material only four days after Hitler began his invasion of the Soviet Union on June 22 June 1941.\nEighteen months later, less well-equipped and less motivated than their German allies, 200,000 troops of the Hungarian Second Army ended up holding the front on the Don River west of Stalingrad.\nHungary also declared war on the United States; the following is an excerpt from Galeazzo Ciano's diaries: {\nThe first massacre of Jewish people from Hungarian territory took place in August 1941, when government officials ordered the deportation of Jews without Hungarian citizenship (principally refugees from other Nazi-occupied countries) to Ukraine. Roughly 18,000\u201320,000 of these deportees were slaughtered by Friedrich Jeckeln and his SS troops; only 2,000\u20133,000 survived. These killings are known as the Kamianets-Podilskyi Massacre. This event, in which the slaughter of Jews for the first time numbered in the tens of thousands, is considered to be among the first large-scale massacre of the Holocaust. Because of the objections of Hungary's leadership, the deportations were halted.\nBy early 1942, Horthy was already seeking to put some distance between himself and Hitler's regime. That March, he dismissed the pro-German prime minister L\u00e1szl\u00f3 B\u00e1rdossy and replaced him with Mikl\u00f3s K\u00e1llay, a moderate whom Horthy expected to loosen Hungary's ties to Germany. K\u00e1llay successfully sabotaged economic cooperation with Nazi Germany, protected refugees and prisoners, resisted Nazi pressure regarding Jews, established contact with the Allies, and negotiated conditions under which Hungary would switch sides against Germany. However, the Allies were not close enough. When the Germans occupied Hungary in March 1944, K\u00e1llay went into hiding. He was finally captured by the Nazis, but was liberated when the war ended. In 1944 Horthy secretly instructed G\u00e9za Lakatos (prime minister of Hungary) to remove far-right officials from government.\nIn September 1942, personal tragedy struck the Hungarian Regent. 37-year-old Istv\u00e1n Horthy, Horthy's eldest son, was killed. Istv\u00e1n Horthy was the Deputy Regent of Hungary and a Flight Lieutenant in the reserves, 1/1 Fighter Squadron of the Royal Hungarian Air Force. He was killed when his Hawk (\"H\u00e9ja\") fighter crashed at an air field near Ilovskoye.\nIn January 1943, Hungary's enthusiasm for the war effort, never especially high, suffered a tremendous blow. The Soviet army, in the full momentum of its triumphant turnaround after the Battle of Stalingrad, punched through Romanian troops at a bend in the Don River and virtually obliterated the Second Hungarian Army in a few days' fighting. In this single action, Hungarian combat fatalities jumped by 80,000. Jew and non-Jew suffered together in this defeat, as the Hungarian troops had been accompanied by some 40,000 Jews and political prisoners in forced-labor units whose job had been to clear minefields.\nGerman officials blamed Hungary's Jews for the nation's \"defeatist attitude.\" In the wake of the Don bend disaster, Hitler demanded at an April 1943 meeting that Horthy punish the 800,000 Jews still living in Hungary, who according to Hitler were responsible for this defeat. In response, Horthy and his government-supplied 10,000 Jewish deportees for labor battalions. With the growing awareness the Allies might well win the war, it became more expedient not to comply with further German requests. Cautiously, the Hungarian government began to explore contacts with the Allies in hopes of negotiating a surrender.\nPrior to the German occupation within the area of Hungary around 63,000 Jews perished. Overall, Hungarian Jews suffered close to 560,000 casualties. Yet Horthy himself gained knowledge of the situation of the Jews in Auschwitz in 1944 when one of the family's friends, Pet\u0151 Ern\u0151, one of the leaders of the Central Jewish Council revealed the truth about the deportations. A personal friend of Horthy, Count Bethlen Istv\u00e1n also urged the Replacement of Szt\u00f3jay-administration and the abolition of deportation. He called the deportation \"inhuman, stupid and unworthy of the Hungarian character with which the present government has sullied the Hungarian name in the eyes of the world.\" The law against deportations was passed on June 26th.\nOccupation.\nBy 1944, the Axis was losing the war, and the Red Army was at Hungary's borders. Fearing that the Soviets would overrun the country, K\u00e1llay, with Horthy's approval, put out numerous feelers to the Allies. He even promised to surrender unconditionally to them once they reached Hungarian territory. An enraged Hitler summoned Horthy to a conference in Klessheim Castle near Salzburg. He pressured Horthy to make greater contributions to the war effort and again commanded him to assist in the killing of more of Hungary's Jews. Horthy now permitted the deportation of a large number of Jews (the generally accepted figure is 100,000), but would not go further.\nThe conference was a ruse. As Horthy was returning home on 19 March, the Wehrmacht invaded and occupied Hungary. Horthy was told he could only stay in office if he dismissed K\u00e1llay and appointed a new government that would fully cooperate with Hitler and his plenipotentiary in Budapest, Edmund Veesenmayer. Knowing the likely alternative was a gauleiter who would treat Hungary in the same manner as the other countries under Nazi occupation, Horthy acquiesced and appointed his ambassador to Germany, General D\u00f6me Szt\u00f3jay, as prime minister. The Germans originally wanted Horthy to reappoint B\u00e9la Imr\u00e9dy (who had been prime minister from 1938 to 1939), but Horthy had enough influence to get Veesenmayer to accept Szt\u00f3jay instead. Contrary to Horthy's hopes, Szt\u00f3jay's government eagerly proceeded to participate in the Holocaust.\nThe chief agents of this collaboration were Andor Jaross, the Minister of the Interior, and his two rabidly anti-Semitic state secretaries, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Endre and L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Baky (later to be known as the \"Deportation Trio\"). On 9 April, Prime Minister Szt\u00f3jay and the Germans obligated Hungary to place 300,000 Jewish people at the \"disposal\" of the Reich, in effect, sentencing most of Hungary's remaining Jews to death. Five days later, on 14 April, Endre, Baky, and SS Lieutenant-Colonel Adolf Eichmann commenced the deportation of the remaining Hungarian Jews. The Yellow Star, Ghettoization laws and deportation were accomplished in less than 8 weeks with the help of the new Hungarian government and authorities. The deportation of Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz began on 14 May 1944 and continued at a rate of 12\u201314,000 a day until 24 July.\nUpon learning about the deportations, Horthy wrote the following letter to the prime minister:Dear Szt\u00f3jay: I was aware that the Government in the given forced situation has to take many steps that I do not consider correct, and for which I can not take responsibility. Among these matters is the handling of the Jewish question in a manner that does not correspond to the Hungarian mentality, Hungarian conditions, and, for the matter, Hungarian interests. It is clear to everyone that what among these were done by Germans or by the insistence of the Germans was not in my power to prevent, so in these matters, I was forced into passivity. As such, I was not informed in advance, or I am not fully informed now, however, I have heard recently that in many cases in inhumaneness and brutality we exceeded the Germans. I demand that the handling of the Jewish affairs in the Ministry of Interior be taken out of the hands of Deputy Minister L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Endre. Furthermore, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Baky's assignment to the management of the police forces should be terminated as soon as possible.Just before the deportations began, two Slovak Jewish prisoners, Rudolf Vrba and Alfr\u00e9d Wetzler, escaped from Auschwitz and passed details of what was happening inside the camps to officials in Slovakia. This document, known as the Vrba-Wetzler Report, was quickly translated into German and passed among Jewish groups and then to Allied officials. Details from the report were broadcast by the BBC on 15 June and printed in \"The New York Times\" on 20 June. World leaders, including Pope Pius XII (25 June), President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 26 June, and King Gustaf V of Sweden on 30 June, subsequently pleaded with Horthy to use his influence to stop the deportations. Roosevelt specifically threatened military retaliation if the transports were not ceased. On 2 July 1944 Horthy put down a coup attempt by Hungarists by using loyal forces. Thereby he temporarily neutralized the men who planned to deport Jews. This enabled Horthy to issue the order halting deportations on 7 July. The transports halted. By that time, 437,000 Jews had been sent to Auschwitz on 147 trains, most of them to their deaths. Horthy was informed about the number of the deported Jews some days later: \"approximately 400,000\". Rudolf Hoss, the commander of Auschwitz, begged the Hungarian authorities not to send more than one transport every other day, as the camp crematoria did not have the capacity to sheer capacity to cope with the number of bodies arriving from the gas chambers. \nBy many estimates, one of every three people murdered at Auschwitz during its operation was a Hungarian Jew killed between May and July 1944.\nThere remains some uncertainty over how much Horthy knew about the number of Hungarian Jews being deported, their destination, and their intended fate \u2013 and when he knew it as well as what he could have done about it. According to historian P\u00e9ter Sipos, the Hungarian government had already known about the Jewish genocide since 1943. Some historians have argued that Horthy believed that the Jews were being sent to the camps to work and that they would be returned to Hungary after the war. Horthy himself wrote in his memoirs: \"Not before August,\" he wrote, \"did secret information reach me of the horrible truth about the extermination camps.\" The Vrba-Wetzler statement is believed to have been passed to Hungarian Zionist leader Rudolf Kastner no later than 28 April 1944, Kastner did not make it public. He made an agreement with the SS to remain silent in order to save the Jews who escaped on the Kastner train. The \"Kastner train\", a convoy that enabled Hungarian Jews to escape to Switzerland, left Budapest on 30 June 1944.\nDeposition and arrest.\nIn August 1944, Romania withdrew from the Axis and turned against Germany and its allies. This development, a sign of the failing German war effort, led Horthy in Budapest to reconsolidate his political position. He ousted Szt\u00f3jay and the other Nazi-friendly ministers installed the preceding spring, replacing them with a new government under G\u00e9za Lakatos. He stopped the mass deportations of Jews and ordered the police to use deadly force if the Germans attempted to resume them. While some smaller groups continued to be deported by train, the Germans did not press Horthy to ramp the pace back up to pre-August levels. Indeed, when Horthy turned down Eichmann's request to restart the deportations, Heinrich Himmler ordered Eichmann to return to Germany.\nRealizing that Hungary's position was untenable, Horthy also renewed peace feelers to the Allies and began considering strategies for surrendering to the Allied force he distrusted the most: the Red Army. Although Horthy was still bitterly anticommunist, his dealings with the Nazis led him to conclude that the Soviets were the lesser evil. Working through his trustworthy General B\u00e9la Mikl\u00f3s, who was in contact with Soviet forces in eastern Hungary, Horthy sought to surrender to the Soviets while preserving the Hungarian government's autonomy. The Soviets willingly promised this, and on 11 October Horthy and the Soviets finally agreed to surrender terms. On 15 October 1944, Horthy told his government ministers that Hungary had signed an armistice with the Soviet Union. He said, \"It is clear today that Germany has lost the war... Hungary has accordingly concluded a preliminary armistice with Russia, and will cease all hostilities against her.\" Horthy informed a representative of the German Reich that \"we were about to conclude a military armistice with our former enemies and to cease all hostilities against them.\"\nThe Nazis had anticipated Horthy's move. On 15 October, after Horthy announced the armistice in a nationwide radio address, Hitler initiated Operation Panzerfaust, sending commando Otto Skorzeny to Budapest with instructions to remove Horthy from power. Horthy's son Mikl\u00f3s Horthy Jr., was meeting with Soviet representatives to finalize the surrender when Skorzeny and his troops forced their way into the meeting and kidnapped the younger Horthy at gunpoint. Trussed up in a carpet, Mikl\u00f3s Jr. was immediately driven to the airport and flown to Germany to serve as a hostage. Skorzeny then brazenly led a convoy of German troops and four Tiger II tanks to the Vienna Gates of Castle Hill, where the Hungarians had been ordered not to resist. Though one unit had not received the order, the Germans quickly captured Castle Hill with minimal bloodshed; seven soldiers were killed and twenty-six wounded.\nHorthy was captured by Veesenmayer and his staff later on the 15th and taken to the Waffen SS office, where he was held overnight. Veesenmayer told Horthy that unless he recanted the armistice and abdicated, his son would be killed the next morning. The fascist Arrow Cross Party swiftly took over Budapest. With his son's life in the balance, Horthy consented to sign a document officially abdicating his office and naming Ferenc Sz\u00e1lasi, leader of the Arrow Cross, as both head of state and prime minister. Horthy understood that the Germans merely wanted the stamp of his prestige on a Nazi-sponsored Arrow Cross coup, but he signed anyway. As he later explained his capitulation: \"I neither resigned nor appointed Sz\u00e1lasi Premier. I merely exchanged my signature for my son's life. A signature wrung from a man at machine-gun point can have little legality.\"Horthy met Skorzeny three days later at Pfeffer-Wildenbruch's apartment and was told he would be transported to Germany in his own special train. Skorzeny told Horthy that he would be a \"guest of honour\" in a secure Bavarian castle. On 17 October, Horthy was personally escorted by Skorzeny into captivity at Schloss Hirschberg am Haarsee in Bavaria, where he was guarded closely, but allowed to live in comfort.\nWith the help of the SS, the Arrow Cross leadership moved swiftly to take command of the Hungarian armed forces, and to prevent the surrender that Horthy had arranged, even though Soviet troops were now deep inside the country. Sz\u00e1lasi resumed persecution of Jews and other \"undesirables\". In the three months between November 1944 and January 1945, Arrow Cross death squads shot 10,000 to 15,000 Jews on the banks of the Danube. The Arrow Cross also welcomed Adolf Eichmann back to Budapest, where he began the deportation of the city's surviving Jews. Eichmann never successfully completed this phase of his plans, thwarted in large measure by the efforts of Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg. Out of a pre-war Hungarian Jewish population estimated at 825,000, only 260,000 survived.\nBy December 1944, Budapest was under siege by Soviet forces. The Arrow Cross leadership retreated across the Danube into the hills of Buda in late January, and by February the city surrendered to the Soviet forces.\nHorthy remained under house arrest in Bavaria until the war in Europe ended. On 29 April, his SS guardians fled in the face of the Allied advance. On 1 May, Horthy was first liberated, and then arrested, by elements of the U.S. 7th Army.\nExile.\nAfter his arrest, Horthy was moved through a variety of detention locations before finally arriving at the prison facility at Nuremberg in late September 1945. There he was asked to provide evidence to the International Military Tribunal in preparation for the trial of the Nazi leadership. Although he was interviewed repeatedly about his contacts with some of the defendants, he did not testify in person. In Nuremberg, he was reunited with his son, Mikl\u00f3s Jr.\nHorthy gradually came to believe that his arrest had been arranged and choreographed by the United States in order to protect him from the Russians. Indeed, the former regent reported being told that Josip Broz Tito, the new ruler of Yugoslavia, asked that Horthy be charged with complicity with the 1942 Novi Sad raid by Hungarian troops in the Ba\u010dka region of Vojvodina. Serbian historian Zvonimir Golubovi\u0107 has claimed that not only was Horthy aware of these genocidal massacres but had approved of them. American trial officials did not indict Horthy for war crimes. The former ambassador John Montgomery, who had some influence in Washington, also contributed to Horthy's release in Nuremberg.\nAccording to the memoirs of Ferenc Nagy, who served for a year as prime minister in post-war Hungary, the Hungarian Communist leadership was also interested in extraditing Horthy for trial. Nagy said that Joseph Stalin was more forgiving: that Stalin told Nagy during a diplomatic meeting in April 1945 not to judge Horthy, because he was old and had offered an armistice in 1944.\nOn 17 December 1945, Horthy was released from Nuremberg Prison and allowed to rejoin his family in the German town of Weilheim, Bavaria. The Horthys lived there for four years, supported financially by ambassador John Montgomery, his successor, Herbert Pell, and by Pope Pius XII, whom he knew personally.\nIn March 1948, Horthy returned to testify at the Ministries Trial, the last of the twelve U.S.-run Nuremberg Trials; he testified against Edmund Veesenmayer, the Nazi administrator who had controlled Hungary during the deportations to Auschwitz in the spring of 1944. Veesenmayer was sentenced to 20 years imprisonment but was released in 1951.\nFor Horthy, returning to Hungary was impossible; it was now firmly in the hands of a Soviet-sponsored Communist government. In an extraordinary twist of fate, the chief of Hungary's post-war Communist apparatus was M\u00e1ty\u00e1s R\u00e1kosi, one of B\u00e9la Kun's colleagues from the ill-fated Communist coup of 1919. Kun had been executed during Stalin's purges of the late 1930s, but R\u00e1kosi had survived in a Hungarian prison cell. In 1940, Horthy had permitted R\u00e1kosi to emigrate to the Soviet Union in exchange for a series of highly symbolic Hungarian battle-flags from the 19th century that were in Russian hands.\nIn 1950, the Horthy family managed to find a home in Portugal, thanks to Mikl\u00f3s Jr.'s contacts with Portuguese diplomats in Switzerland. Horthy and members of his family were relocated to the seaside town of Estoril. His American supporter, John Montgomery, recruited a small group of wealthy Hungarians to raise funds for their upkeep in exile. According to Horthy's daughter-in-law, Countess Ilona Edelsheim-Gyulai, Hungarian Jews also supported Horthy's family in exile, including industrialist Ferenc Chorin and lawyer L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Pathy.\nIn exile, Horthy wrote his memoirs, \"Ein Leben f\u00fcr Ungarn\" (English: \"A Life for Hungary\"), published under the name of Nikolaus von Horthy, in which he narrated many personal experiences from his youth until the end of World War II. He claimed that he had mistrusted Hitler for much of the time he knew him and tried to perform the best actions and appoint the best officials in his country. He also highlighted Hungary's mistreatment by many other countries since the end of World War I. Horthy was one of the few Axis heads of state to survive the war, and thus to write post-war memoirs.\nHorthy never lost his deep contempt for communism, and in his memoirs he blamed Hungary's alliance with the Axis on the threat posed by the \"Asiatic barbarians\" of the Soviet Union. He railed against the influence that the Allies' victory had given to Stalin's totalitarian state. \"I feel no urge to say 'I told you so,'\" Horthy wrote, \"nor to express bitterness at the experiences that have been forced upon me. Rather, I feel wonder and amazement at the vagaries of humanity.\"\nHorthy married Magdolna Purgly de J\u00f3sz\u00e1shely in 1901; they were married for just over 56 years, until his death. He had two sons, Mikl\u00f3s Horthy Jr. (often rendered in English as \"Nicholas\" or \"Nikolaus\") and Istv\u00e1n Horthy, who served as his political assistants; and two daughters, Magda and Paula. Of his four children, only Mikl\u00f3s outlived him.\nHe died in 1957 in Estoril and was initially buried in the British Cemetery, Lisbon. According to footnotes in his memoirs, Horthy was very distraught about the failure of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. In his will, Horthy asked that his body not be returned to Hungary \"until the last Russian soldier has left.\" His heirs honored the request. In 1993, two years after the Soviet troops left Hungary, Horthy's body was returned to Hungary and he was buried in his hometown of Kenderes. The reburial in Hungary was the subject of some controversy on the part of the left.\nLegacy.\nThe interwar period dominated by Horthy's government is known in Hungarian as the \"Horthy-kor\" (\"Horthy age\") or \"Horthy-rendszer\" (\"Horthy system\"). Its legacy, and that of Horthy himself, remain among the most controversial political topics in Hungary today, tied inseparably to the Treaty of Trianon and the Holocaust. According to one school of thought, Horthy was a strong, conservative, but not totalitarian leader who only entered into an alliance with Hitler's Germany in order to restore lands Hungary lost after the First World War and was reluctant, or even defiant, in the face of Germany's demands to deport the Hungarian Jewry. Others see Horthy's alliance with Germany as foolhardy, or think that a positive view of Horthy serves a revisionist historical agenda, pointing to Horthy's passage of various anti-Jewish laws \u2013 the earliest in Europe, in 1920 \u2013 as a sign of his anti-Semitism and the prelude for Hungary's collaboration in the Holocaust.\nDuring the Horthy era.\nDuring his own reign, Horthy's reception was fairly positive, though by no means monolithic. Opponents of the short-lived Soviet Republic saw him as a \"national saviour\", in contrast to the Communist \"losers of the nation\". Because Horthy distanced himself from everyday politics, he was able to cultivate the image of the nationally governing admiral. The peaceful re-acquisition of Hungarian-majority lands lost after Trianon greatly bolstered this image. The regime's efforts at economic development and modernization also improved contemporaries' opinions, and although the Great Depression initially hurt his image, Horthy's wide-ranging social programs saved face for the most part.\nOn the other hand, Horthy's right-wing tendencies were not without their critics even in his time. Bourgeois liberals, among them S\u00e1ndor M\u00e1rai, criticized Horthy's authoritarian style as much as they disdained the violent tendencies of the far-left. He was also criticized by monarchists and elements of the aristocracy and clergy. While the harshest opposition to Horthy initially came from the Communist parties he had overthrown and outlawed, the later 1930s saw him come under increasing criticism from the far-right. After the Arrow Cross Party took control of the country in 1944, Horthy was denounced as a \"traitor\" and \"Jew-lover\".\nHorthy's reception in the West was positive until the outbreak of the Second World War, and while Hitler initially backed Horthy, relations between the two leaders were soured by Horthy's denial of involvement in the invasion of Poland and Czechoslovakia. Horthy likewise viewed the Nazis as \"brigands and clowns.\" The Little Entente criticized Horthy, mainly for his irredentist policy goals.\nDuring the Communist era.\nM\u00e1ty\u00e1s R\u00e1kosi's hardline Stalinist government systematically disseminated, through propaganda and state education, the idea that the Horthy era constituted the \"lowest point in Hungarian history.\" These views were supported by socialist or communist activists persecuted under the Horthy administration. Especially critical in this campaign was the 1950 publication of the textbook \"The Story of the Hungarian People\", which denounced Horthy's military as a \"genocidal band\" consisting of \"sociopathic officers, kulaks, and the dregs of society.\" It further characterized Horthy himself as a \"slave of the Habsburgs\", a \"red-handed dictator\" who \"spoke broken Hungarian\" and was known for his \"hatred of workers and soviets.\" \"The Story of the Hungarian People\" was required reading in middle schools throughout the 1950s.\nThe K\u00e1d\u00e1r era's relative liberalization, coupled with the concomitant professionalization of Hungarian history and historiography, allowed for more objective historical assessments of Horthy's career. Popular volumes still painted him negatively, openly leveling \"ad hominem\" attacks: Horthy was accused of bastardy, lechery, sadism, greed, nepotism, bloodthirst, warmongering, and cowardice, among other vices. Academic evaluations became more nuanced, however. P\u00e9ter Gosztony's 1973 biography, for example, portrayed Horthy as a conscientious, traditional conservative. Gosztony argued that Horthy did not seek a dictatorship until the 1930s and, although he was unable to prevent the German invasion of Yugoslavia, sought to maintain a moderately liberal government, citing his replacement of hardliner L\u00e1szl\u00f3 B\u00e1rdossy with Mikl\u00f3s K\u00e1llay as prime minister as evidence of this. Thomas Sakmyster was also sympathetic while acknowledging Horthy's \"narrow-mindedness.\" Contemporary Hungarian-American historian Istv\u00e1n De\u00e1k regards Horthy as typical of other strongmen of the era, especially dictators Francisco Franco of Spain and Philippe P\u00e9tain of Vichy France. De\u00e1k writes that during the war, Horthy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;alternatively promoted and opposed German influence in his country, depending on how he judged the probable outcome of the war... Similarly, Horthy both persecuted and protected his Jewish subjects, depending on the turn of military events and the social status and degree of assimilation of the Jews under his reign. In the end, he was neither tried nor imprisoned but at the urging of Stalin was allowed to go into exile in Portugal. Many of Horthy's descendants who worked and were associated with the communist government generally referred to him in a negative light with the most prominent of them being the An\u0111elkovi\u0107 family, a Yugoslav-Hungarian branch of Horthy's family that fought against the Hungarian occupation of Vojvodina.\nReburial and contemporary politics.\nThe transition to a Western-style democracy allowed the privatization of media, which led to a shift in how Horthy was viewed in Hungary. In 1993, only a few years after the first democratic elections, Horthy's body was returned from Portugal to his hometown of Kenderes. Tens of thousands of people, as well as almost the entirety of J\u00f3zsef Antall's MDF cabinet, attended the ceremony. Antall had prefaced the burial with a series of interviews praising Horthy as a \"patriot.\" The reburial was broadcast on state television and was accompanied by large-scale protests in Budapest.\nIn contemporary Hungary, the iconography of Horthy is associated with the far-right Jobbik party and its allies. The national-conservative Fidesz has also voiced some positive opinions of Horthy's legacy. Since 2012, Horthy statues, squares have been renamed after, and memorials have been erected to him in numerous villages and cities including Cs\u00f3kak\u0151, Kereki, Gy\u00f6mr\u0151, and Debrecen. In November 2013, the unveiling of a Horthy statue at a Calvinist church in Budapest drew international attention and criticism.\n\"Der Spiegel\" has written about the resurgence of what its writers call \"the Horthy cult\", claiming that Horthy's popularity indicates returning irredentist, reactionary, and ultranationalistic elements. Critics have more specifically connected Horthy's popularity to the \"Magyar G\u00e1rda\", a paramilitary group that uses \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty imagery and to recent incidents of antiziganist and antisemitic vandalism in Hungary. Meanwhile, Fidesz has, according to reporters, \"hedged its bets\" on the Horthy controversy, refusing to outright condemn Horthy statues and other commemorations for fear of losing right-wing voters to Jobbik. Some Fidesz politicians have labeled Horthy memorials \"provocative,\" however. This tension has led some to label Fidesz as \"implicitly anti-semitic\" and to accuse Prime Minister Viktor Orb\u00e1n of a \"revisionist\" agenda.\nLeft-wing groups such as the Hungarian Socialist Party have condemned positive historiography of Horthy. In 2012, for instance, then-party leader Attila Mesterh\u00e1zy condemned the Orb\u00e1n government's position as \"inexcusable\", claiming that Fidesz was \"openly associating itself with the ideology of the regime that collaborated with the fascists.\" Words have led to actions in some instances, as when leftist activist P\u00e9ter D\u00e1niel vandalized a rural bust of Horthy by dousing it in red paint and hanging a sign that read \"Mass Murderer \u2013 War Criminal\" around its neck. Ultranationalist vandals reacted by desecrating a Jewish cemetery in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r and vandalizing several Holocaust memorials in Budapest.\nIn 2017, Orb\u00e1n affirmed his positive view of Horthy, commenting in a speech that he considers Horthy an \"exceptional statesman\" and giving him credit for the survival of the Hungarian state in the First World War's aftermath. The U.S. Holocaust Museum responded in a statement denouncing Orb\u00e1n and the Hungarian government for trying to \"rehabilitate the reputation of Hungary's wartime leader, Mikl\u00f3s Horthy, who was a vocal anti-Semite and complicit in the murder of the country's Jewish population during the Holocaust.\"\nFilm and television portrayals.\nIn the 1985 NBC TV film \"\", the role of Horthy was taken by Hungarian-born actor Guy Deghy, who appeared bearded although Horthy (as photographs bore out) appeared consistently clean-shaven throughout his life.\nIn the 2011 Spanish TV film series, \"El \u00e1ngel de Budapest\" (The angel of Budapest), also set during Wallenberg's time in Hungary in 1944, he is portrayed by actor L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Ag\u00e1rdi. In the 2014 American action drama film \"Walking with the Enemy\", Horthy is portrayed by Ben Kingsley. The movie depicts a story of a young man during the Arrow Cross Party takeover in Hungary.\nLinguistic notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51310", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51310", "title": "Citro\u00ebn", "text": "French car brand of Stellantis\nCitro\u00ebn () is a French automobile company. The \"Automobiles Citro\u00ebn\" manufacturing company was founded on 4 June 1919 by Andr\u00e9 Citro\u00ebn. Citro\u00ebn has been owned by Stellantis since 2021 and previously was part of the PSA Group after Peugeot acquired 89.95% share in 1976. Citro\u00ebn's head office is located in the Stellantis Poissy Plant in Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine since 2021 (previously in Rueil-Malmaison) and its offices studies and research in V\u00e9lizy-Villacoublay, Poissy (CEMR), Carri\u00e8res-sous-Poissy and Sochaux-Montb\u00e9liard.\nIn 1934, the firm established its reputation for innovative technology with the Traction Avant. This was the world's first car to be mass-produced with front-wheel drive and four-wheel independent suspension, as well as unibody construction, omitting a separate chassis, and instead using the body of the car itself as its main load-bearing structure.\nIn 1954, Citro\u00ebn produced the world's first hydropneumatic self-levelling suspension system; then the revolutionary DS, the first mass-produced car with modern disc brakes, in 1955.&lt;ref name=\"vintagecars.about.com/internet archive\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 1967, swiveling headlights that allowed for greater visibility on winding roads were introduced in several models. These cars have received various national and international awards, including three European Car of the Year awards.\nHistory.\nAndr\u00e9 Citro\u00ebn graduated from the \u00c9cole Polytechnique in 1900 and visited his mother's homeland, Poland, shortly after she died. During that holiday, he saw a carpenter working on a set of gears with a fishbone structure that were less noisy and more efficient. Citro\u00ebn bought the patent for very little money, leading to the invention of double helical gears. The next year, he and his partners invested a significant portion of his inheritance in founding \"Citro\u00ebn, Hinstin et Cie,\" a gear manufacturing business specializing in V-shaped helical gears, starting with about ten workers.\nCitro\u00ebn had a successful six-year stint working with Mors between 1908 and the outbreak of World War I. He built armaments for France during the war, but he realized that unless he planned ahead, he would have a modern factory without a product afterward. \nEarly years.\nCitro\u00ebn began planning to switch to automobile manufacturing by 1916, when he asked the engineer Louis Dufresne, previously with Mors rival Panhard, to design a technically sophisticated 18-horsepower automobile he could produce in his factory once peace returned. Long before that happened, however, he had modified his vision and decided, like Henry Ford, that the best post-war opportunities in auto-making would involve a lighter car of good quality, but made in sufficient quantities to be priced enticingly. In February 1917, Citro\u00ebn contacted the 1909 creator of Le Z\u00e8bre, French automotive engineer Jules Salomon, with a mandate that was characteristically both demanding and simple: produce an all-new design for a 10-horsepower car that would be better equipped, more robust, and less costly to produce than any rival product at the time.\nThe result was the Citro\u00ebn Type A, announced to the press in March 1919, just four months after the guns fell silent. The first production Type A emerged from the factory\u2014located at Quai de Javel, Vaugirard, Paris\u2014at the end of May 1919, and in June it was exhibited at a showroom at Number 42, on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris which normally sold Alda cars. Citro\u00ebn persuaded the owner of the Alda business, Fernand Charron, to lend him the showroom, which is still in use today. This \"C42\" showroom is where the company organises exhibitions and shows its vehicles and concept cars. A few years later, Charron would be persuaded to become a major investor in the Citro\u00ebn business. On 7 July 1919, the first customer took delivery of a new 10HP Type A. In the same year, it produced 30 cars daily, totaling 2,810 vehicles, with 12,244 produced in 1920.\nThat same year, Andr\u00e9 Citro\u00ebn briefly negotiated with General Motors a proposed sale of the Citro\u00ebn company. The deal nearly closed, but General Motors ultimately decided that its management and capital would be too overstretched by the takeover, thus, Citro\u00ebn remained independent until 1935.\nBetween 1921 and 1937, Citro\u00ebn produced half-track vehicles for off-road and military uses, using the K\u00e9gresse track system. In the 1920s, the U.S. Army purchased several Citro\u00ebn-K\u00e9gresse vehicles for evaluation followed by a licence to produce them. This resulted in the United States Army Ordnance Department building a prototype in 1939. In December 1942, it went into production with the M2 Half Track Car and M3 Half-track versions. The U.S. eventually produced more than 41,000 vehicles in over 70 versions between 1940 and 1944. After their 1940 occupation of France, the Nazis captured many of the Citro\u00ebn half-track vehicles and armored them for their own use.\nCitro\u00ebn used the Eiffel Tower as the world's largest advertising sign, as recorded in \"Guinness World Records\". He also sponsored expeditions in Asia (Croisi\u00e8re Jaune), North America (Croisi\u00e8re Blanche) and Africa (Croisi\u00e8re Noire), demonstrating the potential for motor vehicles equipped with the K\u00e9gresse track system to cross inhospitable regions. These expeditions conveyed scientists and journalists.\nDemonstrating extraordinary toughness, a 1923 Citro\u00ebn that had already travelled was the first car to be driven around Australia. The car, a 1923 Citro\u00ebn 5CV Type C Torpedo, was driven by Neville Westwood from Perth, Western Australia, on a round trip from August to December 1925. This vehicle is now fully restored and in the collection of the National Museum of Australia.\nIn 1924, Citro\u00ebn began a business relationship with the American engineer Edward G. Budd. From 1899, Budd had worked to develop stainless steel bodies for railroad cars, for Pullman in particular. Budd went on to manufacture steel bodies for many automakers, Dodge being his first big auto client. At the Paris Motor Show in October 1924, Citro\u00ebn introduced the Citro\u00ebn B10, the first all-steel body in Europe. These automobiles were initially successful in the marketplace, but soon competitors who were still using a wooden structure for their vehicles, introduced new body designs. Citro\u00ebn, who did not redesign the bodies of his cars, still sold in large quantities nonetheless, the cars' low price being the main selling point, which factor however caused Citro\u00ebn to experience heavy losses.\nIn 1927, the bank Lazard helped Citro\u00ebn by bringing new much-needed funds, as well as by renegotiating its debt\u2014for example, by buying out the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de Vente des Automobiles Citro\u00ebn (SOVAC). It went even further by entering in its capital and being represented on the board; the three directors sent by Lazard were Raymond Philippe, Andre Meyer and Paul Frantzen. Andr\u00e9 Citro\u00ebn perceived the need to differentiate his product, to avoid the low price competition surrounding his conventional rear drive models in the late 1920s and early 1930s. In 1933 he introduced the Rosalie, the first commercially available passenger car with a diesel engine, developed with Harry Ricardo.\nTraction Avant and Michelin ownership.\nTraction Avant.\nThe Traction Avant is a car that pioneered the mass production of three revolutionary features that are still in use today: a unitary body with no separate frame, four wheel independent suspension and front-wheel drive. Whereas for many decades, the vast majority of motor cars were similar in conception to the Ford Model T \u2013 a body bolted onto a ladder frame which held all the mechanical elements of the car, a solid rear axle that rigidly connected the rear wheels and rear wheel drive. The \"Model T school\" of automobile engineering proved popular because it was considered cheap to build, although it did pose dynamic defects as automobiles were becoming more capable, and resulted in heavier cars, which is why today cars are more like the Traction Avant than the Model T under the skin.\nIn 1934 Citro\u00ebn commissioned the American Budd Company to create a prototype, which evolved into the 7 fiscal horsepower (CV), Traction Avant.\nAchieving quick development of the Traction Avant, tearing down and rebuilding the factory (in five months) and the extensive marketing efforts, were investments that resulted too costly for Citro\u00ebn to do all at once, causing the financial ruin of the company. In December 1934, despite the assistance of the Michelin company, Citro\u00ebn filed for bankruptcy. Within the month, Michelin, already the car manufacturer's largest creditor, became its principal shareholder. However, the technologically advanced Traction Avant had met with market acceptance, and the basic philosophy of cutting-edge technology used as a differentiator, continued until the late 1990s. Pierre Michelin became the chairman of Citro\u00ebn early in 1935. Pierre-Jules Boulanger, his deputy, became the vice-president and chief of the engineering and design departments. In 1935, the founder Andr\u00e9 Citro\u00ebn died from stomach cancer.\nResearch breakthroughs.\nPierre-Jules Boulanger had been a First World War air reconnaissance photography specialist with the French Air Force; he was capable and efficient and finished the war with the rank of captain. He was also courageous, having been decorated with the Military Cross and the Legion of Honour. He started working for Michelin in 1918, reporting directly to \u00c9douard Michelin, co-director and founder of the business. Boulanger joined the Michelin board in 1922 and became president of Citro\u00ebn in January 1938 after the death in a road accident of his friend Pierre Michelin remaining in this position until his own death in 1950. In 1938, he also had become Michelin's joint managing director.\nDuring the German occupation of France in World War II Boulanger refused to meet Dr. Ferdinand Porsche or communicate with the German authorities except through intermediaries. He organized a \"go slow\" on production of trucks for the Wehrmacht, many of which were sabotaged at the factory by putting the notch on the oil dipstick in the wrong place, which resulted in engine seizure. In 1944 when the Gestapo headquarters in Paris was sacked by the French Resistance, his name was prominent on a Nazi blacklist of the most important enemies of the Reich, to be arrested in the event of an allied invasion of France.\nCitro\u00ebn researchers, including Paul Mag\u00e8s, continued their work in secret, against the express orders of the Germans, and developed the concepts that were later brought to market in three remarkable vehicles \u2013 a small car (2CV), a delivery van (Type H) and a large, swift family car (DS). These were widely regarded by contemporary journalists as avant garde, even radical, solutions to automotive design.\nThus began a decades-long period of unusual brand loyalty, normally seen in the automobile industry only in niche brands, like Porsche and Ferrari.\n2CV.\nCitro\u00ebn unveiled the Citro\u00ebn 2CV or \"Deux Chevaux\" signifying two tax horsepower and initially only , at the Paris Salon in 1948. The car became a bestseller, achieving the designer's aim of providing rural French people with a motorized alternative to the horse. It was unusually inexpensive to purchase and, with its small two cylinder engine, inexpensive to run as well. The 2CV pioneered a very soft, interconnected suspension, but did not have the more complex self-levelling feature. This car remained in production, with only minor changes, until 1990 and was a common sight on French roads until recently; 9 million 2CV variants were produced in the period 1948\u20131990.\nDS.\n1955 saw the introduction of the DS, the first full usage of Citro\u00ebn's hydropneumatic self-levelling suspension system, tested on the rear suspension of the Traction in 1954. The DS was also the first production car with modern disc brakes.\nA single high-pressure hydraulic system was used to actuate the power steering, the suspension and brakes; the brakes were fully powered, not power assisted, as pedal force was not a component of braking power.\nThe gearshift, (semi-automatic transmission) was also powered by the hydraulic system through a control valve, with actuating pistons in the gearbox cover to shift the gears in the transmission, and the clutch was operated automatically by the system, so there was no clutch pedal. From 1957 the ID19 model offered a simplified hydraulic system, with manual steering and conventional manual gearshift, and a significant price reduction.\nFrom 1968, with revised front end style, the DS also introduced auxiliary driving lights, that moved directionally with the steering, improving visibility at night.\nProduction from 1956 to 1975 totalled almost 1.5 million cars.\nThe streamlined car was remarkable for its era and had a remarkable sounding name \u2013 in French, \"DS\" is pronounced , which sounds the same as , which means \"Goddess\". It placed third in the 1999 Car of the Century competition.\nHigh pressure hydraulics.\nThis high-pressure hydraulic system would form the basis of over 9 million Citro\u00ebn cars, including the DS, SM, GS, CX, BX, XM, Xantia, C5, and C6. Self-levelling suspension is the principal user benefit: the car maintains a constant ride height above the road, regardless of passenger and cargo load and despite the very soft suspension. Hydropneumatic suspension is uniquely able to absorb road irregularities without disturbing the occupants and is often compared to riding on a \"magic carpet\" for this reason.\nThese vehicles shared the distinguishing feature of rising to operating ride height when the engine was turned on, like a \"mechanical camel\" (per \"Car &amp; Driver\" magazine). A lever ( later replaced by an electronic switch ) beside the driver's seat allowed the driver to adjust the height of the car; this height adjustability allows for the clearing of obstacles, fording shallow (slow-moving) streams and changing tyres.\nSince Citro\u00ebn was underfunded, its vehicles had the tendency to be underdeveloped at launch, with limited distribution and service networks outside France. \nConsequently, the early DS models experienced teething issues with the complex hydraulic system. Eventually, the hydraulic seals and system component design were sorted, becoming reliable.\nLicensing such a technological leap forward was pursued to a limited extent: in 1965 the Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow used this type of suspension, while the 1963 Mercedes-Benz 600 and Mercedes-Benz 300SEL 6.3 tried to replicate its advantages with a costly, complex and expensive to maintain, air suspension, that avoided the Citro\u00ebn-patented technology. By 1975, the Mercedes-Benz 450SEL 6.9 was finally produced with this proven system and Mercedes-Benz continues to offer variations on this technology today.\nDuring Citro\u00ebn's 1968\u20131975 venture with Maserati, the Citro\u00ebn high-pressure hydraulic system was used on several Maserati models : for power clutch operation (Bora); power pedal adjustment (Bora); pop-up headlights (Bora, Merak); brakes (Bora, Merak, Khamsin); steering (Khamsin) and the entire Quattroporte II prototype, which was a four-door Citro\u00ebn SM under the skin.\nAerodynamic pioneer.\nCitro\u00ebn was one of the early pioneers of the now-widespread trend of aerodynamic automobile design, which helps to reduce fuel consumption and to improve high-speed performance, by reducing wind resistance. The DS could happily cruise at without any discomfort for the occupants. The firm began using a wind tunnel in the 1950s, helping them to create highly streamlined cars, like the DS, that were years ahead of their competitors, and so good were the aerodynamics of the CX model, that it took its name \u2013 formula_1 \u2013 from the mathematical term used to measure the drag coefficient.\nExpansion and financial challenges.\nIn the 1960s, Citro\u00ebn undertook a series of financial and development decisions, aiming to build on its strength of the 1950s with the successful 2CV, Type H, and DS models. Nevertheless, these maneuvers were insufficiently effective, and Citro\u00ebn went bankrupt again in 1974.\nThese measures were to address two key gaps facing the company:\nThese steps include:\nThe teams of Charles Marchetti and Citro\u00ebn began working together on the development of the RE-2 helicopter.\nFrom a model range perspective, the 1970s started well, supported by the successful launch of the long-awaited mid-size Citro\u00ebn GS, finally filling the huge gap between the 2CV and the DS \u2013 with a 1-litre, hydropneumatically suspended car. The GS went on to sell 2.5 million units; 601,918 cars were produced in 1972 alone, up from the 526,443 of 1971, and enough to lift the company past Peugeot into second place among French auto makers when ranked by sales volume. The older models continued to sell well: the peak production period of the DS was 1970, and 2CV was in 1974.\nAs the 1970s progressed, circumstances became more unfavourable. In 1973, Fiat sold back to Michelin its 49% stake in the \"PARDEVI\" holding company that owned Citro\u00ebn, the Citro\u00ebn and Fiat joint announcement indicated that the benefits foreseen for their union in 1968 had failed to materialise. This was not in line with the tyre company's long-term strategy of ending involvements in the car manufacturing business and created a very unstable ownership situation. The company suffered another financial blow with the 1973 energy crisis. The gamble on Comotor and Maserati showed that there was a serious flaw with the plan particularly for companies producing engines with high fuel consumption.\nIn 1974, the carmaker withdrew from North America due to U.S. design regulations that outlawed core features of Citro\u00ebn cars (see Citro\u00ebn SM).\nHuge losses at Citro\u00ebn were caused by the failure of the Comotor rotary engine venture added to the strategic management error of going the from 1955 to 1970 without a model in the profitable middle range of the European market, plus the massive development costs a string of new models: the GS, GS Birotor, CX, SM, Maserati Bora, Maserati Merak, Maserati Quattroporte II, and Maserati Khamsin. Each of these models is a technological marvel in its own right.\nThus, forty years after the bankruptcy related to the Traction Avant, Citro\u00ebn went bankrupt again, losing its existence as an independent entity; selling Berliet and Maserati and closing Comotor.\nPSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn era.\nFearing large job losses due to the poor cash flow situation and the unstable ownership structure, the French government arranged talks between Citro\u00ebn and Michelin culminating in the merger of Automobiles Citro\u00ebn and Automobiles Peugeot into a single company. Thus, one year after the break with Fiat, on 24 June 1974 Citro\u00ebn announced the new partnership, this time with Peugeot. to whom Michelin agreed to transfer control of the business.\nIn December 1974 Peugeot S.A. acquired a 38.2% share of Citro\u00ebn and on 9 April 1976 it increased its stake of the then bankrupt company to 89.95%, thus creating the \"PSA Group\" (where PSA is short for Peugeot Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Anonyme), becoming PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn.\nIn May 1975 Maserati was sold to De Tomaso and the new Italian owner was thereby able to exploit the sales potential of the models and technology developed by Citro\u00ebn, as well as to utilise the image of the Maserati brand in a downward brand extension to sell 40,000 of the newly designed Bi-Turbo models. The truck manufacturing company Berliet was sold to Renault.\nThis new PSA venture was a financial success from 1976 to 1979. Citro\u00ebn had two successful new designs in the market, the GS and CX. In the wake of the oil crisis, the brand also had resurgent sales for the 2CV and the Dyane, and soon the Peugeot 104 based Citro\u00ebn Visa and Citro\u00ebn LNA. Peugeot was typically prudent with its own finances. Then, PSA purchased the ageing assets and substantial liabilities of Chrysler Europe for $1, leading to losses from 1980 to 1985. PSA resurrected the Talbot name for the Chrysler cars, but stopped producing cars with the badge in 1987 as the cars were considered unreliable and poorly-made.\nAt the 2019 Geneva International Motor Show, the manufacturer presented the Ami One concept car to celebrate its 100th anniversary. Then, in May 2019, it unveiled the Citro\u00ebn 19_19 Concept at the Viva Technology show in Paris.\nConflict with the trade unions.\nIn the early 1980s, Citro\u00ebn was targeted by union action. On 25 May 1982, events led to a mass demonstration in the streets of Paris, when approximately 27,000 workers affirmed their wish to work at a company, which was being picketed by striking workers who had been blocking access to the factories for four weeks. The demonstration was successful and six days later work at the plants resumed. Jacques Lombard, one of the company's senior managers, had gone public with his concerns, criticising the strikes.\nChanging design language.\nPSA gradually diluted Citro\u00ebn's ambitious, highly individualistic, and distinctive approach to engineering and styling. All through the 1980s, Citro\u00ebn models became increasingly Peugeot-like. The 1982 BX used the hydropneumatic suspension system and had a typical \"Citro\u00ebnesque\" appearance, whilst being powered by Peugeot-derived engines and using the floorpan later seen on the Peugeot 405. In this respect PSA followed the worldwide motor industry trend of platform sharing which is a logical way to reduce costs whilst selling apparently different models. By the late 1980s, many of the distinctive features of the brand had been removed or altered. Peugeot's conventional switchgear replaced Citro\u00ebn's quirky but ergonomic \"Lunule\" designs, complete with self-cancelling indicators that Citro\u00ebn had refused to adopt on ergonomic grounds. The cars were \"more banal and conventional\", but also able to break into new markets, like fleet vehicles in the UK.\nGeographic expansion.\nIn the meantime Citro\u00ebn expanded into many new global markets. Beyond existing manufacturing plants in Argentina, Chile, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia, it added Iran, Greece, Romania, and China.\nIn the late 1970s, the firm developed a small car for production in Romania known as the Oltcit, which it sold in Western Europe as the Citro\u00ebn Axel. That joint venture has now ended, but a new one between PSA and Toyota is now producing cars like the Citro\u00ebn C1 in the Czech Republic.\nThe China joint venture began selling cars in 1984 and building them in 1994. The range of family cars there included the C3 and Xsara and locally designed cars like the Fukang and Elys\u00e9e models. By 2014 the brand had increased its Chinese sales by 30%, amid overall market growth of 11%, and ranked highest in China's 2014 JD Power satisfaction survey.\nCitro\u00ebn is a global brand, except in North America, where the company has not returned since the SM was effectively banned in 1974 for not meeting U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) bumper height regulations.\nIn 2015, the Spanish National Commission on Markets and Competition fined Autom\u00f3viles Citro\u00ebn Espa\u00f1a, S.A with over 14 million euros because it operated a cartel with other car builders and sellers controlling 91% of the Spanish market between 2006 and 2013.\nThey shared information about sales and repairs anti-competitively.\nIn 2016, Peugeot\u2013Citro\u00ebn South Africa (PCSA) announced that it was going to stop importing new Citro\u00ebn models into South Africa in order to focus on increasing Peugeot's sales in the country. In May 2019, it was reported that PCSA would re-introduce the Citro\u00ebn brand into South Africa, this was later confirmed by PCSA, in August 2019, that new Citro\u00ebn models will go on sale in the middle of October 2019.\nRecent decades.\nFrom 2003 to 2010, Citro\u00ebn produced the C3 Pluriel, an unusual convertible with allusions to the 1948\u20131990 2CV model, both in body style (such as the bonnet) and in its all-round practicality.\nIn 2001 it celebrated its history of innovation when it opened a museum of its many significant vehicles: the Conservatoire with 300 cars.\nIn line with the severe decline in European car sales after 2009, worldwide sales of vehicles declined from 1,460,373 in 2010 to 1,435,688 in 2011, with 961,156 of these sold in Europe.\nIn 2011, the PSA Group was close to forming a partnership with BMW, for the development of electric and hybrid vehicles, but the talks fell through, shortly after Groupe PSA, Citro\u00ebn's parent company, had announced a partnership with GM, which later also failed.\nDongfeng Peugeot-Citro\u00ebn continues growing, and has developed eight new car designs exclusively for the China market. By 2016 Citro\u00ebn (and Peugeot) faced the same challenge as Volkswagen in China: there were too many sedans and hatchbacks, but not enough models in the strong selling SUV and minivan/MPV categories.\nThe brand ranked highest in the 2014 customer satisfaction survey by JD Power in China, above luxury brands like Mercedes-Benz and BMW, and above mass market brands, like Volkswagen, ranking only thirteenth and seventeenth respectively. In the first ten months of 2014 in China, the sales of Dongfeng Citro\u00ebn cars increased by 30% in an overall market growth of 11%.\nDespite the near-death financial experience of PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn in 2014, and financial rescue by Dongfeng Motors, the Citro\u00ebn and DS brands worked to develop new technologies with the hope to grow 15% by 2020, according to Citro\u00ebn CEO Linda Jackson and DS CEO Yves Bonnefont. In the end sales of the Citro\u00ebn and DS brands in Europe and China fell by 22% by 2019, and fell even further during the 2020 COVID outbreak.\nIn January 2020, Linda Jackson was succeeded as CEO of Citro\u00ebn by the deputy CEO Vincent Cob\u00e9e, and she would instead \"lead a study to clarify and support brand differentiation within a brand portfolio\".\nCitro\u00ebn entered the Indian market in early 2021 with the launch of the C5 Aircross SUV manufactured at the Hindustan Motors Thiruvallur plant in Tamil Nadu, India.\nDS brand.\nIn early 2009, Citro\u00ebn announced the development of the premium brand DS, for Different Spirit or Distinctive Series (although the reference to the historical Citro\u00ebn DS is evident), to run in parallel to its mainstream cars. The slogan of the DS car marque is \"Spirit of avant-garde\".\nThis new series of cars started early in 2010, with the DS3, a small car based on the floorpan of the new C3. The DS3 is based on the concept that preceded the C3 Pluriel production model and the Citro\u00ebn DS Inside concept car. The DS3 is customisable with various roof colours contrasting with the body panels; it was named 2010 \"Car of the Year\" by \"Top Gear Magazine\", and was awarded best supermini four times in a row by the JD Power Satisfaction Survey UK and second most efficient supermini (Citro\u00ebn DS3 1.6 e-HDi 115 Airdream : True MPG 63.0mpg) by \"What car ?\" behind the C3. In 2013 the DS3 was again the best-selling premium subcompact car, with 40% of the European market share, validating the business model of this product development.\nThe DS series is deeply connected to Citro\u00ebn, as the DS4 launched in 2010, is based on the 2008 Citro\u00ebn Hypnos concept car and the DS5, which followed in 2015 being based on the 2005 C-SportLounge concept car.\nThe rear badge is a new DS logo rather than the familiar Citro\u00ebn double chevron and all will have markedly different styling from their equivalent sister cars. Citro\u00ebn has produced several dramatic looking concept sports cars of late, with the fully working Citro\u00ebn Survolt being badged as a DS. Indeed, the 2014 DS Divine concept car develops the Citro\u00ebn Survolt prototype as the future sport coup\u00e9 of the DS range.\nIn China, Citro\u00ebn has standalone DS showrooms, as well as entire plants built specifically for the production of these vehicles. Since 2014 Citro\u00ebn has sold the Chinese-built DS 5LS and DS 6WR in China.\nList of CEOs.\n\"Current\": Xavier Chardon (since May 2025)\nAdvertising.\nCitro\u00ebn was the first to write in the sky with an airplane. On 4 October 1922, during the opening of the Auto Show, a plane traced the word \"Citro\u00ebn\" in smoke letters across the Paris sky.\nThe firm also contracted Jean Giraud to launch a promotion comic strip for its sales force, several years before 1987. \nAwards.\nCitro\u00ebn was recognised in the 1999 Car of the Century competition as producing the third most influential car of the 20th century, the Citro\u00ebn DS, behind the Ford Model T and BMC Mini.\nCitro\u00ebn has produced three winners of the 50-year-old European Car of the Year award, and many rated second or third place.\nCitro\u00ebn has produced one winner of the United States \"Motor Trend\" Car of the Year award \u2013 the original Car of the Year designation, which began in 1949. This was especially significant because this award used to be only given to cars designed and built in the United States.\nCitro\u00ebn has produced eight \"Auto Europa\" winners in 28 years, since 1987. \"Auto Europa\" is the prize awarded by the jury of the Italian Union of Automotive Journalists (UIGA), which annually celebrates the best car produced at least at 10,000 units in the 27 countries of the European Union: Citro\u00ebn XM (1990), Citro\u00ebn ZX (1992), Citro\u00ebn Xantia (1994), Citro\u00ebn Xsara Picasso (2001), Citro\u00ebn C5 (2002), Citro\u00ebn C3 (2003), Citro\u00ebn C4 (2005) and Citro\u00ebn DS4 (2012).\nIn 2023, Citro\u00ebn won the 'Sustainability Initiative Award' of the year at the Auto Trader New Cars Awards 2023.\nMotorsport.\nCitro\u00ebn Racing, previously known as Citro\u00ebn Sport and before that as Citro\u00ebn Competitions, is the division responsible for Citro\u00ebn's own sporting activities. It is a successful winning competitor in the World Rally Championship and in the World Touring Car Championship. \nIn 2019, Citro\u00ebn announced its withdrawal from the World Rally Championship (WRC).\nEarly rally wins for Citro\u00ebn vehicles.\nCitro\u00ebn vehicles were entered in endurance rally driving events beginning in 1956, with the introduction of the DS. The brand was successful and won many key events over a decades long period, with what was essentially the same production car design.\nRacing the 2CV.\nCitro\u00ebn discovered that while racing the uniquely slow 2CV against other cars made little sense, they could be interesting to watch racing against each other. Citro\u00ebn Competitions sponsored three long distance competitions \u2013 Paris-Kaboul-Paris in 1970, Paris-Persepolis-Paris in 1972, and Raid Afrique in 1973.\nEnthusiasts carried on the tradition with \"2CV Cross\" \u2013 a group of 2CV's racing around a dirt track \u2013 a sport that continues today.\nRebuilding the competition group.\nThe Citro\u00ebn Competitions division was impacted negatively by the firm's 1974 bankruptcy.\nCompetitive rallying was also changing \u2013 away from standard production cars to specially developed low volume models. In response to the entry of the competitive short wheel base Group B 4 wheel drive Audi Quattro into rallying, Citro\u00ebn developed the heavily modified Group B Citro\u00ebn BX 4TC in 1986.\nThe team returned successfully with the Citro\u00ebn ZX Rally Raid to win the Rally Raid Manufacturer's Championship five times (1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997) with Pierre Lartigue and Ari Vatanen. Citro\u00ebn Racing won the Dakar Rally four times, in 1991, continuing the serial of four victories of Peugeot sport, and then again in 1994, 1995, and 1996.\nFrom 2001, the Citro\u00ebn Racing team returned successfully to the World Rally Championship, winning eight times the Manufacturer's Title, continuing the serial of three WRC Championships victories of Peugeot sport, in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012. The Citro\u00ebn WRC Team pilot S\u00e9bastien Loeb also won nine Drivers' Championships. In 2004, 2005, and 2006, the French pilot won the Drivers' Championship, driving the Citro\u00ebn Xsara WRC, in 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 with the Citro\u00ebn C4 WRC, and in 2011 and 2012 with the new Citro\u00ebn DS3 WRC.\nThe Citro\u00ebn World Rally Team has a record of 97 victories in the World Rally Championship.\nNew competition division for touring cars.\nIn 2012, Citro\u00ebn announced plans to enter the World Touring Car Championship. The team transformed a DS3 WRC into a laboratory vehicle to help with early development, while the engine was an evolution of their WRC engine which had been used in the WRC since 2011. Citro\u00ebn started developing the car for the new TC1 regulations, which were brought forward a year early in 2014 to expedite the entry of Citro\u00ebn into the championship. The introduction of the new regulations a year earlier than planned gave a seven-month development headstart to Citro\u00ebn over the other manufacturers. This large development advantage combined with a big budget and a strong driver line-up made Citro\u00ebn the clear favourite going into the first season of the new regulations in 2014. Citro\u00ebn would go on to win most of the races that season as well as the manufacturers' title, while Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda L\u00f3pez won the drivers' title. The team would repeat this feat in 2015 and 2016, before the factory team left the series at the end of 2016. A number of Citro\u00ebns were still raced by other teams in 2017, but were outpaced by the Hondas and the Volvos.\nFormula E.\nOn 12/09/2025 Citro\u00ebn announced its return to the international scene at the highest level by entering the Formula E championship from the 2025/26 season\nConcept cars.\nCitro\u00ebn has produced numerous concept cars over the decades, previewing future design trends or technologies. Notable concepts include the Citro\u00ebn Karin (1980), Citro\u00ebn Activa (1988), Citro\u00ebn C-M\u00e9tisse (2006), GT by Citro\u00ebn (2008) and Citro\u00ebn Survolt (2010).\nLogo.\nThe origin of the logo may be traced back to a trip made by the 22-year-old Andr\u00e9 Citro\u00ebn to the city of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a in Poland, where he discovered an innovative design for a chevron-shaped gear used in milling. He bought the patent for its application in steel. Mechanically a gear with helical teeth produces an axial force. By adding a second helical gear in opposition, this force is cancelled. The two chevrons of the logo represent the intermeshing contact of the two. Early Citro\u00ebn cars used a herringbone bevel gear final drive in the rear axle.\nThe presentation of the logo has evolved over time. Before the war, it was rendered in yellow on a blue background. After the war, the chevrons became more subtle herringbones, usually on a white background. With the company searching for a new image during the 1980s, the logo became white on red to give an impression of dynamism.\nOn 5 February 2009, Citro\u00ebn launched a new brand identity to celebrate its 90th anniversary, replacing the 1985 design. The new logo was a 3D metallic variation of the double chevron logo accompanied by a new font for the Citro\u00ebn name and the new slogan \"Cr\u00e9ative Technologie\". A TV campaign reminiscing over of Citro\u00ebn was commissioned to announce the new identity to the public. In October 2016, Citro\u00ebn released an alternative version of its logo in 2D, adopting the flat design style, which was very popular at the time. In 2022, the brand unveiled a new badge design which is a modern-day representation of its original 1919 logo, returning the oval shape to the two chevrons.\nLogo evolution.\nCitro\u00ebn logos through the history: \nFactories.\nSome joint venture models are manufactured in third party or joint venture factories, including the following:\nInternational markets.\nAustralia.\nHaving been present in Australia since 1923, Citro\u00ebn has been the country's longest continuously-running car manufacturer. However, the brand announced in August 2024 that it would stop taking orders in Australia by 1 November 2024 due to slow sales.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51312", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51312", "title": "Kinship and descent", "text": ""}
{"id": "51314", "revid": "1319207023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51314", "title": "History of Antarctica", "text": "The history of Antarctica emerges from early Western theories of a vast continent, known as Terra Australis, believed to exist in the far south of the globe. The term \"Antarctic\", referring to the opposite of the Arctic Circle, was coined by Marinus of Tyre in the 2nd century AD.\nThe rounding of the Cape of Good Hope and Cape Horn in the 15th and 16th centuries proved that \"Terra Australis Incognita\" (\"Unknown Southern Land\"), if it existed, was a continent in its own right. In 1773, James Cook and his crew crossed the Antarctic Circle for the first time. Although he discovered new islands, he did not sight the continent itself. It is believed that he came as close as 240\u00a0km (150\u00a0mi) from the mainland.\nOn 28 January 1820, a Russian expedition led by Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev reached 69\u00b0 21\u2032 south latitude, 2\u00b0\u00a015\u2032 west longitude, and on 2 February, 66\u00b0 25\u2032 south latitude, 1\u00b0 11\u2032 west longitude, at both of which positions he was stopped by the pack. He then steered eastward, and on 17 February reached 69\u00b0 6\u2032 south latitude, and on the 19th, 68\u00b0 5\u2032 south latitude, 16\u00b0 37\u2032 east longitude. Later, he reached 66\u00b0\u00a053\u2032 south latitude, 40\u00b0\u00a056\u2032 east longitude, where he thought land must be near, on account of the numbers of birds. Ten months later an American sealer, Nathaniel Palmer, became the first to sight Antarctica on 17 November 1820. The first landing was most likely just over a year later when English-born American Captain John Davis, a sealer, set foot on the ice.\nSeveral expeditions attempted to reach the South Pole in the early 20th century, during the \"Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration\". Many resulted in injury and death. Norwegian Roald Amundsen finally reached the Pole on 14 December 1911, following a dramatic race with the Briton Robert Falcon Scott.\nEarly exploration.\nPolynesian Travel Claims.\nSome authors have suggested that a figure in Polynesians oral tradition from Rarotonga, Hui Te Rangiora (also known as 'Ui Te Rangiora) and his crew explored Antarctic waters in the early seventh century on the vessel \"Te Ivi o Atea\". Accounts name the area \"Te tai-uka-a-pia\", which literally means 'powdered pia', but in some interpretations it may refer to snow or ice due to the lack of a word for these phenomena in Polynesian languages. However, this interpretation of the original account is disputed by Te Rangi H\u012broa (Sir Peter Henry Buck) who lists evidence for his belief that 'later historians embellished the tales by adding details learned from European whalers and teachers'. This interpretation of oral history and the probability of such a voyage have likewise been dismissed more recently by Ng\u0101i Tahu scholars, who agree that 'it is very unlikely that M\u0101ori or other Polynesian voyaging reached the Antarctic'.\nThe search for \"Terra Australis Incognita\".\nAristotle speculated, \"Now since there must be a region bearing the same relation to the southern pole as the place we live in bears to our pole...\".\nIt was not until Prince Henry the Navigator began in 1418 to encourage the penetration of the torrid zone in the effort to reach India by circumnavigating Africa that European exploration of the southern hemisphere began. In 1473, Portuguese navigator Lopes Gon\u00e7alves proved that the equator could be crossed, and cartographers and sailors began to assume the existence of another, temperate continent to the south of the known world.\nThe doubling of the Cape of Good Hope in 1487 by Bartolomeu Dias first brought explorers within touch of the Antarctic cold, and proved that there was an ocean separating Africa from any Antarctic land that might exist.\nFerdinand Magellan, who passed through the Straits of Magellan in 1520, assumed that the islands of Tierra del Fuego to the south were an extension of this unknown southern land, and it appeared as such on a map by Ortelius: \"Terra australis recenter inventa sed nondum plene cognita\" (\"Southern land recently discovered but not yet fully known\").\nIn 1539, the King of Spain, Charles V, created the Governorate of Terra Australis granted to Pedro Sancho de la Hoz, who in 1540 transferred the title to the conqueror Pedro de Valdivia and later was incorporated to Chile.\nEuropean geographers connected the coast of Tierra del Fuego with the coast of New Guinea on their globes, and allowing their imaginations to run riot in the vast unknown spaces of the south Atlantic, south Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean, they sketched the outlines of the \"Terra Australis Incognita\" (\"Unknown Southern Land\"), a vast continent stretching in parts into the tropics. The search for this great south land or Third World was a leading motive of explorers in the 16th and the early part of the 17th centuries.\nIn 1599, according to the account of Jacob Le Maire, the blown off course Dutch Dirck Gerritsz Pomp observed mountainous land at latitude (64\u00b0). If so, these were the South Shetland Islands, and possibly the first European sighting of Antarctica (or offshore-lying islands belonging to it). Other accounts, however, do not note this observation, casting doubt on their accuracy. A similar incident happened to the Spaniard Gabriel de Castilla claimed to have sighted \"snow-covered mountains\" beyond the 64\u00b0 S in 1603. Both of these potential discoveries had no consequences. Before the construction of the Panama Canal, the passages around Tierra del Fuego, notorious for their harsh weather, served as the primary route between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Many ships navigating this route reported drifting off course beyond the 60th parallel, yet no land was ever sighted.\nQuir\u00f3s, in 1606, took possession for the king of Spain all of the lands he had discovered in Australia del Espiritu Santo (the New Hebrides) and those he would discover \"even to the Pole\".\nFrancis Drake, like Spanish explorers before him, had speculated that there might be an open channel south of Tierra del Fuego. Indeed, when Schouten and Le Maire discovered the southern extremity of Tierra del Fuego and named it Cape Horn in 1615, they proved that the Tierra del Fuego archipelago was of small extent and not connected to the southern land.\nFinally, in 1642, Tasman showed that even New Holland was separated by sea from any continuous southern continent. Voyagers round the Horn frequently met with contrary winds and were driven southward into snowy skies and ice-encumbered seas; but, so far as can be ascertained, none of them before 1770 reached the Antarctic Circle, or knew it, if they did.\nThe Dutch expedition to Valdivia of 1643 intended to round Cape Horn sailing through Le Maire Strait but strong winds made it instead drift south and east. Northerly winds pushed the expedition as far south as 61\u00b059 S where icebergs were abundant before a southerly wind that begun on April 7 allowed the fleet to advance west. The small fleet led by Hendrik Brouwer managed to enter the Pacific Ocean sailing south of Isla de los Estados disproving earlier beliefs that it was part of Terra Australis.\nSouth of the Antarctic Convergence.\nThe visit to South Georgia by the English merchant Anthony de la Roch\u00e9 in 1675 was the first ever discovery of land south of the Antarctic Convergence. Soon after the voyage cartographers started to depict 'Roch\u00e9 Island', honouring the discoverer.\nJames Cook was aware of La Roch\u00e9's discovery when surveying and mapping the island in 1775.\nEdmond Halley's voyage in HMS \"Paramour\" for magnetic investigations in the South Atlantic met the pack ice in 52\u00b0\u00a0S in January 1700, but that latitude (he reached off the north coast of South Georgia) was his farthest south. A determined effort on the part of the French naval officer Jean-Baptiste Charles Bouvet de Lozier to discover the \"South Land\" \u2013 described by a half legendary \"sieur de Gonneyville\" \u2013 resulted in the discovery of Bouvet Island in 54\u00b010\u2032\u00a0S, and in the navigation of 48\u00b0 of longitude of ice-cumbered sea nearly in 55\u00b0\u00a0S in 1739.\nIn 1771, Yves Joseph Kerguelen sailed from France with instructions to proceed south from Mauritius in search of \"a very large continent.\" He lighted upon a land in 50\u00b0\u00a0S which he called South France, and believed to be the central mass of the southern continent. He was sent out again to complete the exploration of the new land, and found it to be only an inhospitable island which he renamed the Isle of Desolation, but which was ultimately named after him.\nThe Antarctic Circle.\nThe obsession of the undiscovered continent culminated in the brain of Alexander Dalrymple, the brilliant and erratic hydrographer who was nominated by the Royal Society to command the Transit of Venus expedition to Tahiti in 1769. The command of the expedition was given by the admiralty to Captain James Cook. Sailing in 1772 with the \"Resolution\", a vessel of 462 tons under his own command and the \"Adventure\" of 336 tons under Captain Tobias Furneaux, Cook first searched in vain for Bouvet Island, then sailed for 20 degrees of longitude to the westward in latitude 58\u00b0\u00a0S, and then 30\u00b0 eastward for the most part south of 60\u00b0\u00a0S, a higher southern latitude than had ever been voluntarily entered before by any vessel. On 17 January 1773 the Antarctic Circle was crossed for the first time in history and the two ships reached 67\u00b0 15' S by 39\u00b0 35' E, where their course was stopped by ice.\nCook then turned northward to look for French Southern and Antarctic Lands, of the discovery of which he had received news at Cape Town, but from the rough determination of his longitude by Kerguelen, Cook reached the assigned latitude 10\u00b0 too far east and did not see it. He turned south again and was stopped by ice in 61\u00b0 52\u2032 S by 95\u00b0\u00a0E and continued eastward nearly on the parallel of 60\u00b0\u00a0S to 147\u00b0\u00a0E. On 16 March, the approaching winter drove him northward for rest to New Zealand and the tropical islands of the Pacific. In November 1773, Cook left New Zealand, having parted company with the \"Adventure\", and reached 60\u00b0\u00a0S by 177\u00b0\u00a0W, whence he sailed eastward keeping as far south as the floating ice allowed. The Antarctic Circle was crossed on 20 December and Cook remained south of it for three days, being compelled after reaching 67\u00b0 31\u2032 S to stand north again in 135\u00b0\u00a0W.\nA long detour to 47\u00b0 50\u2032 S served to show that there was no land connection between New Zealand and Tierra del Fuego. Turning south again, Cook crossed the Antarctic Circle for the third time at 109\u00b0 30\u2032 W before his progress was once again blocked by ice four days later at 71\u00b0 10\u2032 S by 106\u00b0 54\u2032 W. This point, reached on 30 January 1774, was the farthest south attained in the 18th century. With a great detour to the east, almost to the coast of South America, the expedition regained Tahiti for refreshment. In November 1774, Cook started from New Zealand and crossed the South Pacific without sighting land between 53\u00b0 and 57\u00b0\u00a0S to Tierra del Fuego; then, passing Cape Horn on 29 December, he rediscovered Roch\u00e9 Island renaming it Isle of Georgia, and discovered the South Sandwich Islands (named \"Sandwich Land\" by him), the only ice-clad land he had seen, before crossing the South Atlantic to the Cape of Good Hope between 55\u00b0 and 60\u00b0. He thereby laid open the way for future Antarctic exploration by exploding the myth of a habitable southern continent. Cook's most southerly discovery of land lay on the temperate side of the 60th parallel, and he convinced himself that if land lay farther south it was practically inaccessible and of no economic value.\nDiscovery of the South Shetland Islands (1819).\nThe first land south of the parallel 60\u00b0 south latitude was documented by captain of the cargo ship \"Williams\", Englishman William Smith, who sighted Livingston Island in the South Shetlands archipelago on 19 February 1819 but did not land on it. Smith was blown off course to the south while en route to Valparaiso. On reaching Valparaiso, Smith reported his discovery of the islands and the abundance of seals there, to Captain William Henry Shirreff, of , which had arrived there about 5 September 1818. Smith was unable to visit the islands again while his return to the Atlantic.\nIn October 1819, Smith revisited the South Shetlands, landing on King George Island on 16 October and claimed the new territories for Britain. On 24 November, \"Williams\" was back at Valparaiso from Monte Video. At the beginning of the following year, 1820, the Royal Navy chartered \"Williams\" and dispatched with her with Lieutenant Edward Bransfield on board to survey the newly discovered islands and formally claim them for Great Britain, because Smith was a civilian and his October declaration had no legal force.\nBefore Bransfield's expedition reached its destination, sealer and Smith's navigator from the previous expedition, Joseph Herring, landed on Rugged Island. The second confirmed ship present in the South Shetlands at this time was the American \"Hersilia\". The Americans learned of the new land from the crew of the \"Espirito Santo\", Joseph Herring's ship, that they met on the Falklands.\n\"San Telmo\".\nOn September 2, 1819, the Spanish ship \"San Telmo\" was lost in a storm in the Drake Passage. There were 644 people on board, including soldiers who were supposed to support Spanish forces in Peru. There is speculation that the ship may have sunk near the South Shetland Islands, and even left survivors there. On the Half Moon Beach next to the Doctor Guillermo Mann Base stands a plaque commemorating the sinking of the \"San Telmo\".\nIt is believed that William Smith found the remains of \"San Telmo\" on Livingston Island, but Smith himself never mentioned it and the information is second-hand. There is also uncertainty about where the wreck was actually discovered. Smith landed on Livingston Island only during his fifth voyage to the archipelago, after the expedition commanded by Bransfield. One possible explanation for this discrepancy is that Smith named a bay on King George Island 'Shirreff Bay,' but on a subsequent expedition, Bransfield did not confirm this name in the official records, as he had already named a location 'Cape Shirreff' on Livingston Island. There are doubts as to whether the modest remains were related to \"San Telmo\". During the first season at the turn of 1820 and 1821, four sealing ships were wrecked on the islands.\nFirst sighting of the continent (1820).\nThe first generally recognized sighting of the Antarctic continent was made at a point within of the Princess Martha Coast on 27 or 28 January 1820. The Russian expedition led by Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev, on the ships \"Vostok\" and \"Mirny\". The discovery was described with the problematic term \"matyoroy lyod\" () which can be translated as \"hard ice\".\nThe route of this expedition was eastward, as far south as the ice conditions permitted. Two more observations were made, and then, because of the approach of winter, they proceeded to Sydney. While in Australia, Bellingshausen wrote a report in which he stated that the southern continent probably did not exist, meaning that he did not consider the earlier observations to be a continent. When \"Vostok\" and \"Mirny\" returned to the Antarctic Circle the following summer, they continued eastward, discovering Peter I Island and Alexander I Island, although the latter was considered part of the Antarctic Peninsula until 1940. They then sailed north along the Antarctic Peninsula and reached the South Shetland Islands, where on 5 February 1821, near Deception Island, they encountered \"Hero\", commanded by Nathaniel Palmer, previously second mate of the \"Hersilia\".\nMeanwhile, on 30 January 1820, Edward Bransfield and William Smith sighted Trinity Peninsula, the northernmost point of the Antarctic mainland.\nEarly exploration.\nSealing expeditions.\nIn the years since the discovery of the South Shetland Islands, there have been many sealing expeditions to the area. Most of them have been poorly documented and non-scientific. In 1950s, the notes of John Davis, captain of \"Cecilia\", one of the ships present there, were discovered. Davis described in them the probably first landing on the continent, which was made by his crew on 7 February 1821.\nOf the sealers, the most creditable for the exploration of the coast was captain of \"Hero\", Nathaniel Palmer. The crew of \"Hero\" were the second in history to sight the Antarctic Peninsula, located between 55 and 80 degrees west. Along with English sealer George Powell, Palmer also co-discovered the nearby South Orkney Islands archipelago.\nIn 1823, James Weddell, a British sealer, sailed into what is now known as the Weddell Sea. Weddell found very favorable ice conditions there, which allowed him to set a record for the furthest south. Since no land was encountered during the entire voyage, Weddell assumed that the ocean extended to the pole and that there was no continent to the south, only an archipelago.\nA piece of wood, from the South Shetland Islands, was the first fossil ever recorded from Antarctica, obtained during a private United States expedition during 1829\u201331, commanded by Captain Benjamin Pendleton.\nAs the seal population declined, interest in the region waned. However, the search for new seal colonies led to isolated discoveries, such as the discovery of Enderby Land by John Biscoe in February 1831, discovery of Kemp Land by Peter Kemp in 1833 and discovery of Balleny Islands by John Balleny in 1839.\nState expeditions 1840.\nIn the late 1830s, interest in the far South increased again, resulting in the organisation of three national scientific expeditions during that period. At that time it was still unclear whether there was a continent there or just ice-bound islands.\nThe first to set off in 1837 was a French expedition led by naval officer Jules Dumont d'Urville. After reaching the Antarctic Circle, \"Astrolabe\" and \"Z\u00e9l\u00e9e\" sailed into the Weddel Sea where they failed to repeat Jemes Weddel's feat. At the turn of February and March 1838 the expedition was already in Bransfield Strait, where it had mapped part of the northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, which it named the Louis Philippe Land. In early 1840 a French expedition returned to the Antarctic Circle having sailed from Australia. The two ships reached the north-westernmost and highest islet of the rocky group of Dumoulin Islands, at 500\u2013600 m from the icy coast of the Astrolabe Glacier Tongue of the time, today about 4\u00a0km north from the glacier extremity near Cape G\u00e9od\u00e9sie, and hoisted the French tricolour. Dumont named the archipelago Pointe G\u00e9ologie and the land beyond, Ad\u00e9lie Land The map of the coast drawn under sail by the hydrographer Cl\u00e9ment Adrien Vincendon-Dumoulin is remarkably accurate given the means of the time.\nCharles Wilkes, as commander of a United States Navy expedition in 1840, discovered what is now known as Wilkes Land, a section of the continent around 120 degrees East.\nBoth expeditions operated in the same region and time, leading to disputed claims of priority of discovery. Dumont d'Urville reached the Adelie Land, on 21 or 22 January 1840. Wilkes, on the other hand, claimed to have discovered the same area, which he named \"Wilkes Land\", on 16 January 1840, from a greater distance. The differences in dates and the uncertainties regarding the exact locations of the discoveries led to a rivalry for prestige between France and the United States over who was to be the first to discover the Antarctic continent.\nAfter the North magnetic pole was located in 1831, explorers and scientists began looking for the South magnetic pole. One of the explorers, James Clark Ross, a British naval officer, identified its approximate location, but was unable to reach it on his 4 year-expedition from 1839 to 1843. Commanding the British ships \"Erebus\" and \"Terror\", he braved the pack ice and approached what is now known as the Ross Ice Shelf, a massive floating ice shelf over high. His expedition sailed eastward along the southern Antarctic coast discovering mountains which were since named after his ships: Mount Erebus, the most active volcano on Antarctica, and Mount Terror.\nThese explorers, despite their impressive contributions to South Polar exploration, were unable to penetrate the interior of the continent and, rather, formed a broken line of discovered lands along the coastline of Antarctica. Following the expedition south by the ships \"Erebus\" and \"Terror\", James Clark Ross (January, 1841) suggested that there were no scientific discoveries, or 'problems', worth exploration in the far South. What followed is what historian H.R. Mill called 'the age of averted interest' and in the following twenty years after Ross' return, there was a general lull internationally in Antarctic exploration.\nHistory of recognition of priority of discoveries.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, one of the commanders of the research expeditions from around 1840 was considered to be the discoverer of Antarctica. In Europe, Jules Dumont d'Urville was usually considered, while in America, Charles Wilkes. Wilkes's priority was challenged due to his changing the reported date of his first sighting of the continent twice. The first observation of the land by an American expedition took place on 16 January 1840, from the deck of the \"USS Peacock\" and was supposed to involve distant observation of Eld Peak and Reynolds Peak along the George V Coast. The prevailing view at the time was that the sighting of January 16 and the sighting of January 19 were fabrications, made after d'Urville announced his own sighting of the continent on the evening 19 January.\nIn the late 19th century, New Zealand anthropologist Percy Smith proposed a theory about a Polynesian explorer named Ui-te-Rangiora, who may have reached Antarctica or subantarctic islands.\nBy the early 20th century, efforts began to promote Nathaniel Palmer's 1820 expedition, which sighted the Antarctic Peninsula in November of that year.\nAt the 1925 the priority of Edward Bransfield's expedition, which had mapped the South Shetland Islands and sighted the Trinity Peninsula on 30 January 1820, began to be promoted in Britain.\nThe first Russian Antarctic Expedition remained largely forgotten until 10 February 1949, when Lev Berg, president of the Soviet Geographical Society, presented a report stating that Russian sailors had 'discovered Peter I Island, Alexander Island, Traversay Islands, and others in 1821.' This raised questions about the Russian and Soviet role in Antarctic exploration and the scientific research surrounding the discovery of the continent. Shortly thereafter, expedition documents were reexamined. Based on a letter written by Mikhail Lazarev to a friend after the expedition, it was concluded that an ice shelf, which Lazarev described as 'materyi led' (translated as 'hard ice'), was sighted on 28 January 1820. However, there is some uncertainty regarding Lazarev's accuracy in recalling the chronology of events.\nHeroic Age of Antarctic Exploration.\nThe first documented landing on the mainland of East Antarctica was at Victoria Land by the American sealer Mercator Cooper on 26 January 1853.\nThe Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration began at the end of the 19th century and closed with Ernest Shackleton's Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition in 1917.\nDuring this period the Antarctic continent became the focus of an international effort that resulted in intensive scientific and geographical exploration and in which 17 major Antarctic expeditions were launched from ten countries.\nOrigins.\nAn important precursor to the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration was the Dundee Antarctic Expedition of 1892-93 in which four Dundee whaling ships travelled south to the Antarctic in search of whales instead of their usual Arctic route. The expedition was accompanied by several naturalists (including William Speirs Bruce) and an artist, William Gordon Burn Murdoch. The publications (both scientific and popular) and exhibitions that resulted did much to reignite public interest in the Antarctic. The performance of the whaling ships was also crucial in the decision to build the RRS \"Discovery\" in Dundee.\nFollowing on from that expedition, the specific impetus for the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration was a lecture given by Dr John Murray entitled \"The Renewal of Antarctic Exploration\", given to the Royal Geographical Society in London, 27 November 1893. Murray advocated that research into the Antarctic should be organised to \"resolve the outstanding geographical questions still posed in the south\". Furthermore, the Royal Geographical Society instated an Antarctic Committee shortly prior to this, in 1887, which successfully encouraged many whalers to explore the Southern regions of the world and laid the groundwork for the lecture given by Murray.\nThe Norwegian ship \"Antarctic\" was put ashore at Cape Adare, on 24 January 1895.\nIn August 1895 the Sixth International Geographical Congress in London passed a general resolution calling on scientific societies throughout the world to promote the cause of Antarctic exploration \"in whatever ways seem to them most effective\". Such work would \"bring additions to almost every branch of science\". The Congress had been addressed by the Norwegian Carsten Borchgrevink, who had just returned from a whaling expedition during which he had become one of the first to set foot on the Antarctic mainland. During his address, Borchgrevink outlined plans for a full-scale pioneering Antarctic expedition, to be based at Cape Adare.\nThe Heroic Age was inaugurated by an expedition launched by the Belgian Geographical Society in 1897; Borchgrevink followed a year later with a privately sponsored British expedition. (Some histories consider the \"Discovery\" expedition, which departed in 1901, as the first proper expedition of the Heroic Age.)\nThe Belgian Antarctic Expedition was led by Belgian Adrian de Gerlache. In 1898, they became the first men to spend winter on Antarctica, when their ship \"Belgica\" became trapped in the ice. They became stuck on 28 February 1898, and only managed to get out of the ice on 14 March 1899.\nDuring their forced stay, several men lost their sanity, not only because of the Antarctic winter night and the endured hardship, but also because of the language problems between the different nationalities. This was the first expedition to overwinter within the Antarctic Circle, and they visited the South Shetland Islands.\nEarly British expeditions.\nThe Southern Cross Expedition began in 1898 and lasted for two years. \"SS Southern Cross\" was used during the expedition. This was the first expedition to overwinter on the Antarctic mainland (Cape Adare) and was the first to make use of dogs and sledges. It made the first ascent of The Great Ice Barrier, (The Great Ice Barrier later became formally known as the Ross Ice Shelf). The expedition set a Farthest South record at 78\u00b030'S. It also calculated the location of the South Magnetic Pole.\nThe \"Discovery\" Expedition was then launched, from 1901 to 1904 and was led by Robert Falcon Scott. It made the first ascent of the Western Mountains in Victoria Land, and discovered the polar plateau. Its southern journey set a new Farthest South record, 82\u00b017'S. Many other geographical features were discovered, mapped and named. This was the first of several expeditions based in McMurdo Sound.\nA year later, the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition was launched, headed by William Speirs Bruce. 'Ormond House' was established as a meteorological observatory on Laurie Island in the South Orkneys and was the first permanent base in Antarctica. The Weddell Sea was penetrated to 74\u00b001'S, and the coastline of Coats Land was discovered, defining the sea's eastern limits.\nErnest Shackleton, who had been a member of Scott's expedition, organized and led the \"Nimrod\" Expedition from 1907 to 1909. The expedition's primary objective was of reaching the South Pole. Based in McMurdo Sound, the expedition pioneered the Beardmore Glacier route to the South Pole, and the (limited) use of motorised transport. Its southern march reached 88\u00b023'S, a new Farthest South record 97 geographical miles from the Pole before having to turn back. During the expedition, Shackleton was the first to reach the polar plateau. Parties led by T. W. Edgeworth David also became the first to climb Mount Erebus and to reach the South Magnetic Pole.\nExpeditions from other countries.\nThe First German Antarctic Expedition was sent to investigate eastern Antarctica in 1901. It discovered the coast of Kaiser Wilhelm II Land, and Mount Gauss. The expedition's ship became trapped in ice, however, which prevented more extensive exploration.\nThe Swedish Antarctic Expedition, operating at the same time worked in the east coastal area of Graham Land, and was marooned on Snow Hill Island and Paulet Island in the Weddell Sea, after the sinking of its expedition ship. It was rescued by the Argentinian naval vessel \"Uruguay\".\nThe French organized their first expedition in 1903 under the leadership of Jean-Baptiste Charcot. Originally intended as a relief expedition for the stranded Nordenski\u00f6ld party, the main work of this expedition was the mapping and charting of islands and the western coasts of Graham Land, on the Antarctic Peninsula. A section of the coast was explored, and named Loubet Land after the President of France.\nA follow-up trip was organized from 1908 to 1910 which continued the earlier work of the French expedition with a general exploration of the Bellingshausen Sea, and the discovery of islands and other features, including Marguerite Bay, Charcot Island, Renaud Island, Mikkelsen Bay, Rothschild Island.\nRace to the South Pole.\nThe prize of the Heroic Age was to find and reach the South Pole. Two expeditions set off in 1910 to attain this goal; a party led by Norwegian Polar explorer Roald Amundsen from the ship \"Fram\" and Robert Falcon Scott's British group from the \"Terra Nova\".\nAmundsen succeeded in reaching the Pole on 14 December 1911 using a route from the Bay of Whales to the polar plateau via the Axel Heiberg Glacier.\nScott and his four companions reached the South Pole via the Beardmore route on 17 January 1912, 33 days after Amundsen. All five died on the return journey from the Pole, through a combination of starvation and cold. The Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station was later named after these two men.\nFurther expeditions.\nThe Australasian Antarctic Expedition took place between 1911\u20131914 and was led by Sir Douglas Mawson. It concentrated on the stretch of Antarctic coastline between Cape Adare and Mount Gauss, carrying out mapping and survey work on coastal and inland territories.\nDiscoveries included Commonwealth Bay, Ninnis Glacier, Mertz Glacier, and Queen Mary Land. Major accomplishments were made in geology, glaciology and terrestrial biology.\nThe Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914\u20131917 was led by Ernest Shackleton and set out to cross the continent via the South pole. However, their ship, the \"Endurance\", was trapped and crushed by pack ice in the Weddell Sea before they were able to land. The expedition members survived after a journey on sledges over pack ice, a prolonged drift on an ice-floe, and a voyage in three small boats to Elephant Island. Then Shackleton and five others crossed the Southern Ocean in an open boat called \"James Caird\" and made the first crossing of South Georgia to raise the alarm at the whaling station Grytviken.\nA related component of the Trans-Antarctic Expedition was the Ross Sea party, led by Aeneas Mackintosh. Its objective was to lay depots across the Great Ice Barrier, in order to supply Shackleton's party crossing from the Weddell Sea. All the required depots were laid, but in the process three men, including the leader Mackintosh, died.\nShackleton's last expedition and the one that brought the 'Heroic Age' to a close, was the Shackleton\u2013Rowett Expedition from 1921 to 1922 on board the ship \"Quest\". Its vaguely defined objectives included coastal mapping, a possible continental circumnavigation, the investigation of sub-Antarctic islands, and oceanographic work. After Shackleton's death on 5 January 1922, \"Quest\" completed a shortened programme before returning home.\nFurther exploration.\nBy air.\nAfter Shackleton's last expedition, there was a hiatus in Antarctic exploration for about seven years. From 1929, aircraft and mechanized transportation were increasingly used, earning this period the sobriquet of the 'Mechanical Age'. Hubert Wilkins first visited Antarctica in 1921\u20131922 as an ornithologist attached to the Shackleton\u2013Rowett Expedition. From 1927, Wilkins and pilot Carl Ben Eielson began exploring the Arctic by aircraft.\nOn 15 April 1928, only a year after Charles Lindbergh's flight across the Atlantic, Wilkins and Eielson made a trans-Arctic crossing from Point Barrow, Alaska, to Spitsbergen, arriving about 20 hours later on 16 April, touching along the way at Grant Land on Ellesmere Island. For this feat and his prior work, Wilkins was knighted.\nWith financial backing from William Randolph Hearst, Wilkins returned to the South Pole and flew over Antarctica in the \"San Francisco\". He named the island of Hearst Land after his sponsor.\nUS Navy Rear Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd led five expeditions to Antarctica during the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. He overflew the South Pole with pilot Bernt Balchen on 28 and 29 November 1929, to match his overflight of the North Pole in 1926. Byrd's explorations had science as a major objective and extensively used the aircraft to explore the continent.\nCaptain Finn Ronne, Byrd's executive officer, returned to Antarctica with his own expedition in 1947\u20131948, with Navy support, three planes, and dogs. Ronne disproved the notion that the continent was divided in two and established that East and West Antarctica was one single continent, i.e. that the Weddell Sea and the Ross Sea are not connected. The expedition explored and mapped large parts of Palmer Land and the Weddell Sea coastline, and identified the Ronne Ice Shelf, named by Ronne after his wife Edith Ronne. Ronne covered by ski and dog sled\u2014more than any other explorer in history.\nOverland crossing.\nThe 1955\u20131958 Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition successfully completed the first overland crossing of Antarctica, via the South Pole. Although supported by the British and other Commonwealth governments, most of the funding came from corporate and individual donations.\nIt was headed by British explorer Dr Vivian Fuchs, with New Zealander Sir Edmund Hillary leading the New Zealand Ross Sea Support team. After spending the winter of 1957 at Shackleton Base, Fuchs finally set out on the transcontinental journey in November 1957, with a twelve-man team travelling in six vehicles; three Sno-Cats, two Weasels and one specially adapted \"Muskeg\" tractor. En route, the team were also tasked with carrying out scientific research including seismic soundings and gravimetric readings.\nIn parallel Hillary's team had set up Scott Base\u00a0\u2013 which was to be Fuchs' final destination\u00a0\u2013 on the opposite side of the continent at McMurdo Sound on the Ross Sea. Using three converted Ferguson TE20 tractors and one M29 Weasel (abandoned part-way), Hillary and his three men (Ron Balham, Peter Mulgrew and Murray Ellis), were responsible for route-finding and laying a line of supply depots up the Skelton Glacier and across the Polar Plateau on towards the South Pole, for the use of Fuchs on the final leg of his journey. Other members of Hillary's team carried out geological surveys around the Ross Sea and Victoria Land areas.\nHillary's party reached the South Pole on 3 January 1958, and was just the third (preceded by Amundsen in 1911 and Scott in 1912) to reach the Pole overland. Fuchs' team reached the Pole from the opposite direction on 19 January 1958, where they met up with Hillary. Fuchs then continued overland, following the route that Hillary had laid and on 2 March succeeded in reaching Scott Base, completing the first overland crossing of the continent by land via the South Pole.\nPolitical history.\nSpanish claims.\nAccording to Argentina and Chile, the Spanish Empire had claims on Antarctica. The \"capitulaci\u00f3n\" (governorship) granted to the conquistador Pedro S\u00e1nchez de la Hoz in 1539 by the King of Spain, Charles V, explicitly included all lands south of the Straits of Magellan, (Terra Australis, and Tierra del Fuego and by extension potentially the entire continent of Antarctica) and to the East and West the borders were the ones specified in the Treaty of Tordesillas and Zaragoza, respectively, thus creating the Governorate of Terra Australis.\nDe la Hoz transferred the title to the conqueror Pedro de Valdivia in 1540. In 1555, the claim was incorporated to Chile.\nThis grant established, according to Argentina and Chile, that an \"animus occupandi\" existed on the part of Spain in Antarctica. Spain's sovereignty claim over parts of Antarctica was, according to Chile and Argentina, internationally recognized with the \"Inter caetera\" bull of 1493 and the Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494. Argentina and Chile treat these treaties as legal international treaties mediated by the Catholic Church that was at that time a recognized arbiter in such matters. Each country currently has claimed a sector of the Antarctic continent that is more or less directly south of its national antarctic-facing lands.\nModern Spain has not claimed any Antarctic territory. It operates two summer research stations (Gabriel de Castilla Base and Juan Carlos I Base) in the South Shetland Islands.\nBritish claims.\nThe United Kingdom reasserted sovereignty over the Falkland Islands in the far South Atlantic in 1833 and maintained a continuous presence there. In 1908, the British government extended its territorial claim by declaring sovereignty over \"South Georgia, the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands, and the Sandwich Islands, and Graham's Land, situated in the South Atlantic Ocean and on the Antarctic continent to the south of the 50th parallel of south latitude, and lying between the 20th and the 80th degrees of west longitude\". All these territories were administered as Falkland Islands Dependencies from Stanley by the Governor of the Falkland Islands. The motivation for this declaration lay in the need for regulating and taxing the whaling industry effectively. Commercial operators would hunt whales in areas outside of the official boundaries of the Falkland Islands and its dependencies and there was a need to close this loophole.\nIn 1917, the wording of the claim was modified, so as to, among other things, unambiguously include all the territory in the sector stretching to the South Pole (thus encompassing all of the present-day British Antarctic Territory). The new claim covered \"all islands and territories whatsoever between the 20th degree of west longitude and the 50th degree of west longitude which are situated south of the 50th parallel of south latitude; and all islands and territories whatsoever between the 50th degree of west longitude and the 80th degree of west longitude which are situated south of the 58th parallel of south latitude\".\nUnder the ambition of Leopold Amery, the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies, Britain attempted to incorporate the entire continent into the Empire. In a memorandum to the governor-generals for Australia and New Zealand, he wrote that 'with the exception of Chile and Argentina and some barren islands belonging to France... it is desirable that the whole of the Antarctic should ultimately be included in the British Empire.'\nThe first step was taken on 30 July 1923, when the British government passed an Order in Council under the British Settlements Act 1887, defining the new borders for the Ross Dependency - \"that part of His Majesty's Dominions in the Antarctic Seas, which comprises all the islands and territories between the 160th degree of East Longitude and the 150th degree of West Longitude which are situated south of the 60th degree of South Latitude shall be named the Ross Dependency.\"\nThe Order in Council then went on to appoint the Governor-General and Commander-in Chief of New Zealand as the Governor of the territory.\nIn 1930, the United Kingdom claimed Enderby Land. In 1933, a British imperial order transferred territory south of 60\u00b0 S and between meridians 160\u00b0 E and 45\u00b0 E to Australia as the Australian Antarctic Territory.\nFollowing the passing of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, the government of the United Kingdom relinquished all control over the government of New Zealand and Australia. This however had no bearing on the obligations of the Governor-General of both countries in their capacity as Governor of the Antarctic territories.\nOther European claims.\nMeanwhile, alarmed by these unilateral declarations, the French government laid claim to a strip of the continent in 1924. The basis for their claim to Ad\u00e9lie Land lay on the discovery of the coastline in 1840 by the French explorer Jules Dumont d'Urville, who named it after his wife, Ad\u00e8le. The British eventually decided to recognize this claim and the border between Ad\u00e9lie Land and Australian Antarctic Territory was fixed definitively in 1938.\nThese developments also concerned Norwegian whaling interests, who wished to avoid the British taxation of whaling stations in the Antarctic and were concerned that they would be commercially excluded from the continent. The whale-ship owner Lars Christensen financed several expeditions to the Antarctic with the view to claim land for Norway and establish stations on Norwegian territory to gain better privileges. The first expedition, led by Nils Larsen and Ola Olstad, landed on Peter I Island in 1929 and claimed the island for Norway. On 6 March 1931, a Norwegian royal proclamation declared the island under Norwegian sovereignty and on 23 March 1933 the island was declared a dependency.\nThe 1929 expedition led by Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen and Finn L\u00fctzow-Holm named the continental land mass near the island as Queen Maud Land, named after the Norwegian queen Maud of Wales. The territory was explored further during the \"Norvegia\" expedition of 1930\u201331. Negotiations with the British government in 1938 resulted in the western border of Queen Maud Land being set at 20\u00b0W.\nNorway's claim was disputed by Nazi Germany, which in 1938 dispatched the German Antarctic Expedition, led by Alfred Ritscher, to fly over as much of it as possible. The ship \"Schwabenland\" reached the pack ice off Antarctica on 19 January 1939. During the expedition, an area of about was photographed from the air by Ritscher, who dropped darts inscribed with swastikas every . Germany eventually attempted to claim the territory surveyed by Ritscher under the name New Swabia, but lost any claim to the land following its defeat in the Second World War.\nOn 14 January 1939, five days prior to the German arrival, Queen Maud Land was annexed by Norway, after a royal decree announced that the land bordering the Falkland Islands Dependencies in the west and the Australian Antarctic Dependency in the east was to be brought under Norwegian sovereignty. The primary basis for the annexation was to secure the Norwegian whaling industry's access to the region. In 1948, Norway and the United Kingdom agreed to limit Queen Maud Land to from 20\u00b0W to 45\u00b0E, and that the Bruce Coast and Coats Land were to be incorporated into Norwegian territory.\nSouth American involvement.\nThis encroachment of foreign powers was a matter of immense disquiet to the nearby South American countries, Argentina and Chile. Taking advantage of a European continent plunged into turmoil with the onset of the Second World War, Chile's president, Pedro Aguirre Cerda declared the establishment of a Chilean Antarctic Territory based on the \"uti possidetis juris\" principle inheriting the Spanish claims on Terra Australis that depended on the Captaincy General of Chile. In the 20th Century these areas were claimed by Britain.\nArgentina had an even longer history of involvement in the Continent. Already in 1904 the Argentine government began a permanent occupation in the area with the purchase of a meteorological station on Laurie Island established in 1903 by Dr William S. Bruce's Scottish National Antarctic Expedition. Bruce offered to transfer the station and instruments for the sum of 5.000 pesos, on the condition that the government committed itself to the continuation of the scientific mission. British officer William Haggard also sent a note to the Argentine Foreign Minister, Jose Terry, ratifying the terms of Bruce proposition.\nIn 1906, Argentina communicated to the international community the establishment of a permanent base on South Orkney Islands. However, Haggard responded by reminding Argentina that the South Orkneys were British. The British position was that Argentine personnel was granted permission only for the period of one year. The Argentine government entered into negotiations with the British in 1913 over the possible transfer of the island. Although these talks were unsuccessful, Argentina attempted to unilaterally establish their sovereignty with the erection of markers, national flags and other symbols.\nOn January 14, 1939, Norway declared its territorial claims on Antarctic territory between 0\u00b0 and 20\u00b0 (Queen Maud Land). This alarmed the Chilean government, which led President Pedro Aguirre Cerda to encourage the definition of the National Antarctic Territory. With the establishment of Decree No. 1541 on September 7, he organized a commission to examine Norway's interests in the Antarctic territory.\nThe Chilean commission set the bounds according to the Theory of polar areas, taking into account geographical, historical, legal, and diplomatic precedents, which were formalized by Decree No. 1747, enacted on November 6, 1940, and published on June 21, 1955. Chile considered their Antarctic rights arrived up to the meridian located further west (53\u00b0 West). Thus, the country claimed to not include the South Orkney Islands in consideration of the rights of Argentina.\nIn response to this and earlier German explorations, the British Admiralty and Colonial Office launched Operation Tabarin in 1943 to reassert British territorial claims against Argentine and Chilean incursion and establish a permanent British presence in the Antarctic. The move was also motivated by concerns within the Foreign Office about the direction of United States post-war activity in the region.\nA suitable cover story was the need to deny use of the area to the enemy. The \"Kriegsmarine\" was known to use remote islands as rendezvous points and as shelters for commerce raiders, U-boats and supply ships. Also, in 1941, there existed a fear that Japan might attempt to seize the Falkland Islands, either as a base or to hand them over to Argentina, thus gaining political advantage for the Axis and denying their use to Britain.\nIn 1943, British personnel from HMS \"Carnarvon Castle\" removed Argentine flags from Deception Island. The expedition was led by Lieutenant James Marr and left the Falkland Islands in two ships, HMS \"William Scoresby\" (a minesweeping trawler) and \"Fitzroy\", on Saturday 29 January 1944.\nBases were established during February near the abandoned Norwegian whaling station on Deception Island, where the Union Flag was hoisted in place of Argentine flags, and at Port Lockroy (on February 11) on the coast of Graham Land. A further base was founded at Hope Bay on 13 February 1945, after a failed attempt to unload stores on 7 February 1944. Symbols of British sovereignty, including post offices, signposts and plaques were also constructed and postage stamps were issued.\nOperation Tabarin provoked Chile to organize its First Chilean Antarctic Expedition in 1947\u201348, where the Chilean president Gabriel Gonz\u00e1lez Videla personally inaugurated the Base General Bernardo O'Higgins Riquelme.\nFollowing the end of the war in 1945, the British bases were handed over to civilian members of the newly created Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey (subsequently the British Antarctic Survey) the first such national scientific body to be established in Antarctica.\nGeopolitics over Antarctica and the control of the passages between the south Atlantic and the south Pacific have led to the founding of cities and towns such as Ushuaia and Puerto Williams, both of which claim to be the southernmost cities in World.\nIn the late 1940s, Argentina and Chile recognized each other's claims, stating that \"Chile and Argentina have unquestionable rights of sovereignty in the polar area called American Antarctica (\"\"Ant\u00e1rtida Americana\" in Spanish\")\".\nOn March 4, 1948, Chile and Argentina signed an agreement on mutual protection and legal defense of its Antarctic territorial rights, recognizing each other:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(...) until agreed, by mutual agreement, the line common neighborhood in Antarctic territories of Chile and Argentina, declared: \n1) That both governments acting in agreement on legal protection and defense of their rights in American Antarctica, between the meridians 25\u00b0 and 90\u00b0 west longitude of Greenwich, \"indisputable sovereign rights are recognized by Chile and Argentina.\"\nCurrently, both countries have research stations in Antarctica, as does the United Kingdom. All three nations claim the totality of the Antarctic Peninsula.\nPost-war developments.\nFriction between Britain and the Latin American states continued into the post war period. Royal Navy warships were despatched in 1948 to prevent naval incursions and in 1952, an Argentine shore party at Hope Bay (the British Base \"D\", established there in 1945, came up against the Argentine Esperanza Base, est. 1952) fired a machine gun over the heads of a British Antarctic Survey team unloading supplies from the \"John Biscoe\". The Argentines later extended a diplomatic apology, saying that there had been a misunderstanding and that the Argentine military commander on the ground had exceeded his authority.\nThe United States became politically interested in the Antarctic continent before and during WWII. The United States Antarctic Service Expedition, from 1939 to 1941, was sponsored by the government with additional support came from donations and gifts by private citizens, corporations and institutions. The objectives of the Expedition, outlined by President Franklin D. Roosevelt, was to establish two bases: East Base, in the vicinity of Charcot Island, and West Base, in the vicinity of King Edward VII Land. After operating successfully for two years, but with international tensions on the rise, it was considered wise to evacuate the two bases.\nHowever, immediately after the war, American interest was rekindled with an explicitly geopolitical motive. Operation Highjump, from 1946 to 1947 was organized by Rear Admiral Richard E. Byrd Jr. and included 4,700 men, 13 ships, and multiple aircraft. The primary mission of Operation Highjump was to establish the Antarctic research base Little America IV, for the purpose of training personnel and testing equipment in frigid conditions and amplifying existing stores of knowledge of hydrographic, geographic, geological, meteorological and electromagnetic propagation conditions in the area. The mission was also aimed at consolidating and extending United States sovereignty over the largest practicable area of the Antarctic continent, although this was publicly denied as a goal even before the expedition ended.\nTowards an international treaty.\nMeanwhile, in an attempt at ending the impasse, on May 4, 1955, Britain submitted two applications to the International Court of Justice to adjudicate between the territorial claims of Britain, Argentina and Chile, declaring invalid the claims of sovereignty of the two countries in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic areas, respectively. This proposal failed, as both Latin American countries rejected submitting to an international arbitration procedure. On July 15, 1955, the Chilean government rejected the jurisdiction of the Court in that case, and on August 1, August, Argentine government followed suit. Thus, on March 16 March 1956, claims were filed.\nLaw No. 11486 of June 17, 1955, added the Chilean Antarctic Territory to the Province of Magallanes, which on July 12, 1974 became the Region of Magallanes and Chilean Antarctica.\nIn 1958, the U.S. president, Dwight Eisenhower, invited Chile to the International Geophysical Year Conference in an attempt to resolve the claiming issues.\nNegotiations towards the establishment of an international condominium over the continent first began in 1948, involving the 7 claimant powers (Britain, Australia, New Zealand, France, Norway, Chile and Argentina) and the US. This attempt was aimed at excluding the Soviet Union from the affairs of the continent and rapidly fell apart when the USSR declared an interest in the region, refused to recognize any claims of sovereignty and reserved the right to make its own claims in 1950.\nAn important impetus toward the formation of the Antarctic Treaty System in 1959, was the International Geophysical Year, 1957\u20131958. This year of international scientific cooperation triggered an 18-month period of intense Antarctic science. More than 70 existing national scientific organizations then formed IGY committees, and participated in the cooperative effort. The British established Halley Research Station in 1956 by an expedition from the Royal Society. Sir Vivian Fuchs headed the Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition, which completed the first overland crossing of Antarctica in 1958. In Japan, the Japan Maritime Safety Agency offered ice breaker S\u014dya as the South Pole observation ship and Showa Station was built as the first Japanese observation base on Antarctica.\nFrance contributed with Dumont d'Urville Station and Charcot Station in Ad\u00e9lie Land. The ship \"Commandant Charcot\" of the French Navy spent nine months of 1949/50 at the coast of Adelie Land, performing ionospheric soundings. The US erected the Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station as the first permanent structure directly over the South Pole in January 1957.\nFinally, to prevent the possibility of military conflict in the region, the United States, United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and 9 other countries with significant interests negotiated and signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1959. The treaty entered into force in 1961 and sets aside Antarctica as a scientific preserve, established freedom of scientific investigation and banned military activity on that continent. The treaty was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War.\nRecent history.\nIn May 1965, the American physicist Carl R. Disch went missing during the course of his routine research near Byrd Station, Antarctica. His body was never found.\nA baby, named Emilio Marcos de Palma, was born near Hope Bay on 7 January 1978, becoming the first baby born on the continent. He also was born farther south than anyone in history.\nOn 28 November 1979, an Air New Zealand DC-10 on a sightseeing trip crashed into Mount Erebus on Ross Island, killing all 257 people on board.\nIn 1991 a convention among member nations of the Antarctic Treaty on how to regulate mining and drilling was proposed. Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke and French Prime Minister Michel Rocard led a response to this convention that resulted in the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, now known as the Madrid Protocol. All mineral extraction was banned for 50 years and the Antarctic was set aside as a \"natural reserve, devoted to peace and science\".\nB\u00f8rge Ousland, a Norwegian explorer, finished the first unassisted Antarctic solo crossing on 18 January 1997.\nOn 23 November 2007, the MV \"Explorer\" struck an iceberg and sank, but all on board were rescued by nearby ships, including a passing Norwegian cruise ship, the MS \"Nordnorge\".\nIn 2010, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory was completed. In 2013, it was reported that the observatory had detected 28 neutrinos that originated outside the Solar System.\nWomen in Antarctica.\nWomen did not explore Antarctica until well into the 1950s. A few pioneering women visited the Antarctic land and waters prior to the 1950s and many women requested to go on early expeditions, but were turned away. Early pioneers such as Louise S\u00e9guin and Ingrid Christensen were some of the first women to see Antarctic waters. Christensen was the first woman to set foot on the mainland of Antarctica. The first women to have any fanfare about their Antarctic journeys were Caroline Mikkelsen who set foot on an island of Antarctica in 1935, and Jackie Ronne and Jennie Darlington who were the first women to over-winter in Antarctica in 1947. The first woman scientist to work in Antarctica was Maria Klenova in 1956. Silvia Morella de Palma was the first woman to give birth in Antarctica, delivering 3.4\u00a0kg (7\u00a0lb 8 oz) Emilio Palma at the Argentine Esperanza base 7 January 1978.\nWomen faced legal barriers and sexism that prevented most from visiting Antarctica and doing research until the late 1960s. The United States Congress banned American women from traveling to Antarctica until 1969. Women were often excluded because it was thought that they could not handle the extreme temperatures or crisis situations. The first woman from the British Antarctic Survey to go to Antarctica was Janet Thomson in 1983 who described the ban on women as a \"rather improper segregation.\"\nOnce women were allowed in Antarctica, they still had to fight against sexism and sexual harassment. However, a tipping point was reached in the mid-1990s when it became the new normal that women were part of Antarctic life. Women began to see a change as more and more women began working and researching in Antarctica.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51315", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51315", "title": "History of economics", "text": ""}
{"id": "51317", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51317", "title": "Economic History", "text": ""}
{"id": "51319", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51319", "title": "Intellectual history", "text": "Study of the history of human ideas and of intellectuals\nIntellectual history (also the history of ideas) is the study of the history of human thought and of intellectuals, people who conceptualize, discuss, write about, and concern themselves with ideas. The investigative premise of intellectual history is that ideas do not develop in isolation from the thinkers who conceptualize and apply those ideas; thus the intellectual historian studies ideas in two contexts: (i) as abstract propositions for critical application; and (ii) in concrete terms of culture, life, and history.\nAs a field of intellectual enquiry, the history of ideas emerged from the European disciplines of \"Kulturgeschichte\" (Cultural History) and \"Geistesgeschichte\" (Intellectual History) from which historians might develop a global intellectual history that shows the parallels and the interrelations in the history of critical thinking in every society. Likewise, the history of reading, and the history of the book, about the material aspects of book production (design, manufacture, distribution) developed from the history of ideas.\nThe concerns of intellectual history are the intelligentsia and the critical study of the ideas expressed in the texts produced by intellectuals; therein the difference between intellectual history from other forms of cultural history that study visual and non-verbal forms of evidence. In the production of knowledge, the concept of \"the intellectual\" as a political citizen of public society dates back to the 19th century, referring to someone who is professionally engaged with critical thinking; if their work is of notable relevance to the general public or aims to improve society, such a person is sometimes called a public intellectual. Nonetheless, anyone who explored his or her thoughts on paper can be the subject of an intellectual history.\nHistory of the discipline.\nIntellectual history developed from the history of philosophy and cultural history as practiced since the times of Voltaire (1694\u20131778) and Jacob Burckhardt (1818\u20131897). The scholarly efforts of the eighteenth century can be traced to \"The Advancement of Learning\" (1605), Francis Bacon's call for what he termed \"a literary history\". In economics, John Maynard Keynes (1883\u20131946) was both a historian of economic thought, and the subject of study by historians of economic thought, because of the significance of the Keynesian Revolution.\nThe contemporary understanding of intellectual history emerged in the immediate postwar period of the 1940s, in its earlier incarnation as \"the history of ideas\" under the leadership of Arthur Lovejoy, the founder of the \"Journal of the History of Ideas\". Since that time, Lovejoy's formulation of \"unit-ideas\" was developed in different and divergent intellectual directions, such as contextualism, historically sensitive accounts of intellectual activity in the corresponding historical period, which investigative shift is reflected in the replacement of the term \"history of ideas\" with the term \"intellectual history\".\nIntellectual history is multidisciplinary and includes the history of philosophy and the history of economic thought.\nIn continental Europe, the pertinent example of intellectual history is \"Begriffsgeschichte\" (History of Concepts, 2010), by Reinhart Koselleck. In Britain the history of political thought has been a particular focus since the late 1960s, and is especially associated with historians at Cambridge, such as John Dunn and Quentin Skinner, who studied European political thought in historical context, emphasizing the emergence and development of concepts such as the State and Freedom. Skinner is known for provocative, methodological essays that give prominence to the practice of intellectual history. In the United States, intellectual history encompass different forms of intellectual production, not just the history of political ideas, and includes fields such as the history of historical thought, associated with Anthony Grafton (Princeton University) and J.G.A. Pocock (Johns Hopkins University). Formally established in 2010, the doctorate in History and Culture at Drew University is one of few graduate programs specializing in intellectual history, in the American and European contexts. Despite the pre-eminence of early modern intellectual historians (those studying the age from the Renaissance to the Age of Enlightenment), the intellectual history of the modern period also has been very productive on both shores of the Atlantic Ocean, e.g. \"\" (2001), by Louis Menand and \"The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute of Social Research, 1923\u201350\" (1973), by Martin Jay.\nMethodology.\nThe Lovejoy approach.\nThe historian Arthur O. Lovejoy (1873\u20131962) coined the phrase \"history of ideas\" and initiated its systematic study in the early decades of the 20th century. Johns Hopkins University was a \"fertile cradle\" to Lovejoy's history of ideas; he worked there as a professor of history, from 1910 to 1939, and for decades he presided over the regular meetings of the \"History of Ideas Club\". Another outgrowth of his work is the \"Journal of the History of Ideas\".\nAside from his students and colleagues engaged in related projects (such as Ren\u00e9 Wellek and Leo Spitzer, with whom Lovejoy engaged in extended debates), scholars such as Isaiah Berlin, Michel Foucault, Christopher Hill, J. G. A. Pocock, and others have continued to work in a spirit close to that with which Lovejoy pursued the history of ideas. The first chapter of Lovejoy's book \"The Great Chain of Being\" (1936) lays out a general overview of what he intended to be the programme and scope of the study of the history of ideas.\nUnit-idea.\nIn the History of Ideas, Lovejoy used the \"unit-idea\" (concept) as the basic unit of historical analysis. The unit-idea is the building block of the history of ideas; though relatively stable in itself, the unit-idea combines with other unit-ideas into new patterns of meaning in the context of different historical eras. Lovejoy said that the historian of ideas is tasked with identifying unit-ideas and with describing their historical emergence and development into new conceptual forms and combinations. The methodology of the unit-idea means to extract the basic idea from a work of philosophy and from a philosophical movement, with the investigative principles of the methodology being: (1) assumptions, (2) dialectical motives, (3) metaphysical pathos, and (4) philosophical semantics. The principles of methodology define the overarching philosophical movement in which the historian can find the unit-idea, which then is studied throughout the history of the particular idea.\nThe British historian Quentin Skinner criticized Lovejoy's unit-idea methodology as a \"reification of doctrines\" that has negative consequences. That the historian of ideas must be sensitive to the cultural context of the texts and ideas under analysis. Skinner's historical method is based upon the theory of speech acts, proposed by J.L. Austin. In turn, scholars criticized Skinner's historical method because of his inclination to reify social structures and sociological constructs in place of the historical actors of the period under study. The philosopher Andreas Dorschel said that Skinner's restrictive approach to ideas, through verbal language, and notes that ideas can materialize in non-linguistic media and genres, such as music and architecture. The historian Dag Herbj\u00f8rnsrud said that \"the Skinner perspective is in danger of shutting the door to comparative philosophy, and the search for common problems and solutions across borders and time.\"\nThe historian Peter Gordon said that unlike Lovejoy's practise of the History of Ideas, the praxis of Intellectual History studies and deals with ideas in broad historical contexts. That unlike historians of ideas and philosophers (History of Philosophy), intellectual historians, \"tend to be more relaxed about crossing the boundary between philosophical texts and non-philosophical contexts . . . [Intellectual historians regard] the distinction between 'philosophy' and 'non-philosophy' as something that is, itself, historically conditioned, rather than eternally fixed.\" Therefore, intellectual history is a means for reproducing a historically valid interpretation of a philosophical argument, by implementation of a context in which to study ideas and philosophical movements.\nFoucault's approach.\nMichel Foucault rejected narrative, the historian's traditional mode of communication, because of what he believed to be the shallow treatment of facts, figures, and people in a long period, rather than deep research that shows the interconnections among the facts, figures, and people of a specific period of history. Foucault said that historians should reveal historical descriptions through the use of different perspectives of the \"archaeology of knowledge\", whose historical method for writing history is in four ideas.\nFirst, the archaeology of knowledge defines the period of history through philosophy, by way of the discourses among thought, representation, and themes. Second, that the notion of discontinuity has an important role in the disciplines of history. Third, that discourse does not seek to grasp the moment in history, wherein the social and the persons under study are inverted into each other. Fourth, that Truth is not the purpose of history, but the discourse contained in history.\nGlobal intellectual history.\nIn the 21st century, the field of global intellectual history has received increased attention. In 2013, Samuel Moyn and Andrew Sartori published the anthology \"Global Intellectual History\".\nIn 2016, the Routledge journal \"Global Intellectual History\" (ed. Richard Whatmore) was established. J. G. A. Pocock and John Dunn are among those who recently have argued for a more global approach to intellectual history in contrast to Eurocentrism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51320", "revid": "50891493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51320", "title": "Ancient history", "text": "Period between prehistory and the medieval era\nAncient history is a time period from the beginning of writing and recorded human history through late antiquity. The span of recorded history is roughly 5,000 years, beginning with the development of Sumerian cuneiform script. Ancient history covers all continents inhabited by humans in the period 3000 BC\u00a0\u2013 AD 500, ending with the expansion of Islam in late antiquity.\nThe three-age system periodises ancient history into the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age, with recorded history usually considered to begin with the Bronze Age. The start and end of the three ages vary between world regions. In many regions the Bronze Age is generally considered to begin a few centuries prior to 3000 BC, while the end of the Iron Age varies from the early first millennium BC in some regions to the late first millennium AD in others.\nDuring the time period of ancient history, the world population was exponentially increasing due to the Neolithic Revolution, which was in full progress. In 10,000 BC, the world population stood at 2 million, it rose to 45 million by 3000 BC. By the Iron Age in 1000 BC, the population had risen to 72 million. By the end of the ancient period in AD 500, the world population is thought to have stood at 209 million. In 10,500 years, the world population increased by 100 times.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrehistory.\nPrehistory is the period before written history. Most of the knowledge of that period comes from the work of archaeologists.\nThe early human migrations in the Lower Paleolithic saw \"Homo erectus\" spread across Eurasia 1.8 million years ago. Evidence for the use of fire has been dated as early as 1.8 million years ago, a date which is contested, with generally accepted evidence for the controlled use of fire dating to 780,000 years ago. Actual use of hearths first appears 400,000 years ago. Dates for the emergence of \"Homo sapiens\" (modern humans) range from 250,000 to 160,000 years ago, with the varying dates being based on DNA studies and fossils respectively. Some 50,000 years ago, \"Homo sapiens\" migrated out of Africa. They reached Australia about 45,000 years ago, southwestern Europe about the same time, southeastern Europe and Siberia around 40,000 years ago, and Japan about 30,000 years ago. Humans migrated to the Americas about 15,000 years ago.\nEvidence for agriculture emerges in about 9000 BC in what is now eastern Turkey and spread through the Fertile Crescent. Settlement at G\u00f6bekli Tepe began around 9500 BC and may have the world's oldest temple. The Nile River Valley has evidence of sorghum and millet cultivation starting around 8000 BC and agricultural use of yams in Western Africa perhaps dates to the same time period. Cultivation of millet, rice, and legumes began around 7000 BC in China. Taro cultivation in New Guinea dates to about 7000 BC also with squash cultivation in Mesoamerica perhaps sharing that date. Animal domestication began with the domestication of dogs, which dates to at least 15,000 years ago, and perhaps even earlier. Sheep and goats were domesticated around 9000 BC in the Fertile Crescent, alongside the first evidence for agriculture. Other animals, such as pigs and poultry, were later domesticated and used as food sources. Cattle and water buffalo were domesticated around 7000 BC and horses, donkeys, and camels were domesticated by about 4000 BC. All of these animals were used not only for food, but to carry and pull people and loads, greatly increasing human ability to do work. The invention of the simple plough by 6000 BC further increased agricultural efficiency.\nMetal use in the form of hammered copper items predates the discovery of smelting of copper ores, which happened around 6000 BC in western Asia and independently in eastern Asia before 2000 BC. Gold and silver use dates to between 6000 and 5000 BC. Alloy metallurgy began with bronze in about 3500 BC in Mesopotamia and was developed independently in China by 2000 BC. Pottery developed independently throughout the world, with fired pots appearing first among the Jomon of Japan and in West Africa at Mali. Sometime between 5000 and 4000 BC the potter's wheel was invented. By 3000 BC, the pottery wheel was adapted into wheeled vehicles which could be used to carry loads further and easier than with human or animal power alone.\nWriting developed separately in five different locations in human history: Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, China, and Mesoamerica. By 3400 BC, \"proto-literate\" cuneiform spread in the Middle East. Egypt developed its own system of hieroglyphs by about 3200 BC. By 2800 BC the Indus Valley Civilisation had developed its Indus script, which remains undeciphered. Chinese Characters were independently developed in China during the Shang dynasty in the form of the Oracle Bone Script dating to the period 1600 to 1100 BC. Writing in Mesoamerica dates to 600 BC with the Zapotec civilization.\nHistory by region.\nWest Asia.\nThe ancient Near East is considered the cradle of civilisation. It was the first to practice intensive year-round agriculture; created one of the first coherent writing systems, invented the potter's wheel and then the vehicular wheel, created the first centralised governments, law codes and empires, as well as displaying social stratification, slavery, and organized warfare. It began the study of the stars and the sciences of astronomy and mathematics.\nMesopotamia.\nMesopotamia is the site of some of the earliest known civilisations in the world. Agricultural communities emerged in the area with the Halaf culture around 8000 BC and continued to expand through the Ubaid period around 6000 BC. Cities began in the Uruk period (4000\u20133100 BC) and expanded during the Jemdet Nasr (3100\u20132900 BC) and Early Dynastic (2900\u20132350 BC) periods. The surplus of storable foodstuffs created by this economy allowed the population to settle in one place instead of migrating after crops and herds. It also allowed for a much greater population density, and in turn required an extensive labour force and division of labour. This organisation led to the necessity of record keeping and the development of writing.\nBabylonia was an Amorite state in lower Mesopotamia (modern southern Iraq), with Babylon as its capital. Babylonia emerged when Hammurabi created an empire out of the territories of the former kingdoms of Sumer and Akkad.\nThe Neo-Babylonian Empire, or Chaldea, was Babylonia from the 7th and 6th centuries BC. Under the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II, it conquered Jerusalem. This empire also created the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and the still-surviving Ishtar Gate as architectural embellishments of its capital at Babylon.\nAkkad was a city and its surrounding region near Babylon. Akkad also became the capital of the Akkadian Empire. Despite an extensive search, the precise site has never been found. Akkad reached the height of its power between about 2330 and 2150 BC, following the conquests of King Sargon of Akkad. Through the spread of Sargon's empire, the language of Akkad, known as Akkadian from the city, spread and replaced the Sumerian language in Mesopotamia and eventually by 1450 BC was the main language of diplomacy in the Near East.\nAssyria was originally a region on the Upper Tigris, where a small state was created in the 19th century BC. The capital was at Assur, which gave the state its name. Later, as a nation and empire that came to control all of the Fertile Crescent, Egypt, and much of Anatolia, the term \"Assyria proper\" referred to roughly the northern half of Mesopotamia (the southern half being Babylonia), with Nineveh as its capital. The Assyrian kings controlled a large kingdom at three different times in history. These are called the \"Old\" (20th to 18th centuries BC), \"Middle\" (14th to 11th centuries BC), and \"Neo-Assyrian\" (9th to 7th centuries BC) kingdoms, or periods.\nMitanni was a Hurrian empire in northern Mesopotamia founded around 1500 BC. The Mitanians conquered and controlled Assyria until the 14th century BC while contending with Egypt for control of parts of modern Syria. Its capital was Washukanni, whose precise location has not been determined by archaeologists.\nIranian peoples.\nThe Medes and Persians were peoples who had appeared in the Iranian plateau around 1500 BC. Both peoples spoke Indo-European languages and were mostly pastoralists with a tradition of horse archery. The Medes established their own Median Empire by the 6th century\u00a0BC, having defeated the Neo-Assyrian Empire with the Chaldeans in 614 BC.\nThe Achaemenid Empire was founded by Cyrus the Great, who first became king of the Persians, then conquered the Medes, Lydia, and Babylon by 539 BC. The empire built on earlier Mesopotamian systems of government to govern their large empire. By building roads, they improved both the ability to send governmental instructions throughout their lands as well as improving the ability of their military forces to be deployed rapidly. Increased trade and upgraded farming techniques increased wealth, but also exacerbated inequalities between social classes. The empire's location at the centre of trading networks spread its intellectual and philosophical ideas throughout a wide area, and its religion, while not itself spreading far, had an impact on later religions such as Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. Cyrus' son Cambyses II conquered Egypt, while a later emperor, Darius the Great, expanded the empire to the Indus River, creating the largest empire in the world to that date. But Darius and his son Xerxes I failed to expand into Greece, with expeditions in 490 and 480 BC eventually failing. The Achaemenid dynasty and empire fell to Alexander the Great by 330 BC, and after Alexander's death, much of the area previously ruled by the Cyrus and his successors was ruled by the Seleucid dynasty.\nParthia was an Iranian civilisation situated in the northeastern part of modern Iran. Their power was based on a combination of military power based on heavy cavalry with a decentralised governing structure based on a federated system. The Parthian Empire was led by the Arsacid dynasty, which by around 155 BC under Mithradates I had mostly conquered the Seleucid Empire. Parthia had many wars with the Romans, but it was rebellions within the empire that ended it in the 3rd century AD.\nThe Sasanian Empire began when the Parthian Empire ended in AD 224. Their rulers claimed the Achaemenids as ancestors and set up their capital at Ctesiphon in Mesopotamia. Their period of greatest military expansion occurred under Shapur I, who by the time of his death in AD 272 had defeated Roman imperial armies and set up buffer states between the Sasanians and Roman Empires. After Shapur, the Sasanians were under more pressure from the Kushans to their east as well as the Roman then Byzantine Empire to its west. However, the Sasanians rebuilt and founded numerous cities and their merchants travelled widely and introduced crops such as sugar, rice, and cotton into the Iranian plateau. But in AD 651, the last Sassanid emperor was killed by the expanding Islamic Arabs.\nHittites.\nThe Hittites first came to Anatolia about 1900 BC and during the period 1600\u20131500 they expanded into Mesopotamia where they adopted the cuneiform script to their Indo-European language. By 1200 their empire stretched to Phoenicia and eastern Anatolia. They improved two earlier technologies from Mesopotamia and spread these new techniques widely \u2013 improved iron working and light chariots with spoked wheels in warfare. The Hittites introduced the casting of iron with molds and then hammering it which enabled weapons and tools to be made stronger and also cheaper. Although chariots had been used previously, the use of spoked wheels allowed the chariots to be much lighter and more maneuverable. In 1274 BC the Hittites clashed with the Egyptians at the Battle of Kadesh, where both sides claimed victory. In 1207 BC the Hittite capital of Hattusa was sacked, ending the Hittite Empire.\nIsrael.\nIsrael and Judah were related Iron Age kingdoms of the ancient Levant and had existed during the Iron Ages and the Neo-Babylonian, Persian and Hellenistic periods. The name Israel first appears in the stele of the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah around 1209\u00a0BC. This \"Israel\" was a cultural and probably political entity of the central highlands, well enough established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their hegemony, but an ethnic group rather than an organised state.\nIsrael had emerged by the middle of the 9th century BC, when the Assyrian King Shalmaneser III named \"Ahab the Israelite\" among his enemies at the battle of Qarqar (853). Judah emerged somewhat later than Israel, probably during the 9th century BC, but the subject is one of considerable controversy. Israel came into conflict with the Assyrians, who conquered Israel in 722 BC. The Neo-Babylonian Empire did the same to Judah in 586. After both conquests, the conquering forces deported many of the inhabitants to other regions of their respective empires.\nFollowing the fall of Babylon to the Persian Empire, Cyrus the Great allowed the rebuilding of the temple at Jerusalem, and some of the exiles from Judah returned to Judea, where they remained under Persian rule until the Maccabean revolt led to independence during Hellenistic period until Roman conquest.\nPhoenicia.\nPhoenicia was an ancient civilisation centred in the north of ancient Canaan, with its heartland along the coastal regions of modern-day Lebanon, Syria and Israel. Phoenician civilisation was an enterprising maritime trading culture that spread across the Mediterranean between the period of 1550 to 300 BC. One Phoenician colony, Carthage, ruled an empire in the Western Mediterranean until being defeated by Rome in the Punic Wars. The Phoenicians invented the Phoenician alphabet, the forerunner of the modern alphabet still in use today.\nArabia.\nThe history of Pre-Islamic Arabia before the rise of Islam in the AD 630s is not known in great detail. Archaeological exploration in the Arabian Peninsula has been sparse; indigenous written sources are limited to the many inscriptions and coins from southern Arabia. Existing material consists primarily of written sources from other traditions (such as Egyptians, Greeks, Persians, Romans, etc.) and oral traditions later recorded by Islamic scholars. A number of small kingdoms existed in Arabia from around AD 100 to perhaps about AD 400.\nAfrica.\nAfro-Asiatic Africa.\nCarthage.\nCarthage was founded around 814 BC by Phoenician settlers. Ancient Carthage was a city-state that ruled an empire through alliances and trade influence that stretched throughout North Africa and modern Spain. At the height of the city's influence, its empire included most of the western Mediterranean. The empire was in a constant state of struggle with the Roman Republic, which led to a series of conflicts known as the Punic Wars. After the third and final Punic War, Carthage was destroyed and then occupied by Roman forces. Nearly all of the territory held by Carthage fell into Roman hands.\nEgypt.\nAncient Egypt was a long-lived civilisation geographically located in north-eastern Africa. It was concentrated along the middle to lower reaches of the Nile River, reaching its greatest extent during the 2nd millennium\u00a0BC, which is referred to as the New Kingdom period. It reached broadly from the Nile Delta in the north, as far south as Jebel Barkal at the Fourth Cataract of the Nile. Extensions to the geographical range of ancient Egyptian civilisation included, at different times, areas of the southern Levant, the Eastern Desert and the Red Sea coastline, the Sinai Peninsula, and the Western Desert (focused on the several oases).\nAncient Egypt developed over at least three and a half millennia. It began with the incipient unification of Nile Valley polities around 3100 BC, traditionally under Menes. The civilisation of ancient Egypt was characterised primarily by intensive agricultural use of the fertile Nile Valley; the use of the Nile itself for transportation; the development of writing systems \u2013 first hieroglyphs and then later hieratic and other derived scripts \u2013 and literature; the organisation of collective projects such as the pyramids; trade with surrounding regions; and a polytheistic religious tradition that included elaborate funeral customs including mummification. Overseeing these activities were a socio-political and economic elite under the figure of a (semi)-divine ruler from a succession of ruling dynasties.\nAncient Egyptian history is divided across various periods, beginning with the Old Kingdom, which saw pyramid building on a large scale. After 2100 BC, the Old Kingdom dissolved into smaller states during the First Intermediate Period, which lasted about 100 years. The Middle Kingdom began around 2000 BC with the reunification of Egypt under pharoes ruling from Thebes. The Middle Kingdom ended with the conquest of northern Egypt by the Hyksos around 1650 BC. The Hyksos were expelled from Egypt and the land was reunited in the New Kingdom around 1550 BC. This period lasted until about 1000 BC, and saw Egypt expand its borders into Palestine and Syria. The Third Intermediate Period was marked by the rule of priests as well as the conquest of Egypt by Nubian kings and then later Assyria, Persia, and Macedonians.\nNubia.\nThe Ta-Seti kingdom in Nubia to the south of Egypt was conquered by Egyptian rulers around 3100 BC, but by 2500 BC the Nubians had created a new kingdom further south, known as the Kingdom of Kush, centred on the upper Nile with a capital at Kerma. In the Egyptian New Kingdom period, Kush once more was conquered by Egypt. However, by 1100 BC a new kingdom of Kush had formed, with a capital at Napata. Nubian rulers conquered Egypt around 760 BC and retained control for about a century.\nAksum and ancient Ethiopia.\nThe Kingdom of Aksum was an important trading nation in northeastern Africa centred in present-day Eritrea and northern Ethiopia, it existed from approximately AD 100 to 940, growing from the Iron Age proto-Aksumite period around the 4th century BC to achieve prominence by the 1st century AD. The Kingdom of Aksum at its height by the early 6th-century AD extended through much of modern Ethiopia and across the Red Sea to Arabia. The capital city of the empire was Aksum, now in northern Ethiopia.\nNiger-Congo Africa.\nNok culture.\nThe Nok culture appeared in Nigeria around 1000 BC and mysteriously vanished around AD 200. The civilisation's social system is thought to have been highly advanced. The Nok civilisation was considered to be the earliest sub-Saharan producer of life-sized Terracotta which have been discovered by archaeologists. The Nok also used iron smelting that may have been independently developed.\nSahel.\nDjenn\u00e9-Djenno.\nThe civilisation of Djenn\u00e9-Djenno was located in the Niger River Valley in the country of Mali and is considered to be among the oldest urbanised centres and the best-known archaeology site in sub-Saharan Africa. This archaeological site is located about away from the modern town and is believed to have been involved in long-distance trade and possibly the domestication of African rice. The site is believed to exceed ; however, this is yet to be confirmed with extensive survey work. With the help of archaeological excavations mainly by Susan and Roderick McIntosh, the site is known to have been occupied from 250 BC to AD 900. The city is believed to have been abandoned and moved where the current city is located due to the spread of Islam and the building of the Great Mosque of Djenn\u00e9. Previously, it was assumed that advanced trade networks and complex societies did not exist in the region until the arrival of traders from Southwest Asia. However, sites such as Djenn\u00e9-Djenno disprove this, as these traditions in West Africa flourished long before. Towns similar to that at Djenne-Jeno also developed at the site of Dia, also in Mali along the Niger River, from around 900\u00a0BC.\nDhar Tichitt and Oualata.\nDhar Tichitt and Oualata were prominent among the early urban centres, dated to 2000 BC, in present-day Mauritania. About 500 stone settlements littered the region in the former savannah of the Sahara. Its inhabitants fished and grew millet. It has been found that the Soninke of the Mand\u00e9 peoples were responsible for constructing such settlements. Around 300 BC, the region became more desiccated and the settlements began to decline, most likely relocating to Koumbi Saleh. From the type of architecture and pottery, it is believed that Tichit was related to the subsequent Ghana Empire. Old Jenne (Djenne) began to be settled around 300 BC, producing iron and with sizeable population, evidenced in crowded cemeteries. The inhabitants and creators of these settlements during these periods are thought to have been ancestors of the Soninke people.\nBantu expansion.\nPeoples speaking precursors to the modern-day Bantu languages began to spread throughout southern Africa, and by 2000 BC they were expanding past the Congo River and into the Great Lakes area. By AD 1000 these groups had spread throughout all of southern Africa south of the equator. Iron metallurgy and agriculture spread along with these peoples, with the cultivation of millet, oil palms, sorghum, and yams as well as the use of domesticated cattle, pigs, and sheep. These technologies helped increase population, and settled communities became common in sub-Saharan Africa except in deserts or heavy forests.\nSouth Asia.\nPaleolithic tools have been discovered in India dating to 200,000 years ago, and Neolithic sites are known from near the Indus Valley dating to around 8000 BC. Agriculture began in the Indus Valley around 7000 BC, and reached the Ganges Valley by 3000 BC. Barley, cotton, and wheat were grown and the population had domesticated cattle, goats, and sheep.\nThe Indus Valley Civilisation developed around 3000 BC in the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra river valleys of north-east Afghanistan, Pakistan, and western India. Another name for this civilisation is Harappan, after the first of its cities to be excavated, Harappa (now in the Pakistani province of Punjab). Harappan civilisation grew out of the earlier agricultural communities as they evolved into cities. These communities created and traded jewelry, figurines, and seals that appear widely scattered throughout Mesopotamia, Afghanistan, and Iran. Chickens were domesticated in addition to the earlier crops and animals. They developed their own writing system, the Indus Valley script, which is still mostly undeciphered. The exact structure of society and the way the cities were governed is not known. By about 1600 BC, the Indus Valley culture had abandoned many of their cities, including Mohenjo-Daro. The exact reason for this decline is not known.\nIndo-European speaking peoples began to spread into India about 1500 BC. The \"Rigveda\", in Sanskrit, dates to this period and begins a period often known as the Vedic period. Between 1500 and 500 BC these peoples spread throughout most of India and had begun to found small cities. Vedic society was characterised by the \"varna\" system which divided society into four broad castes, which were later elaborated. By the end of the Vedic period, this way of organising society had become central to Indian society. Religion in the late Vedic period was evolving into Hinduism, which spread throughout Southeast Asia. Siddhartha Gautama, born around 560 BC in northern India, went on to found a new religion based on his ascetic life \u2013 Buddhism. This faith also spread throughout Eastern and Southeastern Asia after his death. This period also saw the composition of the epics \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharata\".\nThe kingdom of Magadha rose to prominence under a number of dynasties that peaked in power under the reign of Ashoka Maurya, one of India's most legendary and famous emperors. During the reign of Ashoka, the four dynasties of Chola, Chera, and Pandya were ruling in the South, while Devanampiya Tissa (250\u2013210 BC) controlled Anuradhapura (now Sri Lanka). These kingdoms, while not part of Ashoka's empire, were in friendly terms with the Maurya Empire. An alliance existed between Devanampiya Tissa and Ashoka of India, who sent Buddhist missionaries to Sri Lanka.\nMost of North India was reunited under the Gupta Empire beginning under Chandragupta I around AD 320. Under his successors the empire spread to include much of India except for the Deccan Plateau and the very south of the peninsula. This was a period of relative peace, and the Gupta rulers generally left administration in local rulers. The Gupta Empire was weakened and ultimately ruined by the raids of Hunas (a branch of the Hephthalites emanating from Central Asia), and the empire broke up into smaller regional kingdoms by the end of the fifth century AD. India would remain fragmented into smaller states until the rise of the Mughal Empire in the 1500s.\nSoutheast Asia and Oceania.\nThe Neolithic period of Southeast Asia was characterised by several migrations into Mainland and Island Southeast Asia from southern China by Austronesian, Austroasiatic, Kra-Dai, and Hmong\u2013Mien speakers.\nTerritorial principalities in both Insular and Mainland Southeast Asia, characterised as \"agrarian kingdoms\", developed an economy by around 500\u00a0BCE based on surplus crop cultivation and moderate coastal trade of domestic natural products. Several states of the Malayan-Indonesian \"thalassian\" zone shared these characteristics with Indochinese polities like the Pyu city-states in the Irrawaddy River valley, the V\u0103n Lang kingdom in the Red River Delta and Funan around the lower Mekong. V\u0103n Lang, founded in the 7th century BCE, endured until 258\u00a0BCE under the H\u1ed3ng B\u00e0ng dynasty, as part of the \u0110\u00f4ng S\u01a1n culture that sustained a dense and organised population that produced an elaborate Bronze Age industry.\nIntensive wet-rice cultivation in an ideal climate enabled the farming communities to produce a regular crop surplus that was used by the ruling elite to raise, command and pay work forces for public construction and maintenance projects such as canals and fortifications.\nMainland Southeast Asia.\nThe earliest known evidence of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia was found at Ban Chiang in north-east Thailand and among the Ph\u00f9ng Nguy\u00ean culture of northern Vietnam around 2000\u00a0BCE.\nThe \u0110\u00f4ng S\u01a1n culture established a tradition of bronze production and the manufacture of evermore refined bronze and iron objects, such as plows, axes and sickles with shaft holes, socketed arrows and spearheads and small ornamented items. By about 500\u00a0BCE, large and delicately decorated bronze drums of remarkable quality, weighing more than , were produced in the laborious lost-wax casting process. This industry of highly sophisticated metal processing was developed independent of Chinese or Indian influence. Historians relate these achievements to the presence of organised, centralised and hierarchical communities and a large population.\nBetween 1000\u00a0BCE and 100\u00a0CE, the Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture flourished along the south-central coast of Vietnam. Ceramic jar burial sites that included grave goods have been discovered at various sites along the entire territory. Among large, thin-walled terracotta jars, ornamented and colorized cooking pots, glass items, jade earrings and metal objects were deposited near the rivers and along the coast.\nAustronesia.\nAround 3000 to 1500 BCE, a large-scale migration of Austronesians, known as the Austronesian expansion began from Taiwan. Population growth primarily fueled this migration. These first settlers settled in northern Luzon, in the archipelago of the Philippines, intermingling with the earlier Australo-Melanesian population who had inhabited the islands since about 23,000 years earlier. Over the next thousand years, Austronesian peoples migrated southeast to the rest of the Philippines, and into the islands of the Celebes Sea and Borneo. From southwestern Borneo, Austronesians spread further west in a single migration event to both Sumatra and the coastal regions of southern Vietnam, becoming the ancestors of the speakers of the Malayic and Chamic branches of the Austronesian language family.\nSoon after reaching the Philippines, Austronesians colonized the Northern Mariana Islands by 1500 BCE or even earlier, becoming the first humans to reach Remote Oceania. The Chamorro migration was also unique in that it was the only Austronesian migration to the Pacific Islands to successfully retain rice cultivation. Palau and Yap were settled by separate voyages by 1000 BCE.\nAnother important migration branch was by the Lapita culture, which rapidly spread into the islands off the coast of northern New Guinea and into the Solomon Islands and other parts of coastal New Guinea and Island Melanesia by 1200 BCE. They reached the islands of Fiji, Samoa, and Tonga by around 900 to 800 BCE. This remained the furthest extent of the Austronesian expansion into Polynesia until around 700 CE, when there was another surge of island colonisation. It reached the Cook Islands, Tahiti, and the Marquesas by 700 CE; Hawaii by 900 CE; Rapa Nui by 1000 CE; and New Zealand by 1200 CE. For a few centuries, the Polynesian islands were connected by bidirectional long-distance sailing, with the exception of Rapa Nui, which had limited further contact due to its isolated geographical location. Island groups like the Pitcairns, the Kermadec Islands, and the Norfolk Islands were also formerly settled by Austronesians but later abandoned. There is also putative evidence, based in the spread of the sweet potato, that Austronesians may have reached South America from Polynesia, where they might have traded with the Indigenous peoples of the Americas.\nAustronesians established prehistoric maritime trade networks in Island Southeast Asia, including the Maritime Jade Road, a jade trade network, in Southeast Asia which existed in Taiwan and the Philippines for 3,000 years from 2000 BCE to 1000 CE. The trade was established by links between the indigenous peoples of Taiwan and the Philippines, and later included parts of Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and other areas in Southeast Asia (known as the Sa Huynh-Kalanay Interaction Sphere). Lingling-o artifacts are one of the notable archeological finds originating from the Maritime Jade Road. During the operation of the Maritime Jade Road, the Austronesian spice trade networks were also established by Islander Southeast Asians with Sri Lanka and Southern India by around 1000 to 600 BCE.\nThey also established early long-distance contacts with Africa, possibly as early as before 500 BCE, based on archaeological evidence like banana phytoliths in Cameroon and Uganda and remains of Neolithic chicken bones in Zanzibar. An Austronesian group, originally from the Makassar Strait region around Kalimantan and Sulawesi, eventually , either directly from Southeast Asia or from preexisting mixed Austronesian-Bantu populations from East Africa. Estimates for when this occurred vary from the 1st century CE, to as late as the 6th to 7th centuries CE. It is likely that the Austronesians that settled Madagascar followed a coastal route through South Asia and East Africa, rather than directly across the Indian Ocean. Genetic evidence suggests that some individuals of Austronesian descent reached Africa and the Arabian Peninsula.\nBy around the 2nd century BCE, the Neolithic Austronesian jade and spice trade networks in Southeast Asia connected with the maritime trade routes of South Asia, the Middle East, eastern Africa, and the Mediterranean, becoming what is now known as the Maritime Silk Road. Prior to the 10th century, the eastern part of the route was primarily used by Southeast Asian Austronesian traders using distinctive lashed-lug ships, although Tamil and Persian traders also sailed the western parts of the routes. It allowed the exchange of goods from East and Southeast Asia on one end, all the way to Europe and eastern Africa on the other.\nSrivijaya, an Austronesian polity founded at Palembang in 682 CE, rose to dominate the trade in the region around the straits of Malacca and Sunda and the South China Sea emporium by controlling the trade in luxury aromatics and Buddhist artifacts from West Asia to a thriving Tang market.12 It emerged through the conquest and subjugation of neighboring thalassocracies. These included Melayu, Kedah, Tarumanagara, and Mataram, among others. These polities controlled the sea lanes in Southeast Asia and exploited the spice trade of the Spice Islands, as well as maritime trade-routes between India and China.\nEast Asia.\nChina.\nThe Chinese civilisation that emerged within the Yellow River valley is one of earliest civilisations in the world. Prior to the formation of civilisation, neolithic cultures such as the Longshan and Yangshao dating to 5000 BC produced sophisticated pottery, cultivated millet, and likely produced clothes woven from hemp and silk. Rice was also farmed and pigs and water buffalo were kept for food. Longshan potters may have used the pottery wheel to produce their wares. Ancient Chinese traditions described three ancient dynasties that predated the unification under the Qin and Han dynasties. These were the Xia, the Shang, and the Zhou. It was not until the later 20th century that many historians considered the Shang or Xia to be anything other than legendary. Little is yet known about the Xia, which appears to have begun around 2200 BC, and may have controlled parts of the Yangtze River valley.\nThe Shang dynasty traditionally is dated to 1766 to 1122 BC. Bronze was central to Shang culture and technology, with chariots and bronze weapons helping to expand Shang control over northern China. The cities at Ao and Yinxu, near Anyang, have been excavated and city walls, royal palaces, and archives as well as tombs and workshops were found. A system of writing developed, beginning with oracle bones, of which over 100,000 are still extant.\nTowards the end of the 2nd millennium BC, the Shang were overrun by the Zhou dynasty from the Wei River valley to the west. The Zhou rulers at this time invoked the concept of the Mandate of Heaven to legitimize their rule, a concept that would be influential for almost every successive dynasty. The Zhou initially established their capital in the west near modern Xi'an, near the Yellow River, but they would preside over a series of expansions into the Yangtze River valley. Zhou administration was decentralised, with local elites responsible for collecting tribute and providing military support to the Zhou rulers.\nIn the 8th century BC, power became decentralized during the Spring and Autumn period, named after the influential \"Spring and Autumn Annals\". In this period, local military leaders used by the Zhou began to assert their power and vie for hegemony. The situation was aggravated by the invasion of other peoples, forcing the Zhou to move their capital east to Luoyang. In each of the hundreds of states that eventually arose, local strongmen held most of the political power and continued their subservience to the Zhou kings in name only. The Hundred Schools of Thought of Chinese philosophy blossomed during this period, and such influential intellectual movements as Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism and Mohism were founded, partly in response to the changing political world.\nAfter further political consolidation, seven prominent states remained by the end of the 5th century BC, and the years in which these few states battled each other is known as the Warring States period. Though there remained a nominal Zhou king until 256 BC, he was largely a figurehead and held little power. As neighboring territories of these warring states, including areas of modern Sichuan and Liaoning, were annexed by the growing power of the rulers of Qin, they were governed under the new local administrative system of commandery. The final expansion in this period began during the reign of Ying Zheng, the king of Qin. His unification of the other six powers, and further annexations to the south and southeast by 213 BC enabled him to proclaim himself the First Emperor (Qin Shi Huangdi).\nQin Shi Huangdi ruled the unified China directly with absolute power. In contrast to the decentralised and feudal rule of earlier dynasties the Qin ruled directly. Nationwide the philosophy of legalism was enforced and publications promoting rival ideas such as Confucianism were prohibited. In his reign unified China created the first continuous Great Wall with the use of forced labour. Invasions were launched southward to annex Vietnam. The Qin period also saw the standardisation of the Chinese writing system and the government unified the legal systems as well as setting standardised units of measurement throughout the empire. After the emperor's death rebellions began and the Han dynasty took power and ruled China for over four centuries with a brief interruption from AD 9 to 23. The Han dynasty promoted the spread of iron agricultural tools, which helped create a food surplus that led to a large growth of population during the Han period. Silk production also increased and the manufacture of paper was invented. Though the Han enjoyed great military and economic success, it was strained by the rise of aristocrats who disobeyed the central government. Public frustration provoked the Yellow Turban Rebellion; though a failure it nonetheless accelerated the empire's downfall. After AD 208, the Han dynasty broke up into rival kingdoms. China would remain divided for almost the next 400 years.\nNeighbours of China.\nThe East Asian nations adjacent to China were all profoundly influenced by their interactions with Chinese civilisation. Northwestern Korea and Northern Vietnam were brought under Han rule by Han Wudi in the second century BC, and this rule led to cultural influences on both areas for many centuries to come. Wudi also faced a threat from the Xiongnu, a nomadic people from the Central Asian steppes. Wudi's invasions ended the Xiongnu state.\nIn 108 BC, the Han dynasty of China conquered much of northern Korea but when Han China began its decline, three kingdoms in Korea \u2013 those of Baekje, Goguryeo and Silla \u2013 emerged and expelled the Chinese. Goguryeo and Baekje were eventually destroyed by a Tang dynasty and Silla alliance. Silla then drove out the Tang dynasty in 676 to control most of the Korean peninsula undisputed.\nJomon culture formed in Japan before 500 BC and under Chinese influence became the Yayoi culture which built large tombs by AD 200. In the 300s, a kingdom formed in the Yamato plain, perhaps influenced by Korean refugees.\nAmericas.\nIn pre-Columbian times, several large, centralised ancient civilisations developed in the Western Hemisphere, both in Mesoamerica and western South America. Beyond these areas, the use of agriculture expanded East of the Andes Mountains in South America particularly with the Marajoara culture, and in the continental United States.\nAndean civilisations.\nAncient Andean civilisation began with the rise of organised fishing communities from 3500 BC onwards. Along with a sophisticated maritime society came the construction of large monuments, which likely existed as community centres. The peoples of this area grew beans, cotton, peanuts, and sweet potatoes, fished in the ocean, and by about 2000 BC had added the potato to their crops. The Chavin culture, based around the Chavin cult, emerged around 1000 BC and led to large temples and artworks as well as sophisticated textiles. Gold, silver, and copper were worked for jewelry and occasionally for small copper tools.\nAfter the decline of Chavin culture, a number of cities formed after about 200 BC. The cities at Huari, Pucara, and Tiahuanaco were all likely over 10,000 residents. From about AD 300, the Mochica culture arose along the Moche River. These people left painted pottery depicting their society and culture with a wide range of varied subjects. Besides the Mochica, there were a number of other large states in the Andes after about AD 100. Included amongst these are the Nazca culture, who were mainly village-dwelling but left behind a large ceremonial centre at Cahuachi as well as the Nazca lines, a large number of huge designs set into the desert floor.\nMesoamerica.\nAgricultural cultivation began around 8000 BC in Mesoamerica, where avocados, beans, chili peppers, gourds, and squashes were grown from about 7000 BC. Around 4000 BC maize began to be grown, and soon after this tomatoes. Settlements appeared around 3000 BC and by 2000 BC most of Mesoamerica was practicing agriculture. Although some animals were domesticated \u2014 notably turkeys and dogs \u2014 the lack of suitable large animals precluded the development of animals used for transportation or labour.\nAround 1200 BC the first Olmec centre of San Lorenzo was founded, which remained the centre of Olmec civilisation until around 800 BC when La Venta took over before losing primacy to Tres Zapotes around 400 BC. These and other Olmec centres were groups of tombs, temples, and other ceremonial sites built of stone. Their construction testifies to the complexity of Olmec society, although the exact nature of how they were governed is not known. They also erected large stone sculptures of human heads and other subjects. Jade jewelry and other Olmec objects are found throughout Mesoamerica, likely having travelled via trade networks. The Olmec writing system was mainly used for recording their calendar, both of which influenced later Mesoamerican cultures.\nAfter the decline of the Olmecs, other civilisations in Mesoamerica either arose or emerged from the Olmec shadow - the Mayans, the Zapotecs, and Teotihuacan. The Zapotecs began around 500 BC in the Oaxaca Valley at the site of Monte Alban. Monte Alban grew to around 25,000 residents in the period around AD 200, with the city having large stone temples and an expansive stone plaza. Like the Olmecs, they had a writing system and calendar. But by AD 900 Monte Alban was deserted for unknown reasons. Teotihuacan developed around AD 200 and centred on the city of Teotihuacan, which grew to perhaps as many as 200,000 inhabitants at its height. Teotihuacan lasted until around AD 700, when it was burned and vandalised.\nMaya culture began to emerge around AD 300 in the Yucatan Peninsula and modern-day Guatemala. During the 600 years of the Classical Maya period, more than 80 Mayan sites were built, with temples, pyramids, and palaces the focal point of each centre. The most influential was Tikal, but Mayan civilisation was based on city-states which often were at war with each other. This seems not to have restricted trade, which went on between the cities. A priestly elite kept astronomical and calendrical knowledge, recording it with a writing system based on the Olmec system of glyphs. History, poetry, and other records were recorded in books, most of which did not survive the Spanish conquest of Mesoamerica. Mathematics was also studied, and they used the concept of zero in their calculations. The Mayan civilisation began to decline about AD 800, and most of its cities were deserted soon afterwards.\nNorthern America.\nOrganized societies, in the ancient United States or Canada, were often mound builder civilisations. One of the most significant of these was the Poverty Point culture that existed in the U.S. state of Louisiana, and was responsible for the creation of over 100 mound sites. The Mississippi River was a core area in the development of long-distance trade and culture. Following Poverty Point, successive complex cultures such as the Hopewell emerged in the Southeastern United States in the Early Woodland period. Before AD 500 many mound builder societies retained a hunter gatherer form of subsistence.\nEurope.\nGreece.\nGreece is home to the first advanced civilizations in Europe beginning with the Cycladic culture on the islands of the Aegean Sea around 3200 BC, and the Minoan civilisation in Crete (2700\u20131500 BC). The Minoans built large palaces decorated with frescoes and wrote in the undeciphered script known as Linear A. The Mycenaean civilization, the first distinctively Greek civilisation later emerged on the mainland (1600\u20131100 BC), consisting of a network of palace-centred states and writing the earliest attested form of Greek with the Linear B script. The Mycenaeans gradually absorbed the Minoans, but collapsed violently around 1200 BC, along with several other civilizations in the eastern Mediterranean, during the regional event known as the Late Bronze Age collapse. This ushered in a period known as the Greek Dark Ages, from which written records are absent.\nThe Archaic Period in Greece is generally considered to have lasted from around the 8th century BC to the invasion by Xerxes in 480 BC. This period saw the expansion of the Greek world around the Mediterranean, with the founding of Greek city-states as far afield as Sicily in the west and the Black Sea in the east. Politically, the Archaic period in Greece saw the collapse of the power of the old aristocracies, with democratic reforms in Athens and the development of Sparta's unique constitution. The end of the Archaic period also saw the rise of Athens, which would come to be a dominant power in the Classical Period, after the reforms of Solon and the tyranny of Pisistratus.\nThe Classical Greek world was dominated throughout the 5th century BC by the major powers of Athens and Sparta. Through the Delian League, Athens was able to convert pan-hellenist sentiment and fear of the Persian threat into a powerful empire, and this, along with the conflict between Sparta and Athens culminating in the Peloponnesian War, was the major political development of the first part of the Classical period. The period in Greek history from the death of Alexander the Great until the rise of the Roman empire and its conquest of Egypt in 30 BC is known as the Hellenistic period. After Alexander's death, a series of wars between his successors eventually led to three large states being formed from parts of Alexander's conquests, each ruled by a dynasty founded by one of the successors. These were the Antigonids, the Selucids, and the Ptolemies. These three kingdoms, along with smaller kingdoms, spread Greek culture and lifestyles into Asia and Egypt. These varying states eventually were conquered by Rome or the Parthian Empire.\nRome.\nAncient Rome was a civilisation that grew out of the city-state of Rome, originating as a small agricultural community founded on the Italian peninsula in the 8th century BC, with influences from Greece and other Italian civilisations, such as the Etruscans. Traditionally Rome was founded as a monarchy that then became a republic. Rome expanded through the Italian peninsula through a series of wars in the fifth through the third centuries BC. This expansion brought the Roman republic into conflict with Carthage, leading to a series of Punic Wars, that ended with the destruction of Carthage in 146 BC. Rome then expanded into Greece and the eastern Mediterranean, while a series of internal conflicts led to the republic becoming an empire ruled by an emperor by the first century AD. Throughout the first and second centuries AD, the Empire grew slightly while spreading Roman culture throughout its boundaries.\nA number of factors led to the eventual decline of the Roman Empire. The western half of the empire, including Hispania, Gaul, and Italy, eventually broke into independent kingdoms in the 5th century AD; the Eastern Roman Empire, governed from Constantinople, is referred to as the Byzantine Empire after AD 476, the traditional date for the \"fall of Rome\" and subsequent onset of the Middle Ages.\nLate antiquity.\nThe Roman Empire underwent considerable social, cultural and organisational change starting with reign of Diocletian, who began the custom of splitting the empire into eastern and western halves ruled by multiple emperors. Constantine the Great initiated the process of Christianisation of the empire and established a new capital at Constantinople. Migrations of Germanic tribes disrupted Roman rule from the late 4th century onwards, culminating in the eventual collapse of the empire in the West in 476, replaced by the so-called barbarian kingdoms. The resultant cultural fusion of Greco-Roman, Germanic and Christian traditions formed the cultural foundations of Europe. There has been attempt by scholars to connect European late antiquity to other areas in Eurasia.\nNomads and Iron Age peoples.\nThe Celts were a diverse group of tribal societies in Iron Age Europe. Proto-Celtic culture formed in the Early Iron Age in Central Europe (Hallstatt period, named for the site in present-day Austria). By the later Iron Age (La T\u00e8ne period), Celts had expanded over wide range of lands: as far west as Ireland and the Iberian Peninsula, as far east as Galatia (central Anatolia), and as far north as Scotland. By the early centuries AD, following the expansion of the Roman Empire and the Great Migrations of Germanic peoples, Celtic culture had become restricted to the British Isles.\nThe Huns were a nomadic people who formed a large state in Eastern Europe by about AD 400, and under their leader Attila, they fought against both sections of the Roman Empire. However, after Attila's death, the state fell apart and the Huns' influence in history disappeared. The Hun-Xiongnu connection is controversial at best and is often disputed but is also not completely discredited.\nMigration of Germanic peoples to Britain from what is now northern Germany and southern Scandinavia is attested from the 5th century. Groups of Goths migrated into western Europe, with the Ostrogoths eventually settling in Italy before being conquered by the Lombards. A related people, the Visigoths, settled in Spain, founding a kingdom that lasted until it was conquered by Islamic rulers in the AD 700s.\nSeveral Indo-european speaking peoples inhabited the Balkan peninsula including the Thracians and Illyrians, that were divided into many tribes. The first Illyrian tribe to create its own kingdom was the Enchelei, which formed its own state around the 8th-7th century BC and reached the height of their power under king Bardylis. The Ardiani were infamous for their piracy and wars against the Roman Empire, for the first time between 229 BC-228 BC, then for a second time during 220 BC-219 BC and for a third time during 168 BC.\nDevelopments.\nReligion and philosophy.\nThe rise of civilisation corresponded with the institutional sponsorship of belief in gods, supernatural forces and the afterlife. During the Bronze Age, many civilisations adopted their own form of polytheism. Usually, polytheistic Gods manifested human personalities, strengths and failings. Early religion was often based on location, with cities or entire countries selecting a deity, that would grant them preferences and advantages over their competitors. Worship involved the construction of representation of deities, and the granting of sacrifices. Sacrifices could be material goods, food, or in extreme cases human sacrifice to please a deity. New philosophies and religions arose in both east and west, particularly about the 6th century BC. Over time, a great variety of religions developed around the world, with some of the earliest major ones being Hinduism (around 2000 BC), Buddhism (5th century BC), and Jainism (6th century BC) in India, and Zoroastrianism in Persia. The Abrahamic religions trace their origin to Judaism, around 1700 BC.\nIn the east, three schools of thought were to dominate Chinese thinking until the modern day. These were Taoism, Legalism and Confucianism. The Confucian tradition, which would attain dominance, looked for political morality not to the force of law but to the power and example of tradition. Confucianism would later spread into the Korean peninsula and Japan.\nIn the west, the Greek philosophical tradition, represented by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, was diffused throughout Europe and the Middle East in the 4th century BC by the conquests of Alexander the Great. After the Bronze and Iron Age religions formed, Christianity spread through the Roman world.\nScience and technology.\nAncient technological progress began before the recording of history, with tools, use of fire, domestication of animals, and agriculture all predating recorded history. The use of metals and the ability to make metal alloys was foundational for later technologies to develop. Medical knowledge, including the use of herbs to treat illnesses and wounds as well as some surgical techniques, advanced during antiquity. An early very important development that allowed for further advancement was writing, which allowed humans to record information for later use.\nThe characteristics of ancient Egyptian technology are indicated by a set of artifacts and customs that lasted for thousands of years. The Egyptians invented and used many basic machines, such as the ramp and the lever, to aid construction processes. The Egyptians also played an important role in developing Mediterranean maritime technology, including ships. The Babylonians and Egyptians were early astronomers who recorded their observations of the night sky.\nWater managing Qanats which likely emerged on the Iranian plateau and possibly also in the Arabian peninsula sometime in the early 1st millennium BC spread from there slowly west- and eastward.\nThe Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system with the concept of zero was developed in India, while modern forms of paper were invented in China in the first century AD.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51321", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51321", "title": "East Asian history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51322", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51322", "title": "Medieval European history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51323", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51323", "title": "Islamic history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51324", "revid": "14784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51324", "title": "South Asian history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51325", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51325", "title": "African history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51326", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51326", "title": "Russian history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51327", "revid": "17313478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51327", "title": "Byzantine history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51328", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51328", "title": "Southeast Asian history", "text": ""}
{"id": "51329", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51329", "title": "Famine", "text": "Widespread scarcity of food\nA famine is a widespread scarcity of food caused by several possible factors, including, but not limited to: war, natural disasters, crop failure, widespread poverty, an economic catastrophe or government policies. This phenomenon is usually accompanied or followed by regional malnutrition, starvation, epidemic, and increased mortality. Every inhabited continent in the world has experienced a period of famine throughout history. During the 19th and 20th centuries, Southeast and South Asia, as well as Eastern and Central Europe, suffered the greatest number of fatalities due to famine. Deaths caused by famine declined sharply beginning in the 1970s, with numbers falling further since 2000. Since 2010, Africa has been the most affected continent in the world by famine. As of 2025, Haiti and Afghanistan are the two countries with the most catastrophic and widespread states of famine, followed by Sudan.\nDefinitions.\nAccording to the United Nations World Food Programme, famine is declared when malnutrition is widespread, and when people have started dying from starvation through lack of access to sufficient,\u00a0nutritious food. The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification criteria define \"Phase 5 famine\" of acute food insecurity as occurring when all three of the following situations exist at the same time:\nThe declaration of a famine carries no binding obligations on the UN or member states, but serves to focus global attention on the problem.\nHistory.\nThe cyclical occurrence of famine has been a mainstay of societies engaged in subsistence agriculture since the dawn of agriculture itself. The frequency and intensity of famine has fluctuated throughout history, depending on changes in food demand, such as population growth, and supply-side shifts caused by changing climatic conditions.\nDecline of famine.\nIn the 16th and 17th centuries, the feudal system began to break down, and more prosperous farmers began to enclose their own land and improve their yields to sell the surplus crops for a profit. These capitalist landowners paid their labourers with money, thereby increasing the commercialization of rural society. In the emerging competitive labour market, better techniques for the improvement of labour productivity were increasingly valued and rewarded. It was in the farmer's interest to produce as much as possible on their land, in order to sell it to areas that demanded their produce. They produced guaranteed surpluses of their crop every year if they could.\nSubsistence peasants were also increasingly forced to commercialize their activities because of increasing taxes. Taxes that had to be paid to central governments in money, forced the peasants to produce crops intended for sale at market. This often meant producing industrial crops alongside subsistence crops, and forced peasants to increase their production in order to meet both their subsistence requirements as well as their tax obligations. Peasants also used the new money to purchase manufactured goods. The agricultural and social developments encouraging increased food production were gradually taking place throughout the 16th century, but took off in the early 17th century.\nBy the 1590s, these trends were sufficiently developed in the rich and commercialized province of Holland to allow its population to withstand a general outbreak of famine in Western Europe at that time. By that time, the Netherlands had one of the most commercialized agricultural systems in Europe. They grew many industrial crops such as flax, hemp and hops. Agriculture became increasingly specialized and efficient. The efficiency of Dutch agriculture allowed for much more rapid urbanization in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries than anywhere else in Europe. As a result, productivity and wealth increased, allowing the Netherlands to maintain a steady food supply.\nBy 1650, English agriculture had also become commercialized on a much wider scale. The last peacetime famine in England was in 1623\u201324. There were still periods of hunger, as in the Netherlands, but no more famines ever occurred. Common areas for pasture were enclosed for private use and large scale, efficient farms were consolidated. Other technical developments included the draining of marshes, more efficient field use patterns, and the wider introduction of industrial crops. These agricultural developments led to wider prosperity in England and increasing urbanization. By the end of the 17th century, English agriculture was the most productive in Europe. In both England and the Netherlands, the population stabilized between 1650 and 1750, the same time period in which the sweeping changes to agriculture occurred. Famine still occurred in other parts of Europe, however. In Eastern Europe, famines occurred as late as the twentieth century.\nAttempts at famine alleviation.\nIn pre-industrial Europe preventing famine and ensuring timely food supplies was one of the chief concerns of many governments, as famines could lead to revolt and other forms of social disruption. Most government they were severely limited in their options, though, due to limited levels of external trade, infrastructure, and bureaucracy generally too rudimentary to effect real relief.\nBy the mid-19th century and the onset of the Industrial Revolution, it became possible for governments to alleviate the effects of famine through price controls, large scale importation of food products from foreign markets, stockpiling, rationing, regulation of production and charity. The Great Famine of 1845 in Ireland was one of the first famines to feature such intervention, although the government response was often lackluster. The initial response of the British government to the early phase of the famine was \"prompt and relatively successful\", according to F. S. L. Lyons. Confronted by widespread crop failure in the autumn of 1845, Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel purchased \u00a3100,000 worth of maize and cornmeal secretly from America. Baring Brothers &amp; Co initially acted as purchasing agents for the Prime Minister. The government hoped that they would not \"stifle private enterprise\" and that their actions would not act as a disincentive to local relief efforts. Due to weather conditions, the first shipment did not arrive in Ireland until the beginning of February 1846. The maize corn was then re-sold for a penny a pound.\nIn 1846, Peel moved to repeal the Corn Laws, tariffs on grain which kept the price of bread artificially high. The famine situation worsened during 1846 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in that year did little to help the starving Irish; the measure split the Conservative Party, leading to the fall of Peel's ministry. In March, Peel set up a programme of public works in Ireland.\nDespite this promising start, the measures undertaken by Peel's successor, Lord John Russell, proved comparatively \"inadequate\" as the crisis deepened. Russell's ministry introduced public works projects, which by December 1846 employed some half million Irish and proved impossible to administer. The government was influenced by a laissez-faire belief that the market would provide the food needed. It halted government food and relief works, and turned to a mixture of \"indoor\" and \"outdoor\" direct relief; the former administered in workhouses through the Poor Law, the latter through soup kitchens.\nA systematic attempt at creating the necessary regulatory framework for dealing with famine was developed by the British Raj in the 1880s. In order to comprehensively address the issue of famine, the British created an Indian Famine commission to recommend steps that the government would be required to take in the event of a famine. The Famine Commission issued a series of government guidelines and regulations on how to respond to famines and food shortages called the Famine Code. The famine code was also one of the first attempts to scientifically predict famine in order to mitigate its effects. These were finally passed into law in 1883 under Lord Ripon.\nThe Code introduced the first famine scale: three levels of food insecurity were defined: near-scarcity, scarcity, and famine. \"Scarcity\" was defined as three successive years of crop failure, crop yields of one-third or one-half normal, and large populations in distress. \"Famine\" further included a rise in food prices above 140% of \"normal\", the movement of people in search of food, and widespread mortality. The Commission identified that the loss of wages from lack of employment of agricultural labourers and artisans were the cause of famines. The Famine Code applied a strategy of generating employment for these sections of the population and relied on open-ended public works to do so.\n20th century.\nDuring the 20th century, an estimated 70 to 120 million people died from famines across the world, of whom over half died in China, with an estimated 30 million dying during the famine of 1958\u20131961, up to 10 million in the Chinese famine of 1928\u20131930, and over two million in the Chinese famine of 1942\u20131943, and millions more lost in famines in North and East China. The USSR lost 8 million claimed by the Soviet famine of 1930\u20131933, over a million in both the Soviet famine of 1946\u20131947 and Siege of Leningrad, the 5 million in the Russian famine of 1921\u20131922, and others famines. Java suffered 2.5 million deaths under Japanese occupation during World War Two. The other most notable famine of the century was the Bengal famine of 1943, resulting both from the Japanese occupation of Burma, resulting in an influx of refugees, and blocking Burmese grain imports and a failure of the Bengali provincial Government to declare a famine, and fund relief, the imposition of grain and transport embargoes by the neighbouring provincial administrations, to prevent their own stocks being transferred to Bengal, the failure to implement India wide rationing by the central Delhi authority, hoarding and profiteering by merchants, medieval land management practices, an Axis powers denial program that confiscated boats once used to transport grain, a Delhi administration that prioritised supplying, and offering medical treatment to the British Indian Army, War workers, and Civil servants, over the populace at large, incompetence and ignorance, and an Imperial War Cabinet initially leaving the issue to the Colonial administration to resolve, than to the original local crop failures, and blights.\nA few of the great famines of the late 20th century were: the Biafran famine in the 1960s, the Khmer Rouge-caused famine in Cambodia in the 1970s, the North Korean famine of the 1990s, and the Ethiopian famine of 1983\u20131985. Approximately 3 million died as a consequence of the Second Congo War.\nThe Ethiopian famine was reported on television reports around the world, carrying footage of starving Ethiopians whose plight was centered around a feeding station near the town of Korem. This stimulated the first mass movements to end famine across the world.\nBBC newsreader Michael Buerk gave moving commentary of the tragedy on 23 October 1984, which he described as a \"biblical famine\". This prompted the Band Aid single, which was organized by Bob Geldof and featured more than 20 pop stars. The Live Aid concerts in London and Philadelphia raised even more funds for the cause. Hundreds of thousands of people died within one year as a result of the famine, but the publicity Live Aid generated encouraged Western nations to make available enough surplus grain to end the immediate hunger crisis in Africa.\nSome of the famines of the 20th century served the geopolitical purposes of governments, including traumatizing and replacing distrusted ethnic populations in strategically important regions, rendering regions vulnerable to invasion difficult to govern by an enemy power and shifting the burden of food shortage onto regions where the distress of the population posed a lesser risk of catastrophic regime de-legitimation.\n21st century.\nUntil 2017, worldwide deaths from famine had been falling dramatically. The World Peace Foundation reported that from the 1870s to the 1970s, great famines killed an average of 928,000 people a year. Since 1980, annual deaths had dropped to an average of 75,000, less than 10% of what they had been until the 1970s. That reduction was achieved despite the approximately 150,000 lives lost in the 2011 Somalia famine. Yet in 2017, the UN officially declared famine had returned to Africa, with about 20 million people at risk of death from starvation in the northern part of Nigeria, in South Sudan, in Yemen, and in Somalia.\nOn 20 April 2021, hundreds of aid organizations from around the world wrote an open letter to The Guardian newspaper, warning that millions of people in Yemen, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Burkina Faso, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Honduras, Venezuela, Nigeria, Haiti, Central African Republic, Uganda, Zimbabwe and Sudan faced starvation. Organizations including the International Council of Voluntary Agencies and the World Food Programme said: \"Girls and boys, men and women, are being starved by conflict and violence; by inequality; by the impacts of climate change; by the loss of land, jobs of prospects; by a fight against Covid-19 that has left them even further behind\". The groups warned that funding had dwindled, while money alone would not be enough by itself. Governments should step in to end conflicts and ensure humanitarian access, they said. \"If no action is taken, lives will be lost. The responsibility to address this lies with states\", they added.\nIn November 2021, the World Food Programme reported that 45 million people were \"teetering on the very edge of famine\" in 43 countries and that the slightest shock would push them over the precipice. This number had risen from 42 million earlier in 2021, and from 27 million in 2019. The slightest shock \u2014 be it extreme weather linked to climate change, conflict, or the deadly interplay of both hunger drivers \u2014 could push tens of millions of people into irreversible peril, a prospect the agency had been warning of for more than a year. Afghanistan was becoming the world's largest humanitarian crisis, with the country's needs surpassing those of the other worst-hit countries \u2014 Ethiopia, South Sudan, Syria and even Yemen.\nIn August 2024, famine was declared in Sudan, where several refugee camps, displaced by the ongoing Sudanese civil war, were found to be facing severe famine conditions. According to the IPC, over 24 million people are facing acute food insecurity, and a phase 5 famine was detected in multiple regions. UN experts have accused the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) of using 'starvation tactics' against the civilians in the country, and have said \"Never in modern history have so many people faced starvation and famine as in Sudan today\".\nIn August 2025, famine was declared in Gaza, More than half a million people in Gaza were trapped in famine, marked by widespread starvation, destitution and preventable deaths, according to a new Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis that was released, Access to food in Gaza remains severely constrained. In July, the number of households reporting very severe hunger doubled across the territory compared to May and more than tripled in Gaza City. More than one in three people (39 percent) indicated they were going days at a time without eating, and adults regularly skip meals to feed their children.\nMalnutrition among children in Gaza is accelerating at a catastrophic pace. In July alone, more than 12,000 children were identified as acutely malnourished \u2013 the highest monthly figure ever recorded and a six-fold increase since the start of the year. Nearly one in four of these children were suffering from severe acute malnutrition (SAM), the deadliest form with both short and long-term impacts.\nAccording to the IPC Analysis in May, the number of children expected to be at severe risk of death from malnutrition by the end of June 2026 has tripled from 14,100 to 43,400. Similarly, for pregnant and breastfeeding women, the number of estimated cases has tripled from 17,000 in May to 55,000 women expected to be suffering from perilous levels of malnutrition by mid-2026. The impact is visible: one in five babies are born prematurely or underweight.\nThe new assessment reports the most severe deterioration since the IPC began analyzing acute food insecurity and acute malnutrition in the Gaza Strip, and it marks the first time a famine has been officially confirmed in the Middle East region.\nMeanwhile, approximately 98 percent of cropland in the territory is damaged or inaccessible \u2013 decimating the agriculture sector and local food production \u2013 and nine of ten people have been serially displaced from homes. Cash is critically scarce, aid operations remain severely disrupted, with most UN trucks looted amid growing desperation. Food prices are extremely high and there is not enough fuel and water to cook and medicines and medical supplies.\nGaza's health system has severely deteriorated, access to safe drinking water and sanitation services has been drastically reduced, while multi-drug resistant infections are surging and levels of morbidity \u2013 including diarrhea, fever, acute respiratory and skin infections \u2013 are alarmingly high among children.\nRegional history.\nAfrica.\nEarly history.\nIn the mid-22nd century BC, a sudden and short-lived climatic change that caused reduced rainfall resulted in several decades of drought in Upper Egypt. The resulting famine and civil strife is believed to have been a major cause of the collapse of the Old Kingdom. An account from the First Intermediate Period states, \"All of Upper Egypt was dying of hunger and people were eating their children.\" As for recorded examples about more recent centuries: in the 1680s, famine extended across the entire Sahel, and in 1738 half the population of Timbuktu died of famine. In Egypt, between 1687 and 1731, there were six famines. The famine that afflicted Egypt in 1784 cost it roughly one-sixth of its population. The Maghreb experienced famine and plague in the late 18th century and early 19th century. There was famine in Tripoli in 1784, and in Tunis in 1785.\nAccording to John Iliffe, \"Portuguese records of Angola from the 16th century show that a great famine occurred on average every seventy years; accompanied by epidemic disease, it might kill one-third or one-half of the population, destroying the demographic growth of a generation and forcing colonists back into the river valleys.\"\nThe first documentation of weather in West-Central Africa occurred around the mid-16th to 17th centuries in areas such as Luanda Kongo, however, not much data was recorded on the issues of weather and disease except for a few notable documents. The only records obtained are of violence between Portuguese and Africans during the Battle of Mbwila in 1665. In these documents the Portuguese wrote of African raids on Portuguese merchants solely for food, giving clear signs of famine. Additionally, instances of cannibalism by the African Jaga were also more prevalent during this time frame, indicating an extreme deprivation of a primary food source.\nColonial period.\nA notable period of famine occurred around the turn of the 20th century in the Congo Free State. In forming this state, Leopold used mass labor camps to finance his empire. This period resulted in the death of up to 10 million Congolese from brutality, disease and famine. Some colonial \"pacification\" efforts often caused severe famine, notably with the repression of the Maji Maji revolt in Tanganyika in 1906. The introduction of cash crops such as cotton, and forcible measures to impel farmers to grow these crops, sometimes impoverished the peasantry in many areas, such as northern Nigeria, contributing to greater vulnerability to famine when severe drought struck in 1913.\nA large-scale famine occurred in Ethiopia in 1888 and in succeeding years, as the rinderpest epizootic, introduced into Eritrea by infected cattle, spread southwards reaching ultimately as far as South Africa. In Ethiopia it was estimated that as much as 90 percent of the national herd died, rendering rich farmers and herders destitute overnight. This coincided with drought associated with an \"El Ni\u00f1o\" oscillation, human epidemics of smallpox, and in several countries, intense war. The Ethiopian Great famine that afflicted Ethiopia from 1888 to 1892 cost it roughly one-third of its population. In Sudan the year 1888 is remembered as the worst famine in history, on account of these factors and also the exactions imposed by the Mahdist state.\nThe oral traditions of the Himba people recall two droughts from 1910 to 1917. From 1910 to 1911 the Himba described the drought as \"drought of the omutati seed\", also called \"omangowi\", the fruit of an unidentified vine that people ate during the time period. From 1914 to 1916, droughts brought \"katur' ombanda\" or \"kari' ombanda\" 'the time of eating clothing'.\n20th century.\nFor the middle part of the 20th century, agriculturalists, economists and geographers did not consider Africa to be especially famine prone. From 1870 to 2010, 87% of deaths from famine occurred in Asia and Eastern Europe, with only 9.2% in Africa. There were notable counter-examples, such as the famine in Rwanda during World War II and the Malawi famine of 1949, but most famines were localized and brief food shortages. Although the drought was brief the main cause of death in Rwanda was due to Belgian prerogatives to acquisition grain from their colony (Rwanda). The increased grain acquisition was related to WW2. This and the drought caused 300,000 Rwandans to perish.\nFrom 1967 to 1969 large scale famine occurred in Biafra and Nigeria due to a government blockade of the Breakaway territory. It is estimated that 1.5 million people died of starvation due to this famine. Additionally, drought and other government interference with the food supply caused 500 thousand Africans to perish in Central and West Africa.\nFamine recurred in the early 1970s, when Ethiopia and the west African Sahel suffered drought and famine. The Ethiopian famine of that time was closely linked to the crisis of feudalism in that country, and in due course helped to bring about the downfall of the Emperor Haile Selassie. The Sahelian famine was associated with the slowly growing crisis of pastoralism in Africa, which has seen livestock herding decline as a viable way of life over the last two generations.\nFamines occurred in Sudan in the late-1970s and again in 1990 and 1998. The 1980 famine in Karamoja, Uganda was, in terms of mortality rates, one of the worst in history. 21% of the population died, including 60% of the infants. In the 1980s, large scale multilayer drought occurred in the Sudan and Sahelian regions of Africa. This caused famine because even though the Sudanese Government believed there was a surplus of grain, there were local deficits across the region.\nIn October 1984, television reports describing the Ethiopian famine as \"biblical\", prompted the Live Aid concerts in London and Philadelphia, which raised large sums to alleviate the suffering. A primary cause of the famine (one of the largest seen in the country) is that Ethiopia (and the surrounding Horn) was still recovering from the droughts which occurred in the mid-late 1970s. Compounding this problem was the intermittent fighting due to Ethiopian Civil War, the government's lack of organization in providing relief, and hoarding of supplies to control the population. Ultimately, over 1 million Ethiopians died and over 22 million people suffered due to the prolonged drought, which lasted roughly 2 years.\nIn 1992 Somalia became a war zone with no effective government, police, or basic services after the collapse of the dictatorship led by Siad Barre and the split of power between warlords. This coincided with a massive drought, causing over 300,000 Somalis to perish.\nRecent years.\nSince the start of the 21st century, more effective early warning and humanitarian response actions have reduced the number of deaths by famine markedly. That said, many African countries are not self-sufficient in food production, relying on income from cash crops to import food. Agriculture in Africa is susceptible to climatic fluctuations, especially droughts which can reduce the amount of food produced locally. Other agricultural problems include soil infertility, land degradation and erosion, swarms of desert locusts, which can destroy whole crops, and livestock diseases. Desertification is increasingly problematic: the Sahara reportedly spreads up to per year. The most serious famines have been caused by a combination of drought, misguided economic policies, and conflict. The 1983\u201385 famine in Ethiopia, for example, was the outcome of all these three factors, made worse by the Communist government's censorship of the emerging crisis. In Capitalist Sudan at the same date, drought and economic crisis combined with denials of any food shortage by the then-government of President Gaafar Nimeiry, to create a crisis that killed perhaps 250,000 people\u2014and helped bring about a popular uprising that overthrew Nimeiry.\nNumerous factors make the food security situation in Africa tenuous, including political instability, armed conflict and civil war, corruption and mismanagement in handling food supplies, and trade policies that harm African agriculture. An example of a famine created by human rights abuses is the 1998 Sudan famine. AIDS is also having long-term economic effects on agriculture by reducing the available workforce, and is creating new vulnerabilities to famine by overburdening poor households. On the other hand, in the modern history of Africa on quite a few occasions famines acted as a major source of acute political instability. In Africa, if current trends of population growth and soil degradation continue, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to United Nations University (UNU)'s Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.\nFamines in the early 21st century in Africa include the 2005\u201306 Niger food crisis, the 2010 Sahel famine and the 2011 East Africa drought, where two consecutive missed rainy seasons precipitated one of the worst droughts in East Africa in 60 years. An estimated 50,000 to 150,000 people are reported to have died during the period. In 2012, the Sahel drought put more than 10 million people in the western Sahel at risk of famine (according to a Methodist Relief &amp; Development Fund (MRDF) aid expert), due to a month-long heat wave.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.poverties.org Famine in Africa\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nToday, famine is most widespread in Sub-Saharan Africa, but with exhaustion of food resources, overdrafting of groundwater, wars, internal struggles, and economic failure, famine continues to be a worldwide problem with hundreds of millions of people suffering. These famines cause widespread malnutrition and impoverishment. The famine in Ethiopia in the 1980s had an immense death toll, although Asian famines of the 20th century have also produced extensive death tolls. Modern African famines are characterized by widespread destitution and malnutrition, with heightened mortality confined to young children.\nCurrent initiatives.\nAgainst a backdrop of conventional interventions through the state or markets, alternative initiatives have been pioneered to address the problem of food security. One pan-African example is the Great Green Wall. Another example is the \"Community Area-Based Development Approach\" to agricultural development (\"CABDA\"), an NGO programme with the objective of providing an alternative approach to increasing food security in Africa. CABDA proceeds through specific areas of intervention such as the introduction of drought-resistant crops and new methods of food production such as agro-forestry. Piloted in Ethiopia in the 1990s it has spread to Malawi, Uganda, Eritrea and Kenya. In an analysis of the programme by the Overseas Development Institute, CABDA's focus on individual and community capacity-building is highlighted. This enables farmers to influence and drive their own development through community-run institutions, bringing food security to their household and region.\nThe role of African Unity organization.\nThe organization of African unity and its role in the African crisis has been interested in the political aspects of the continent, especially the liberation of the occupied parts of it and the elimination of racism. The organization has succeeded in this area, but has not achieved success in the economic field or in development. African leaders have agreed to waive the role of their organization in the development to the United Nations through the Economic Commission for Africa \"ECA\".\nFar East.\nChina.\nChinese scholars had kept count of 1,828 instances of famine from 108\u00a0BCE to 1911 in one province or another\u2014an average of more than one famine per year. A major famine from 1333 to 1337 killed 6 million. The four famines of 1810, 1811, 1846, and 1849 are said to have killed no fewer than 45 million people.\nChina's Qing dynasty bureaucracy devoted extensive attention to minimizing famines with a network of granaries. Its famines generally occurred immediately after El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation-linked droughts and floods. These events are comparable, though somewhat smaller in scale, to the ecological trigger events of China's vast 19th-century famines. Qing China carried out its relief efforts, which included vast shipments of food, a requirement that the rich open their storehouses to the poor, and price regulation, as part of a state guarantee of subsistence to the peasantry (known as \"ming-sheng\"). However the Taiping Rebellion of the 1850s disrupted the granary relief system such that 1850 to 1873 saw the population of China drop by over 30 million people from early deaths and missing births.\nWhen a stressed monarchy shifted from state management and direct shipments of grain to monetary charity in the mid-19th century, the system broke down. Thus the 1867\u201368 famine under the Tongzhi Restoration was successfully relieved but the Great North China Famine of 1877\u201378, caused by drought across northern China, was a catastrophe. The province of Shanxi was substantially depopulated as grains ran out, and desperately starving people stripped forests, fields, and their very houses for food. Estimated mortality is 9.5 to 13 million people.\nGreat Leap Forward 1958\u20131961.\nThe largest famine of the 20th century was the 1958\u20131961 famine associated with the Great Leap Forward in China. The immediate causes of this famine lay in Mao Zedong's ill-fated attempt to transform China from an agricultural nation to an industrial power in one huge leap. Communist Party cadres across China insisted that peasants abandon their farms for collective farms, and begin to produce steel in small foundries, often melting down their farm instruments in the process. Collectivisation undermined incentives for the investment of labor and resources in agriculture; unrealistic plans for decentralized metal production sapped needed labor; unfavorable weather conditions; and communal dining halls encouraged overconsumption of available food. Such was the centralized control of information and the intense pressure on party cadres to report only good news\u2014such as production quotas met or exceeded\u2014that information about the escalating disaster was effectively suppressed. When the leadership did become aware of the scale of the famine, it did little to respond, and continued to ban any discussion of the cataclysm. This blanket suppression of news was so effective that very few Chinese citizens were aware of the scale of the famine, and the greatest peacetime demographic disaster of the 20th century only became widely known twenty years later, when the veil of censorship began to lift.\nThe exact number of famine deaths during 1958\u20131961 is difficult to determine, and estimates range from 18 million to at least 42 million people, with a further 30 million cancelled or delayed births. It was only when the famine had wrought its worst that Mao reversed agricultural collectivisation policies, which were effectively dismantled in 1978. China has not experienced a famine of the proportions of the Great Leap Forward since 1961.\nJapan.\nJapan experienced more than 130 famines between 1603 and 1868.\nCambodia.\nIn 1975, the Khmer Rouge took control of Cambodia. The new government was led by Pol Pot, who desired to turn Cambodia into a communist, agrarian utopia. His regime emptied the cities, abolished currency and private property, and forced Cambodia's population into slavery on communal farms. In less than four years, the Khmer Rouge had executed nearly 1.4 million people, mostly those believed to be a threat to the new ideology.\nDue to the failure of the Khmer Rouge's agrarian reform policies, Cambodia experienced widespread famine. As many as one million more died from starvation, disease, and exhaustion resulting from these policies. In 1979 Vietnam invaded Cambodia and removed the Khmer Rouge from power. By that time about one quarter of Cambodia's population had been killed.\nNorth Korean famine in the 1990s.\nFamine struck North Korea in the mid-1990s, set off by unprecedented floods. This autarkic urban, industrial state depended on massive inputs of subsidised goods, including fossil fuels, primarily from the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. When the Soviet collapse and China's marketization switched trade to a hard currency, full-price basis, North Korea's economy collapsed. The vulnerable agricultural sector experienced a massive failure in 1995\u201396, expanding to full-fledged famine by 1996\u20131999.\nEstimates based on the North Korean census suggest that 240,000 to 420,000 people died as a result of the famine and that there were 600,000 to 850,000 unnatural deaths in North Korea from 1993 to 2008. North Korea has not yet regained food self-sufficiency and relies on external food aid from China, Japan, South Korea, Russia and the United States. While Woo-Cumings have focused on the FAD side of the famine, Moon argues that FAD shifted the incentive structure of the authoritarian regime to react in a way that forced millions of disenfranchised people to starve to death.\nAccording to the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), North Korea is facing a serious cereal shortfall in 2017 after the country's crop harvest was diminished as a result of severe drought. The FAO estimated that early-season production fell by over 30 percent compared to agricultural output from the previous year, leading to the country's worst famine since 2001.\nVietnam.\nThe Japanese occupation during World War II caused the Vietnamese famine of 1944\u20131945, which caused around 700,000 to 2,000,000 deaths.\nIndia.\nOwing to its almost entire dependence upon the monsoon rains, India is vulnerable to crop failures, which upon occasion deepen into famine. There were 14 famines in India between the 11th and 17th centuries (Bhatia, 1985). For example, during the 1022\u20131033 Great famines in India entire provinces were depopulated. Famine in Deccan killed at least two million people in 1702\u20131704. B.M. Bhatia believes that the earlier famines were localised, and it was only after 1860, during the British rule, that famine came to signify general shortage of foodgrains in the country. There were approximately 25 major famines spread through states such as Tamil Nadu in the south, and Bihar and Bengal in the east during the latter half of the 19th century.\nRomesh Chunder Dutt argued as early as 1900, and present-day scholars such as Amartya Sen agree, that some historic famines were a product of both uneven rainfall and British economic and administrative policies, which since 1857 had led to the seizure and conversion of local farmland to foreign-owned plantations, restrictions on internal trade, heavy taxation of Indian citizens to support British expeditions in Afghanistan (see The Second Anglo-Afghan War), inflationary measures that increased the price of food, and substantial exports of staple crops from India to Britain. (Dutt, 1900 and 1902; Srivastava, 1968; Sen, 1982; Bhatia, 1985.)\nSome British citizens, such as William Digby, agitated for policy reforms and famine relief, but Lord Lytton, the governing British viceroy in India, opposed such changes in the belief that they would stimulate shirking by Indian workers. The first, the Bengal famine of 1770, is estimated to have taken around 10 million lives\u2014one-third of Bengal's population at the time. Other notable famines include the Great Famine of 1876\u20131878, in which 6.1 million to 10.3 million people died and the Indian famine of 1899\u20131900, in which 1.25 to 10 million people died. The famines were ended by the 20th century with the exception of the Bengal famine of 1943 killing an estimated 2.1 million Bengalis during World War II.\nThe observations of the Famine Commission of 1880 support the notion that food distribution is more to blame for famines than food scarcity. They observed that each province in British India, including Burma, had a surplus of foodgrains, and the annual surplus was 5.16 million tons (Bhatia, 1970). At that time, annual export of rice and other grains from India was approximately one million tons.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Population growth worsened the plight of the peasantry. As a result of peace and improved sanitation and health, the Indian population rose from perhaps 100 million in 1700 to 300 million by 1920. While encouraging agricultural productivity, the British also provided economic incentives to have more children to help in the fields. Although a similar population increase occurred in Europe at the same time, the growing numbers could be absorbed by industrialization or emigration to the Americas and Australia. India enjoyed neither an industrial revolution nor an increase in food growing. Moreover, Indian landlords had a stake in the cash crop system and discouraged innovation. As a result, population numbers far outstripped the amount of available food and land, creating dire poverty and widespread hunger.\u2014\u200a\nThe Maharashtra drought saw zero deaths from starvation and is known for the successful employment of famine prevention policies, unlike during British rule.\nMiddle East.\nThe Persian famine of 1870\u20131872 is believed to have caused the death of 1.5 million persons (20\u201325% of the population) in Persia (present-day Iran).\nIn the early 20th century an Ottoman blockade of food being exported to Lebanon caused a famine which killed up to 450,000 Lebanese (about one-third of the population). The famine killed more people than the Lebanese Civil War. The blockade was caused by uprisings in the Syrian region of the Empire, including one which occurred in the 1860s which led to the massacre of thousands of Lebanese and Syrian by Ottoman Turks and local Druze.\nIn 2025 Gaza has faced famine as a result of Israeli airstrikes during the Gaza war and an Israeli blockade, including of basic essentials and humanitarian aid. Airstrikes have destroyed food infrastructure, such as bakeries, mills, and food stores, and there is a widespread scarcity of essential supplies due to the blockade of aid. According to a group of UN experts, as of July 2024 Israel's \"targeted starvation campaign\" had spread throughout the entire Gaza Strip, causing the death of children. Israel's mission to the UN criticized the statement, calling it \"misinformation\". The same month, detected cases of childhood malnutrition in northern Gaza increased by 300 percent compared to May 2024. The UN-backed IPC confirmed famine is taking place in Gaza on 22 August 2025.\nVolker T\u00fcrk, the UN high commissioner for human rights, stated that Israel's restrictions on the entry of aid may constitute starvation as a weapon of war, which would be a war crime. An Independent International Commission of Inquiry also found Israel was using starvation as a method of war. In April and May, USAID and the US State Department's Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration determined that Israel was blocking food aid from entering Gaza. These findings were rejected by Secretary of State Blinken and the Biden Administration. The Israeli government has denied it is using starvation as a weapon of war and said that arguments that its actions regarding the famine violate the Genocide Convention are \"wholly unfounded\". COGAT, the Israeli agency responsible for allowing aid into Gaza, has stated Israel was not putting limits into the amount of aid entering Gaza. COGAT's claim has been challenged by multiple entities, including the European Union, United Nations, Oxfam, and United Kingdom. Since March 2025, Israel has made the blockade publicly official, with Defense Minister declaring that \"No humanitarian aid will enter Gaza\". Israel has claimed that \"Hamas stockpiled supplies and kept them from increasingly desperate civilians,\" but, as of February 2024, the US has not received evidence supporting this claim. There have been reports of armed gangs stealing aid.\nEurope.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Great Famine of 1315\u20131317 (or to 1322) was the first major food crisis to strike Europe in the 14th century. Millions in northern Europe died over an extended number of years, marking a clear end to the earlier period of growth and prosperity during the 11th and 12th centuries. An unusually cold and wet spring of 1315 led to widespread crop failures, which lasted until at least the summer of 1317; some regions in Europe did not fully recover until 1322. Most nobles, cities, and states were slow to respond to the crisis and when they realized its severity, they had little success in securing food for their people. In 1315, in Norfolk, England, the price of grain soared from 5 shillings/quarter to 20 shillings/quarter. It was a period marked by extreme levels of criminal activity, disease and mass death, infanticide, and cannibalism. It had consequences for Church, State, European society and future calamities to follow in the 14th century. There were 95 famines in medieval Britain, and 75 or more in medieval France. More than 10% of England's population, or at least 500,000 people, may have died during the famine of 1315\u20131316.\nFamine was a very destabilizing and devastating occurrence. The prospect of starvation led people to take desperate measures. When scarcity of food became apparent to peasants, they would sacrifice long-term prosperity for short-term survival. They would kill their draught animals, leading to lowered production in subsequent years. They would eat their seed corn, sacrificing next year's crop in the hope that more seed could be found. Once those means had been exhausted, they would take to the road in search of food. They migrated to the cities where merchants from other areas would be more likely to sell their food, as cities had a stronger purchasing power than did rural areas. Cities also administered relief programs and bought grain for their populations so that they could keep order. With the confusion and desperation of the migrants, crime would often follow them. Many peasants resorted to banditry in order to acquire enough to eat.\nOne famine would often lead to difficulties in the following years because of lack of seed stock or disruption of routine, or perhaps because of less-available labour. Famines were often interpreted as signs of God's displeasure. They were seen as the removal, by God, of His gifts to the people of the Earth. Elaborate religious processions and rituals were made to prevent God's wrath in the form of famine.\n16th century.\nDuring the 15th century to the 18th century, famines in Europe became more frequent due to the Little Ice Age. The colder climate resulted in harvest failures and shortfalls that led to a rise in conspiracy theories concerning the causes behind these famines, such as the Pacte de Famine in France.\nThe 1590s saw the worst famines in centuries across all of Europe. Famine had been relatively rare during the 16th century. The economy and population had grown steadily as subsistence populations tend to when there is an extended period of relative peace (most of the time). Although peasants in areas of high population density, such as northern Italy, had learned to increase the yields of their lands through techniques such as promiscuous culture, they were still quite vulnerable to famines, forcing them to work their land even more intensively.\nThe great famine of the 1590s began a period of famine and decline in the 17th century. The price of grain, all over Europe was high, as was the population. Various types of people were vulnerable to the succession of bad harvests that occurred throughout the 1590s in different regions. The increasing number of wage labourers in the countryside were vulnerable because they had no food of their own, and their meager living was not enough to purchase the expensive grain of a bad-crop year. Town labourers were also at risk because their wages would be insufficient to cover the cost of grain, and, to make matters worse, they often received less money in bad-crop years since the disposable income of the wealthy was spent on grain. Often, unemployment would be the result of the increase in grain prices, leading to ever-increasing numbers of urban poor.\nAll areas of Europe were badly affected by the famine in these periods, especially rural areas. The Netherlands was able to escape most of the damaging effects of the famine, though the 1590s were still difficult years there. Amsterdam's grain trade with the Baltic guaranteed a food supply.\n17th century.\nThe years around 1620 saw another period of famine sweep across Europe. These famines were generally less severe than the famines of twenty-five years earlier, but they were nonetheless quite serious in many areas. Perhaps the worst famine since 1600, the great famine in Finland in 1696, killed one-third of the population.\nDevastating harvest failures afflicted the northern Italian economy from 1618 to 1621, and it did not recover fully for centuries. There were serious famines in the late-1640s and less severe ones in the 1670s throughout northern Italy.\nOver two million people died in two famines in France between 1693 and 1710. Both famines were made worse by ongoing wars.\nAs late as the 1690s, Scotland experienced famine which reduced the population of parts of Scotland by at least 15%.\nThe Great Famine of 1695\u20131697 may have killed a third of the Finnish population. and roughly 10% of Norway's population. Death rates rose in Scandinavia between 1740 and 1800 as the result of a series of crop failures. For instance, the Finnish famine of 1866\u20131868 killed 15% of the population.\n18th century.\nThe period of 1740\u20131743 saw frigid winters and summer droughts, which led to famine across Europe and a major spike in mortality. The winter 1740\u201341 was unusually cold, possibly because of volcanic activity.\nAccording to Scott and Duncan (2002), \"Eastern Europe experienced more than 150 recorded famines between AD 1500 and 1700 and there were 100 hunger years and 121 famine years in Russia between AD 971 and 1974.\"\nThe Great Famine, which lasted from 1770 until 1771, killed about one tenth of Czech lands' population, or 250,000 inhabitants, and radicalised countrysides leading to peasant uprisings.\nThere were sixteen good harvests and 111 famine years in northern Italy from 1451 to 1767. According to Stephen L. Dyson and Robert J. Rowland, \"The Jesuits of Cagliari [in Sardinia] recorded years during the late 1500s 'of such hunger and so sterile that the majority of the people could sustain life only with wild ferns and other weeds'\u00a0... During the terrible famine of 1680, some 80,000 persons, out of a total population of 250,000, are said to have died, and entire villages were devastated\".\nAccording to Bryson (1974), there were thirty-seven famine years in Iceland between 1500 and 1804. In 1783 the volcano Laki in south-central Iceland erupted. The lava caused little direct damage, but ash and sulphur dioxide spewed out over most of the country, causing three-quarters of the island's livestock to perish. In the following famine, around ten thousand people died, one-fifth of the population of Iceland. [Asimov, 1984, 152\u201353]\n19th century.\nOther areas of Europe have known famines much more recently. France saw famines as recently as the 19th century. The Great Famine in Ireland, 1846\u20131851, caused by the failure of the potato crop over a few years, resulted in 1,000,000 dead and another 2,000,000 refugees fleeing to Britain, Australia and the United States.\n20th century.\nFamine still occurred in Eastern Europe during the 20th century. Droughts and famines in Imperial Russia are known to have happened every 10 to 13 years, with average droughts happening every 5 to 7 years. Russia experienced eleven major famines between 1845 and 1922, one of the worst being the famine of 1891\u20131892. The Russian famine of 1921\u201322 killed an estimated 5 million.\nFamines continued in the Soviet era, the most notorious being the \"Holodomor\" in various parts of the country, especially the Volga, and the Ukrainian and northern Kazakh SSR's during the winter of 1932\u20131933. The Soviet famine of 1932\u20131933 is nowadays reckoned to have cost an estimated 6 million lives. The last major famine in the USSR happened in 1947 due to the severe drought and the mismanagement of grain reserves by the Soviet government.\nThe Hunger Plan, i.e. the Nazi plan to starve large sections of the Soviet population, caused the deaths of many. The Russian Academy of Sciences in 1995 reported civilian victims in the USSR at German hands, including Jews, totaled 13.7 million dead, 20% of the 68 million persons in the occupied USSR. This included 4.1 million famine and disease deaths in occupied territory. There were an additional estimated 3 million famine deaths in areas of the USSR not under German occupation.\nThe 872 days of the Siege of Leningrad (1941\u20131944) caused unparalleled famine in the Leningrad region through disruption of utilities, water, energy and food supplies. This resulted in the deaths of about one million people.\nFamine also struck in Western Europe during the Second World War. In the Netherlands, the of 1944 killed approximately 30,000 people. Some other areas of Europe also experienced famine at the same time.\nLatin America.\nThe pre-Columbian Americans often dealt with severe food shortages and famines. The persistent drought around 850 AD coincided with the collapse of Classic Maya civilization, and the famine of One Rabbit (AD 1454) was a major catastrophe in Mexico.\nBrazil's 1877\u201378 \"Grande Seca\" (Great Drought), the worst in Brazil's history, caused approximately half a million deaths. The one from 1915 was devastating too.\nOceania.\nEaster Island was hit by a great famine between the 15th and 18th centuries. Hunger and subsequent cannibalism was caused by overpopulation and depletion of natural resources as a result of deforestation, partly because work on megalithic monuments required a lot of wood.\nThere are other documented episodes of famine in various islands of Polynesia, such as occurred in Kau, Hawaii in 1868.\nAccording to Daniel Lord Smail, \"'Famine cannibalism' was until recently a regular feature of life in the islands of the Massim near New Guinea and of some other societies of Southeast Asia and the Pacific.\"\nWhen Russian explorer Otto von Kotzebue visited the Marshall Islands in Micronesia in 1817, he noted that Marshallese families practiced infanticide after the birth of a third child as a form of population planning due to frequent famines.\nRisk of future famine.\nYALE climate connections reports that, as of 2022, approximately 34% of the world's agricultural land is degraded. If current trends of soil degradation continue in Africa, the continent might be able to feed just 20% of its population by 2030, according to a WHO study in 2024. As of late 2007, increased farming for use in biofuels, along with world oil prices at nearly $100 a barrel, has pushed up the price of grain used to feed poultry and dairy cows and other cattle, causing higher prices of wheat (up 58%), soybean (up 32%), and maize (up 11%) over the year. In 2007 Food riots took place in many countries across the world. An epidemic of stem rust, which is destructive to wheat and is caused by race Ug99, has in 2007 spread across Africa and into Asia.\nBeginning in the 20th century, nitrogen fertilizers, new pesticides, desert farming, and other agricultural technologies began to be used to increase food production, in part to combat famine. Between 1950 and 1984, as the Green Revolution influenced agriculture world grain production increased by 250%. Developed nations have shared these technologies with developing nations with a famine problem. However, as early as 1995, there were signs that these new developments may contribute to the decline of arable land (e.g. persistence of pesticides leading to soil contamination, salt accumulation due to irrigation, erosion).\nIn 1994, David Pimentel, professor of ecology and agriculture at Cornell University, and Mario Giampietro, senior researcher at the National Research Institute on Food and Nutrition (INRAN), estimated the maximum U.S. population for a sustainable economy at 200 million.\nAccording to geologist Dale Allen Pfeiffer, coming decades could see rising food prices without relief and massive starvation on a global level. Water deficits, which are already spurring heavy grain imports in numerous smaller countries, may soon do the same in larger countries, such as China or India. The water tables are falling in many countries (including Northern China, the US, and India) due to widespread overconsumption. Other countries affected include Pakistan, Iran, and Mexico. This will eventually lead to water scarcity and cutbacks in grain harvest. Even while overexploiting its aquifers, China has developed a grain deficit, contributing to the upward pressure on grain prices. Most of the three billion people projected to be added worldwide by mid-century will be born in countries already experiencing water shortages.\nAfter China and India, there is a second tier of smaller countries with large water deficits\u00a0\u2013 Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Mexico, and Pakistan. Four of these already import a large share of their grain. Only Pakistan remains marginally self-sufficient. But with a population expanding by 4 million a year, it will also soon turn to the world market for grain. According to a UN climate report, the Himalayan glaciers that are the principal dry-season water sources of Asia's biggest rivers\u00a0\u2013 Ganges, Indus, Brahmaputra, Yangtze, Mekong, Salween and Yellow\u00a0\u2013 could disappear by 2350 as temperatures rise and human demand rises. Approximately 2.4 billion people live in the drainage basin of the Himalayan rivers. India, China, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar could experience floods followed by severe droughts in coming decades. In India alone, the Ganges provides water for drinking and farming for more than 500 million people.\nEvan Fraser, a geographer at the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada, explores the ways in which climate change may affect future famines. To do this, he draws on a range of historic cases where relatively small environmental problems triggered famines as a way of creating theoretical links between climate and famine in the future. Drawing on situations as diverse as the Great Famine of Ireland, a series of weather induced famines in Asia during the late 19th century, and famines in Ethiopia during the 1980s, he concludes there are three \"lines of defense\" that protect a community's food security from environmental change. The first line of defense is the agro-ecosystem on which food is produced: diverse ecosystems with well managed soils high in organic matter tend to be more resilient. The second line of defense is the wealth and skills of individual households: If those households affected by bad weather such as drought have savings or skills they may be able to do all right despite the bad weather. The final line of defense is created by the formal institutions present in a society. Governments, churches, or NGOs must be willing and able to mount effective relief efforts. Pulling this together, Evan Fraser argues that if an ecosystem is resilient enough, it may be able to withstand weather-related shocks. But if these shocks overwhelm the ecosystem's line of defense, it is necessary for the household to adapt using its skills and savings. If a problem is too big for the family or household, then people must rely on the third line of defense, which is whether or not the formal institutions present in a society are able to provide help. Evan Fraser concludes that in almost every situation where an environmental problem triggered a famine you see a failure in each of these three lines of defense. Hence, understanding how climate change may cause famines in the future requires combining both an assessment of local socio-economic and environmental factors along with climate models that predict where bad weather may occur in the future.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic, alongside lockdowns and travel restrictions, has prevented movement of aid and greatly impacted food production. As a result, several famines are forecast, which the United Nations called a crisis \"of biblical proportions\", or \"hunger pandemic\". This pandemic, in conjunction with the 2019-20 locust infestations and several ongoing armed conflicts, is predicted to form the worst series of famines since the Great Chinese Famine, affecting between 10 and 20 percent of the global population in some way.\nWestern nations suspended humanitarian aid to Afghanistan following the Taliban's takeover of the country in August 2021. The United States has frozen about $9 billion in assets belonging to the Afghan central banks, blocking the Taliban from accessing billions of dollars held in U.S. bank accounts. In October 2021, more than half of Afghanistan's 39 million people faced an acute food shortage. On 11 November 2021, the \"Human Rights Watch\" reported that Afghanistan is facing widespread famine due to collapsed economy and broken banking system. The UN World Food Programme has also issued multiple warnings of worsening food insecurity.\nCauses.\nDefinitions of famines are based on three different categories\u2014these include food supply-based, food consumption-based and mortality-based definitions. Some definitions of famines are:\nFood shortages in a population are caused either by a lack of food or by difficulties in food distribution; it may be worsened by natural climate fluctuations and by extreme political conditions related to oppressive government or warfare. The conventional explanation until 1981 for the cause of famines was the Food availability decline (FAD) hypothesis. The assumption was that the central cause of all famines was a decline in food availability. However, FAD could not explain why only a certain section of the population such as the agricultural laborer was affected by famines while others were insulated from famines. Based on the studies of some recent famines, the decisive role of FAD has been questioned and it has been suggested that the causal mechanism for precipitating starvation includes many variables other than just decline of food availability. According to this view, famines are a result of entitlements, the theory being proposed is called the \"failure of exchange entitlements\" or FEE. A person may own various commodities that can be exchanged in a market economy for the other commodities he or she needs. The exchange can happen via trading or production or through a combination of the two. These entitlements are called trade-based or production-based entitlements. Per this proposed view, famines are precipitated due to a breakdown in the ability of the person to exchange his entitlements. An example of famines due to FEE is the inability of an agricultural laborer to exchange his primary entitlement, i.e., labor for rice when his employment became erratic or was eliminated.\nAccording to the Physicians for Social Responsibility (PSR), global climate change is additionally challenging the Earth's ability to produce food, potentially leading to famine.\nSome elements make a particular region more vulnerable to famine. These include poverty, population growth, an inappropriate social infrastructure, a suppressive political regime, and a weak or under-prepared government.\nAccording to Oxfam International, commenting on a Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET) report, \"Famines are not natural phenomena, they are catastrophic political failures.\"\nClimate and population pressure.\nThomas Malthus's \"Essay on the Principle of Population\" has made popular the theory of the Malthusian catastrophe\u2014that many famines are caused by imbalance of food production compared to the large populations of countries whose population exceeds the regional carrying capacity. However, anthropologist Alex de Waal, executive director of the World Peace Foundation, refutes the Malthus theory, looking instead to political factors as major causes of recent (over the last 150 years) famines. Historically, famines have occurred from agricultural problems such as drought, crop failure, or pestilence. Changing weather patterns, the ineffectiveness of medieval governments in dealing with crises, wars, and epidemic diseases such as the Black Death helped to cause hundreds of famines in Europe during the Middle Ages, including 95 in Britain and 75 in France. In France, the Hundred Years' War, crop failures and epidemics reduced the population by two-thirds. Economist Amartya Sen has also argued that sustained famines historically have been caused by political instability and repressive political regimes rather than overpopulation.\nThe failure of a harvest or change in conditions, such as drought, can create a situation whereby large numbers of people continue to live where the carrying capacity of the land has temporarily dropped radically. Famine is often associated with subsistence agriculture. The total absence of agriculture in an economically strong area does not cause famine; Arizona and other wealthy regions import the vast majority of their food, since such regions produce sufficient economic goods for trade.\nFamines have also been caused by volcanism. The 1815 eruption of the Mount Tambora volcano in Indonesia caused crop failures and famines worldwide and caused the worst famine of the 19th century. The current consensus of the scientific community is that the aerosols and dust released into the upper atmosphere causes cooler temperatures by preventing the sun's energy from reaching the ground. The same mechanism is theorized to be caused by very large meteorite impacts to the extent of causing mass extinctions.\nState-sponsored famines.\nIn certain cases, such as the Great Leap Forward in China (which produced the largest famine in absolute numbers), Francoist Spain's \"years of hunger\", North Korea in the mid-1990s, or Zimbabwe in the early-2000s, famine can occur because of government policy.\nAccording to Simon Payaslian, a tentative scholarly consensus classifies the Soviet famine (at least in Ukraine where 2.5 to 4 million perished) as a genocide, although some scholars say that it remains a significant issue in modern politics and dispute whether Soviet policies would fall under the legal definition of genocide. Several scholars have disputed that the famine was a genocidal act by the Soviet government, including J. Arch Getty, Stephen G. Wheatcroft, R. W. Davies, and Mark Tauger. Getty says that the \"overwhelming weight of opinion among scholars working in the new archives\u00a0... is that the terrible famine of the 1930s was the result of Stalinist bungling and rigidity rather than some genocidal plan.\" Wheatcroft says that the Soviet government's policies during the famine were criminal acts of fraud and manslaughter, though not outright murder or genocide. In regard to the Soviet state's reaction to this crisis, Wheatcroft comments: \"The good harvest of 1930 led to the decisions to export substantial amounts of grain in 1931 and 1932. The Soviet leaders also assumed that the wholesale socialisation of livestock farming would lead to the rapid growth of meat and dairy production. These policies failed, and the Soviet leaders attributed the failure not to their own lack of realism but to the machinations of enemies. Peasant resistance was blamed on the kulaks, and the increased use of force on a large scale almost completely replaced attempts at persuasion.\" Wheatcroft says that Soviet authorities refused to scale down grain procurements despite the low harvest, and that \"[Wheatcroft and his colleague's] work has confirmed \u2013 if confirmation were needed \u2013 that the grain campaign in 1932/33 was unprecedentedly harsh and repressive.\"\nJoseph Stalin biographer Stephen Kotkin supports a similar view, stating that while \"there is no question of Stalin's responsibility for the famine\" and many deaths could have been prevented if not for the \"insufficient\" and counterproductive Soviet measures, there is no evidence for Stalin's intention to kill the Ukrainians deliberately. While Mark Tauger considers the famine to be the result of natural factors stating that \"the harsh 1932\u20131933 procurements only displaced the famine from urban areas\" but the low harvest \"made a famine inevitable\". Ultimately concluding that it is difficult to accept the famine \"as the result of the 1932 grain procurements and as a conscious act of genocide\" he still concurs with Wheatcroft that \"the regime was still responsible for the deprivation and suffering of the Soviet population in the early 1930s\", and \"if anything, these data show that the effects of [collectivization and forced industrialization] were worse than has been assumed.\"\nIn 1958 in China, Mao Zedong's Communist Government launched the Great Leap Forward campaign, aimed at rapidly industrializing the country. The government forcibly took control of agriculture. Barely enough grain was left for the peasants, and starvation occurred in many rural areas. Exportation of grain continued despite the famine and the government attempted to conceal it. While the famine is attributed to unintended consequences, it is believed that the government refused to acknowledge the problem, thereby further contributing to the deaths. In many instances, peasants were persecuted. Between 20 and 45 million people perished in this famine, making it one of the deadliest famines to date.\nHistorian and journalists, such as Seumas Milne and Jon Wiener, have criticized the emphasis on communism when assigning blame for famines. In a 2002 article for \"The Guardian\", Milne mentions \"the moral blindness displayed towards the record of colonialism\", and he writes: \"If Lenin and Stalin are regarded as having killed those who died of hunger in the famines of the 1920s and 1930s, then Churchill is certainly responsible for the 4 million deaths in the avoidable Bengal famine of 1943. Weiner makes a similar assertion while comparing the Holodomor and the Bengal famine of 1943, stating that Winston Churchill's role in the Bengal famine \"seems similar to Stalin's role in the Ukrainian famine\". Historian Mike Davis, author of \"Late Victorian Holocausts\", draws comparisons between the Great Chinese Famine and the Indian famines of the late 19th century, arguing that in both instances the governments which oversaw the response to the famines deliberately chose not to alleviate conditions and as such bear responsibility for the scale of deaths in said famines. According to Jason Hickel and Dylan Sullivan, the number excess deaths during the apex of British colonialism in India rise to around 100 million.\nMalawi ended its famine by subsidizing farmers despite the strictures imposed by the World Bank. During the 1973 Wollo Famine in Ethiopia, food was shipped out of Wollo to the capital city of Addis Ababa, where it could command higher prices. In the late-1970s and early-1980s, residents of the dictatorships of Ethiopia and Sudan suffered massive famines, but the democracy of Botswana avoided them, despite also suffering a severe drop in national food production. In Somalia, famine occurred because of a failed state.\nThe famine in Yemen is a direct result of the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen and the blockade imposed by Saudi Arabia and its allies, including the United States. According to the UN, 130 children under five years of age were dying from starvation and starvation related diseases every day by the end of 2017, with 50,000 dead for the year. As of October 2018, half the population is at risk of famine.\nIsrael's blockade of Gaza and the war between Israel and Hamas led to a famine in the Gaza Strip in 2024. On 16 January 2024, UN experts accused Israel of \"destroying Gaza's food system and using food as a weapon against the Palestinian people\". The UN-backed IPC confirmed famine is taking place in Gaza on 22 August 2025.\nAccording to Amartya Sen (1999), \"there has never been a famine in a functioning multiparty democracy\". Hasell and Roser have demonstrated that while there have been a few minor exceptions, famines rarely occur in democratic systems but are strongly correlated with autocratic and colonial systems.\nEconomic sanctions.\nEconomic sanctions are state or UN sanctioned measures to pressure a targeted country to submit to political demands. Because such measures often involve limiting imports and exports to \"crash\" or inflict pain on the targeted nation's economy. This can restrict the targeted nation's economic development and make it more difficult for their population to access food. Economic sanctions have been blamed for contributing to the North Korean famine in the 1990s. The effects of sanctions against Iraq in the 1990s on mortality are disputed. Following the Taliban's takeover of Afghanistan in August 2021, Human Rights Watch warned that Afghanistan was at risk of famine and urged the UN, World Bank, US and other countries to modify their sanctions to help prevent famine.\nFamine prevention.\nRelief technologies, including immunization, improved public health infrastructure, general food rations and supplementary feeding for vulnerable children, has provided temporary mitigation to the mortality impact of famines, while leaving their economic consequences unchanged, and not solving the underlying issue of too large a regional population relative to food production capability. Humanitarian crises may also arise from genocide campaigns, civil wars, agro-terrorism, refugee flows and episodes of extreme violence and state collapse, creating famine conditions among the affected populations.\nDespite repeated stated intentions by the world's leaders to end hunger and famine, famine remains a chronic threat in much of Africa, Eastern Europe, the Southeast, South Asia, and the Middle East. In July 2005, the Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET) labelled Niger with emergency status, as well as Chad, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Somalia and Zimbabwe. In January 2006, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization warned that 11 million people in Somalia, Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia were in danger of starvation due to the combination of severe drought and military conflicts. In 2006, the most serious humanitarian crisis in Africa was in Sudan's region Darfur.\nFrances Moore Lapp\u00e9, later co-founder of the Institute for Food and Development Policy (Food First) argued in \"Diet for a Small Planet\" (1971) that vegetarian diets can provide food for larger populations, with the same resources, compared to omnivorous diets.\nNoting that modern famines are sometimes aggravated by misguided economic policies, political design to impoverish or marginalize certain populations, or acts of war, political economists have investigated the political conditions under which famine is prevented. Economist Amartya Sen states that the liberal institutions that exist in India, including competitive elections and a free press, have played a major role in preventing famine in that country since independence. Alex de Waal has developed this theory to focus on the \"political contract\" between rulers and people that ensures famine prevention, noting the rarity of such political contracts in Africa, and the danger that international relief agencies will undermine such contracts through removing the locus of accountability for famines from national governments.\nThe demographic impacts of famine are sharp. Mortality is concentrated among children and the elderly. A consistent demographic fact is that in all recorded famines, male mortality exceeds female, even in those populations (such as northern India and Pakistan) where there is a male longevity advantage during normal times. Reasons for this may include greater female resilience under the pressure of malnutrition, and possibly female's naturally higher percentage of body fat. Famine is also accompanied by lower fertility. Famines therefore leave the reproductive core of a population\u2014adult women\u2014lesser affected compared to other population categories, and post-famine periods are often characterized a \"rebound\" with increased births.\nEven though the theories of Thomas Malthus would predict that famines reduce the size of the population commensurate with available food resources, in fact even the most severe famines have rarely dented population growth for more than a few years. The mortality in China in 1958\u201361, Bengal in 1943, and Ethiopia in 1983\u201385 was all made up by a growing population over just a few years. Of greater long-term demographic impact is emigration: Ireland was chiefly depopulated after the 1840s famines by waves of emigration.\nOverall food production.\nGlobally, the amount of food produced per person has kept rising, despite a growing world population. A local crop failure does not cause a famine unless there is also a lack of money to buy food from elsewhere. A war or political oppression can also disrupt distribution of otherwise adequate global supplies.\nFood security.\nLong term measures to improve food security, include investment in modern agriculture techniques, such as fertilizers and irrigation, but can also include strategic national food storage.\nWorld Bank strictures restrict government subsidies for farmers, and increasing use of fertilizers is opposed by some environmental groups because of its unintended consequences: adverse effects on water supplies and habitat.\nThe effort to bring modern agricultural techniques found in the Western world, such as nitrogen fertilizers and pesticides, to the Indian Sub-continent, called the Green Revolution, resulted in decreases in malnutrition similar to those seen earlier in Western nations. This was possible because of existing infrastructure and institutions that are in short supply in Africa, such as a system of roads or public seed companies that made seeds available. Supporting farmers in areas of food insecurity, through such measures as free or subsidized fertilizers and seeds, increases food harvest and reduces food prices.\nThe energy for the Green Revolution was provided by fossil fuels in the form of fertilizers (natural gas), pesticides (oil), and hydrocarbon fueled irrigation. The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer has significantly supported global population growth\u00a0\u2014 it has been estimated that almost half the people on the Earth are currently fed as a result of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use.\nThe World Bank and some rich nations press nations that depend on them for aid to cut back or eliminate subsidized agricultural inputs such as fertilizer, in the name of privatization even as the United States and Europe extensively subsidized their own farmers.\nRelief.\nThere is a growing realization among aid groups that giving cash or cash vouchers instead of food is a cheaper, faster, and more efficient way to deliver help to the hungry, particularly in areas where food is available but unaffordable. The United Nations World Food Programme, the biggest non-governmental distributor of food, announced that it will begin distributing cash and vouchers instead of food in some areas, which Josette Sheeran, WFP's former executive director, described as a \"revolution\" in food aid. The aid agency Concern Worldwide is piloting a method through a mobile phone operator, Safaricom, which runs a money transfer program that allows cash to be sent from one part of the country to another.\nHowever, for people in a drought living a long way from and with limited access to markets, delivering food may be the most appropriate way to help. Fred Cuny stated that \"the chances of saving lives at the outset of a relief operation are greatly reduced when food is imported. By the time it arrives in the country and gets to people, many will have died.\" US Law, which requires buying food at home rather than where the hungry live, is inefficient because approximately half of what is spent goes for transport. Fred Cuny further pointed out \"studies of every recent famine have shown that food was available in-country\u2014though not always in the immediate food deficit area\" and \"even though by local standards the prices are too high for the poor to purchase it, it would usually be cheaper for a donor to buy the hoarded food at the inflated price than to import it from abroad.\"\nDeficient micronutrients can be provided through fortifying foods. Fortifying foods such as peanut butter sachets (see Plumpy'Nut) have revolutionized emergency feeding in humanitarian emergencies because they can be eaten directly from the packet, do not require refrigeration or mixing with scarce clean water, can be stored for years and, vitally, can be absorbed by extremely ill children.\nWHO and other sources recommend that malnourished children\u2014and adults who also have diarrhea\u2014drink rehydration solution, and continue to eat, in addition to antibiotics, and zinc supplements. There is a special oral rehydration solution called ReSoMal which has less sodium and more potassium than standard solution. However, if the diarrhea is severe, the standard solution is preferable as the person needs the extra sodium. Obviously, this is a judgment call best made by a physician, and using either solution is better than doing nothing. Zinc supplements often can help reduce the duration and severity of diarrhea, and Vitamin A can also be helpful. The World Health Organization underlines the importance of a person with diarrhea continuing to eat, with a 2005 publication for physicians stating: \"Food should \"never\" be withheld and the child's usual foods should \"not\" be diluted. Breastfeeding should \"always\" be continued.\"\nEthiopia has been pioneering a program that has now become part of the World Bank's prescribed recipe for coping with a food crisis and had been seen by aid organizations as a model of how to best help hungry nations. Through the country's main food assistance program, the Productive Safety Net Program, Ethiopia has been giving rural residents who are chronically short of food, a chance to work for food or cash. Foreign aid organizations like the World Food Program were then able to buy food locally from surplus areas to distribute in areas with a shortage of food.\nThe Green Revolution was widely viewed as an answer to famine in the 1970s and 1980s. Between 1950 and 1984, hybrid strains of high-yielding crops transformed agriculture around the globe and world grain production increased by 250%. Some criticize the process, stating that these new high-yielding crops require more chemical fertilizers and pesticides, which can harm the environment. Although these high-yielding crops make it technically possible to feed more people, there are indications that regional food production has peaked in many world sectors, due to certain strategies associated with intensive agriculture such as groundwater overdrafting and overuse of pesticides and other agricultural chemicals.\nLevels of food insecurity.\nIn modern times, local and political governments and non-governmental organizations that deliver famine relief have limited resources with which to address the multiple situations of food insecurity that are occurring simultaneously. Various methods of categorizing the gradations of food security have thus been used in order to most efficiently allocate food relief. One of the earliest were the Indian Famine Codes devised by the British in the 1880s. The Codes listed three stages of food insecurity: near-scarcity, scarcity and famine, and were highly influential in the creation of subsequent famine warning or measurement systems. The early warning system developed to monitor the region inhabited by the Turkana people in northern Kenya also has three levels, but links each stage to a pre-planned response to mitigate the crisis and prevent its deterioration\nThe experiences of famine relief organizations throughout the world over the 1980s and 1990s resulted in at least two major developments: the \"livelihoods approach\" and the increased use of nutrition indicators to determine the severity of a crisis. Individuals and groups in food stressful situations will attempt to cope by rationing consumption, finding alternative means to supplement income, etc., before taking desperate measures, such as selling off plots of agricultural land. When all means of self-support are exhausted, the affected population begins to migrate in search of food or fall victim to outright mass starvation. Famine may thus be viewed partially as a social phenomenon, involving markets, the price of food, and social support structures. A second lesson drawn was the increased use of rapid nutrition assessments, in particular of children, to give a quantitative measure of the famine's severity.\nSince 2003, many of the most important organizations in famine relief, such as the World Food Programme and the U.S. Agency for International Development, have adopted a five-level scale measuring intensity and magnitude. The intensity scale uses both livelihoods' measures and measurements of mortality and child malnutrition to categorize a situation as food secure, food insecure, food crisis, famine, severe famine, and extreme famine. The number of deaths determines the magnitude designation, with under 1000 fatalities defining a \"minor famine\" and a \"catastrophic famine\" resulting in over 1,000,000 deaths.\nSociety and culture.\nFamine personified as an allegory is found in some cultures: Famine is one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in Christian tradition, a man riding a black horse holding a balance scale; the fear gorta of Irish folklore; or the Wendigo of Algonquian tradition.\nEffects on society.\nA 2023 systematic review and meta-analysis has shown that prenatal famine exposure is associated with an increased risk of mental disorders (such as depression and schizophrenia) and changes in DNA methylation, that is further exacerbating the impact of famine on human health and nutrition.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51330", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51330", "title": "Babington Plot", "text": "1586 plot to assassinate Queen Elizabeth I of England\nThe Babington Plot was a plan in 1586 to assassinate Queen Elizabeth I, a Protestant, and put Mary, Queen of Scots, her Catholic cousin, on the English throne. It led to Mary's execution, a result of a letter sent by Mary (who had been imprisoned for 19 years since 1568 in England at the behest of Elizabeth) in which she consented to the assassination of Elizabeth.\nThe long-term goal of the plot was the invasion of England by the Spanish forces of King Philip II and the Catholic League in France, leading to the restoration of the old religion. The plot was discovered by Elizabeth's spymaster Sir Francis Walsingham and used to entrap Mary for the purpose of removing her as a claimant to the English throne.\nThe chief conspirators were Anthony Babington and John Ballard. Babington, a young recusant, was recruited by Ballard, a Jesuit priest who hoped to rescue the Scottish queen. Working for Walsingham were double agents Robert Poley and Gilbert Gifford, as well as Thomas Phelippes, a spy agent and cryptanalyst, and the Puritan spy Maliverey Catilyn. The turbulent Catholic deacon Gifford had been in Walsingham's service since the end of 1585 or the beginning of 1586. Gifford obtained a letter of introduction to Queen Mary from a confidant and spy for her, Thomas Morgan. Walsingham then placed double agent Gifford and spy decipherer Phelippes inside Chartley Castle, where Queen Mary was imprisoned. Gifford organised the Walsingham plan to place Babington's and Queen Mary's encrypted communications into a beer barrel cork which were then intercepted by Phelippes, decoded and sent to Walsingham.\nOn 7 July 1586, the only Babington letter that was sent to Mary was decoded by Phelippes. Mary responded in code on 17 July 1586 ordering the would-be rescuers to assassinate Queen Elizabeth. The response letter also included deciphered phrases indicating her desire to be rescued: \"The affairs being thus prepared\" and \"I may suddenly be transported out of this place\". At the Fotheringay trial in October 1586, Elizabeth's Lord High Treasurer William Cecil\u00a0\u2013 Lord Burghley\u00a0\u2013 and Walsingham used the letter against Mary, who refused to admit that she was guilty. However, Mary was betrayed by her secretaries Nau and Curle, who confessed under pressure that the letter was mainly truthful.\nMary's imprisonment.\nMary, Queen of Scots, a Roman Catholic, was regarded by Roman Catholics as the legitimate heir to the throne of England. In 1568, she escaped imprisonment by Scottish rebels and sought the aid of her first cousin once removed, Queen Elizabeth I, a year after her forced abdication from the throne of Scotland. The issuance of the papal bull \"Regnans in Excelsis\" by Pope Pius V on 25 February 1570, granted English Catholics authority to overthrow the English queen. Queen Mary became the focal point of numerous plots and intrigues to restore England to its former religion, Catholicism, and to depose Elizabeth and even to take her life. Rather than rendering the expected aid, Elizabeth imprisoned Mary for nineteen years in the charge of a succession of jailers, principally the Earl of Shrewsbury.\nIn 1584, Elizabeth's Privy Council signed a \"Bond of Association\" designed by Cecil and Walsingham which stated that anyone within the line of succession to the throne \"on whose behalf\" anyone plotted against the Queen, would be excluded from the line and executed. This was agreed upon by hundreds of Englishmen, who likewise signed the Bond. Mary also agreed to sign the Bond. The following year, Parliament passed the Act of Association, which provided for the execution of anyone who would benefit from the death of the Queen if a plot against her was discovered. Because of the bond, Mary could be executed if a plot was initiated by others that could lead to her accession to England's throne.\nIn 1585, Elizabeth ordered Mary to be transferred in a coach and under heavy guard and placed under the strictest confinement at Chartley Hall in Staffordshire, under the control of Sir Amias Paulet. She was prohibited any correspondence with the outside world. Puritan Paulet was chosen by Queen Elizabeth in part because he abhorred Queen Mary's Catholic faith.\nReacting to the growing threat posed by Catholics, urged on by the pope and other Catholic monarchs in Europe, Francis Walsingham, Queen Elizabeth's Secretary of State and spymaster, together with William Cecil, Elizabeth's chief advisor, realised that if Mary could be implicated in a plot to assassinate Elizabeth, she could be executed and the papist threat diminished. As he wrote to the Earl of Leicester: \"So long as that devilish woman lives, neither Her Majesty must make account to continue in quiet possession of her crown, nor her faithful servants assure themselves of safety of their lives.\"\nWalsingham used Babington to ensnare Queen Mary by sending his double agent, Gilbert Gifford to Paris to obtain the confidence of Morgan, then locked in the Bastille. Morgan previously worked for George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury, an earlier jailer of Queen Mary. Through Shrewsbury, Queen Mary became acquainted with Morgan. Queen Mary sent Morgan to Paris to deliver letters to the French court. While in Paris, Morgan became involved in a previous plot designed by William Parry, which resulted in Morgan's incarceration in the Bastille. In 1585 Gifford was arrested returning to England while coming through Rye in Sussex with letters of introduction from Morgan to Queen Mary. Walsingham released Gifford to work as a double agent, in the Babington Plot. Gifford used the alias \"No. 4\" just as he had used other aliases such as Colerdin, Pietro and Cornelys. Walsingham had Gifford function as a courier in the entrapment plot against Queen Mary.\nPlot.\nThe Babington plot was related to several separate plans:\nAt the behest of Mary's French supporters, John Ballard, a Jesuit priest and agent of the Roman Church, went to England on various occasions in 1585 to secure promises of aid from the northern Catholic gentry on behalf of Mary. In March 1586, he met with John Savage, an ex-soldier who was involved in a separate plot against Elizabeth and who had sworn an oath to assassinate the queen. He was resolved in this plot after consulting with three friends: Dr. William Gifford, Christopher Hodgson and Gilbert Gifford. Gilbert Gifford had been arrested by Walsingham and agreed to be a double agent. Gifford was already in Walsingham's employ by the time Savage was going ahead with the plot, according to Conyers Read. Later that same year, Gifford reported to Charles Paget and the Spanish diplomat Don Bernardino de Mendoza, and told them that English Catholics were prepared to mount an insurrection against Elizabeth, provided that they would be assured of foreign support. While it was uncertain whether Ballard's report of the extent of Catholic opposition was accurate, what was certain is that he was able to secure assurances that support would be forthcoming. He then returned to England, where he persuaded a member of the Catholic gentry, Anthony Babington, to lead and organise the English Catholics against Elizabeth. Ballard informed Babington about the plans that had been so far proposed. Babington's later confession made it clear that Ballard was sure of the support of the Catholic League:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He told me he was retorned from Fraunce uppon this occasion. Being with Mendoza at Paris, he was informed that in regarde of the iniuries don by our state unto the greatest Christian princes, by the nourishinge of sedition and divisions in their provinces, by withholding violently the lawful possessions of some, by invasion of the Indies and by piracy, robbing the treasure and the wealthe of others, and sondry intolerable wronges for so great and mighty princes to indure, it was resolved by the Catholique league to seeke redresse and satisfaction, which they had vowed to performe this sommer without farther delay, havinge in readiness suche forces and all warlike preparations as the like was never scene in these partes of Christendome ... The Pope was chief disposer, the most Christian king and the king Catholic with all other princes of the league concurred as instruments for the righting of these wronges, and reformation of religion. The conductors of this enterprise for the French nation, the D. of Guise, or his brother the D. de Main; for the Italian and Hispanishe forces, the P. of Parma; the whole number about 60,000.\nDespite this assurance of this foreign support, Babington was hesitant, as he thought that no foreign invasion would succeed for as long as Elizabeth remained, to which Ballard answered that the plans of John Savage would take care of that. After a lengthy discussion with friends and soon-to-be fellow conspirators, Babington consented to join and to lead the conspiracy.\nUnfortunately for the conspirators, Walsingham was certainly aware of some of the aspects of the plot, based on reports by his spies, most notably Gilbert Gifford, who kept tabs on all the major participants. While he could have shut down some part of the plot and arrested some of those involved within reach, he still lacked any piece of evidence that would prove Queen Mary's active participation in the plot and he feared to commit any mistake which might cost Elizabeth her life.\nInfiltration.\nAfter the Throckmorton Plot, Queen Elizabeth had issued a decree in July 1584, which prevented all communication to and from Mary. However, Walsingham and Cecil realised that that decree also impaired their ability to entrap Mary. They needed evidence for which she could be executed based on their Bond of Association tenets. Thus Walsingham established a new line of communication, one which he could carefully control without incurring any suspicion from Mary. Gifford approached the French ambassador to England, Guillaume de l'Aubespine, Baron de Ch\u00e2teauneuf-sur-Cher, and described the new correspondence arrangement that had been designed by Walsingham. Gifford and jailer Paulet had arranged for a local brewer to facilitate the movement of messages between Queen Mary and her supporters by placing them in a watertight box inside a beer barrel. Thomas Phelippes, a cipher and language expert in Walsingham's employ, was then quartered at Chartley Hall to receive the messages, decode them and send them to Walsingham. Gifford submitted a code table (supplied by Walsingham) to Chateauneuf and requested the first message be sent to Mary.\nAll subsequent messages to Mary would be sent via diplomatic packets to Chateauneuf, who then passed them on to Gifford. Gifford would pass them on to Walsingham, who would confide them to Phelippes. The cipher used was a nomenclator cipher. Phelippes would decode and make a copy of the letter. The letter was then resealed and given back to Gifford, who would pass it on to the brewer. The brewer would then smuggle the letter to Mary. If Mary sent a letter to her supporters, it would go through the reverse process. In short order, every message coming to and from Chartley was intercepted and read by Walsingham.\nCorrespondence.\nBabington wrote to Mary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Myself with ten gentlemen and a hundred of our followers will undertake the delivery of your royal person from the hands of your enemies. For the dispatch of the usurper, from the obedience of whom we are by the excommunication of her made free, there be six noble gentlemen, all my private friends, who for the zeal they bear to the Catholic cause and your Majesty's service will undertake that tragical execution.\nThis letter was received by Mary on 14 July 1586, who was in a dark mood knowing that her son had betrayed her in favour of Elizabeth, and three days later she replied to Babington in a long letter in which she outlined the components of a successful rescue and the need to assassinate Elizabeth. She also stressed the necessity of foreign aid if the rescue attempt was to succeed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For I have long ago shown unto the foreign Catholic princes, what they have done against the King of Spain, and in the time the Catholics here remaining, exposed to all persecutions and cruelty, do daily diminish in number, forces, means and power. So as, if remedy be not thereunto speedily provided, I fear not a little but they shall become altogether unable for ever to rise again and to receive any aid at all, whensoever it were offered. Then for mine own part, I pray you to assure our principal friends that, albeit I had not in this cause any particular interest in this case... I shall be always ready and most willing to employ therein my life and all that I have, or may ever look for, in this world.\"\nMary, in her response letter, advised the would-be rescuers to confront the Puritans and to link her case to the Queen of England as her heir.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These pretexts may serve to found and establish among all associations, or considerations general, as done only for your preservation and defence, as well in religions as lands, lives and goods, against the oppressions and attempts of said Puritans, without directly writing, or giving out anything against the Queen, but rather showing yourselves willing to maintain her, and her lawful heirs after her, not naming me.\nMary was clear in her support for the murder of Elizabeth if that would have led to her liberty and Catholic domination of England. In addition, Queen Mary supported in that letter, and in another one to Ambassador Bernardino de Mendoza, a Spanish invasion of England.\nThe letter was again intercepted and deciphered by Phelippes. But this time, Phelippes, on the direction of Walsingham, kept the original and made a copy, adding a request for the names of the conspirators:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would be glad to know the names and quelityes of the sixe gentlemen which are to accomplish the dessignement, for that it may be, I shall be able uppon knowledge of the parties to give you some further advise necessarye to be followed therein; and even so do I wish to be made acquainted with the names of all such principall persons ... as also from time to time particularlye how you proceede and as sone as you may for the same purpose who bee alredye and how farr every one privye hereunto.\nThen, a letter was sent that would destroy Mary's life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let the great plot commence.&lt;br&gt;Signed&lt;br&gt;Mary\nArrests, trials and executions.\nJohn Ballard was arrested on 4 August 1586, and under torture he confessed and implicated Babington. Although Babington was able to receive the letter with the postscript, he was not able to reply with the names of the conspirators, as he was arrested. Others were taken prisoner by 15 August 1586. Mary's two secretaries, Claude Nau and Gilbert Curle, and a clerk J\u00e9r\u00f4me Pasquier were likewise taken into custody and interrogated. A large chest filled with Mary's papers seized at Chartley was taken to London.\nThe conspirators were sentenced to death for treason and conspiracy against the crown, and were to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. This first group included Babington, Ballard, Chidiock Tichborne, Thomas Salisbury, Henry Donn, Robert Barnewell and John Savage. A further group of seven men including Edward Habington, Charles Tilney, Edward Jones, John Charnock, John Travers, Jerome Bellamy, and Robert Gage, were tried and convicted shortly afterward. Ballard and Babington were executed on 20 September 1586 along with the other men who had been tried with them. Such was the public outcry at the horror of their execution that Elizabeth changed the order for the second group to be allowed to hang until \"quite dead\" before disembowelling and quartering.\nIn October 1586, Mary was sent to be tried at Fotheringhay Castle in Northamptonshire by 46 English lords, bishops and earls. She was not permitted legal counsel, not permitted to review the evidence against her, nor to call witnesses. Portions of Phellipes' letter translations were read at the trial. Mary denied knowing Babington and Ballard, but it was insisted that she had sent a reply to Babington using the same cipher code, entrusting the letter to a servant in a blue coat. Mary was convicted of treason against England. One English Lord voted not guilty. Elizabeth signed her cousin-once-removed's death warrant, and on 8 February 1587, in front of 300 witnesses, Mary, Queen of Scots, was executed by beheading.\nIn January 1598, a French diplomat in London, Huraut de Maisse, laid the blame for the discovery of the plot and Mary's execution on the ambassador Guillaume de l'Aubespine de Ch\u00e2teauneuf and his secretary Jean Arnault de Cherelles as they were held responsible for Elizabeth's agents obtaining Mary's ciphers.\nIn literature.\n\"Mary Stuart\" (), a dramatised version of the last days of Mary, Queen of Scots, including the Babington Plot, was written by Friedrich Schiller and performed in Weimar, Germany, in 1800. This in turn formed the basis for \"Maria Stuarda\", an opera by Donizetti, in 1835. Although the Babington Plot occurs before the events of the opera, and is only referenced twice during the opera, the second such occasion being Mary admitting her own part in it in private to her confessor (a role taken by Lord Talbot in the opera, although not in real life).\nThe story of the Babington Plot is dramatised in the novel \"Conies in the Hay\" by Jane Lane (), and features prominently in Anthony Burgess's \"A Dead Man in Deptford\". A fictional account is given in the \"My Story\" book series, \"The Queen's Spies\" (retitled \"To Kill A Queen\" 2008) told in diary format by a fictional Elizabethan girl, Kitty.\nThe Babington plot forms the historical background\u00a0\u2013 and provides much of the intrigue\u00a0\u2013 for \"Holy Spy\", the 7th in the historical detective series by Rory Clements, featuring John Shakespeare, an intelligencer for Walsingham and elder brother of the more famous Will.\nThe simplified version of the Babington plot is also the subject of the children's or Young Adult novel \"A Traveller in Time\" (1939), by Alison Uttley, who grew up near the Babington family home in Derbyshire. A young modern girl finds that she slips back to the time shortly before the Plot is about to be implemented. This was later made into a BBC TV mini-series in 1978, with small changes to the original novel.\nThe Babington Plot is also dramatized in the 2017 Ken Follett novel \"A Column of Fire\", in Jacopo della Quercia's 2015 novel \"License to Quill\", and in SJ Parris's 2020 novel \"Execution\", the latest of her novels featuring Giordano Bruno as protagonist.\nThe Babington Plot is also dramatized in the 2024 T.S. Milbourne novel \"Gilbert Gifford\".\nThe novel focuses on Gilbert Gifford, the double agent in the Babington Plot, and portrays his complicated position through the dramatization of the people involved in the plot.\nThe plot figures prominently in the first chapter of \"The Code Book\", a survey of the history of cryptography written by Simon Singh and published in 1999.\nDramatic adaptations.\nEpisode four of the 1971 television miniseries \"Elizabeth R\" (titled \"Horrible Conspiracies\") is devoted to the Babington Plot. It is also depicted in the miniseries \"Elizabeth I\" (2005) and the films \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" (1971), \"\" (2007) and \"Mary Queen of Scots\" (2018).\nA 45-minute drama entitled \"The Babington Plot\", written by Michael Butt and directed by Sasha Yevtushenko, was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 2 December 2008 as part of the \"Afternoon Drama\". This drama took the form of a documentary on the first anniversary of the executions, with the story being told from the perspectives of Thomas Salisbury, Robert Poley, Gilbert Gifford and others who, while not conspirators, are in some way connected with the events, all of whom are interviewed by the Presenter (played by Stephen Greif). The cast also included Samuel Barnett as Thomas Salisbury, Burn Gorman as Robert Poley, Jonathan Taffler as Thomas Phelippes and Inam Mirza as Gilbert Gifford.\nEpisode one of the 2017 BBC miniseries \"Elizabeth I's Secret Agents\" (broadcast in the U.S. on PBS in 2018 as \"Queen Elizabeth's Secret Agents\") deals in part with the Babington plot.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51331", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51331", "title": "Dimensionless quantity", "text": "Quantity with no physical dimension\nDimensionless quantities, or quantities of dimension one, are quantities implicitly defined in a manner that prevents their aggregation into units of measurement. Typically expressed as ratios that align with another system, these quantities do not necessitate explicitly defined units. For instance, alcohol by volume (ABV) represents a volumetric ratio; its value remains independent of the specific units of volume used, such as in milliliters per milliliter (mL/mL).\nThe number one is recognized as a dimensionless base quantity. Radians serve as dimensionless units for angular measurements, derived from the universal ratio of 2\u03c0 times the radius of a circle being equal to its circumference.\nDimensionless quantities play a crucial role serving as parameters in differential equations in various technical disciplines. In calculus, concepts like the unitless ratios in limits or derivatives often involve dimensionless quantities. In differential geometry, the use of dimensionless parameters is evident in geometric relationships and transformations. Physics relies on dimensionless numbers like the Reynolds number in fluid dynamics, the fine-structure constant in quantum mechanics, and the Lorentz factor in relativity. In chemistry, state properties and ratios such as mole fractions concentration ratios are dimensionless.\nHistory.\nQuantities having dimension , \"dimensionless quantities\", regularly occur in sciences, and are formally treated within the field of dimensional analysis. In the 19th century, French mathematician Joseph Fourier and Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell led significant developments in the modern concepts of dimension and unit. Later work by British physicists Osborne Reynolds and Lord Rayleigh contributed to the understanding of dimensionless numbers in physics. Building on Rayleigh's method of dimensional analysis, Edgar Buckingham proved the \u03c0 theorem (independently of French mathematician Joseph Bertrand's previous work) to formalize the nature of these quantities.\nNumerous dimensionless numbers, mostly ratios, were coined in the early 1900s, particularly in the areas of fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Measuring logarithm of ratios as \"levels\" in the (derived) unit decibel (dB) finds widespread use nowadays.\nThere have been periodic proposals to \"patch\" the SI system to reduce confusion regarding physical dimensions. For example, a 2017 op-ed in Nature argued for formalizing the radian as a physical unit. The idea was rebutted on the grounds that such a change would raise inconsistencies for both established dimensionless groups, like the Strouhal number, and for mathematically distinct entities that happen to have the same units, like torque (a vector product) versus energy (a scalar product). In another instance in the early 2000s, the International Committee for Weights and Measures discussed naming the unit of 1 as the \"uno\", but the idea of just introducing a new SI name for 1 was dropped.\nBuckingham \u03c0 theorem.\nThe Buckingham \u03c0 theorem indicates that validity of the laws of physics does not depend on a specific unit system. A statement of this theorem is that any physical law can be expressed as an identity involving only dimensionless combinations (ratios or products) of the variables linked by the law (e.g., pressure and volume are linked by Boyle's law \u2013 they are inversely proportional). If the dimensionless combinations' values changed with the systems of units, then the equation would not be an identity, and Buckingham's theorem would not hold.\nAnother consequence of the theorem is that the functional dependence between a certain number (say, \"n\") of variables can be reduced by the number (say, \"k\") of independent dimensions occurring in those variables to give a set of \"p\" = \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" independent, dimensionless quantities. For the purposes of the experimenter, different systems that share the same description by dimensionless quantity are equivalent.\nIntegers.\nInteger numbers may represent dimensionless quantities. They can represent discrete quantities, which can also be dimensionless. \nMore specifically, counting numbers can be used to express countable quantities.\nThe concept is formalized as quantity number of entities (symbol \"N\") in ISO 80000-1.\nExamples include number of particles and population size. In mathematics, the \"number of elements\" in a set is termed \"cardinality\". \"Countable nouns\" is a related linguistics concept.\nCounting numbers, such as number of bits, can be compounded with units of frequency (inverse second) to derive units of count rate, such as bits per second.\nCount data is a related concept in statistics.\nThe concept may be generalized by allowing non-integer numbers to account for fractions of a full item, e.g., number of turns equal to one half.\nRatios, proportions, and angles.\nDimensionless quantities can be obtained as ratios of quantities that are not dimensionless, but whose dimensions cancel out in the mathematical operation. Examples of quotients of dimension one include calculating slopes or some unit conversion factors. Another set of examples is mass fractions or mole fractions, often written using parts-per notation such as ppm (=\u00a010\u22126), ppb (=\u00a010\u22129), and ppt (=\u00a010\u221212), or perhaps confusingly as ratios of two identical units (kg/kg or mol/mol). For example, alcohol by volume, which characterizes the concentration of ethanol in an alcoholic beverage, could be written as mL / 100 mL.\nOther common proportions are percentages %\u00a0(=\u00a00.01), \u00a0\u2030\u00a0(=\u00a00.001). Some angle units such as turn, radian, and steradian are defined as ratios of quantities of the same kind. In statistics the coefficient of variation is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean and is used to measure the dispersion in the data.\nIt has been argued that quantities defined as ratios \"Q\" = \"A\"/\"B\" having equal dimensions in numerator and denominator are actually only \"unitless quantities\" and still have physical dimension defined as dim \"Q\" = dim \"A\" \u00d7 dim \"B\"\u22121.\nFor example, moisture content may be defined as a ratio of volumes (volumetric moisture, m3\u22c5m\u22123, dimension L3\u22c5L\u22123) or as a ratio of masses (gravimetric moisture, units kg\u22c5kg\u22121, dimension M\u22c5M\u22121); both would be unitless quantities, but of different dimension.\nDimensionless physical constants.\nCertain universal dimensioned physical constants, such as the speed of light in vacuum, the universal gravitational constant, the Planck constant, the Coulomb constant, and the Boltzmann constant can be normalized to 1 if appropriate units for time, length, mass, charge, and temperature are chosen. The resulting system of units is known as the natural units, specifically regarding these five constants, Planck units. However, not all physical constants can be normalized in this fashion. For example, the values of the following constants are independent of the system of units, cannot be defined, and can only be determined experimentally:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51332", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51332", "title": "Power number", "text": " For Newton number, see also Kissing number in the sphere packing problem.\nThe power number \"N\"p (also known as Newton number) is a commonly used dimensionless number relating the resistance force to the inertia force. \nThe power-number has different specifications according to the field of application. E.g., for stirrers the power number is defined as:\nformula_1\nwith \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51333", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51333", "title": "Milo\u0161 Forman", "text": "Czech-American filmmaker (1932\u20132018)\nJan Tom\u00e1\u0161 \"Milo\u0161\" Forman (; ; 18 February 1932 \u2013 13 April 2018) was a Czech-American film director, screenwriter, actor, and professor who rose to fame in his native Czechoslovakia before emigrating to the United States in 1968. Throughout Forman's career he won two Academy Awards, a BAFTA Award, three Golden Globe Awards, a Golden Bear, a C\u00e9sar Award, and the Czech Lion.\nForman was an important figure in the Czechoslovak New Wave. Film scholars and Czechoslovak authorities saw his 1967 film \"The Firemen's Ball\" as a biting satire on Eastern European Communism. The film was initially shown in theatres in his home country in the more reformist atmosphere of the Prague Spring. However, it was later banned by the Communist government after the invasion by the Warsaw Pact countries in 1968. Forman was subsequently forced to leave Czechoslovakia for the United States, where he continued making films.\nHe received two Academy Awards for Best Director for the psychological drama \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" (1975) and the biographical drama \"Amadeus\" (1984). During this time, he also directed notable and acclaimed films such as \"Black Peter\" (1964), \"Loves of a Blonde\" (1965), \"Hair\" (1979), \"Ragtime\" (1981), \"Valmont\" (1989), \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\" (1996) and \"Man on the Moon\" (1999).\nEarly life.\nMilo\u0161 Forman's childhood was marked by the early loss of his parents. Forman was born in \u010c\u00e1slav, Czechoslovakia (now the Czech Republic) to Anna \u0160v\u00e1bov\u00e1 Forman, who ran a summer hotel. His parents attended a Protestant church. He believed that his father was Rudolf Forman. During the Nazi occupation, Rudolf, a member of the Czech Resistance, was arrested for distributing banned books, and reportedly died from typhus in Mittelbau-Dora, a subcamp of the Buchenwald concentration camp in May 1944. Another version has it that he died in Mittelbau-Dora during interrogation. Forman's mother had been murdered in Auschwitz in March the previous year. Forman said that he did not fully understand what had happened to them until he saw footage of the concentration camps when he was 16.\nForman was subsequently raised by two uncles and by family friends. His older brother Pavel was a painter twelve years his senior, and he emigrated to Australia after the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia. Forman later discovered that his biological father was in fact the Jewish architect Otto Kohn, a survivor of the Holocaust, and Forman was thus a half-brother of mathematician Joseph J. Kohn.\nIn his youth, Forman wanted to become a theatrical producer. After attending grammar school in N\u00e1chod, he went to the King George boarding school in Pod\u011bbrady, following the end of the war; fellow students included V\u00e1clav Havel, the Ma\u0161\u00edn brothers, and future film-makers Ivan Passer and Jerzy Skolimowski.\nHe later studied screenwriting at the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague. He was assistant of Alfr\u00e9d Radok, creator of Laterna Magika. Along with fellow filmmaker and friend Passer, he left Czechoslovakia for the United States during the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in summer 1968.\nCareer.\nAlong with cinematographer Miroslav Ond\u0159\u00ed\u010dek and long-time friend from school Ivan Passer, Forman filmed the silent documentary \"Semafor\" about the Semafor theater. Forman's first important production was \"Audition,\" a documentary about competing singers. He directed several Czech comedies in Czechoslovakia. He was in Paris negotiating the production of his first American film during the Prague Spring in 1968. His employer, a Czech studio, fired him, so he decided to move to the United States. He moved to New York, where he later became a professor of film at Columbia University in 1978 and co-chair (with his former teacher Franti\u0161ek Daniel) of Columbia's film department. One of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s was future director James Mangold, whom he mentored at Columbia. He regularly collaborated with cinematographer Miroslav Ond\u0159\u00ed\u010dek.\n1964\u20131971.\n\"Black Peter\" is one of the first and most representative films of the Czechoslovak New Wave. It won the Golden Leopard award at the Locarno International Film Festival. It covers the first few days in the working life of a Czech teenager. In Czechoslovakia in 1964, the aimless Petr (Ladislav Jakim) starts work as a security guard in a busy self-service supermarket; unfortunately, he is so lacking in confidence that even when he sees shoplifters, he cannot bring himself to confront them. He is similarly tongue-tied with the lovely Asa (Pavla Mart\u00ednkov\u00e1) and during the lectures about personal responsibility and the dignity of labor that his blustering father (Jan Vostr\u010dil) delivers at home. \"Loves of a Blonde\" is one of the best\u2013known movies of the Czechoslovak New Wave, and won awards at the Venice and Locarno film festivals. It was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1967.\nIn 1967, he directed \"The Firemen's Ball\" an original Czechoslovak\u2013Italian co-production; this was Forman's first color film. It is one of the best\u2013known movies of the Czechoslovak New Wave. On the face of it a naturalistic representation of an ill-fated social event in a provincial town, the film has been seen by both film scholars and the then-authorities in Czechoslovakia as a biting satire on East European Communism, which resulted in it being banned for many years in Forman's home country. The Czech term \"zhasnout\" (\"to switch lights off\"), associated with petty theft in the film, was used to describe the large-scale asset stripping that occurred in the country during the 1990s. It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Film.\n\"When Soviet tanks rumbled into Prague in August 1968, Forman was in Paris negotiating for the production of \"Taking Off\" (1971), his first American film. Claiming that he was out of the country illegally, his Czech studio fired him, forcing Forman to emigrate to New York\"&lt;ref name=\"pbs/AmMasters//597\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe first movie Forman made in the United States, \"Taking Off\", shared the Grand Prix (ex aequo)(second prize)&lt;ref name=\"festival-cannes/taking-off\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; with \"Johnny Got His Gun\" at the 1971 Cannes Film Festival. The film starred Lynn Carlin and Buck Henry, and also featured, as Jeannie, Linnea Heacock, discovered, with friends, in Washington Square Park.&lt;ref name=\"cinema.wisc.edu/2015/taking-forman\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It was critically panned and left Forman struggling to find work. Forman later said that it did so poorly he ended up owing the studio $500.\n1975\u20131989.\nHis next film was \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" (1975). Despite the failure of \"Taking Off\", producers Michael Douglas and Saul Zaentz hired him to direct the adaptation of Ken Kesey's cult novel \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\". Forman later said they hired him because he was in their price range. Starring Jack Nicholson and Louise Fletcher, the adaptation was a critical and commercial success. The film won Oscars in the five most important categories: Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Picture and Best Adapted Screenplay. One of only three films in history to do so (alongside \"It Happened One Night\" and \"The Silence of the Lambs\"), it firmly established Forman's reputation.\nArthur Knight, film critic of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" declared in his review, \"With \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo\u2019s Nest\", Forman takes his rightful place as one of our most creative young directors. His casting is inspired, his sense of milieu is assured, and he could probably wring Academy Award performances from a stone.\" The success of \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" allowed Forman to direct his long-planned film version of \"Hair\" in 1979, a rock musical based on the Broadway musical by James Rado, Gerome Ragni and Galt MacDermot. The film starred Treat Williams, John Savage and Beverly D'Angelo. It was disowned by the writers of the original musical, and, although it received positive reviews, it did not do well financially.\nIn 1981, he directed \"Ragtime\", the American drama based on the 1975 historical novel \"Ragtime\" by E.L. Doctorow. Forman's next important achievement was \"Amadeus\" (1984), an adaptation of Peter Shaffer's play of the same name. Retelling the story of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Antonio Salieri, it starred Tom Hulce, Elizabeth Berridge and F. Murray Abraham. The film was internationally acclaimed and won eight Oscars, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actor (for Abraham). \"Chicago Sun-Times\" film critic Roger Ebert praised the film, writing: \"\"Amadeus\" is a magnificent film, full and tender and funny and charming -- and, at the end, sad and angry, too, because in the character of Salieri it has given us a way to understand not only greatness, but our own lack of it\".\nForman's adaptation, \"Valmont\" (1989) of Pierre Choderlos de Laclos's novel \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\" had its premiere on 17 November 1989. Another film adaptation by Stephen Frears from the same source material had been released the previous year, and overshadowed Forman's adaptation. The film starred Colin Firth, Meg Tilly and Annette Bening. The film received mixed reviews with critic of the \"Los Angeles Times\" Sheila Benson, praising its gorgeous costumes, but noting its inferior quality to \"Dangerous Liaisons\". She wrote: \"\"Valmont\" is gorgeous, and for a while you can coast on its costumes and production details...But to consider \"Valmont\" in the light of Baudelaire\u2019s words on \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\"--\u201dThis book, if it burns, must burn like ice\u201d\u2014is to see just how far down this ice has been watered.\"\n1996\u20132006.\nThe 1996 biographical film, \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\" was a portrayal of pornography mogul Larry Flynt who brought Forman another directing Oscar nomination. The film starred Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, and Edward Norton. Though critically acclaimed, it grossed only $20 million at the box office. The biography, \"Man on the Moon\" (1999) was of famous actor and avant-garde comic Andy Kaufman (Jim Carrey, who won a Golden Globe for his performance) premiered on 22 December 1999. The film also starred Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, and Paul Giamatti. Several actors from \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" appeared in the film, including DeVito. In 2000, Forman performed alongside actor Edward Norton in Norton's directorial debut, \"Keeping the Faith\" (2000), as the wise friend to Norton's conflicted priest. \nForman returned to directing with \"Goya's Ghosts\", which premiered on 8 November 2006. It was a biography of the Spanish painter Francisco Goya, and an American-Spanish co-production. This was Forman's last film. It starred Natalie Portman, Javier Bardem, Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd and Randy Quaid and struggled at the box office. The film received mixed reviews with Phillip French of \"The Guardian\" lauding it writing \"This is a most engaging, thoughtful, beautifully mounted film\". However, Kirk Honeycut from \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote, \"In general, the filmmakers failed to make several basic decisions before shooting...[the] Below-the-line credits are terrific, which only increases an overwhelming sense of disappointment with the film\u2019s failed ambitions.\"\nUnfinished projects.\nIn the late 1950s, Forman and Josef \u0160kvoreck\u00fd started adapting \u0160kvoreck\u00fd's short story \"Eine kleine Jazzmusik\" for the screen. The script, named \"Kapela to vyhr\u00e1la\" (\"The Band Won It\"), tells the story of a student jazz band during the Nazi Occupation of Czechoslovakia. The script was submitted to Barrandov Film Studios. The studio required changes and both artists continued to rewrite the script. Right before the film started shooting, the whole project was completely scrapped, most probably due to intervention from people at the top of the political scene, as \u0160kvoreck\u00fd had just published his novel \"The Cowards\", which was strongly criticized by communist politicians. The story \"Eine kleine Jazzmusik\" was dramatized as a TV film in the 1990s. In the spring and summer of 1968, \u0160kvoreck\u00fd and Forman cooperated again by jointly writing a script synopsis to make a film version of \"The Cowards\". After \u0160kvoreck\u00fd fled the Warsaw Pact invasion, the synopsis was translated into English, but no film was made.\nIn the mid-1960s, Forman, Passer and Papou\u0161ek were working on a script about a soldier secretly living in Lucerna Palace in Prague. They got stuck writing the script and went to a village firemen's ball. Inspired by the experience, they decided to cancel the script and write \"The Firemen's Ball\" instead.\nIn early 1970s, Forman worked on a script with Thomas Berger based on his novel \"Vital Parts\".\nIn 1989, Forman was asked to direct \"Ghost\" for Paramount and pitched directing the film to screenwriter Bruce Joel Rubin. However, he was dismissed from the film when both Rubin and Paramount disliked his ideas for the film. \nIn the early 1990s, Forman co-wrote a screenplay with Adam Davidson. The screenplay, titled \"Hell Camp\", was about an American-Japanese love affair in the world of sumo wrestlers. The picture was to be funded by TriStar Pictures, and was cancelled just four days before shooting because of the disapproval of the Japan Sumo Association, while Forman refused to make the changes requested by the association.\nForman was hand-picked by writer/producer Michael Crichton to direct \"Disclosure\" (1994), but subsequently left the project over creative differences with Crichton.\nIn 1995, it was announced that Forman would direct a remake of \"Dodsworth\" (1936) for Warner Bros. starring Harrison Ford, from a script by Alfred Uhry. It was postponed however, following an injury of Forman's.\nIn January 1997, Forman agreed to make Universal's \"The Little Black Book\" as his next film, expecting to shoot in the fall. It was an adaptation of the French play by Jean-Claude Carri\u00e8re. Later that same month, he reportedly was reading the script for, and considering directing, the Arnold Schwarzenegger vehicle \"With Wings as Eagles\". Forman was the star's preferred choice to take on the helm of the project, which was set up at Paramount, under Alan Ladd Jr.\nAround 2000, Forman was in talks to direct a film about the early life of Howard Hughes with screenplay by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, and Edward Norton in the role of the eccentric young billionaire.\nAround 2001, Forman was set to direct and co-write the comic crime caper \"Bad News\", adapted from the novel by Donald E. Westlake. Forman was co-writing the script with Doug Wright. The project never came to fruition.\nIn the early 2000s, Forman developed a film project to be titled \"Embers\", adapted by Jean-Claude Carri\u00e8re from Hungarian novelist S\u00e1ndor M\u00e1rai\u2019s novel. The film was about two men in the former Austria-Hungary Empire from different social backgrounds who become friends in military school and meet again 41 years later. Forman cast Sean Connery and Klaus Maria Brandauer as well as Winona Ryder. Several months before shooting, Sean Connery and the Italian producer had a disagreement, and Connery withdrew from the project. Forman was so convinced that Sean Connery fit the role that he didn't want to shoot the film without him and cancelled the project a few days before the shooting was due to start.\nIn the late 2000s, the screenplay for \"Ghost of Munich\" was written by Forman, Jean-Claude Carriere and V\u00e1clav Havel (the former Czech president and writer, who had studied at school with Forman), inspired by the novel by the French novelist . The story takes a closer look at the events that surrounded the Munich Agreement. The role of the French Prime Minister \u00c9douard Daladier was supposed to have been played by the French actor Mathieu Amalric, with his older self played by G\u00e9rard Depardieu. However, the production company Path\u00e9 was not able to fund the project.\nIn 2011, Forman was reportedly in negotiations to direct a screen adaptation of Mitchell Zuckoff's acclaimed biography, \"Ponzi's Scheme: The True Story of a Financial Legend\", with Christopher Weekes penning the script.\nPersonal life.\nForman's first wife was Czech movie star Jana Brejchov\u00e1. They met while making \"\u0160t\u011b\u0148ata\" (1957). They divorced in 1962. Forman had twin sons with his second wife Czech actress and singer V\u011bra K\u0159esadlov\u00e1. They separated in 1969. Their sons Petr and Mat\u011bj (b. 1964) are both involved in the theatre. Forman married Martina Zbo\u0159ilov\u00e1 on 28 November 1999, and they also had twin sons Jim and Andy (born 1999).\nForman was professor emeritus of film at Columbia University. In 1996, asteroid 11333 Forman was named after him. He wrote poems and published the autobiography \"Turnaround\" in 1994. After a short illness, he died at Danbury Hospital near his home in Warren, Connecticut on 13 April 2018 at age 86. He is interred at New Warren Cemetery in Warren, Connecticut.\nWork.\nFilm.\nDocumentary film\nShort film\nActing credits\nHonours and legacy.\nIn 1977, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. In 1985, he headed the Cannes Film Festival and in 2000 did the same for the Venice Film Festival. He presided over a C\u00e9sar Award ceremony in 1988. In April 2007, he took part in the jazz opera \"Dob\u0159e placen\u00e1 proch\u00e1zka\", itself a remake of the TV film he made in 1966. It premiered at the Prague National Theatre, directed by Forman's son, Petr Forman. Named 30th greatest Czech by \"Nejv\u011bt\u0161\u00ed \u010cech\" Forman's films \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" and \"Amadeus\" were selected for the National Film Registry as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" in 1993 and 2019 respectively\nAwards and nominations.\nThroughout Forman's career he won two Academy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival, Golden Bear at the Berlin Film Festival, a BAFTA Award, a C\u00e9sar Award, and the Czech Lion.\nDirected Academy Award performances\nUnder Forman's direction, these actors have received Academy Award nominations (and wins) for their performances in their respective roles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nThe Milos Forman Stories von Antonin J. Liehm "}
{"id": "51334", "revid": "2955670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51334", "title": "Antigua (disambiguation)", "text": "Antigua is an island in the Caribbean.\nAntigua can also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51335", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51335", "title": "Amartya Sen", "text": "Indian economist and Nobel laureate (born 1933)\nAmartya Kumar Sen (; born 3 November 1933) is an Indian American economist and philosopher. Sen has taught and worked in England and the United States since 1972. In 1998, Sen received the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for his contributions to welfare economics. He has also made major scholarly contributions to social choice theory, economic and social justice, economic theories of famines, decision theory, development economics, public health, and the measures of well-being of countries.\nSen is currently the Thomas W. Lamont University Professor, and Professor of Economics and Philosophy, at Harvard University. He previously served as Master of Trinity College at the University of Cambridge. In 1999, he received India's highest civilian honour, Bharat Ratna, for his contribution to welfare economics. The German Publishers and Booksellers Association awarded him the 2020 Peace Prize of the German Book Trade for his pioneering scholarship addressing issues of global justice and combating social inequality in education and healthcare.\nEarly life and education.\nAmartya Sen was born on 3 November 1933 in a Bengali family in Santiniketan, Bengal, British India. The first Asian to win a Nobel Prize, the polymath and writer Rabindranath Tagore, gave Amartya Sen his name (, lit.\u2009'immortal or heavenly'). Sen's family was from Wari and Manikganj, Dhaka, both in present-day Bangladesh. His father, Ashutosh Sen, was a Professor of Chemistry at Dhaka University, then the Development Commissioner in Delhi and then Chairman of the West Bengal Public Service Commission. Sen moved with his family to West Bengal in 1945. Sen's mother, Amita Sen, was the daughter of Kshiti Mohan Sen, the eminent Sanskritist and scholar of ancient and medieval India. Sen's maternal grandfather was a close associate of Tagore. K.M. Sen served as the second Vice-Chancellor of Visva Bharati University from 1953 to 1954.\nSen began his school education at St Gregory's School in Dhaka in 1940. In the fall of 1941, he was admitted to Patha Bhavana, Santiniketan, where he completed his school education. The school had many progressive features, such as distaste for examinations or competitive testing. In addition, the school stressed cultural diversity, and embraced cultural influences from the rest of the world. In 1951, he went to Presidency College, Calcutta, where he earned a BA in economics with First in the First Class, with a minor in Mathematics, as a graduating student of the University of Calcutta. While at Presidency, Sen was diagnosed with oral cancer, and given a 15 per cent chance of living five years. With radiation treatment, he survived, and in 1953 he moved to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he earned a second BA in economics in 1955 with a first class, topping the list as well. At this time, he was elected President of the Cambridge Majlis. While Sen was officially a PhD student at Cambridge (though he had finished his research in 1955\u201356), he was offered the position of First-Professor and First-Head of the Economics Department of the newly created Jadavpur University in Calcutta. Appointed to the position at age 22, he is still the youngest chairman to have headed the Department of Economics. He served in that position, starting the new Economics Department, from 1956 to 1958.\nMeanwhile, Sen was elected to a Prize Fellowship at Trinity College, which gave him four years to study any subject; he made the decision to study philosophy. Sen explained: \"The broadening of my studies into philosophy was important for me not just because some of my main areas of interest in economics relate quite closely to philosophical disciplines (for example, social choice theory makes intense use of mathematical logic and also draws on moral philosophy, and so does the study of inequality and deprivation), but also because I found philosophical studies very rewarding on their own.\" His interest in philosophy, however, dates back to his college days at Presidency, where he read books on philosophy and debated philosophical themes. One of the books he was most interested in was Kenneth Arrow's \"Social Choice and Individual Values\".\nIn Cambridge, there were major debates between supporters of Keynesian economics, and the neo-classical economists who were sceptical of Keynes. Because of a lack of enthusiasm for social choice theory in both Trinity and Cambridge, Sen chose a different subject for his PhD thesis, which was on \"The Choice of Techniques\" in 1959. The work had been completed earlier, except for advice from his adjunct supervisor in India, A.\u00a0K. Dasgupta, given to Sen while teaching and revising his work at Jadavpur, under the supervision of the \"brilliant but vigorously intolerant\" post-Keynesian Joan Robinson. Quentin Skinner notes that Sen was a member of the secret society Cambridge Apostles during his time at Cambridge.\nDuring 1960\u201361, Amartya Sen visited the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, on leave from Trinity College.\nResearch work.\nSocial choice theory.\nSen's work on 'Choice of Techniques' complemented that of Maurice Dobb. In a developing country, the Dobb-Sen strategy relied on maximising investible surpluses, maintaining constant real wages and using the entire increase in labour productivity, due to technological change, to raise the rate of accumulation. In other words, workers were expected to demand no improvement in their standard of living despite having become more productive.\nSen's papers in the late 1960s and early 1970s helped develop the theory of social choice, which first came to prominence in the work by the American economist Kenneth Arrow. Arrow had most famously shown that when voters have three or more distinct alternatives (options), any ranked order voting system will in at least some situations inevitably conflict with what many assume to be basic democratic norms. Sen's contribution to the literature was to show under what conditions Arrow's impossibility theorem applied, as well as to extend and enrich the theory of social choice, informed by his interests in history of economic thought and philosophy.\nLiberal Paradox.\nIn 1970, Sen published his paper \"The Impossibility of a Paretian Liberal,\" which introduced the \"liberal paradox\", also sometimes . This paradox shows that no means of aggregating individual preferences into a single, social choice, can simultaneously fulfill the following, seemingly mild conditions: unrestricted domain, the weak Pareto principle, and a minimal requirement of individual rights. Pareto efficiency dictates that if every individual in a society prefers option A to option B, the society as a whole should also prefer A. Minimal liberalism suggests that individuals should have the decisive right to make choices in purely personal matters, such as what to read or how to dress.\nSen illustrated the result using a hypothetical example involving two individuals (\u201cLewd\u201d and \u201cPrude\u201d) and three social states: one person reading a particular book, the other reading, or neither reading. Prude thinks that the book is indecent and that it should be disposed of, unread. However, if someone must read it, Prude would prefer to read it rather than Lewd since Prude thinks it would be even worse for someone to read and enjoy the book rather than read it in disgust. Given these preferences of the two individuals in the society, a social planner must decide what to do. Should the planner force Lewd to read the book, force Prude to read the book or let it go unread? Under this decisiveness assignment, society would generate cyclic collective preferences, violating acyclicity (or transitivity) of social ordering.\nThis paradox, now known as the \u201cliberal paradox,\u201d demonstrates a conflict between individual rights and social efficiency: ensuring minimal individual liberty may force the violation of Pareto-style aggregation consistency.\n\"Poverty and Famines\" (1981).\nIn 1981, Sen published \"Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation\" (1981), a book in which he argued that famine occurs not only from a lack of food, but from inequalities built into mechanisms for distributing food. Sen also argued that the Bengal famine was caused by an urban economic boom that raised food prices, thereby causing millions of rural workers to starve to death when their wages did not keep up. In 1999 he wrote, \"no famine has ever taken place ... in a functioning democracy\".\nIn addition to his important work on the causes of famines, Sen's work in the field of development economics has had considerable influence in the formulation of the \"Human Development Report\", published by the United Nations Development Programme. This annual publication that ranks countries on a variety of economic and social indicators owes much to the contributions by Sen among other social choice theorists in the area of economic measurement of poverty and inequality.\n\"Equality of What?\" (1979).\nSen's revolutionary contribution to development economics and social indicators is the concept of \"capability\" developed in his article \"Equality of What?\". He argues that governments should be measured against the concrete capabilities of their citizens. This is because top-down development will always trump human rights as long as the definition of terms remains in doubt (is a \"right\" something that must be provided or something that simply cannot be taken away?). For instance, in the United States citizens have a right to vote. To Sen, this concept is fairly empty. In order for citizens to have a capacity to vote, they first must have \"functionings\". These \"functionings\" can range from the very broad, such as the availability of education, to the very specific, such as transportation to the polls. Only when such barriers are removed can the citizen truly be said to act out of personal choice. It is up to the individual society to make the list of minimum capabilities guaranteed by that society. For an example of the \"capabilities approach\" in practice, see Martha Nussbaum's \"Women and Human Development\".\n\"More than 100 Million Women Are Missing\" (1990).\nHe wrote a controversial article in \"The New York Review of Books\" entitled \"More Than 100 Million Women Are Missing\" (see Missing women of Asia), analysing the mortality impact of unequal rights between the genders in the developing world, particularly Asia. Other studies, including one by Emily Oster, had argued that this is an overestimation, though Oster has since then recanted her conclusions.\n\"Development as Freedom\" (1999).\nIn 1999, Sen further advanced and redefined the capability approach in his book \"Development as Freedom\". Sen argued that development should be viewed as an effort to advance the real freedoms that individuals enjoy, rather than simply focusing on metrics such as GDP or income-per-capita.\nSen was inspired by violent acts he had witnessed as a child leading up to the Partition of India in 1947. On one morning, a Muslim daily labourer named Kader Mia stumbled through the rear gate of Sen's family home, bleeding from a knife wound in his back. Because of his extreme poverty, he had come to Sen's primarily Hindu neighbourhood searching for work; his choices were the starvation of his family or the risk of death in coming to the neighbourhood. The price of Kader Mia's economic unfreedom was his death. Kader Mia need not have come to a hostile area in search of income in those troubled times if his family could have managed without it. This experience led Sen to begin thinking about economic unfreedom from a young age.\nIn \"Development as Freedom\", Sen outlined five specific types of freedoms: political freedoms, economic facilities, social opportunities, transparency guarantees, and protective security. Political freedoms refer to the ability of the people to have a voice in government and to be able to scrutinise the authorities. Economic facilities concern both the resources within the market and the market mechanism itself. Any focus on income and wealth in the country would serve to increase the economic facilities for the people. Social opportunities deal with the establishments that provide benefits like healthcare or education for the populace, allowing individuals to live better lives. Transparency guarantees allow individuals to interact with some degree of trust and knowledge of the interaction. Protective security is the system of social safety nets that prevent a group affected by poverty being subjected to terrible misery. Development encompassing non-economic areas, Sen argues, renders the notion of a dichotomy between \"freedom\" and \"development,\" as implied by the concept of Asian values, meaningless and disingenuous.\nBefore Sen's work, these had been viewed as only the ends of development; luxuries afforded to countries that focus on increasing income. However, Sen argued that the increase in real freedoms should be both the ends and the means of development. He elaborates upon this by illustrating the closely interconnected natures of the five main freedoms as he believes that expansion of one of those freedoms can lead to expansion in another one as well. In this regard, he discussed the correlation between social opportunities of education and health and how both of these complement economic and political freedoms as a healthy and well-educated person is better suited to make informed economic decisions and be involved in fruitful political demonstrations, etc. A comparison is also drawn between China and India to illustrate this interdependence of freedoms. Sen noted that both countries had been working towards developing their economies\u2014China since 1979 and India since 1991.\n\"The Idea of Justice\" (2009).\nIn 2009, Sen published a book called \"The Idea of Justice\". Based on his previous work in welfare economics and social choice theory, but also on his philosophical thoughts, Sen presented his own theory of justice that he meant to be an alternative to the influential modern theories of justice of John Rawls or John Harsanyi. In opposition to Rawls but also earlier justice theoreticians Immanuel Kant, Jean-Jacques Rousseau or David Hume, and inspired by the philosophical works of Adam Smith and Mary Wollstonecraft, Sen developed a theory that is both comparative and realisations-oriented (instead of being transcendental and institutional). However, he still regards institutions and processes as being equally important. As an alternative to Rawls's veil of ignorance, Sen chose the thought experiment of an impartial spectator as the basis of his theory of justice. He also stressed the importance of public discussion (understanding democracy in the sense of John Stuart Mill) and a focus on people's capabilities (an approach that he had co-developed), including the notion of universal human rights, in evaluating various states with regard to justice.\nCareer.\nSen began his career both as a teacher and a research scholar in the Department of Economics, Jadavpur University as a professor of economics in 1956. He spent two years in that position. From 1957 to 1963, Sen served as a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Between 1960 and 1961, Sen was a visiting professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States, where he got to know Paul Samuelson, Robert Solow, Franco Modigliani, and Norbert Wiener. He was also a visiting professor at the University of California, Berkeley (1964\u20131965) and Cornell University (1978\u20131984). He taught as Professor of Economics between 1963 and 1971 at the Delhi School of Economics (where he completed his \"magnum opus\", \"Collective Choice and Social Welfare\", in 1969).\nDuring this time Sen was also a frequent visitor to various other premiere Indian economic schools and centres of excellence, such as Jawaharlal Nehru University, the Indian Statistical Institute, the Centre for Development Studies, Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, and the Centre for Studies in Social Sciences. He was a companion of distinguished economists like Manmohan Singh (ex-Prime Minister of India and a veteran economist responsible for liberalising the Indian economy), K. N. Raj (advisor to various prime ministers and a veteran economist who was the founder of the Centre for Development Studies, Trivandrum, which is one of India's premier think tanks and schools), and Jagdish Bhagwati (who is known to be one of the greatest Indian economists in the field of international trade and currently teaches at Columbia University). This is a period considered to be a Golden Period in the history of the DSE. In 1971, he joined the London School of Economics as a professor of economics, and taught there until 1977. From 1977 to 1988, he taught at the University of Oxford, where he was first a professor of economics and fellow of Nuffield College, and then from 1980 the Drummond Professor of Political Economy and a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford.\nIn 1985, Sen co-founded the Eva Colorni Trust at the former London Guildhall University in memory of his deceased wife. In 1987, Sen joined Harvard as the Thomas W. Lamont University Professor of Economics. In 1998 he was appointed as Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, becoming the first Asian head of an Oxbridge college. In January 2004, Sen returned to Harvard.\nIn May 2007, he was appointed chairman of Nalanda Mentor Group to plan the establishment of Nalanda University. The university was intended to be a revival of Nalanda mahavihara, an ancient educational centre.\nHe chaired the Social Sciences jury for the Infosys Prize from 2009 to 2011, and the Humanities jury from 2012 to 2018.\nOn 19 July 2012, Sen was named the first chancellor of the proposed Nalanda University (NU). Sen was criticised as the project suffered due to inordinate delays, mismanagement, and lack of presence of faculty on ground. Finally teaching began in August 2014. On 20 February 2015, Sen withdrew his candidature for a second term.\nMemberships and associations.\nHe has served as president of the Econometric Society (1984), the International Economic Association (1986\u20131989), the https:// (1989) and the American Economic Association (1994). He has also served as president of the Development Studies Association and the Human Development and Capability Association. He serves as the honorary director of the Academic Advisory Committee of the Center for Human and Economic Development Studies at Peking University in China.\nSen has been called \"the Conscience of the profession\" and \"the Mother Teresa of Economics\" for his work on famine, human development theory, welfare economics, the underlying mechanisms of poverty, gender inequality, and political liberalism. However, he denies the comparison to Mother Teresa, saying that he has never tried to follow a lifestyle of dedicated self-sacrifice. Amartya Sen also added his voice to the campaign against the anti-gay Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code.\nSen has served as Honorary Chairman of Oxfam, the UK based international development charity, and is now its Honorary Advisor.\nSen is also a member of the Berggruen Institute's 21st Century Council.\nSen is an Honorary Fellow of St Edmund's College, Cambridge.\nHe is also one of the 25 leading figures on the Information and Democracy Commission launched by Reporters Without Borders.\nMedia and culture.\nA 56-minute documentary named \"Amartya Sen: A Life Re-examined\" directed by Suman Ghosh details his life and work. A documentary about Amartya Sen, titled The Argumentative Indian (the title of one of Sen's own books), was released in 2017.\nA 2001 portrait of Sen by Annabel Cullen is in Trinity College's collection. A 2003 portrait of Sen hangs in the National Portrait Gallery in London.\nIn 2011, he was present at the \"Rabindra Utsab\" ceremony at Bangabandhu International Conference Centre (BICC), Bangladesh. He unveiled the cover of Sruti Gitobitan, a Rabindrasangeet album comprising all the 2222 Tagore songs, brought out by Rezwana Chowdhury Bannya, principal of Shurer Dhara School of Music.\nMax Roser said that it was the work of Sen that made him create Our World in Data.\nIn 2022, Sen Published his photo book \"Around the World in Fifty Shots: A travel story through Portraits by Amartya Sen.\"\nPolitical views.\nSen was critical of Narendra Modi when he was announced as the prime ministerial candidate for the BJP. In April 2014, he said that Modi would not make a good prime minister. He conceded later in December 2014 that Modi did give people a sense of faith that things can happen. In February 2015, Sen opted out of seeking a second term for the chancellor post of Nalanda University, stating that the Government of India was not keen on him continuing in the post.\nIn August 2019, during the clampdown and curfew in Kashmir for more than two weeks after the Indian revocation of Jammu and Kashmir's special status, Sen criticised the government and said \"As an Indian, I am not proud of the fact that India, after having done so much to achieve a democratic norm in the world \u2013 where India was the first non-Western country to go for democracy \u2013 that we lose that reputation on the grounds of action that have been taken\". He regarded the detention of Kashmiri political leaders as \"a classical colonial excuse\" to prevent backlash against the Indian government's decision and called for a democratic solution that would involve Kashmiri people.\nSen has spent much of his later life as a political writer and activist. He has been outspoken about Narendra Modi's leadership in India. In an interview with \"The New York Times\", he claimed that Modi's fearmongering among the Indian people was anti-democratic. \"The big thing that we know from John Stuart Mill is that democracy is government by discussion, and, if you make discussion fearful, you are not going to get a democracy, no matter how you count the votes.\" He disagreed with Modi's ideology of Hindu nationalism, and advocated for a more integrated and diverse ideology that reflects the heterogeneity of India.\nSen also wrote an article for \"The New York Times\" in 2013 documenting the reasons why India trailed behind China in economic development. He advocated for healthcare reform, because low-income people in India have to deal with exploitative and inadequate private healthcare. He recommended that India implement the same education policies that Japan did in the late 19th century. However, he conceded that there is a tradeoff between democracy and progress in Asia because democracy is a near reality in India and not in China.\nIn a 1999 article in \"The Atlantic\", Sen recommended for India a middle path between the \"hard-knocks\" development policy that creates wealth at the expense of civil liberties, and radical progressivism that only seeks to protect civil liberties at the expense of development. Rather than create an entirely new theory for ethical development in Asia, Sen sought to reform the current development model.\nIn 2025, Sen raised concerns about the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls in Bihar, warning that it could disenfranchise poor and marginalized people if documentation requirements are too strict.\nPersonal life and beliefs.\nSen has been married three times. His first wife was Nabaneeta Dev Sen, an Indian writer and scholar, with whom he had two daughters: Antara, a journalist and publisher, and Nandana, a Bollywood actress. Their marriage broke up shortly after they moved to London in 1971. In 1978 Sen married Eva Colorni, an Italian economist, daughter of Eugenio Colorni and Ursula Hirschmann and niece of Albert O. Hirschman. The couple had two children, a daughter Indrani, who is a journalist in New York, and a son Kabir, a hip hop artist, MC, and music teacher at Shady Hill School. Eva died of cancer in 1985. In 1991, Sen married Emma Georgina Rothschild, who serves as the Jeremy and Jane Knowles Professor of History at Harvard University.\nThe Sens have a house in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which is the base from which they teach during the academic year. They also have a home in Cambridge, England, where Sen is a Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and Rothschild is a Fellow of Magdalene College. He usually spends his winter holidays at his home in Shantiniketan in West Bengal, India, where he used to go on long bike rides until recently. Asked how he relaxes, he replies: \"I read a lot and like arguing with people.\"\nSen is an atheist. In an interview, he noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In some ways people had got used to the idea that India was spiritual and religion-oriented. That gave a leg up to the religious interpretation of India, despite the fact that Sanskrit had a larger atheistic literature than exists in any other classical language. Madhava Acharya, the remarkable 14th century philosopher, wrote this rather great book called \"Sarvadarshansamgraha\", which discussed all the religious schools of thought within the Hindu structure. The first chapter is \"Atheism\"\u2014a very strong presentation of the argument in favor of atheism and materialism.\nAwards and honours.\nSen has received over 90 honorary degrees from universities around the world. In 2019, London School of Economics announced the creation of the Amartya Sen Chair in Inequality Studies.\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReviewed in the \"Social Scientist\": \nReviewed in \"The Economic Journal\".\nReview in \"Asia Times\".\nReview \"The Guardian.\"\nReview \"The Washington Post\".\nReprinted in \nNews coverage of the \"1998 Romanes Lecture\" in the \"Oxford University Gazette.\"\nSelected works in Persian.\nA list of Persian translations of Amartya Sen's work is available https:// \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "51336", "revid": "40551159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51336", "title": "Barbuda", "text": "Island and dependency in Antigua and Barbuda\nBarbuda (; ) is an island and dependency located in the eastern Caribbean forming part of the twin-island state of Antigua and Barbuda as an autonomous entity. Barbuda is located approximately north of Antigua. The only settlements on the island are Codrington and its surrounding localities. Barbuda is a flat island with the western portion being dominated by Codrington Lagoon, and the eastern portion being dominated by the elevated plateau of the Barbuda Highlands, with salty ponds and scrubland spread throughout the island. The climate is classified as tropical marine.\nThe first inhabitants of Barbuda were canoe-driving hunter-gatherers around 3,000\u20134,000 years ago. The island was subsequently inhabited by the Arawak and Kalinago. Early settlements by the Spanish were followed by the French and English who formed a colony in 1666. In 1685, Barbuda was leased to brothers John and Christopher Codrington. In 1834, slavery was abolished in Barbuda. Because the entire island had been covered by a single land grant, the Barbudans kept on autonomous cultivation on communal property after slavery's abolition.\nWith a population of 1,634, and an area of , Barbuda is one of the most sparsely populated islands in the Caribbean. Barbuda has a population density significantly lower than Antigua. In September 2017, the Category 5 Hurricane Irma destroyed more than 90 percent of Barbuda's buildings, and the entire population was evacuated to Antigua. By February 2019, most of the residents had returned to the island. The population of Barbuda is now higher than it was before the hurricane.\nThe economy of Barbuda is based mostly around tourism and government, with the central government and the local government being the largest employers on the island. Fisheries accounts for the majority of the island's exports, with the island having a significant lobster catching industry.\nHistory.\nArchaic period.\nThe first settlements on Barbuda date to 2,900\u20133,000 BC with the arrival of Archaic Age people. Some scholars have referred to these first settlers as Ciboney or Siboney. Other scholars say these people were not the Ciboney, who inhabited Cuba, Jamaica, and Haiti, and thus refer to them as Archaic Age people, \"Archaic People\", or first settlers. These first settlers arrived in Barbuda by canoe and were hunter-gatherers. Sources disagree on whether they came from South America or the Greater Antilles, or from the Yucat\u00e1n region of Mexico.\nArtifacts from the Archaic period include cutting blades made from gastropods, along with hoes, picks, and water containers constructed from conch, trumpet, and whelk shells. Archeological sites have been discovered on the southwest coast of Barbuda, from Coco Point up to River, and the southeast corner of the Lagoon. Additional habitat locations have been found in Codrington, River, Sucking Hole, Factory, and Goat Pen along the coast. At Boiling Rocks, close to Spanish Point, more recent human remains that were carbon-dated as being 3,100 years old were discovered.\nCeramic period.\nThe successors of the Ciboney were the Arawaks, who were present on Barbuda and Antigua from at least 1,000 BC. Their population on Barbuda peaked between 1,500 and 800 years ago. They likely arrived from present-day Venezuela and Guyana, and used Barbuda for brief stays or seasonal supplies. They lived mostly in the Barbuda Highlands and Spanish Point in the easternmost parts of the island, but six or more village additional sites are known including Sufferers, Indian Town Trail, Highland Road, Guava, and Welches. The Arawaks grew sweet potatoes, corn, peanuts, cotton, tobacco, as well as a variety of other fruits, vegetables, and medicinal plants. They also made intricate pottery known as Saladoid. This unique pottery, characterize its white-on-red designs, were decorated with zoned-incised crosshatching. The pottery has been found at Indian Town Trail, close to Two Foot Bay, as well as Sufferers in the Spanish Point region.\nThe Kalinago people spent time in Barbuda as well. By the time the Europeans arrived, they had probably displaced the Arawaks. The Kalinago preferred the mountainous and well-watered islands of Saint Kitts and Dominica, and visited Barbuda only sometimes to harvest seafood and whatever crops and land animals they could find. In the early 1700s, the British Royal Navy was forced to defend the people of Codrington against Kalinago raids because the Kalinago served as a deterrent to European colonization. The Kalinago called Barbuda \"Wa'omoni\", which is thought to mean \"Island of Herons\"; however, it may have also referred to frigate or weather birds, also common on Barbuda.\nColonial period.\nChristopher Columbus traveled through the eastern Caribbean south of Antigua in 1493, but it's unclear if he ever sighted Barbuda. Under a Letters Patent granted to the Earl of Carlisle in 1625, Captain Smith and John Littleton attempted to colonize Barbuda from St. Kitts. Barbuda was referred to as \"Barbado\" in these Letters Patent. Due to strong Kalinago resistance, this attempt at colonization was unsuccessful; however, subsequent early settlers called Barbuda \"Dulcina\", and by 1666 the village of Codrington had become the primary residential area. In 1678, Barbuda was colonized. The island was given to the Codrington family by the crown in 1685. The colonisers intended Barbuda to be a slave forced reproduction colony but this never went through.\nThe Codrington family held Barbuda from 1685 to 1870, and were absentee owners of the island. The Codringtons were represented on Barbuda by their resident managers. The slave population in Barbuda grew from 172 in 1746 to 503 in 1831. Due to the increase in the slave population, to increase profits, the Codringtons attempted to transfer some of slaves to Antigua, which was ultimately unsuccessful.\nBeach's Rebellion, the first slave rebellion on Barbuda, occurred in 1741 as a result of claims of cruel and inhuman treatment of the island's slaves by the island manager Thomas Beach. This resulted in the killing of several animals, property of the Codringtons damaged, and the escape of several slaves. In 1774, another island manager, named McNish, was killed with seized arms after the mutilation of slaves as a punishment for stealing sheep and cattle. The slaves successfully occupied the Codringtons' castle and its arms and ammunition. To put down the rebellion, soldiers were brought from Antigua, and two slaves (known as \"afro heroes\") were burned alive in front of the castle at the main gate.\nIn 1834, slavery was abolished in Barbuda per the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. Because the entire island had been covered by a single land grant, the Barbudans kept on autonomous cultivation on communal property after slavery's abolition.\nIn 1860, Barbuda was annexed as a dependency of Antigua, after the passing of the Barbuda (Extension of Laws of Antigua) Act (c. 43 (Antigua)) in 1859. This made Barbuda subject to the laws of the Antigua colony.\nModern history.\nBarbuda was first granted a status of autonomy in 1976, during the concluding era of the Associated State of Antigua. This autonomous status came after the passing of the Barbuda Local Government Act. This established the Barbuda Council, which allowed Barbuda to regulate its own public works, finance, and agriculture, among other activities. The Barbuda Local Government Act was later enshrined in the constitution under the Antigua and Barbuda Constitution of 1981. The Barbuda Council elects a chairperson and a vice chairperson, with Devon Warner serving as chairperson since 2024.\nIn 1981, the island gained its independence from the United Kingdom as an integral part of Antigua and Barbuda. It remains part of the Commonwealth of Nations, and remains a constitutional monarchy, with Charles III as King of Antigua and Barbuda.\nThe right for Barbudans to use the island's lands in common was enshrined in the law in 2007 by the Baldwin Spencer-led United Progressive Party government. On April 5, 2007, the Barbuda Council released the final copies of the Barbuda Land Act, which created a land registry, a Barbuda Planning Commission, and a National Park Authority, all subordinate to the council. In 2017, immediately after Hurricane Irma which devastated Barbuda, this was considered the starting point of the Barbuda land grab which has resulted in various policies and laws made by the Gaston Browne-led administration relating to Barbudan land. On August 1, 2023, it was announced by the Barbuda People's Movement, which controls the Barbuda seat in parliament, and controls the council, that a bill proposed and passed days earlier that would end Barbudan communal land ownership, would vow to do everything to reverse the decision, with the council being in support of the stance of the Barbuda People's Movement.\nChristianity is the largest religion on the island, and the main ethnic group being those of African descent. English and Barbudan Creole are the most commonly spoken languages on the island. Based on voter registration records, the population of Barbuda has grown significantly since Irma.\nPolitics and government.\nThe political system of Antigua and Barbuda is a unitary, parliamentary, representative democratic monarchy. Charles III is the present King of Antigua and Barbuda.\nWhile executive power is exercised by the government, legislative power is vested in both the government and the legislature. Antigua and Barbuda elects a legislature on national level. Parliament has two chambers: the House of Representatives, which has 19 members, and the Senate, which has 17 appointed members. There are special legislative provisions to account for Barbuda's low population relative to that of Antigua. Barbuda is guaranteed at least one member of the House of Representatives and two members of the Senate. The current representative for Barbuda in the House of Representatives is Trevor Walker.\nBarbuda Council.\nThe Barbuda Council is an 11-member body consisting of nine directly elected and two \"ex officio\" (Barbuda's House and Senate representatives in the national Parliament). Council sessions are held in Codrington. Councillors serve for four years with elections held every two years in March.\nIn January of every year, the council elects a chairperson and a deputy chairperson. In a year where an election is held, at the first sitting of the council after the election, this is also an instance where the council must elect a chairperson and a deputy chairperson.\nThe Barbuda Council has many duties, including administering public utilities and other ministries and departments; managing roadwork; and improving building and marine facilities. The Council also has the power to make local by-laws.\nDistricts.\nBarbuda is divided into eight districts:\nGeography and wildlife.\nThere are a total of 160.56 square kilometers of land, which is equivalent to 62 square miles. Codrington, which is the largest town, has a population of estimated 1,300 people as of 2011[ [update]]. Coral limestone makes up the majority of the island, which has very little topographical diversity. The Barbuda Highlands on the eastern side of the island is home to hills that can reach heights of up to 38 meters (125 feet), but the majority of the island is quite flat, and the northwest corner is home to many lagoons.\nBetween the months of August and October, the island is at risk of being hit by hurricanes. After Hurricane Irma, NASA satellite images showed \"browning\" of Barbuda and other Caribbean islands that had been hit by the storm. The images, captured by the Operational Land Imager (OLI) on the Landsat 8 satellite, show a primarily green-colored Barbuda on August 27, 2017, and brown-colored Barbuda on September 12, 2017. NASA provided several possible reasons for the browning, including green vegetation being ripped away by hurricane winds, as well as salt spray from the storm coating and desiccating tree leaves.\nThe climate is classified as tropical marine, which means that there is little seasonal temperature variation. In January and February, the coolest months, the average daily high temperature is , while in July and August, the warmest months, the average daily high is .\nBarbuda is host to several rare and endemic species:\nBarbuda is host to several near-threatened bird species, including the West Indian whistling duck (\"Dendrocygna arborea\"), endemic to the Caribbean, and the white-crowned pigeon (\"Patagioenas leucocephala\"). Barbuda is also host to the Barbuda Bank tree anole (\"Anolis leachii\"), an anole endemic to the Caribbean, also known as the Antigua Bank tree anole or panther anole. Barbuda is also one of two islands in eastern Caribbean, along with Guiana Island, to host the European fallow deer (\"Dama dama dama\"), an important symbol of the island and of the entire country. Previously, Barbuda was host to the Barbudan muskrat (\"Megalomys audreyae\"), an extinct rodent formerly endemic to the island. The Barbudan muskrat may have gone extinct around 1500 AD. The Magnificent Frigate Bird Sanctuary, located in Codrington Lagoon, is one of the primary tourist destinations on Barbuda. Few predators exist here, making this Barbuda breeding area the most crucial worldwide for these threatened birds.\nDrawings (petroglyphs) made by the Arawak or the Siboney, Barbuda's first inhabitants, may be found inside Indian Cave. A sinkhole in the Barbuda Highlands, Darby Cave is located three and a half miles northeast of Codrington. The Darby Sink Hole has a diameter of more than 300 feet and is around 70 feet deep. Stalactites up to eight feet long have grown under the overhang on one side of the hole, which has been severely undercut. The palms, ferns, and lianas give the vegetation the appearance of a little rainforest. Two miles south of Darby Cave is Dark Cave. As evidenced by artifacts discovered nearby, the cave's tiny entrance opens into a large cavern with pools of water. These ponds were likely a source of water for Amerindian occupants. The blind shrimp, a rare kind of amphipod, and various species of bats can be found at Dark Cave. Five chambers make up the complex of Nicey Cave, and a collapsed roof part serves as the complex's rear entrance and skylight. Three inner chambers are separated by modest ceiling ridges, and there is an outside chamber that is immediately accessible from the outside. The cave's vast stalactites and stalagmites are covered in shattered stalactites on the cave floor, which is primarily made of sand. The cave also has a circular stone enclosure that is comparable to tortoise pens found on modern sites, although the enclosure's walls are too low to accommodate tortoises and it is located distant from natural light.\nDemographics.\nEthnicity and immigration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2011, Barbuda had a nearly homogeneous population with nine reported ethnic origins. The majority of the population identified as African (95.11%), followed by Mixed Black/White (2.88%), other Mixed (1.00%), Hispanic (0.44%), White (0.13%), Indian (0.13%), Syrian/Lebanese (0.13%), and other (0.13%). A small portion (0.06%) did not specify their ethnicity.\nRegarding the countries of birth in Barbuda, over 18 different countries were represented in the 2011 census. The top five countries and territories contributing the largest number of people born outside Barbuda were Guyana (2.76%), Dominica (1.50%), Jamaica (1.19%), the United States (1.07%), and the United States Virgin Islands (0.63%).\nNotably, Barbuda had a high proportion of its population (89.28%) born in Antigua and Barbuda, compared to St. John's which had a lower percentage (62.66%) of residents born in the country.\nWhen looking at specific ethnic backgrounds based on the countries of birth, the data showed that a significant majority of people born in Antigua and Barbuda were of African descent (97.12%). Similarly, those born in Guyana (86.36%), Dominica (91.67%), the United States (88.24%), and Jamaica (100.00%) were predominantly of African descent. In contrast, those born in the United States Virgin Islands had a mixed background, with 70.00% being Mixed Black/White and only 30.00% being of African descent.\nThe total population of Barbuda in March 2025 was estimated to be 2,233.\nHousing and lands.\nAbout 34.31% of Barbudan households consist of only one person, while 18.35% have two people, and 16.51% have three people; the remaining households have four or more people. The majority of homes (72.84%) use concrete/blocks as the main material for outer walling. Additionally, 12.48% of households use wood. In terms of dwelling types, 93.58% of homes are separate homes, and 3.49% are businesses and dwellings. Similar to most homes in Antigua and Barbuda, 93.76% of homes in Barbuda use sheet metal as the main roofing material, with an additional 3.12% using wood shingles. Moreover, 98.53% of homes are situated on owned/freeheld land, a result of the Barbuda Land Acts that establish a unique system of communal land ownership.\nEducation.\n67.46% of Barbuda's population across all age groups lacked any form of educational examination. The most common type of examination, achieved by 7.90% of individuals, was the GCE 'O' level/CXC General examination. Among those aged 18\u201359, the largest segment in the country at 50.95% had no level of examination. In comparison, Saint George had the lowest percentage of people aged 18\u201359 with no examination at 21.88%. Within this age group, 3.70% held a school leaving certificate, 5.16% possessed a high school certificate, 7.07% completed a Cambridge School/CXC examination, 13.69% passed a GCE 'O' level/CXC General examination, 0.79% obtained a GCE 'A' Levels or CAPE examination, 6.51% earned a college certificate, 2.81% had an associate degree, 2.13% held a bachelor's degree, 0.22% had a postgraduate diploma, 0.67% possessed a professional certificate, 0.34% held a master's or doctoral degree, and 5.95% either didn't know or didn't disclose their examination status.\nHealth.\nIn 2011, the census reported health statistics for Barbuda. No cases of AIDS were documented, while 10.75% of the population had allergies, 6.58% had asthma, and 0.32% had cancer. Additionally, 6.45% of the population had diabetes, and no cases of HIV were reported. Among those with allergies, 92.94% were of African descent.\nRegarding disabilities, 77.62% of the population had no disability, 16.87% had a disability with some difficulty, 4.83% had a disability with lots of difficulty or were unable to do certain things at all, and 0.69% did not state their disability status. Specific disability breakdowns included 193 people with vision disabilities, with 35.45% attributing it to old age and 22.75% to illness. Additionally, 68 people had a hearing disability, with 35.82% unaware of the cause and 26.87% attributing it to old age.\nMoreover, 121 people had a walking disability, with 35.29% attributing it to illness, 29.41% to old age, and 15.97% to an accident. A total of 35 people had a self-care disability, with 38.24% unaware of the cause, 26.47% attributing it to illness, and 23.53% to \"other\" reasons. Lastly, 111 people had a remembering disability, with 33.94% attributing it to old age, 26.61% for unknown reasons, 14.68% to illness, 11.01% from birth, and 4.59% to an accident.\nYouth.\nIn 2011, 33.92% of Barbuda's population, totaling 551 individuals, were aged 0\u201317. The age distribution within this group was as follows: 10.91% (177) were aged 0\u20134, 10.03% (163) were aged 5\u20139, 7.52% (122) were aged 10\u201314, and 7.65% (124) were aged 15\u201319. Among those aged 0\u20134, 94.25% were of African descent, 2.87% were Mixed Black/White, and 2.87% were of other Mixed descent. All other youth age groups were predominantly African descendant or mixed.\nReligion.\nIn 2011, Barbuda reported 16 religious affiliations. The majority of the population identified as follows: 26.71% as Pentecostal, 17.66% as Anglican, 17.54% as Wesleyan Holiness, 11.94% as Baptist, 3.90% as irreligious, 3.77% as \"other\", and 3.39% as Rastafarian. The remaining affiliations were mostly Catholics, Jehovah's Witnesses, and Evangelicals.\nEconomy.\nBusiness.\nIn 2011, Barbuda had 94 business owners. The distribution of monthly earnings for these businesses was as follows: 26.09% earned less than $1,000 EC, 16.30% earned $1,000 to $1,999 EC, 15.22% earned $2,000 to $2,999 EC, 20.65% earned $3,000 to $4,999 EC, and 21.74% earned $5,000 EC or more. Among the business owners, 60 were men and 34 were women.\nFor businesses owned by men, the income distribution was: 27.12% earned under $1,000 EC, 15.25% earned $1,000 to $1,999 EC, 11.86% earned $2,000 to $2,999 EC, 25.42% earned $3,000 to $4,999 EC, and 20.34% earned $5,000 EC and over. For businesses owned by women, the income distribution was: 24.24% earned under $1,000 EC, 18.18% earned $1,000 to $1,999 EC, 21.21% earned $2,000 to $2,999 EC, 12.12% earned $3,000 to $4,999 EC, and 24.24% earned $5,000 EC and over.\nEmployment.\nIn the 2011 census, 1,162 people were surveyed about their job status. The majority, 75.55%, were employed and actively working. Additionally, 9.99% were attending school, 7.10% were retired, and the remaining respondents were mostly unable to work.\nOut of the 859 people queried about their workplace, 80.31% had a fixed place of work outside the home, 3.56% worked at home, 15.78% had no fixed place of work, and 0.36% either didn't know or didn't state their workplace.\nRegarding employment types, 61.33% of workers were paid employees of the government, 3.68% worked for statutory bodies, 21.83% were private employees, 0.36% were private home employees, 3.08% were self-employed with paid employees, 8.66% were self-employed without paid employees, 0.59% had another worker status, and 0.47% either didn't know or didn't state their worker status. These figures were based on responses from the 859 individuals surveyed.\nJob training.\nIn 2011, a total of 486 individuals participated in, tried, or completed various types of training. Among them, 70.65% had successfully finished their training, 9.01% were still undergoing training, 17.61% had attempted training, and 2.73% were unsure or had not stated their status.\nBreaking down the types of training, 50.10% of participants completed on-the-job training, 9.64% completed an apprenticeship, 1.89% completed a correspondence course, 1.05% completed secondary school job training, 24.32% completed vocational/technical/trade training, 0.21% completed commercial/secretarial training, 2.10% completed business/computer training, 4.19% completed university/campus training, 1.26% completed private study, 3.56% completed another type of training, and the remaining respondents either didn't know or didn't state their specific training type.\nTourism.\nBarbuda's climate, pristine beaches, and geography have attracted tourists for many years. Tourism accounts for more than half Antigua and Barbuda's GDP, 40% of investment, and more than 46% of Antigua and Barbuda's national employment (directly and indirectly). Barbuda is served by Burton\u2013Nibbs International Airport and also has a ferry service to Antigua. Popular outdoor activities for tourists include swimming, snorkeling, fishing, and caving. Additional popular attractions include the Frigate Bird Sanctuary in the Codrington Lagoon, Martello Tower, a 19th-century fort and the Indian Cave with its two rock-carved petroglyphs.\nOther points of interest include the beautiful Pink Sands Beach, Darby's Cave, a sinkhole with a tropical rain forest inside and Highland House (called \"Willybob\" locally), the ruins of the 18th-century Codrington family home, and the Dividing Wall that separated the wealthy family from its slaves. Years after Hurricane Luis, in August 2017, there were still only two operating resorts on the island, although plans were being made to build other resorts before Hurricane Irma.\nCulture.\nFestivals and sport.\nA Teenage Pageant, the Caribana Queen Show, calypso competitions, and weekend beach parties are typically part of the annual Barbuda Caribana Festival, which takes place in May, and occasionally in early June.\nFrom an early age, students are encouraged to participate in sports in school. Two Barbuda Council employees have been designated to support sports in the local area. Since Irma, the basketball and tennis courts have been resurfaced. Athletics, cricket, and horse racing are quite popular, and there are year-round fishing competitions, a triathlon, and other sport activities.\nBarbuda is home to an abundance of lobster, conchs, and other seafood that is responsibly harvested by low impact fishing techniques that have been developed over many generations there. Barbudans frequently go fishing for larger species including kingfish, dolphin or mahi mahi, tuna, and barracuda, which are captured and sold to the hotels throughout the season. In general, these larger fish do not contain the Ciguatera toxicity that limits their ingestion in other regions of the Caribbean. Large barracuda can be seen near to shore in the waters around the island and are eaten widely in Barbuda. All fishing in Barbuda's seas must be done aboard a vessel with a local fishing license.\nSince the French, Spanish, and British fought each other for dominance of the Caribbean, there are hundreds of shipwrecks off the shore of Barbuda, dating from various periods in the island's history. The Marine Areas Act has identified and protected each one. Due to Barbuda being a relatively flat and \"hard-to-see\" island, there are even more contemporary boats that have lost their way onto the perilous reefs that encircle the island.\nOccasionally, after 4 o'clock local time on Sundays, the Barbuda Turf Club (horse racing) gathers at the local track in the Spring View sector south of the airport. There are often four races, each featuring two or three horses.\nThe Barbuda tennis court was partially motivated by the success of the Anguilla professional tennis program and is open all day, every day to anyone who wishes to play tennis. School groups have utilized it for CXC sport exams, and there used to be a vibrant tennis association that worked hard to establish connections with Antigua to keep the sport alive on Barbuda and raise money through contributions. Barbuda has thus produced a few talented tennis players. Since the court was resurfaced after Hurricane Irma, this group has disbanded and a formal tennis program is now required, along with some new initiatives.\nThe floodlit basketball court is where the Vipers, Young Warriors, Rockers, Flip-mo, Boars, and Vikings teams compete in a league table structure, with the top teams moving on to the playoffs. The basketball season on Barbuda typically begins in August. Barbudans have experienced great success playing basketball internationally and have been signed by numerous institutions in the US and other nations.\nThe Antigua Barbuda Triathlon's Barbuda leg has rekindled interest in endurance sports on Barbuda.\nCuisine.\nWhile lobster is cooked directly from the sea, there are frequently individuals grilling on the street. Deer meat, land turtle, seafood (lobster, crab, conch), locally raised beef, lamb, or goat are some of the regional specialties. These meals are sometimes served with rice, fungi (similar to the Italian polenta), or dumplings, particularly yabba dumplings. Soursop, ginger beer, passion fruit, sea moss, tamarind, and other regional juices are among the drinks available. Fresh fish and lobster are frequently served on the street in cold boxes or at the fisheries pier as the boats dock most days between 2 and 4 pm local time. Although there is no market on Barbuda, local produce is occasionally sold in the Barbuda Council agriculture building, local fruit and vegetables are also sold on the street.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates public domain material from "}
{"id": "51337", "revid": "842922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51337", "title": "Saint Maartin", "text": ""}
{"id": "51339", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51339", "title": "Wilhelm II, German Emperor", "text": ""}
{"id": "51341", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51341", "title": "560s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 569 BC \u2013 560 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51342", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51342", "title": "570s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 579 BC \u2013 570 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51343", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51343", "title": "590s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 599 BC \u2013 590 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51344", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51344", "title": "600s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 609 BC \u2013 600 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51345", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51345", "title": "610s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 619 BC \u2013 610 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51346", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51346", "title": "Coconut", "text": "Species of plant in the palm family\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe coconut (Cocos nucifera) is a member of the palm family (Arecaceae) and the only living species of the genus \"Cocos\". The term \"coconut\" (or the archaic \"cocoanut\") can denote the whole coconut palm tree or the large hard fruit. Originally native to Central Indo-Pacific, they are ubiquitous in coastal tropical regions.\nThe coconut tree provides food, fuel, cosmetics, folk medicine and building materials. The inner flesh of the mature fruit forms a regular part of the diets of many people in the tropics and subtropics. Coconut endosperm contains a large quantity of a liquid, \"coconut water\". Mature coconuts can be processed for oil and coconut milk from the flesh, charcoal from the hard shell, and coir from the fibrous husk. Dried coconut flesh is called copra, and the oil and milk derived from it are commonly used in cooking and in soaps and cosmetics. Sweet coconut sap can be made into drinks or fermented into palm wine or coconut vinegar. The hard shells, fibrous husks and long pinnate leaves are used to make a products for furnishing and decoration.\nThe coconut has cultural and religious significance for Austronesian peoples, appearing in their mythologies, songs, and oral traditions. It has religious significance in South Asian cultures, where it is used in Hindu rituals including weddings and worship. \nThe species evolved in the central Indo-Pacific. It was domesticated by Austronesian peoples in Island Southeast Asia and spread during the Neolithic via their seaborne migrations as far east as the Pacific Islands, and as far west as Madagascar. The species played a critical role in their long sea voyages by providing a portable source of food and water, as well as building materials for outrigger boats. Coconuts were spread much later along the coasts of the Indian and Atlantic Oceans by South Asian, Arab, and from the 16th century by European sailors. Based on these introductions, the species can be divided into Pacific and Indo-Atlantic types. The Indo-Atlantic type was introduced to the Americas during the colonial era in the Columbian exchange, while Austronesian sailors appear to have introduced Pacific coconuts to Panama in pre-Columbian times.\nTrees can grow up to tall and can yield up to 75 fruits per year, though fewer than 30 is more typical. They are intolerant to cold and prefer copious precipitation and full sunlight. Many insect pests and diseases affect commercial production. In 2023, world production of coconuts was 65 million tonnes, with 73% of the total produced by Indonesia, India, and the Philippines.\nDescription.\n\"Cocos nucifera\" is a large palm, growing up to tall, with pinnate leaves long, and pinnae long; old leaves break away cleanly, leaving the trunk smooth. \nOn fertile soil, a tall coconut palm tree produces around 80 fruits per year; new varieties may be able to yield as many as 150 per year. In India, average production is over 8,000 nuts per hectare per year. Tall varieties produce their first fruit in 6 to 10 years, and live for 60 to 100 years; dwarf varieties become productive more quickly, but have a shorter lifespan.\nInflorescence.\nThe coconut is monoecious, meaning that both male and female flowers grow on the same tree, in its case in the same inflorescence. It is possible that the species in addition occasionally has bisexual flowers. The female flower is much larger than the male flower. Mature trees grow continuously, producing leaves, flowers, and fruit all year round. It takes some 14 months for each flower primordium to develop into an inflorescence, botanically a spadix inside a sheathing spathe. A healthy tree can produce up to 15 inflorescences per year, staggered so that there is always a mature one with others in different stages of development. It takes 11 months from the opening of the female flowers to the time of harvest. Coconut palms are largely cross-pollinated, although most dwarf varieties are self-pollinating.\nFruit.\nBotanically, the coconut fruit is a drupe, not a true nut. Like other fruits, it has three layers: the exocarp, mesocarp, and endocarp. The exocarp is the glossy outer skin, usually yellow-green to yellow-brown in color. The mesocarp is composed of a fiber, called coir, which has many traditional and commercial uses. The exocarp and the mesocarp make up the \"husk\" of the coconut, while the endocarp makes up the hard coconut \"shell\". The endocarp is around thick and has three distinctive germination pores (micropyles) on the distal end. Two of the pores are plugged (the \"eyes\"), while one is functional.\nThe interior of the endocarp is hollow and is lined with a thin brown seed coat, some thick. The endocarp is initially filled with a liquid endosperm (the coconut water). The liquid contains many free cell nuclei (it is multinucleate) dividing by mitosis, without cell boundaries. As development continues, cellular layers of endosperm deposit along the walls of the endocarp up to thick, starting at the far end. They eventually form the edible solid endosperm (\"coconut meat\") which hardens over time. The small cylindrical embryo is embedded in the solid endosperm directly below the functional pore. During germination, the embryo pushes out of the functional pore and forms a haustorium inside the central cavity. This absorbs the solid endosperm to nourish the seedling.\nThe fruits have two distinctive forms. Wild \"niu kafa\" coconuts feature an elongated triangular fruit with a thicker husk and a smaller amount of endosperm. These make the fruits more buoyant, ideal for ocean dispersal. Domesticated \"niu vai\" Pacific coconuts are rounded in shape with a thinner husk, more endosperm, and more coconut water.\nA full-sized fruit weighs about depending on variety. The 21st century Bido variety from Indonesia averages per fruit.\nCoconuts are exported without husks; de-husked nuts from Cote d'Ivoire average around 575 grams, while de-husked nuts from the Dominican Republic average nearly 700 grams. \nCoconuts sold domestically in coconut-producing countries are typically not de-husked. Immature coconuts (6 to 8 months from flowering) are sold for coconut water and softer jelly-like coconut meat (known as \"green coconuts\", \"young coconuts\", or \"water coconuts\"), where the original coloration of the fruit is more pleasing.\nWhole mature coconuts (11 to 13 months from flowering) sold for export, however, typically have the husk removed to reduce weight and volume for transport. This results in the naked coconut \"shell\" with three pores, remnants of the three carpels of the flower, more familiar in countries where coconuts are not grown locally. De-husked coconuts are easier for consumers to open, but have a shorter postharvest storage life of around two to three weeks at temperatures of or up to 2 months at . In comparison, mature coconuts with a husk can be stored for three to five months at room temperature.\nRoots.\nThe palm tree has neither a taproot nor root hairs, but a fibrous root system. This consists of many thin roots that grow outward from the plant near the surface. Only a few penetrate deep into the soil for stability. This is known as a fibrous or adventitious root system, and is a characteristic of grass species. 2,000\u20134,000 adventitious roots may grow, each about in diameter. Decayed roots are replaced regularly as the tree grows new ones.\nTaxonomy.\nTaxonomic history.\nThe Swedish botanist and taxonomist Carl Linnaeus formally described the species \"Cocos nucifera\" in his book \"Species Plantarum\" in 1753. The name is accepted by botanists. In 1768, in his book \"The Gardeners Dictionary\", the English botanist Philip Miller redescribed the plant as \"Palma cocos\", a name treated as a synonym. In 1891, the German botanist Otto Kuntze gave it the name \"Calappa nucifera\" in his \"Revisio Generum Plantarum\", also treated as a synonym.\nEtymology.\nThe generic name \"Cocos\", and the common name, is derived from the 16th-century Portuguese word \"coco\", meaning 'head' or 'skull' after the three indentations on the coconut shell that give an impression of a face. This apparently came from encounters in 1521 by Portuguese and Spanish explorers with Pacific Islanders, when the coconut shell reminded them of ghosts in Portuguese folklore called \"coco\" or \"c\u00f4ca\". In the West, the fruit was originally called \"nux indica\", a name used by Marco Polo in 1280 while in Sumatra. His term is a translation from the Arabic of the time, where it was called \u062c\u0648\u0632 \u0647\u0646\u062f\u064a \"jawz hind\u012b\", \"Indian nut\". \"Thenga\", its Tamil/Malayalam name, was used in the detailed description of coconut found in \"Itinerario\" by Ludovico di Varthema published in 1510 and in the later \"Hortus Indicus Malabaricus\".\nThe specific name \"nucifera\" means \"nut-bearing\", from the Latin words \"nux\" (nut) and \"fera\" (bearing).\nOrigins.\nFossil history.\nThe vast majority of \"Cocos\"-like fossils have been recovered from only two regions in the world: New Zealand and west-central India. However, \"Cocos\"-like fossils are still putative, as they are difficult to identify. The earliest \"Cocos\"-like fossil to be found was \"C. zeylandica\", a fossil species with small fruits, around \u00d7 in size, from the Miocene (~23 to 5.3 million years ago) of New Zealand. Since then, numerous other fossils of similar fruits of uncertain affinity have been found in New Zealand from the Eocene, Oligocene, and possibly the Holocene. In the Deccan Traps of west-central India, numerous fossils of \"Cocos\"-like fruits, leaves, and stems have been found. They include morphotaxa like \"Palmoxylon sundaran\", \"Palmoxylon insignae\", and \"Palmocarpon cocoides\". \"Cocos\"-like fossils of fruits include \"Cocos intertrappeansis\", \"Cocos pantii\", and \"Cocos sahnii\". Some have been tentatively identified as modern \"C. nucifera\". These include two specimens named \"C. palaeonucifera\" and \"C. binoriensis\", both dated by their authors to the Maastrichtian\u2013Danian of the early Tertiary (70 to 62 million years ago). \"C. binoriensis\" has been claimed to be the earliest known fossil of \"C. nucifera\".\nOnly two other regions have reported \"Cocos\"-like fossils, namely Australia and Colombia. In Australia, a \"Cocos\"-like fossil fruit, measuring , was recovered from the Chinchilla Sand Formation dated to the latest Pliocene or basal Pleistocene. Rigby (1995) assigned them to modern \"Cocos nucifera\" based on its size. In Colombia, a single \"Cocos\"-like fruit was recovered from the middle to late Paleocene Cerrej\u00f3n Formation. The fruit, however, was compacted in the fossilization process and it was not possible to determine if it had the diagnostic three pores that characterize members of the tribe Cocoseae. Nevertheless, one study assigned it to \"Cocos\" based on the size and the ridged shape of the fruit.\nPhylogeny.\nA 2016 molecular phylogenomic analysis of the palms places the genus \"Cocos\" among the tribe Cocoseae:\nHuman dispersal.\nGenetic studies identify the coconut's center of origin as the Central Indo-Pacific, where it has its greatest genetic diversity. Its cultivation and spread was closely tied to migrations of the Austronesian peoples who carried coconuts to the islands they settled. Linguistic, archaeological, and genetic evidence all points to domestication of Pacific coconuts by Austronesians in Southeast Asia during the Austronesian expansion (c. 3000 to 1500 BCE). Drift models based on wind and ocean currents show that coconuts could not have drifted across the Pacific unaided, implying that dispersal was human-assisted.\nCoconuts are divided into two subpopulations, a Pacific group from Island Southeast Asia and an Indo-Atlantic group from the south of the Indian subcontinent. The Pacific group is clearly domesticated, with dwarf habit, self-pollination, and \"niu vai\" fruits with large endosperm-to-husk ratios. The distribution of Pacific coconuts corresponds to regions settled by Austronesian voyagers, especially Madagascar. The island's coconuts show genetic admixture between the two subpopulations, indicating that Pacific coconuts interbred with Indo-Atlantic coconuts there. Although archaeological remains from 1000 to 500 BCE suggest that Indo-Atlantic coconuts were later independently cultivated by Dravidian peoples, only Pacific coconuts show clear domestication traits like dwarf habits, self-pollination, and rounded fruits. Indo-Atlantic coconuts, in contrast, have the ancestral traits of tall habits and elongated triangular fruits.\nGenetic studies have confirmed pre-Columbian populations of coconuts in Panama. However, it is not native and displays a genetic bottleneck resulting from a founder effect. Coconuts in the Americas are most closely related to those in the Philippines, indicating that the coconuts were not introduced naturally, such as by sea currents, but by early Austronesian sailors to the Americas from at least 4250 BCE. During the colonial era, Pacific coconuts were further introduced to Mexico from the Spanish East Indies via the Manila galleons, starting in the 16th century. In contrast, Indo-Atlantic coconuts were spread by Arab and Persian traders into the East African coast. Indo-Atlantic coconuts were introduced into the Atlantic Ocean by Portuguese ships from colonies in India and Sri Lanka, again starting in the 16th century: first to coastal West Africa, and then to the Caribbean and Brazil.\nDomestication.\nCoconuts can be broadly divided into two fruit types \u2013 the ancestral \"niu kafa\" form with a thick-husked, angular fruit, and the \"niu vai\" form with a thin-husked, spherical fruit with a higher proportion of endosperm. The terms are Samoan.\nThe \"niu kafa\" form is the wild ancestral type, with thick husks to protect the seed, and an angular, highly ridged shape to promote buoyancy during ocean dispersal. It is the dominant form in the Indo-Atlantic coconuts. However, they may have been selected to some extent for thicker husks for coir production, which was important in Austronesian material culture as a source for cordage in building houses and boats.\nThe \"niu vai\" form is the domesticated form dominant in Pacific coconuts. They were artificially selected by Austronesians for their larger endosperm-to-husk ratio and higher coconut water content, making them more useful as food and water reserves for sea voyages. The decreased buoyancy and increased fragility of this spherical, thin-husked fruit did not matter for a species that had started to be dispersed by humans and grown in plantations. \"Niu vai\" endocarp fragments have been recovered in archaeological sites in the St. Matthias Islands of the Bismarck Archipelago. The fragments are dated to approximately 1000 BCE, suggesting that cultivation and artificial selection of coconuts were already practiced by the Austronesian Lapita people.\nCoconuts can be broadly divided into two general types based on habit: the \"Tall\" (var. \"typica\") and \"Dwarf\" (var. \"nana\") varieties. The two groups are genetically distinct, with the dwarf variety showing a greater degree of artificial selection for ornamental traits and for early germination and fruiting. The tall variety is outcrossing while dwarf palms are self-pollinating, which has led to a much greater degree of genetic diversity within the tall group.\nThe dwarf coconut cultivars are fully domesticated, unlike the more diverse tall cultivars. Dwarf coconuts share three genetic markers out of thirteen (rare in tall cultivars), making it likely that they originate from a single domesticated population. Philippine and Malayan dwarf coconuts diverged early into two distinct types. They usually remain genetically isolated when introduced to new regions. Numerous other dwarf cultivars developed after such introductions, hybridizing with tall cultivars. The origin of dwarf varieties is Southeast Asia, which contain the tall cultivars genetically closest to dwarf coconuts.\nGenome sequencing of tall and dwarf varieties reveals that they diverged 2 to 8 million years ago and that the dwarf variety arose through alterations in genes for the metabolism of the plant hormone gibberellin.\nAnother ancestral variety is the niu leka of Polynesia (the \"Compact Dwarfs\"). Although it resembles dwarf coconuts (including slow growth), it is genetically distinct and was independently domesticated, likely in Tonga. Other cultivars of \"niu leka\" may exist in other islands of the Pacific, and some are probably descendants of advanced crosses between Compact Dwarfs and Southeast Asian Dwarf types.\nDistribution and habitat.\nCoconuts have a nearly cosmopolitan distribution due to human cultivation and dispersal. However, their original distribution was in the Central Indo-Pacific, in the regions of Maritime Southeast Asia and Melanesia.\nThe coconut palm thrives on sandy soils and is highly tolerant of salinity. It prefers areas with abundant sunlight and regular rainfall of between 1500 mm and 2500 mm per year. It prefers humidity above 60%. If rainfall is less than this, it can survive if its roots can reach the soil water table, but it cannot tolerate waterlogging. It grows from sea level to an altitude of 600 metres in the tropics. It can tolerate a dry season of one month on sandy soils inland, and as much as three months on heavier soils, but the soil must be free-draining. It grows on soils with a pH of 4.5 to 8 (the latter on coral atolls), but prefers a range of 5.5 to 7. Growth is seriously limited by shade. It can resist hurricane-strength winds provided it has developed a good root system.\nWild coconuts are restricted to coastal areas in sandy, saline soils. The fruit is adapted for ocean dispersal. Coconuts could not reach inland locations without human intervention to carry seednuts and plant seedlings.\nCultivation.\nCoconut palms are normally cultivated in hot and wet tropical climates. They need year-round warmth and moisture to grow well and fruit. Coconut palms are hard to establish in dry climates, and cannot grow there without frequent irrigation. In drought conditions, the new leaves do not open well, older leaves may become desiccated, and fruit may be shed.\nThe extent of cultivation in the tropics is threatening a number of habitats, such as mangroves; an example of such damage to an ecoregion is in the Petenes mangroves of the Yucat\u00e1n. Uniquely among trees, coconut trees can be irrigated with sea water. \nPests and diseases.\nCoconuts are susceptible to the phytoplasma disease, lethal yellowing. Yellowing diseases affect plantations in Africa, India, Mexico, the Caribbean and the Pacific Region. \nThe coconut palm is damaged by the larvae of many Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species which feed on it, including the African armyworm (\"Spodoptera exempta\") and \"Batrachedra\" spp.: \"B. arenosella\", \"B. atriloqua\" (feeds exclusively on \"C. nucifera\"), \"B. mathesoni\" (feeds exclusively on \"C. nucifera\"), and \"B. nuciferae\".\nThe coconut leaf beetle \"Brontispa longissima\" feeds on young leaves, and damages both seedlings and mature coconut palms. In 2007, the Philippines imposed a quarantine in Metro Manila and 26 provinces to stop the spread of the pest and protect the Philippine coconut industry managed by some 3.5 million farmers.\nThe fruit may be damaged by eriophyid coconut mites (\"Aceria guerreronis\"). This mite infests coconut plantations, and can cause economic damage up to 60% of coconut production. The immature seeds are infested and damaged by larvae. Chemical control is possible, but since it needs to be repeated frequently it is impracticable on grounds of cost, environmental harm, and pesticide residues in coconut meat and coconut water.\nCultivars.\nCoconut has many commercial and traditional cultivars. They can be sorted mainly into tall, dwarf, and hybrid cultivars (hybrids between talls and dwarfs). Varieties are often regional, such as Ceylon Tall, Jamaica Tall, Java Tall, and Malayan Tall. \nDwarf varieties of Pacific coconuts have been cultivated by Austronesian peoples since ancient times. These varieties were selected for slower growth, sweeter coconut water, and often brightly colored fruits. Dwarf varieties include Dwarf Green and Dwarf Orange. \nVarieties have been selected for diverse traits: for example, King coconut is a Sri Lankan variety with a relatively low sugar content, while Macapuno has soft jelly-like flesh that fills the whole central cavity; it is used to make sweet desserts. \nMaypan is an F1 hybrid bred in Jamaica in the 1970s to resist lethal yellowing. However, Maypan resistance soon began to fail, possibly as early as the 1980s, and certainly by the 2000s. Some other coconut varieties have natural resistance to lethal yellowing with alleles at microsatellites, with \"Vanuatu tall\" and \"Sri-Lanka green dwarf\" as the most resistant cultivars, while \"West African tall\" is especially susceptible.\nBreeding.\nConventional plant breeding is of limited use with coconut because there is no wild coconut species to supply additional genetic diversity; the generation time is long; there is much heterozygosity; artificial pollination to conduct crosses produces only a few seeds; and vegetative reproduction (cloning) is unreliable. Coconut breeding objectives can include copra content, production of female flowers, oil content, aroma of coconut meat and water, softness and sweetness of endosperm, drought tolerance, resistance to root wilt, and resistance to eriophorid mites.\nHybrids provide higher precocity and productivity with the number of fruits than other breeds, but they produce fruits with low market acceptance for the water quality of the fruit. Intravarietal crosses in Dwarf coconut (dwarf coconuts bred together) have been tested to provide better water quality for the coconut water market than the hybrids.\nHarvesting.\nThe two most common harvesting methods are by climbing and by using poles.\nClimbing is the more widespread, but it is more dangerous and requires skilled workers. Manually climbing trees is traditional in most countries and requires a posture that exerts pressure on the trunk with the feet. Climbers employed on coconut plantations often develop musculoskeletal disorders and risk injury or death from falling. For safety, coconut climbers in the Philippines and Guam use a bolo knife tied with a rope to the waist to cut grooves at regular intervals on the coconut trunks. This makes the trunk of the tree more like a ladder, though it reduces the value of timber recovered from the trees and can admit infection. Other methods to make climbing easier include using a system of pulleys and ropes; using pieces of vine, rope, or cloth tied to both hands or feet; using spikes attached to the feet or legs; or attaching coconut husks to the trunk with ropes. \nThe pole method uses a long pole with a cutting device at the end. In the Philippines, the traditional tool is called the \"halabas\" and is made from a long bamboo pole with a sickle-like blade at its tip. Though safer and faster than climbing, it does not allow workers to examine and clean the crown of coconuts for pests and diseases.\nModern methods use hydraulic elevators mounted on tractors or ladders. Mechanical coconut climbing devices and robots have been developed in India, Sri Lanka, and Malaysia. The Coconut Maturity Detection Project uses imaging and machine learning to identify mature coconut bunches ready for harvesting.\nA system of bamboo bridges and ladders directly connecting the tree canopies is used in the Philippines for coconut plantations that harvest coconut sap (not fruits) for coconut vinegar and palm wine production. In other areas, as in Papua New Guinea, coconuts are simply collected when they fall to the ground.\nSome coconut farmers in Thailand and Malaysia use southern pig-tailed macaques to harvest coconuts. Thailand has been raising and training them to pick coconuts for around 400 years. Training schools for pig-tailed macaques still exist in southern Thailand and in the Malaysian state of Kelantan. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) objected to the Thailand practice in 2019.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of coconuts in shells was 65 million tonnes, led by Indonesia, India, and the Philippines, with 73% of the total when combined (table). \nIn India, four southern states account for most of India's total production: Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala, and Andhra Pradesh. Though Kerala has the largest number of coconut trees, Tamil Nadu is the most productive per hectare. The coconut is the official state tree of Kerala, whose name in the local language Malayalam means \"coconut land\".\nThe main coconut-producing area in the Middle East is the Dhofar region of Oman. The ancient coconut groves of Dhofar were mentioned by the medieval Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta in his book \"The Rihla\".\nSri Lanka is the fourth-largest producer, and is the second-largest producer of coconut oil and copra, accounting for 15% of global production. The production of coconuts is the main source of Sri Lanka economy, with 12% of cultivated land and 409,244 hectares used for coconut growing (2017). Sri Lanka established its Coconut Development Authority and Coconut Cultivation Board and Coconut Research Institute in the early British Ceylon period.\nHealth concerns.\nCardiovascular disease.\nAs a rich source of lauric acid and other saturated fats, coconut oil is a dietary risk factor for cardiovascular diseases by elevating blood levels of LDL cholesterol. Many national clinical associations recommend limiting consumption of coconut oil products, replacing them instead with foods containing unsaturated fats.\nAllergens.\nProteins from coconut in food may cause allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, in some people. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration has declared that coconut must be disclosed as an ingredient on food package labels as a \"tree nut\" with potential allergenicity.\nCocamidopropyl betaine (CAPB) is a surfactant manufactured from coconut oil and used in personal hygiene products and cosmetics, such as shampoos, liquid soaps, cleansers and antiseptics. CAPB may cause mild skin irritation, but allergic reactions to CAPB are rare; they are probably related to impurities rendered during the manufacturing process (which include amidoamine and dimethylaminopropylamine) rather than CAPB itself.\nUses.\nThe coconut palm is grown throughout the tropics for decoration, as well as for its culinary and nonculinary uses; virtually every part of the coconut palm is used by humans in some manner and has significant economic value. The coconut's versatility is noted in some of its names: in Sanskrit, it is \"kalpa vriksha\" (\"the tree of the necessities of life\"), while in Malay, it is \"pokok seribu guna\" (\"the tree of a thousand uses\"), and in the Philippines, it is called the \"tree of life\". It is one of the most useful trees in the world.\nNutrition.\nRaw coconut meat is 47% water, 33% fat, 15% carbohydrates, and 3% protein (table). In a reference amount of , raw coconut flesh supplies 350 calories of food energy, and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of manganese (65% DV) and copper (48% DV), with various other dietary minerals in moderate amounts (10-18% DV; table). It is a poor source of vitamins. Raw coconut meat has a high content of saturated fatty acids (30% of total fats), with lauric acid as the main saturated fat (15% of total; USDA source in table).\nCulinary.\nThe many culinary uses of coconuts are largely based on the edible white, fleshy part of the seed (the endosperm), known as \"coconut meat\". The meat of immature coconuts can be eaten as it is or cooked in pastries. Mature coconut meat is tough and is processed before consumption, being made into products like coconut milk, \"coconut chips\" or grated and dehydrated as \"desiccated coconut\". \nCoconut milk, used for cooking many dishes, is pressed from coconut meat. It can be diluted to create coconut milk beverages such as milk substitutes. Coconut milk powder, a protein-rich powder, can be processed from coconut milk. Coconut milk and coconut cream extracted from grated coconut can be added to desserts and savory dishes, or used in curries and stews. Products made from thickened coconut milk with sugar and eggs, like coconut jam and coconut custard, are widespread in Southeast Asia. Coconut oil is used for frying and cooking.\nCoconut water can be drunk fresh or used in cooking. It can be fermented to produce a jelly-like dessert known as \"nata de coco\". Coconut vinegar, made from fermented coconut water or sap, is used extensively in Southeast Asian and Goan cuisine.\nCoconut sap, fresh or fermented, is drunk as toddy or \"tub\u00e2\" in the Philippines. When left to ferment on its own, it becomes palm wine. Palm wine is distilled to produce \"arrack\". The sap can be reduced by boiling to create a sweet syrup, or reduced further to yield coconut sugar. A young, well-maintained tree can produce around of toddy per year, while a 40-year-old tree may yield around .\nOil.\nIn 2022, world production of processed coconut oil was 3.2 million tonnes, led by the Philippines with 43% of the total, and Indonesia and India as secondary producers (table).\nCoconut oil is used in cooking, especially for frying. It can be used in liquid form like other vegetable oils, or in solid form like butter or lard. Coconut butter is a solidified coconut oil, but the name is also applied to creamed coconut, a specialty product made of coconut milk solids or pur\u00e9ed coconut meat and oil.\nNon-food uses.\nAmong the many non-food uses of coconut palms, the husk and shells can be used for fuel or made into charcoal. The husks can serve as flotation devices or as an abrasive. The shell, freed from the husk, and heated on warm ashes, exudes an oily material that is used to soothe dental pains in traditional medicine of Cambodia. Coir fiber from husks is used in ropes, mats, brushes, and sacks, as caulking for boats, and as stuffing for mattresses. It is used in horticulture in potting compost, especially in orchid mix, and to make brooms in Cambodia. Coconut cups were frequently carved with scenes in relief and mounted with precious metals. The leaves provide material for baskets and for roofing thatch; they can be woven into mats, cooking skewers, and kindling arrows. Leaves are woven into small pouches that are filled with rice and cooked to make \"pus\u00f4\" and \"ketupat\". \nHawaiians hollowed out coconut trunks to form drums, containers, or small canoes. The \"branches\" (leaf petioles) are strong and flexible enough to make a switch. The use of coconut branches in corporal punishment was revived in the Gilbertese community on Choiseul in the Solomon Islands in 2005. The roots are used to make dye, a mouthwash, and a folk medicine for diarrhea and dysentery. A frayed piece of root can be used as a toothbrush. In Cambodia, the roots are used in traditional medicine. Leftover fiber from coconut oil and coconut milk production, coconut meal, is used as livestock feed. The dried calyx is used as fuel in wood-fired stoves. Coconut water is traditionally used as a growth supplement in plant tissue culture and micropropagation.\nIn culture.\nA coconut () is used in Hindu rituals. Often it is decorated with bright metal foils. It is offered during worship to a Hindu god or goddess. Narali Purnima is celebrated on a full moon day which usually signifies the end of monsoon season in India. The word \"Narali\" is derived from Marathi \"naral\", \"coconut\". Fishermen give an offering of coconut to the sea to celebrate the beginning of a new fishing season, in the hope of bountiful catches. Hindus often initiate any new activity by breaking a coconut to ensure the blessings of the gods. The Hindu goddess of well-being and wealth, Lakshmi, is often shown holding a coconut. They are used in Hindu weddings as a symbol of prosperity. The flowers are used sometimes in wedding ceremonies in Cambodia. The coconut has cultural and religious significance for Austronesian peoples, appearing in their mythologies, songs, and oral traditions.\nThe Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club of New Orleans traditionally throws hand-decorated coconuts, one of the most valuable Mardi Gras souvenirs, to parade revelers. The tradition began in the 1910s, and has continued since. In 1987, a \"coconut law\" was signed by Governor Edwin Edwards exempting from insurance liability any decorated coconut \"handed\" from a Zulu float.\nThe coconut is used as a target and prize in the traditional British fairground game coconut shy. The player buys some small balls which are thrown at coconuts balanced on sticks. The aim is to knock a coconut off the stand and win it.\nIt was the main food of adherents of the now discontinued Vietnamese Coconut Religion, \"\u0110\u1ea1o D\u1eeba\".\nMyths and legends.\nSome South Asian, Southeast Asian, and Pacific Ocean cultures have origin myths in which the coconut plays the main role. In the Hainuwele myth from Maluku, a girl emerges from the blossom of a coconut tree. In Maldivian folklore, one of the main myths of origin reflects the dependence of the Maldivians on the coconut tree. In the story of Sina and the Eel, the origin of the coconut is related as the beautiful woman Sina burying an eel, which eventually became the first coconut.\nAccording to urban legend, more deaths are caused by falling coconuts than by sharks annually, though the truth is actually the reverse.\nEarly history.\nLiterary evidence from the \"Ramayana\" and Sri Lankan chronicles indicates that the coconut was present in the Indian subcontinent before the 1st century BCE. The earliest direct description is given by Cosmas Indicopleustes in his \"Topographia Christiana\" written around 545, where the coconut is called \"the great nut of India\". Another early mention is the \"One Thousand and One Nights\" story of Sinbad the Sailor, who bought and sold a coconut during his fifth voyage.\nIn March 1521, Antonio Pigafetta described the coconut in his journal in Italian with the word \"\"cocho\", plural \"cochi\"\". This followed the first European crossing of the Pacific Ocean during the Magellan circumnavigation. He explained how at Guam \"they eat coconuts\" (\"mangiano cochi\") and that the natives there \"anoint the body and the hair with coconut and beniseed oil\" (\"ongieno el corpo et li capili co oleo de cocho et de giongioli\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51347", "revid": "38854409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51347", "title": "620s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 629 BC \u2013 620 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51348", "revid": "507787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51348", "title": "630s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 639 BC \u2013 630 BC.\nDecade"}
{"id": "51349", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51349", "title": "640s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 649 BC \u2013 640 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51350", "revid": "1233354450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51350", "title": "650s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 659 BC \u2013 650 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51351", "revid": "1552560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51351", "title": "660s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 669 BC \u2013 660 BC.\nDecade\nEvents.\nAt a slightly uncertain date during the latter part of this decade, there was an extreme solar particle event comparable with the event detected for AD 774/775 The exact date and duration of the event is uncertain due in part to an approximate 2-year residence time of the nuclei generated in the atmosphere, before they \"rained out\" to be incorporated into tree rings and glacial ice, but the event seems to have happened during the latter part of this decade. The possibility of there being a series of events spread over a period of time remains in consideration. What meteorological and astronomical phenomena would have accompanied this event is unknown. The estimated \"brightness\" of the event is about 2 orders of magnitude stronger than any that has been recorded instrumentally since the beginning of the Space Age.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51352", "revid": "48926330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51352", "title": "670s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 679 BC \u2013 670 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51353", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51353", "title": "680s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 689 BC \u2013 680 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51354", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51354", "title": "690s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 699 BC \u2013 690 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51355", "revid": "194638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51355", "title": "700s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 709 BC \u2013 700 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51356", "revid": "3736169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51356", "title": "710s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 719 BC \u2013 710 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51357", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51357", "title": "Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins", "text": "Class of environmentally polluting organic compounds\nPolychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), or simply dioxins, are a group of long-lived polyhalogenated organic compounds that are primarily anthropogenic, and contribute toxic, persistent organic pollution in the environment.\nThey are commonly but inaccurately referred to as dioxins for simplicity, because every PCDD molecule contains a dibenzo-1,4-dioxin skeletal structure, with 1,4-dioxin as the central ring. Members of the PCDD family bioaccumulate in humans and wildlife because of their lipophilic properties, and may cause developmental disturbances and cancer.\nBecause dioxins can persist in the environment for more than 100 years, the majority of PCDD pollution today is not the result of recent emissions, but the cumulative result of synthetic processes undertaken since the beginning of the 20th century, including organochloride-related manufacturing, incineration of chlorine-containing substances such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and chlorine bleaching of paper. Forest fires and volcanic eruptions have also been cited as an airborne source, although their contribution to the current levels of PCDD accumulation are minor in comparison. Incidents of dioxin poisoning resulting from industrial emissions and accidents were first recorded as early as the mid 19th century during the Industrial Revolution.\nThe word \"dioxins\" may also refer to other similarly acting chlorinated compounds (see Dioxins and dioxin-like compounds).\nChemical structure of dibenzo-1,4-dioxins.\nThe structure of dibenzo-1,4-dioxin consists of two benzene rings joined by two oxygen bridges. This makes the compound an aromatic diether. The name dioxin formally refers to the central dioxygenated ring, which is stabilized by the two flanking benzene rings.\nIn PCDDs, chlorine atoms are attached to this structure at any of eight different places on the molecule, at positions 1\u20134 and 6\u20139. There are 75 different PCDD congeners (that is, related dioxin compounds).\nThe toxicity of PCDDs depends on the number and positions of the chlorine atoms. Congeners that have chlorine in the 2, 3, 7, and 8 positions have been found to be significantly toxic. In fact, 7 congeners have chlorine atoms in the relevant positions which were considered toxic by the World Health Organization toxic equivalent (WHO-TEQ) scheme.\nHistorical perspective.\nLow concentrations of dioxins existed in nature prior to industrialization as a result of natural combustion and geological processes. Dioxins were first unintentionally produced as by-products from 1848 onwards as Leblanc process plants started operating in Germany. The first intentional synthesis of chlorinated dibenzodioxin was in 1872. Today, concentrations of dioxins are found in all humans, with higher levels commonly found in persons living in more industrialized countries. The most toxic dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), became well known as a contaminant of Agent Orange, a herbicide used in the Malayan Emergency and the Vietnam War. Later, dioxins were found in Times Beach, Missouri and Love Canal, New York and Seveso, Italy. More recently, dioxins have been in the news with the poisoning of President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine in 2004, the Naples Mozzarella Crisis, the 2008 Irish pork crisis, and the German feed incident of 2010.\nSources of dioxins.\nThe United States Environmental Protection Agency inventory of sources of dioxin-like compounds is possibly the most comprehensive review of the sources and releases of dioxins, but other countries now have substantial research as well.\nOccupational exposure is an issue for some in the chemical industries, historically for those making chlorophenols or chlorophenoxy acid herbicides or in the application of chemicals, notably herbicides. In many developed nations there are now emissions regulations which have dramatically decreased the emissions and thus alleviated some concerns, although the lack of continuous sampling of dioxin emissions causes concern about the understatement of emissions. In Belgium, through the introduction of a process called AMESA, continuous sampling showed that periodic sampling understated emissions by a factor of 30 to 50 times. Few facilities have continuous sampling.\nDioxins are produced in small concentrations when organic material is burned in the presence of chlorine, whether the chlorine is present as chloride ions or as organochlorine compounds, so they are widely produced in many contexts. According to the most recent US EPA data, the major sources of dioxins are broadly in the following types:\nWhen first carried out in 1987, the original US EPA inventory of dioxin sources revealed that incineration represented more than 80% of known dioxin sources. As a result, US EPA implemented new emissions requirements. These regulations succeeded in reducing dioxin stack emissions from incinerators. Incineration of municipal solid waste, medical waste, sewage sludge, and hazardous waste together now produce less than 3% of all dioxin emissions. Since 1987, however, backyard barrel burning has showed almost no decrease, and is now the largest source of dioxin emissions, producing about one third of the total output.\nIn incineration, dioxins can also reform or form \"de novo\" in the atmosphere above the stack as the exhaust gases cool through a temperature window of 600 to 200\u00a0\u00b0C. The most common method of reducing the quantity of dioxins reforming or forming \"de novo\" is through rapid (30 millisecond) quenching of the exhaust gases through that 400\u00a0\u00b0C window. Incinerator emissions of dioxins have been reduced by over 90% as a result of new emissions control requirements. Incineration in developed countries is now a very minor contributor to dioxin emissions.\nDioxins are also generated in reactions that do not involve burning\u00a0\u2014 such as chlorine bleaching fibers for paper or textiles, and in the manufacture of chlorinated phenols, particularly when reaction temperature is not well controlled. Compounds involved include the wood preservative pentachlorophenol, and also herbicides such as 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (or 2,4-D) and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T). Higher levels of chlorination require higher reaction temperatures and greater dioxin production. Dioxins may also be formed during the photochemical breakdown of the common antimicrobial compound triclosan.\nSources of human intake.\nTolerable daily, monthly or annual intakes have been set by the World Health Organization and a number of governments. Dioxins enter the general population almost exclusively from ingestion of food, specifically through the consumption of fish, meat, and dairy products since dioxins are fat-soluble and readily climb the food chain.\nChildren are passed substantial body burdens by their mothers, and breastfeeding increases the child's body burden. Dioxin exposure can also occur from contact with Pentachlorophenol (Penta) treated lumber as Pentachlorophenol often contains dioxins as a contaminant. Children's daily intakes during breast feeding are often many times above the intakes of adults based on body weight. This is why the WHO consultation group assessed the tolerable intake so as to prevent a woman from accumulating harmful body burdens before her first pregnancy. Breast fed children usually still have higher dioxin body burdens than non breast fed children. The WHO still recommends breast feeding for its other benefits. In many countries dioxins in breast milk have decreased by even 90% during the two last decades.\nDioxins are present in cigarette smoke. Dioxin in cigarette smoke was noted as \"understudied\" by the US EPA in its \"Re-Evaluating Dioxin\" (1995). In that same document, the US EPA acknowledged that dioxin in cigarettes is \"anthropogenic\" (man-made, \"not likely in nature\").\nMetabolism.\nDioxins are absorbed primarily through dietary intake of fat, as this is where they accumulate in animals and humans. In humans, the highly chlorinated dioxins are stored in fatty tissues and are neither readily metabolized nor excreted. The estimated elimination half-life for highly chlorinated dioxins (4\u20138 chlorine atoms) in humans ranges from 4.9 to 13.1 years.\nThe persistence of a particular dioxin congener in an animal is thought to be a consequence of its structure. Dioxins with no lateral (2, 3, 7, and 8) chlorines, which thus contain hydrogen atoms on adjacent pairs of carbons, can more readily be oxidized by cytochromes P450. The oxidized dioxins can then be more readily excreted rather than stored for a long time.\nToxicity.\n2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) is considered the most toxic of the congeners (for the mechanism of action, see 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin and Aryl hydrocarbon receptor). Other dioxin congeners including PCDFs and PCBs with dioxin-like toxicity, are given a toxicity rating from 0 to 1, where TCDD = 1 (see Dioxins and dioxin-like compounds). This toxicity rating is called the Toxic Equivalence Factor concept, or TEF. TEFs are consensus values and, because of the strong species dependence for toxicity, are listed separately for mammals, fish, and birds. TEFs for mammalian species are generally applicable to human risk calculations. The TEFs have been developed from detailed assessment of literature data to facilitate both risk assessment and regulatory control. Many other compounds may also have dioxin-like properties, particularly non-ortho PCBs, one of which has a TEF as high as 0.1.\nThe total dioxin toxic equivalence (TEQ) value expresses the toxicity as if the mixture were pure TCDD. The TEQ approach and current TEFs have been adopted internationally as the most appropriate way to estimate the potential health risks of mixture of dioxins. Recent data suggest that this type of simple scaling factor may not be the most appropriate treatment for complex mixtures of dioxins; both transfer from the source and absorption and elimination vary among different congeners, and the TEF value is not able to accurately reflect this.\nDioxins and other persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are subject to the Stockholm Convention. The treaty obliges signatories to take measures to eliminate where possible, and minimize where not possible to eliminate, all sources of dioxin.\nHealth effects in humans.\nDioxins build up primarily in fatty tissues over time (bioaccumulation), so even small exposures may eventually reach dangerous levels. In 1994, the US EPA reported that dioxins are a probable carcinogen, but noted that non-cancer effects (reproduction and sexual development, immune system) may pose a greater threat to human health. TCDD, the most toxic of the dibenzodioxins, is classified as a Group 1 carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). TCDD has a half-life of approximately 8 years in humans, although at high concentrations, the elimination rate is enhanced by metabolism. The health effects of dioxins are mediated by their action on a cellular receptor, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).\nExposure to high levels of dioxins in humans causes a severe form of persistent acne, known as chloracne. High occupational or accidental levels of exposures to dioxins have been shown by epidemiological studies to lead to an increased risk of tumors at all sites. Other effects in humans (at high dose levels) may include:\nRecent studies have shown that high exposure to dioxins changes the ratio of male to female births among a population such that more females are born than males.\nDioxins accumulate in food chains in a fashion similar to other chlorinated compounds (bioaccumulation). This means that even small concentrations in contaminated water can be concentrated up a food chain to dangerous levels because of the long biological half life and low water solubility of dioxins.\nToxic effects in animals.\nWhile it has been difficult to establish specific health effects in humans due to the lack of controlled dose experiments, studies in animals have shown that dioxin causes a wide variety of toxic effects. In particular, TCDD has been shown to be teratogenic, mutagenic, carcinogenic, immunotoxic, and hepatotoxic. Furthermore, alterations in multiple endocrine and growth factor systems have been reported. The most sensitive effects, observed in multiple species, appear to be developmental, including effects on the developing immune, nervous, and reproductive systems. The most sensitive effects are caused at body burdens relatively close to those reported in humans.\nAmong the animals for which TCDD toxicity has been studied, there is strong evidence for the following effects:\nIn rodents, including rats, mice, hamsters and guinea pigs, birds, and fish.\nIn rodents and fish.\nIn rodents, chickens, and fish.\nIn rodents and fish.\nIn rodents and fish.\nThe LD50 of dioxin also varies wildly between species with the most notable disparity being between the ostensibly similar species of hamster and guinea pig. The oral LD50 for guinea pigs is as low as 0.5 to 2 \u03bcg/kg body weight, whereas the oral LD50 for hamsters can be as high as 1 to 5\u00a0mg/kg body weight, a difference of as much as thousandfold or more, and even among rat strains there may be thousandfold differences.\nAgent Orange.\nAgent Orange was the code name for one of the herbicides and defoliants the U.S. military used as part of its herbicidal warfare program, Operation Ranch Hand, during the Vietnam War from 1961 to 1971. It was a mixture of 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D. The 2,4,5-T used was contaminated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), an extremely toxic dioxin compound.\nDuring the Vietnam war, between 1962 and 1971, the United States military sprayed of chemical herbicides and defoliants in Vietnam, eastern Laos and parts of Cambodia, as part of Operation Ranch Hand.\nBy 1971, 12% of the total area of South Vietnam had been sprayed with defoliating chemicals, which were often applied at rates that were 13 times as high as the legal USDA limit. In South Vietnam alone, an estimated 10 million hectares of agricultural land were ultimately destroyed. In some areas, TCDD concentrations in soil and water were hundreds of times greater than the levels considered safe by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.\nAccording to Vietnamese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 4.8 million Vietnamese people were exposed to Agent Orange, resulting in 400,000 people being killed or maimed, and 500,000 children born with birth defects. The Red Cross of Vietnam estimates that up to 1 million people are disabled or have health problems due to Agent Orange contamination. The United States government has challenged these figures as being unreliable and unrealistically high.\nDioxin testing.\nThe analyses used to determine these compounds' relative toxicity share common elements that differ from methods used for more traditional analytical determinations. The preferred methods for dioxins and related analyses use high resolution gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (HRGC/HRMS). Concentrations are determined by measuring the ratio of the analyte to the appropriate isotopically labeled internal standard.\nAlso novel bio-assays like DR CALUX are nowadays used in identification of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds. The advantage in respect to HRGC/HRMS is that it is able to scan many samples at lower costs. Also it is able to detect all compounds that interact with the Ah-receptor which is responsible for carcinogenic effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51358", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51358", "title": "Project Management", "text": ""}
{"id": "51359", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51359", "title": "500 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nThe year 500 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Republic it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Camerinus and Longus (or, less frequently, year 254 \" Ab urbe condita\"). when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51360", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51360", "title": "486 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 486 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Viscellinus and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 268 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 486 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51361", "revid": "44696368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51361", "title": "480 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 480 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vibulanus and Cincinnatus (or, less frequently, year 274 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 480 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArts.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51362", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51362", "title": "430s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 439 BC \u2013 430 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51363", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51363", "title": "History of the Caribbean", "text": "The history of the Caribbean reveals the region's significant role in the colonial struggles of the European powers since the 15th century. In the modern era, it remains strategically and economically important. In 1492, Christopher Columbus landed in the Caribbean and claimed the region for Spain. The following year, the first Spanish settlements were established in the Caribbean. Although the Spanish conquests of the Aztec empire and the Inca empire in the early sixteenth century made Mexico and Peru more desirable places for Spanish exploration and settlement, the Caribbean remained strategically important.\nFrom the 1620s and 1630s onwards, non-Hispanic privateers, traders, and settlers established permanent colonies and trading posts on the Caribbean islands neglected by Spain. Such colonies spread throughout the Caribbean, from the Bahamas in the northwest to Tobago in the southeast. Furthermore, during this period, French, Dutch, and English buccaneers settled on the island of Tortuga, the northern and western coasts of Hispaniola (Haiti and Dominican Republic), and later in Jamaica as well as the island of Martinica.\nAfter the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, the islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico were no longer part of the Spanish Empire in the Western Hemisphere. In the 20th century, the Caribbean was again important during World War II, in the decolonization wave after the war, and in the tension between Communist Cuba and the United States. The exploitation of the labor of Indigenous peoples and the demographic collapse of that population, forced migration of enslaved Africans, immigration of Europeans, Chinese, South Asians, and others, and rivalry amongst world powers since the sixteenth century have given Caribbean history an impact disproportionate to its size. Many islands have attained independence from colonial powers and sovereignty; others have formal political ties with major powers, including the United States. The early economic structure integrating the Caribbean into the Atlantic world and world economic system continues to impact the modern Caribbean region. \nBefore European contact.\nDuring European contact in 1492, Caribbean islands were densely populated by different indigenous groups. Recent scholarly research has investigated the origins and evolution of the islands' populations over the entire period. At the beginning of the current geological epoch, the Holocene era, the northern part of South America was occupied by groups of small-game hunters, fishers, and foragers. These groups occasionally resided in semi-permanent campsites while mostly being mobile to use a wide range of plant and animal resources in various habitats.\nArchaeological evidence suggests that Trinidad was the first Caribbean island settled as early as 9000/8000 BCE. However, the first settlers most likely arrived in Trinidad when it was still attached to South America by land bridges. It was not until about 7000/6000 BCE, during the early Holocene that Trinidad became an island rather than part of the mainland due to a significant jump in sea level by about 60 m., which may be attributable to climate change. The conclusion is that Trinidad was the only Caribbean Island that could have been colonized by Indigenous people from the South American mainland by not traversing hundreds or thousands of kilometers of the open sea. The earliest major habitation sites discovered in Trinidad are the shell midden deposits of Banwari Trace and St. John, which have been dated between 6000 and 5100 BCE. Both shell middens represent extended deposits of shells discarded by human populations utilizing the crustaceans as a food source and stone and bone tools. They are considered to belong to the Ortoiroid archaeological tradition, named after the similar but much more recent Ortoire site in Mayaro, Trinidad.\nScholars have attempted to classify Caribbean prehistory into different \"ages,\" a difficult and controversial task. In the 1970s archaeologist Irving Rouse defined three \"ages\" to classify Caribbean prehistory: the Lithic, Archaic and Ceramic Age, based on archaeological evidence. Current literature on Caribbean prehistory still uses these three terms, but, there is much dispute regarding their usefulness and definition. In general, the Lithic Age is considered the first era of human development in the Americas and the period where stone chipping was first practiced. The ensuing Archaic age is often defined by specialized subsistence adaptions, combining hunting, fishing, collecting and the managing of wild food plants. Ceramic Age communities manufactured ceramic and made use of small-scale agriculture.\nExcept for Trinidad, the first Caribbean islands were settled during the Archaic Age between 3500 and 3000 BCE. Archaeological sites of this period have been located in Barbados, Cuba, Cura\u00e7ao and St. Martin, followed closely by Hispaniola and Puerto Rico. This settlement phase is often attributed to the Ortoiroid culture. However, in the southern Lesser Antilles, particularly Grenada and St. Vincent, evidence for Archaic occupation is ephemeral and consists mainly of isolated shell finds rather than established settlements, suggesting these islands may have been largely bypassed by early foragers.\nBetween 800 and 200 BCE a new migratory group expanded through the Caribbean island: the Saladoid. This group is named after the Saladero site in Venezuela, where their distinctive pottery (typically distinguished by white-on-red painted designs) was first identified. The introduction of pottery and plant domestication to the Caribbean is often attributed to Saladoid groups and is considered the beginning of the Ceramic Age. However, recent studies have revealed that crops and pottery were already present in some Archaic Caribbean populations before the arrival of the Saladoid. Although a large number of Caribbean Islands were settled during the Archaic and Ceramic Ages, some islands were presumably visited much later. Jamaica has no known settlements until around 600 CE while the Cayman Islands show no evidence of settlement before European arrival.\nFollowing the colonization of Trinidad, it was originally proposed that Saladoid groups island-hopped their way to Puerto Rico, but current research tends to move away from this stepping-stone model in favor of the \"southward route hypothesis.\" This hypothesis proposes that the northern Antilles were settled directly from South America followed by progressively southward movements into the Lesser Antilles. This hypothesis has been supported by both radiocarbon dates and seafaring simulations. For example, radiocarbon evidence from Grenada indicates no permanent Ceramic Age settlements until roughly AD 200, centuries later than islands to the north. Modeling based on the Ideal Free Distribution (IFD) further supports this, showing settlement timing in the region correlates with latitude, with northern islands settled earlier. One initial impetus of movement from the mainland to the northern Antilles may have been the search for high quality materials such as flint. Flinty Bay on Antigua is one of the best-known sources of high-quality flint in the Lesser Antilles. The presence of flint from Antigua on many other Caribbean Islands highlights the importance of this material during the Pre-Contact period.\nThe period from 650 to 800 CE saw major cultural, socio-political and ritual reformulations, which took place both on the mainland and in many Caribbean islands. The Saladoid interaction sphere disintegrated rapidly. This period is characterized with a change in climate. Centuries of abundant rainfall were replaced by prolonged droughts and increased frequency of hurricanes. In general, the Caribbean population increased, with communities changing from scattered single villages to the creation of settlement clusters. Agricultural activity increased. In the southern Windward Islands, research utilizing Resilience Theory suggests this population expansion amid drought was driven by an influx of Arauquinoid migrants from the mainland around AD 750. This acted as a \"release\" mechanism, breaking earlier cultural rigidity and leading to the \"Troumassan Troumassoid\" period, characterized by settlement in diverse environments and a reorganized society capable of coping with aridity. Settlement choices during this time were heavily influenced by proximity to freshwater wetlands and, later, large coral reefs. Analysis of cultural material has also shown the development of tighter networks between islands during the post-Saladoid period.\nThe period after 800 CE can be seen as a period of transition in which status differentiation and hierarchically ranked society evolved, identified by a shift from achieved to ascribed leadership. After about 1200 CE this process was interrupted by the absorption of many Caribbean settlements into the evolving socio-political structure of the Greater Antillean society. This process disrupted more-or-less independent lines of development of local communities and marked the beginnings of sociopolitical changes on a much larger scale.\nAt the time of the European arrival, three major groups of indigenous peoples lived on the islands: the Ta\u00edno (sometimes also referred to as Arawak) in the Greater Antilles, the Bahamas and the Leeward Islands; the Kalinago and Galibi in the Windward Islands; and the Ciboney in western Cuba. Scholars have divided Ta\u00ednos into Classic Ta\u00ednos, who occupied Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, Western Ta\u00ednos, who occupied Cuba, Jamaica, and the Bahamian archipelago, and the Eastern Ta\u00ednos, who occupied the Leeward Islands. Trinidad was inhabited by both Carib speaking and Arawak-speaking groups. Recent archaeological evidence from Grenada suggests that the group historically identified as \"Caribs\" (or Cara\u00efbe) were likely long-term, Arawakan-speaking inhabitants producing Suazan Troumassoid pottery, who co-existed and allied with a separate \"Galibi\" group, likely recent arrivals from the mainland associated with Cayo pottery. This challenges the traditional narrative of a total \"Carib invasion\" replacing the Arawak population, arguing for a more complex mosaic of interaction.\nDNA studies changed some of the traditional understandings of pre-Contact indigenous history. In 2003, a geneticist from the University of Puerto Rico at Mayag\u00fcez, Juan Mart\u00ednez Cruzado, designed an island-wide DNA survey of Puerto Rico's modern population. The received understanding of the profile of Puerto Ricans' ancestry has been as mainly having Spanish ethnic origins, with some African ancestry, and distant and less significant indigenous ancestry. Mart\u00ednez Cruzado's research revealed that 61% of all Puerto Ricans have Amerindian mitochondrial DNA, 27% have African and 12% Caucasian. According to National Geographic, \"Among the surprising findings is that most of the Caribbean's original inhabitants may have been wiped out by South American newcomers a thousand years before the Spanish invasion that began in 1492. Moreover, indigenous populations of islands like Puerto Rico and Hispaniola were likely far smaller at the time of the Spanish arrival than previously thought.\"\nEarly colonial history.\nSoon after the voyages of Christopher Columbus to the Americas in 1492, both Portuguese and Spanish ships began claiming territories in Central and South America. These colonies brought in gold, and other European powers, most specifically the English, Dutch and French, hoped to establish profitable colonies of their own. Imperial rivalries made the Caribbean a contested area during European wars for centuries. In the Spanish American wars of independence in the early nineteenth century, most of Spanish America broke away from the Spanish Empire, but Cuba and Puerto Rico remained under the Spanish crown until the Spanish\u2013American War of 1898.\nSpanish Empire and Caribbean settlements.\nThe Spanish encounter with lands and peoples unknown to them before the 1492 began with the first voyage of Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus, sailing under license from Queen Isabel I of Castile. Permanent Spanish settlement began in 1493. The first quarter century of Spanish settlement in the Caribbean set enduring patterns that were to be replicated throughout the Americas. After the Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire and the subsequent conquest of Peru with their dense indigenous populations organized in high civilizations and the discovery of rich deposits of precious metals, the Caribbean ceased to be the primary focus of the Spanish Empire in the Americas. But the administrative, social, and cultural patterns the Spanish set in the Caribbean were enduring. Spanish contact and exploitation of the indigenous peoples of the Caribbean had devastating consequences for the natives. Natives' deaths through disease and overwork prompted in Spanish settlers' search for indigenous labor on other Caribbean islands, resulting in the enslavement of natives and their transportation to the islands of Spanish settlement. Most saliently, the crown considered the indigenous population their new vassals and the crown attempted to stem the precipitous loss of indigenous population and settlers' enslavement and maltreatment of the indigenous population by enacting laws to curb settlers' exploitative activities.\nDuring Columbus's first voyage of exploration in 1492, he made contact with the Lucayans, whom he called \"Indians\" (\"indios\") in the Bahamas and the Ta\u00edno in Cuba and the northern coast of Hispaniola. Starting with his second voyage in 1493, Spaniards came to settle permanently in the region dubbed \"The Indies\". Spaniards saw evidence of gold deposits when seeing natives' gold personal ornaments enticing the Spanish search for wealth. Although Spain claimed the entire Caribbean and concluded the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494) with Portugal that divided the world between the two monarchies, Spaniards settled only the larger islands of Hispaniola (now the Dominican Republic) (1493), where they founded the permanent settlement of Santo Domingo. The Spanish later founded settlements on Martinica (1502); Puerto Rico (1508); Jamaica (1509); Cuba (1511); and Trinidad (1530), and the small 'pearl islands' of Cubagua and Margarita off the Venezuelan coast because of their valuable pearl beds, which were worked extensively between 1508 and 1530.\nThe Spanish settled permanently in the Caribbean, establishing as far as possible lives similar or better than what they had in Iberia. Unlike the Portuguese pattern of expansion that created a series of small trading posts or forts, Spaniards' expectation was to create Spanish-style cities with permanent residents. They expected to use forced labor of the indigenous population to make European settlement not only possible but also profitable. Spaniards required the natives produce food for European settlers, putting strain on agriculture that did not generally produce major surpluses. Spaniards took it as their right to force the indigenous to labor for them in enterprises often far from natives' home villages. The allocation of labor to individual Spanish settlers was via grants, called \"encomiendas\"; the holders of these grants, \"encomenderos\" set indigenous to search for deposits of gold and mine it. The most famous account of the abuses and exploitation was by Dominican friar Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, who influenced the Spanish crown to create laws to end the abuses and to attempt to stem the precipitous plunge of the indigenous populations. To supplement and then replace the dwindling indigenous labor force, the Spanish transported enslaved Africans to the Caribbean to work on plantations cultivating cane sugar, a high-value export product.\nSpaniards continued their explorations of islands and the lands around the Caribbean Sea in search of sources of dense indigenous populations and material wealth. The expedition of Spanish settler on Cuba, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, resulted in Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire in 1521, which shifted the crown's focus to Mexico.\nOther European powers.\nAlthough the Caribbean remained strategically important for the Spanish Empire, other European powers established a presence in the Caribbean after Spain's main interest turned toward Mexico and Peru, where there were dense indigenous populations that could be forced to labor and where there were rich deposits of silver. The Dutch, the French and the English conquered islands claimed by Spain but not effectively controlled. For European powers without colonies in the Americas, the islands presented possibilities for commercial development of sugar plantations on the model established by the Spanish, using enslaved African laborers. Also important was that the islands could serve as bases for trade and piracy in the region. Piracy in the Caribbean was widespread during the colonial era, especially between 1640 and 1680. The term \"buccaneer\" is often used to describe a pirate operating in this region.\nEarly French actions.\nDuring the first three-quarters of the sixteenth century, matters of balance of power and dynastic succession weighed heavily on the course of European diplomacy and war. Europe's largest and most powerful kingdoms, France and Spain, were the continent's fierce rivals. Tensions increased after 1516, when the kingdoms of Castile, Le\u00f3n, and Aragon were ruled by Charles V as his inheritance from his maternal grandparents Isabel I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon and his mother, Queen Joan. Three years later expanded Charles domains after his election as Holy Roman Emperor and the territories he held as his personal empire surrounded France. In 1521, France went to war with the Holy Roman Empire. Spanish troops routed French armies in France, the Italian Peninsula, and elsewhere, forcing the French Crown to surrender in 1526 and again in 1529. The Italian Wars, as the French-Spanish wars came to be known, reignited in 1536 and again in 1542. Intermittent warring between the Valois monarchy and the Habsburg Empire continued until 1559, when Charles abdicated and retired to a monastery after dividing his realms.\nFrench corsair attacks began in the early 1520s, as soon as France declared war on Spain in 1521, the year Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s defeated the Aztecs. Prodigious treasures from Mexico began to cross the Atlantic en route to Spain. French monarch Francis I challenged Spain's exclusivist claims to the New World and its wealth, demanding to see \"the clause in Adam's will which excluded me from my share when the world was being divided.\" Giovanni da Verrazzano (aka Jean Florin) led the first recorded French corsair attack against Spanish vessels carrying treasures from the New World. In 1523, off the Cape of St. Vincent, Portugal, his vessels captured two Spanish ships laden with a fabulous treasure consisting of 70,000 ducats worth of gold, large quantities of silver and pearls, and 25,000 pounds of sugar, a much-treasured commodity at the time.\nThe first recorded incursion in the Caribbean happened in 1528, when a lone French corsair vessel appeared off the coast of Santo Domingo and its crew sacked the village of San Germ\u00e1n on the western coast of Puerto Rico. In the mid-1530s, corsairs, some Catholic but most of them Protestant (Huguenot), began routinely attacking Spanish vessels and raiding Caribbean ports and coastal towns; the most coveted were Santo Domingo, Havana, Santiago, and San Germ\u00e1n. Corsair port raids in Cuba and elsewhere in the region usually followed the \"rescate\" (ransom) model, whereby the aggressors seized villages and cities, kidnapped local residents, and demanded payment for their release. If there were no hostages, corsairs demanded ransoms in exchange for sparing towns from destruction. Whether ransoms were paid or not, corsairs looted and frequently committed acts of violence against their victims, desecrated churches and holy images, and left smoldering reminders of their incursions.\nIn 1536, France and Spain went to war again and French corsairs launched a series of attacks on Spanish Caribbean settlements and ships. The next year, a corsair vessel appeared in Havana and demanded a 700-ducat rescate. Spanish men-of-war arrived soon and scared off the intruding vessel, which returned soon thereafter to demand yet another rescate. Santiago was also victim of an attack that year, and both cities endured raids yet again in 1538. The waters off Cuba's northwest became particularly attractive to pirates as commercial vessels returning to Spain had to squeeze through the 90-mile-long strait between Key West and Havana. In 1537\u20131538, corsairs captured and sacked nine Spanish vessels. While France and Spain were at peace until 1542, beyond-the-line corsair activity continued. When war erupted again, it echoed once more in the Caribbean. A particularly vicious French corsair attack took place in Havana in 1543. It left a gory toll of 200 killed Spanish settlers. In all, between 1535 and 1563, French corsairs carried out around sixty attacks against Spanish settlements and captured over seventeen Spanish vessels in the region (1536\u20131547).\nEuropean rivalries and impact on the Caribbean.\nWhile the French and Spanish fought one another in Europe and the Caribbean, England sided with Spain, largely because of dynastic alliances. Spain's relations with England soured upon the crowning of the Protestant Elizabeth I in 1558. She openly supported the Dutch insurrection in the Spanish Netherlands and aided Huguenot forces in France. After decades of increasing tensions and confrontations in the northern Atlantic and the Caribbean, Anglo-Spanish hostilities broke out in 1585, when the English Crown dispatched over 7,000 troops to the Netherlands and Queen Elizabeth liberally granted licenses for privateers to carry out piracy against Spain's Caribbean possessions and vessels. Tensions further intensified in 1587, when Elizabeth I ordered the execution of Catholic Mary Queen of Scots after twenty years of captivity and gave the order for a preemptive attack against the Spanish Armada stationed in C\u00e1diz. In retaliation, Spain organized the famous naval attack that ended tragically for Spain with the destruction of the \"invincible\" Armada in 1588. Spain rebuilt its naval forces, largely with galleons built in Havana, and continued to fight England until Elizabeth's death in 1603. Spain, however, had received a near-fatal blow that ended its standing as Europe's most powerful nation and virtually undisputed master of the Indies.\nFollowing the Franco-Spanish peace treaty of 1559, crown-sanctioned French corsair activities subsided, but Huguenot pirate incursions persisted. In at least one this instance led to the formation of a temporary Huguenot settlement in the Isle of Pines, off Cuba. English piracy increased during the reign of Charles I, King of England, Scotland, and Ireland (1625\u20131649) and became more aggressive as Anglo-Spanish relations further deteriorated during the Thirty Years' War. Although Spain had been dealing with the insurrection of Netherlands against the Habsburg monarchy since the 1560s, the Dutch were latecomers to the Caribbean. They appeared in the region only after the mid-1590s, when the Dutch Republic was no longer on the defensive in its long conflict against Spain. Dutch privateering became more widespread and violent beginning in the 1620s.\nEnglish incursions in the Spanish-claimed Caribbean boomed during Queen Elizabeth's rule. These actions originally took the guise of well-organized, large-scale smuggling expeditions headed by piratical smugglers the likes of John Hawkins, John Oxenham, and Francis Drake. One of their main objectives were smuggling African slaves into Spain's Caribbean possessions in exchange for tropical products. The first instances of English mercantile piracy took place in 1562\u201363, when Hawkins' men raided a Portuguese vessel off the coast of Sierra Leone, captured the 300 slaves on board, and smuggled them into Santo Domingo in exchange for sugar, hides, and precious woods. Hawkins and his contemporaries pioneered the method of maximizing the number of slaves that could fit into a ship. He and other slave traders methodically packed enslaved Africans by forcing them to lie on their sides, spooned against one another. An example is Hawkins's slave-trading vessel \"Jesus of L\u00fcbeck\", a ship he used on slave smuggling expeditions, on which he transported hundreds of enslaved Africans. In 1567 and 1568, Hawkins commanded two piratical smuggling expeditions, the last of which ended disastrously. He lost almost all of his ships and three-fourths of his men were killed by Spanish soldiers at San Juan de Ul\u00faa, off the coast of Veracruz, the point of departure of the fleet of New Spain. Hawkins and Drake barely escaped but Oxenham was captured, convicted of heresy of Protestantism by the Mexican Inquisition and burned alive.\nMany of the battles of the Anglo-Spanish war were fought in the Caribbean, not by regular English forces but rather by privateers whom Queen Elizabeth had licensed to carry out attacks on Spanish vessels and ports. These were former pirates who now held a more venerable status as privateers. During those years, over seventy-five documented English privateering expeditions targeted Spanish possessions and vessels. Drake terrorized Spanish vessels and ports. Early in 1586, his forces seized Santo Domingo, retaining control over it for around a month. Before departing they plundered and destroyed the city, taking a huge bounty. Drake's men destroyed images and ornaments in Catholic churches.\nEnslavement of Africans.\nThe development of agriculture in the Caribbean required a large workforce of manual laborers, which the Europeans created by the forced migration of enslaved Africans to the Americas. The concomitant Atlantic slave trade brought enslaved Africans to Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, English, and French colonies in the Americas. Enslaved Africans were brought to the Caribbean from the early 16th century until the end of the 19th century, with majority brought between 1701 and 1810.\nThe following table lists the number of slaves brought into some of the Caribbean colonies:\nAbolitionists in the Americas and in Europe became vocal opponents of the slave trade throughout the 19th century. The importation of slaves to the colonies was often outlawed years before the end of the institution of slavery itself. It was well into the 19th century before many slaves in the Caribbean were legally free. The trade in slaves was abolished in the British Empire through the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act in 1807. Slaves in the British Empire continued to remain enslaved, however, until the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. When the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 came into force in 1834, roughly 700,000 slaves in the British West Indies immediately became free; other enslaved workers were freed several years later after a period of apprenticeship which lasted several years. Slavery was abolished in the Dutch Empire in 1814. Spain abolished slavery in its empire in 1811, with the exceptions of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Santo Domingo; Spain ended the slave trade to these colonies in 1817, after being paid \u00a3400,000 by Britain. Slavery itself was not abolished in Cuba until 1886. France abolished slavery in its colonies in 1848.\nMarriage, separation, and sale together.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The official plantocratic view of slave marriage sought to deny the slaves any loving bonds or long-standing relationships, thus conveniently rationalising the indiscriminate separation of close kin through sales.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSlaves could be sold so that spouses could be sold separately.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Slave couples were sometimes separated by sale\u00a0... They lived as single slaves or as part of maternal or extended families but considered themselves 'married.'\"\nSale of estates with \"stock\" to pay debts, more common in the late period of slavery, was criticised as separating slave spouses. William Beckford argued for \"families to be sold together or kept as near as possible in the same neighbourhood\" and \"laws were passed in the late period of slavery to prevent the breakup of slave families by sale,\u00a0... [but] these laws were frequently ignored\". \"Slaves frequently reacted strongly to enforced severance of their emotional bonds\", feeling \"sorrow and despair\", sometimes, according to Thomas Cooper in 1820, resulting in death from distress. John Stewart argued against separation as leading slave buyers to regret it because of \"despair[,]\u00a0... utter despondency[,] or 'put[ting] period to their lives'\". Separated slaves often used free time to travel long distances to reunite for a night and sometimes runaway slaves were married couples. However, \"sale of slaves and the resulting breakup of families decreased as slave plantations lost prosperity.\"\nColonial laws.\nEuropean plantations required laws to regulate the plantation system and the many slaves imported to work on the plantations. This legal control was the most oppressive for slaves inhabiting colonies where they outnumbered their European masters and where rebellion was persistent such as Jamaica. During the early colonial period, rebellious slaves were harshly punished, with sentences including death by torture; less serious crimes such as assault, theft, or persistent escape attempts were commonly punished with mutilations, such as the cutting off of a hand or a foot.\nIn European colonies in the Caribbean, each colony had to develop laws regulating slavery. British West Indian colonies were able to establish laws regulating the institution through their own local legislatures, and the assent of the colony's governor (who served as a representative of the Crown). In contrast, French, Danish, Dutch and Spanish colonies were strictly controlled by their metropole, including the implementation of slave codes. The French regulated slaves under the \"Code Noir\" (Black Code) which was in force in all of France's colonies, and was based upon early French slave practises in the Caribbean colonies.\nAs noted by American historian Jan Rogozinski, \"All [Caribbean] islands sought to protect the planter and not the slave.\" Slave codes in the British West Indies frequently did not recognize marriage for slaves, family rights, education for slaves, or the right to religious practices such as holidays. The \"Code Noir\" recognized slave marriages, but only with the consent of the master, and like Spanish colonial law gave legal recognition to marriages between European men and black or Creole women. They were also more generous than their British counterparts in granting the possibility of manumission to slaves.\nSlave rebellions.\nThe plantation system and the slave trade that enabled its growth led to regular slave resistance in many Caribbean islands throughout the colonial era. Resistance was made by escaping from the plantations altogether, and seeking refuge in the areas free of European settlement. Communities of escaped slaves, who were known as Maroons, banded together in heavily forested and mountainous areas of the Greater Antilles and some of the islands of the Lesser Antilles. The spread of the plantations and European settlement often meant the end of many Maroon communities, although they survived on Saint Vincent and Dominica, and in the more remote mountainous areas of Jamaica, Hispaniola, Martinique and Cuba.\nViolent resistance broke out periodically on the larger Caribbean islands. Many more conspiracies intended to create rebellions were discovered and ended by Europeans before they could materialise. Actual violent uprisings, involving anywhere from dozens to thousands of slaves, were regular events, however. Dominican Republic, Jamaica and Cuba in particular had many slave uprisings. Such uprisings were brutally crushed by European forces.\nCaribbean slave uprisings (1522\u20131844).\nThe following table lists slave rebellions that resulted in actual violent uprisings:\nImpact of colonialism on the Caribbean.\nEconomic exploitation and colonial dependency.\nThe extraction of wealth from the Caribbean dates back to the Spanish colonists, starting in the 1490s, who forced indigenous peoples held by Spanish settlers in encomienda to mine for gold. Gold was not the long term motor of the Caribbean economy, but rather the cultivation of cane sugar. Christopher Columbus observed that the islands were favorable for the cultivation of cane sugar, a high value export commodity. The history of export Caribbean agriculture is directly linked with European colonialism. Spaniards replicated of the model of plantation sugar cultivation in the Atlantic islands using forced labor. Sugar was a luxury in Europe prior to the 18th century. With increased production and falling prices, it became widely popular in the 18th century, becoming a necessity in Europe the 19th century. This evolution of taste and demand for sugar as an essential food ingredient unleashed major economic and social changes. Caribbean islands with plentiful sunshine, abundant rainfalls, and no extended frosts were well suited for sugarcane agriculture and sugar factories. With the precipitous decline in the indigenous population during the first years of Spanish colonization, the problem was the lack of labor. Spaniards sought a large and resilient labor force for cultivation of sugar, initiating the large-scale forced migration of enslaved Africans.\nThe success of Spanish Caribbean sugar plantations was a model for other European powers. The Portuguese colony of Brazil also developed large-scale sugar plantations. The high demand in Europe for sugar attracted other European powers to stake claims on Caribbean islands claimed by the Spanish but not effectively held. In the seventeenth century the Dutch, the English and the French took Caribbean islands and developed plantation agriculture. By the middle of the 18th century, sugar was Britain's largest import which made the Caribbean islands that much more important as colonies. The islands also became bases for European commerce that circumvented Spanish restrictions on the trade monopoly that the Spanish crown sought to impose on its overseas possessions.\nFollowing the abolition of slavery during the 19th century across the Atlantic World, many emancipated Africans left their former masters. This created an economic chaos for the owners of Caribbean sugar cane plantations. The hard work in hot, humid farms required a labor force of strong, low-waged men. The plantation owners looked for cheap labor. This they found initially in China and then in India; the plantation owners subsequently crafted a new legal system of forced labor, which in many ways resembled enslavement. They were indentured laborers, technically not enslaved labor, but the labor regime was harsh. Migrants from the Indian subcontinent began to replace Africans previously brought as slaves, under this indentured labor scheme to serve on sugarcane plantations in European colonies in the Americas and parts of South America. The first ships carrying indentured laborers for sugarcane plantations left India in 1836. Over the next 70 years, numerous more ships brought indentured laborers to the Caribbean, as cheap labor for harsh work. The enslaved labor and indentured laborers - both in millions of people - were brought to the Caribbean, as in other European colonies throughout the world.\nExport agriculture dominated the island economies, with few cities, and no industrial base. Agricultural workers had no alternative for urban, nonfarming employment. Agricultural laborers' wages were extremely low with no potential for growth, since producers sought to keep labor costs low and their own profits high. Profits from Caribbean agriculture were not converted to industrial development or for the changes in agricultural workers' conditions. As industrialized nations sought cheap sources of food for their industrial working classes, Caribbean islands continued to be the producers of cane sugar. Cane sugar was no longer a high-value commodity only for elites; Caribbean sugar was cheap enough for the industrial working classes to consider it a staple in their diet. It would prove extremely difficult for Caribbean producers to escape from the economic relationship with the developed world that was forged during the colonial era. Caribbean nations were among the world's most impoverished.\nWars affecting the Caribbean.\nThe Caribbean region was affected by violence and war throughout much of colonial history, but the wars were often based in Europe, with only minor battles fought in the Caribbean.\nPiracy in the Caribbean was often a tool used by the European empires to wage war unofficially against one another. Gold plundered from Spanish ships and brought to other European nations had a pivotal effect on European interest in colonising the region.\nIndependence.\nHaiti, the former French colony of Saint-Domingue on Hispaniola, was the first Caribbean nation to gain independence from European powers in 1804. This followed 13 years of war that started as a slave uprising in 1791 and quickly turned into the Haitian Revolution under the leadership of Toussaint Louverture. Black Haitian revolutionaries overthrew the French colonial government, before becoming the world's first and oldest black republic, and also the second-oldest republic in the Western Hemisphere after the United States. This is additionally notable as being the only successful slave uprising in history. The remaining two-thirds of Hispaniola, Santo Domingo, was declared independent from Spain in 1821. A year later, in 1822, the nation was conquered by Haitian forces. In 1844, the newly formed Dominican Republic declared its independence from Haiti. After a brief return to Spanish rule, the Dominican Republic gained its third and final independence in 1865.\nThe nations bordering the Caribbean in Central America gained independence with Mexican independence from Spain in 1821 and the establishment of the First Mexican Empire. The region now comprises the modern states of Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. The nations bordering the Caribbean in South America also gained independence from Spain in 1821 with the establishment of Gran Colombia, comprising the modern states of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and Panama.\nThe islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico remained as Spanish colonies until the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898 and they were strategically important to the much-reduced Spanish Empire, which also lost the Philippine Islands to the U.S. in the war. The long civil conflict known in Cuba as the Ten Years' War was hijacked by the U.S. and the treaty signed between the U.S. and Spain ending the war did not include signatories from Cuban independence forces. Cuba was made independent in 1902 and came under U.S. supervision and an economic dependency of the U.S. The 1959 Cuban Revolution broke that economic dependency when Cuba became allied with the Soviet Union. Puerto Rico became an unincorporated territory of the United States, being the last of the Greater Antilles under Spanish colonial control. There are modern advocates for Puerto Rican independence.\nBetween 1958 and 1962 most of the British-controlled Caribbean was integrated as the new West Indies Federation in an attempt to create a single unified future independent state\u2014but it failed. The following former British Caribbean island colonies achieved independence in their own right; Jamaica (1962), Trinidad and Tobago (1962), Barbados (1966), Bahamas (1973), Grenada (1974), Dominica (1978), St. Lucia (1979), St. Vincent (1979), Antigua and Barbuda (1981), St. Kitts and Nevis (1983).\nIn addition British Honduras in Central America became independent as Belize (1981), British Guiana in South America became independent as Guyana (1966), and Dutch Guiana also in South America became independent as Suriname (1975).\nIslands currently under colonial administration.\nNot all Caribbean islands have become independent, as of the early 21st century. A number of islands continue to have government ties with European countries, or with the United States.\nFrench overseas departments and territories include several Caribbean islands. Guadeloupe and Martinique are French overseas departments, a legal status that they have had since 1946. Their citizens are considered full French citizens with the same legal rights. In 2003, the populations of St. Martin and St. Barth\u00e9lemy voted in favor of secession from Guadeloupe in order to form separate overseas territories of France. After a bill was passed in the French Parliament, the new status took effect on February 21, 2007.\nPuerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands are officially territories of the United States, but are sometimes referred to as \"protectorates\" of the United States. They are self-governing territories subject to Congress plenary powers over the territories.\nBritish overseas territories in the Caribbean include: Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, and Turks and Caicos.\nAruba, Cura\u00e7ao, and Sint Maarten are all presently separate constituent countries, formerly part of the Netherlands Antilles. Along with Netherlands, they form the four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Citizens of these islands have full Dutch citizenship.\nHistory of U.S. relations.\nPresident James Monroe's State of the Union address in 1823 included a significant change to United States foreign policy which later became known as the Monroe Doctrine. In a key addition to this policy called the Roosevelt Corollary, the United States reserved the right to intervene in any nation of the Western Hemisphere it determined to be engaged in \"chronic wrongdoing\". This new expansionism coupled with the loss of relative power by the colonial nations enabled the United States to become a major influence in the region. In the early part of the twentieth century this influence was extended by participation in The Banana Wars. Areas outside British or French control became known in Europe as \"America's tropical empire\".\nVictory in the Spanish\u2013American War and the signing of the Platt amendment in 1901 ensured that the United States would have the right to interfere in Cuban political and economic affairs, militarily if necessary. After the Cuban revolution of 1959 relations deteriorated rapidly leading to the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Missile Crisis and successive US attempts to destabilise the island. The US invaded and occupied Hispaniola (present day Dominican Republic and Haiti) for 19 years (1915\u201334), subsequently dominating the Haitian economy through aid and loan repayments. The U.S. invaded Haiti again in 1994 to overthrow a military regime, and restored elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. In the 2004, Aristide was overthrown in coup d'\u00e9tat, and flown out of the country by the U.S.. Aristide later accused the U.S. of kidnapping him.\nIn 1965, 23,000 US troops were sent to the Dominican Republic to intervene into the Dominican Civil War to end the war and prevent supporters of deposed left-wing president Juan Bosch taking over, in what was the first U.S. military intervention in Latin America in more than 30 years. President Lyndon Johnson had ordered the invasion to stem what he claimed to be a \"Communist threat\", but the mission appeared ambiguous and was condemned throughout the hemisphere as a return to gunboat diplomacy. On October 25 1983 the United States invaded Grenada to remove left-wing leader Hudson Austin, who had deposed Maurice Bishop nine days earlier on October 16. Bishop was executed three days later on the 19th. The United States maintains a naval military base in Cuba at Guantanamo Bay. The base is one of five unified commands whose \"area of responsibility\" is Latin America and the Caribbean. The command is headquartered in Miami, Florida.\nAs an arm of the economic and political network of the Americas, the influence of the United States stretches beyond a military context. In economic terms, the United States represents a key market for the export of Caribbean goods. Notably, this is a recent historical trend. The post-war era reflects a time of transition for the Caribbean basin when, as colonial powers sought to disentangle from the region (as part of a larger trend of decolonisation), the US began to expand its hegemony throughout the region. This pattern is confirmed by economic initiatives such as the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), which sought to congeal alliances with the region in light of a perceived Soviet threat. The CBI marks the emergence of the Caribbean basin as a geopolitical area of strategic interest to the US.\nThis relationship has carried through to the 21st century, as reflected by the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act. The Caribbean Basin is also of strategic interest in regards to trade routes; it has been estimated that nearly half of US foreign cargo and crude oil imports are brought via Caribbean seaways. During wartime, these figures only stand to increase.\nThe United States is also of strategic interest to the Caribbean. Caribbean foreign policy seeks to strengthen its participation in a global free market economy. As an extension of this, Caribbean states do not wish to be excluded from their primary market in the United States, or be bypassed in the creation of \"wider hemispheric trading blocs\" that stand to drastically alter trade and production in the Caribbean Basin. As such, the US has played an influential role in shaping the Caribbean's role in this hemispheric market. Likewise, building trade relationships with the US has always figured in strongly with the political goal of economic security in post-independence Caribbean states.\nEsencia is a $2 billion imperial development project in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico that aims to seize more than 800 hectares of land, covering five kilometers of beaches in Punta Melones, Cabo Rojo, by 2028. The United States has long justified its imperial presence in Puerto Rico under the guise of \"progress\" and \"development.\" With the complicity of a local government that prioritizes American interests, policies like Act 60, which allows foreign investors to evade local and federal taxes, have been implemented.\nEconomic change in the 20th century.\nThe mainstay of the Caribbean economy, sugar, has declined gradually since the beginning of the 20th century, although it is still a major crop in the region. Caribbean sugar production became relatively expensive in comparison to other parts of the world that developed their own sugar cultivation industries, making it difficult for Caribbean sugar products to compete. Caribbean economic diversification into new activities became essential to the islands.\nTourism.\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, the Caribbean islands enjoyed greater political stability. Large-scale violence was no longer a threat after the end of slavery in the islands. The British-controlled islands in particular benefited from investments in the infrastructure of colonies. By the beginning of World War I, all British-controlled islands had their own police force, fire department, doctors and at least one hospital. Sewage systems and public water supplies were built, and death rates in the islands dropped sharply. Literacy also increased significantly during this period, as schools were set up for students descended from African slaves. Public libraries were established in large towns and capital cities.\nThese improvements in the quality of life for the inhabitants also made the islands a much more attractive destination for visitors. Tourists began to visit the Caribbean in larger numbers by the beginning of the 20th century, although there was a tourist presence in the region as early as the 1880s. The U.S.-owned United Fruit Company operated a fleet of \"banana boats\" in the region that doubled as tourist transportation. The United Fruit Company also developed hotels for tourist accommodations. It soon became apparent, however, that this industry was much like a new form of colonialism; the hotels operated by the company were fully staffed by Americans, from chefs to waitresses, in addition to being owned by Americans, so that the local populations saw little economic benefit. The company also enforced racial discrimination in many policies for its fleet. Black passengers were assigned to inferior cabins, were sometimes denied bookings, and were expected to eat meals early before white passengers. The most popular early destinations were Jamaica and the Bahamas; the Bahamas remains today the most popular tourist destination in the Caribbean.\nPost-independence economic needs, particularly in the aftermath of the end of preferential agricultural trade ties with Europe, led to a boom in the development of the tourism industry in the 1980s and thereafter. Large luxury hotels and resorts have been built by foreign investors in many of the islands. Cruise ships are also regular visitors to the Caribbean.\nSome islands have gone against this trend, such as Cuba and Haiti, whose governments chose not to pursue foreign tourism, although Cuba has developed this part of the economy very recently. Other islands lacking sandy beaches, such as Dominica, missed out on the 20th-century tourism boom, although they have recently begun to develop eco-tourism, diversifying the tourism industry in the Caribbean.\nFinancial services.\nThe development of offshore banking services began during the 1920s. The close proximity of the Caribbean islands to the United States has made them an attractive location for branches of foreign banks. Clients from the United States take advantage of offshore banking services to avoid U.S. taxation. The Bahamas entered the financial services industry first, and continues to be at the forefront of financial services in the region. The Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands, and the Netherlands Antilles have also developed competitive financial services industries. In recent years reduced interest rates and higher costs related largely to anti-money laundering compliance have led to the closure of many https:// arrangements by extra-regional banks.\nShipping.\nPorts both large and small were built throughout the Caribbean during the colonial era. The export of sugar on a large scale made the Caribbean one of the world's shipping cornerstones, as it remains today. Many key shipping routes still pass through the region.\nThe development of large-scale shipping to compete with other ports in Central and South America ran into several obstacles during the 20th century. Economies of scale, high port handling charges, and a reluctance by Caribbean governments to privatise ports put Caribbean shipping at a disadvantage. Many locations in the Caribbean are suitable for the construction of deepwater ports for commercial ship container traffic, or to accommodate large cruise ships. The deepwater port at Bridgetown, Barbados, was completed by British investors in 1961. A more recent deepwater port project was completed by Hong Kong investors in Grand Bahama in the Bahamas.\nSome Caribbean islands take advantage of flag of convenience policies followed by foreign merchant fleets, registering the ships in Caribbean ports. The registry of ships at \"flag of convenience\" ports is protected by the Law of the Sea and other international treaties. These treaties leave the enforcement of labour, tax, health and safety, and environmental laws under the control of the registry, or \"flag\" country, which in practical terms means that such regulations seldom result in penalties against the merchant ship. The Cayman Islands, Bahamas, Antigua, Bermuda, and St. Vincent are among the top 11 flags of convenience in the world. However, the flag of convenience practice has been a disadvantage to Caribbean islands as well, since it also applies to cruise ships, which register outside the Caribbean and thus can evade Caribbean enforcement of the same territorial laws and regulations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "51364", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51364", "title": "420s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 429 BC \u2013 420 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51365", "revid": "1305083619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51365", "title": "History of Central America", "text": "Central America is commonly said to include Guatemala, Belize, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Panama. This definition matches modern political borders. Central America begins geographically in Mexico, at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Mexico's narrowest point, and the former country of Yucat\u00e1n (1841\u20131848) was part of Central America. At the other end, before its independence in 1903 Panama was part of South America, as it was a Department of Colombia. At times Belize, a British colony until 1981, where English instead of Spanish is spoken, and where the population is primarily of African origin, has been considered not part of (Spanish-speaking) Central America.Long and narrow, Central America does not have an obvious geographical center. Until the middle of the 20th century there were no roads between the countries, which isolated them from each other, and railroads have never connected them. During colonial times Guatemala was the administrative and religious center; religiously it remains so. However, attempts to create a Central American Political Union, like the European Union, have failed. The countries that joined the EU already had extensive cross-border traffic by train; even today (2021) there is by comparison very little, and none by train.\nThe countries, furthermore, are more diverse than they appear at first glance. Some (Guatemala) have a large indigenous or Native American population, others (Costa Rica) do not. Some (El Salvador) are focused on their Pacific coast, while in others (Belize, Honduras) the Caribbean or Atlantic coast is more important. Panama and to a lesser extent Guatemala and Costa Rica have both coasts playing a significant role. Some countries have stable governments (Costa Rica), others do not (Nicaragua, El Salvador). Panama is heavily Americanized, uses the US dollar as its currency, has a large industry and source of revenue (the canal), and a sophistication which comes from the ships and people passing through the country and previously the U.S. military installations in the former Canal Zone.\nBefore European contact.\nIn the pre-Columbian era, the northern areas of Central America were inhabited by the indigenous peoples of Mesoamerica. Most notable among these were the Maya peoples, who had built numerous cities throughout the region, and the Aztecs, who had created a vast empire. The pre-Columbian cultures of eastern Honduras, Caribbean Nicaragua, most of Costa Rica and Panama were predominantly speakers of the Chibchan languages at the time of European contact and are considered by some culturally different and grouped in the Isthmo-Colombian Area.\nSpanish colonial era.\nCentral America is composed of seven independent nations: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. After the Spanish conquest in the 16th century, most of the inhabitants of Central America shared a similar history. The exception was the Western Caribbean Zone, which included the Caribbean coast and encompassed both semi-independent indigenous polities, runaway slave communities, and settlers, especially British settlers who would eventually form British Honduras (the modern-day nation of Belize), a sparsely populated area that was inhabited by the British through the Treaty of Madrid from Spain. When Spain failed to regain control over British Honduras, the British continued to inhabit the country and eventually colonized it. When Guatemala gained its independence, it assumed inheritance of British Honduras from Spain. British Honduras had been a British settlement, not a colony (the treaty between Spain and the United Kingdom prohibited British colonies in the territory) for several years. After many years of controversy, a treaty was signed between Guatemala and the United Kingdom in which the Guatemalan President of the time recognized the original territory (granted by the kingdom of Spain to the British Crown) of Belize. Within this treaty, was also an agreement for a cart road to be built from Guatemala City through British Honduras to the Caribbean Sea. Since the cart road was never built, Guatemala declared the treaty null and void. British Honduras, as the British called it, and Belize as the Spaniards and Guatemalans said, gained its independence from Great Britain in 1981 and adopted the name \"Belize\". Guatemala still disputes the Belizean territory.\nFrom the 16th century through 1821, Central America formed the Captaincy General of Guatemala, sometimes known also as the Kingdom of Guatemala, composed by a part of the state of Chiapas (nowadays part of Mexico), Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. Officially, the Captaincy was part of the Vice royalty of New Spain and therefore under the supervision of the Spanish viceroy in Mexico City. It was, however, administered not by the viceroy or his deputies, but by an independently appointed Captain General headquartered first in Antigua and later in Guatemala City.\nIndependence.\n \nIn 1811, independence movements broke out in El Salvador in reaction to events in the Peninsular War, and again in 1814 after the restoration of Ferdinand VII. Both revolts were easily suppressed and the political unrest was subsumed into the general political process in the Spanish world that led to the Spanish Constitution of 1812. Between 1810 and 1814, the Captaincy General elected seven representatives to the Cortes of C\u00e1diz, in addition to forming a locally elected Provincial Deputation. In 1821 a congress of Central American \"Criollos\" in Guatemala City composed the Act of Independence of Central America to declare the region's independence from Spain, effective on 15 September of that year. That date is still marked as independence day by most Central American nations. The Spanish Captain General, Gabino Ga\u00ednza, sympathized with the rebels and it was decided that he should stay on as interim leader until a new government could be formed. Independence was short-lived, for the conservative leaders in Guatemala welcomed annexation by the First Mexican Empire of Agust\u00edn de Iturbide on 5 January 1822. Central American liberals objected to this, but an army from Mexico under General Vicente Fil\u00edsola occupied Guatemala City and quelled dissent.\nWhen Mexico became a republic the following year, it acknowledged Central America's right to determine its own destiny. On 1 July 1823, the congress of Central America declared the Absolute Declaration. The primary provision of this declaration was the absolute independence of Central America from Spain, Mexico, and any other foreign nation, including any in North America. With regards to Spain, the declaration stated that Spain had usurped the rights of the colonies in Central America for three centuries, and reiterated the earlier independence acts of 1821. On the issue of Mexico and annexation into a greater Spanish American state in North America, the declaration labeled Mexican involvement in Central American independence as forceful and unlawful. This served to de-legitimize Mexican actions during the previous two years and separate Central America as a political entity. Further, a Republican system of government was established under a unitary system. Though Guatemala would attempt to unify the provinces of Central America with its adoption of federalism, regional divisions endured. The conflicts between powerful urban centers in each region, including Guatemala itself, would make it difficult to unify provinces internally, and it was all the harder to do so as a wider region. The conflict between republicans and monarchists also made political unity difficult in Central America. These qualities would exist for decades after the region's separation from Spain and Mexico and would help to create the modern boundaries of Central America. \nFederal Republic of Central America.\nIn 1823, the Federal Republic of Central America was formed. It was intended to be a federal republic modeled after the United States of America. It was provisionally known as \"The United Provinces of Central America,\" while the final name according to the Constitution of 1824 was \"The Federal Republic of Central America.\" It is sometimes incorrectly referred to in English as \"The United States of Central America.\" The Central American nation consisted of the states of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. In the 1830s, an additional state was added, Los Altos, with its capital in Quetzaltenango, occupying parts of what is now the western highlands of Guatemala as well as part of Chiapas (now part of Mexico), but this state was reincorporated into Guatemala and Mexico respectively in 1840.\nCentral American liberals had high hopes for the federal republic, which they believed would evolve into a modern, democratic nation, enriched by trade crossing through it between the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans. These aspirations are reflected in the emblems of the federal republic: The flag shows a white band between two blue stripes, representing the land between two oceans. The coat of arms shows five mountains (one for each state) between two oceans, surmounted by a Phrygian cap, the emblem of the French Revolution.\nThe Union dissolved in civil war between 1838 and 1840. Its disintegration began when Nicaragua separated from the federation on November 5, 1838. The United Provinces of Central America (or PUCA- Provincias Unidas De Centro-America in Spanish) is the name given to the different states of Central America in the time after Central America's independence and before becoming their own distinct nations (between 1823 and 1840). It was a political movement that strived to unify the regions of El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Guatemala (Panama and Belize at the time were under separate ownership) under a liberal federal government and believed that united they would be a stronger political unit. Unfortunately, due to many strong political disagreements within the different states, the UPCA eventually disbanded and the regions became separate nations with devastating political and economic civil wars that are still felt today.\nThe kingdom of Guatemala, as Central America was more commonly known as during Spanish and Mexican rule, had been annexed into Mexico in 1822 under the rule of emperor Agust\u00edn de Iturbide. The annexation was not without controversy, however, and tensions simmered between the republicans and nationalists favoring complete independence on one side and monarchists, who often favored annexation into Mexico, on the other. These tensions took varying forms depending on the region in question. In El Salvador, the provincial council openly defied annexation into Mexico. Meanwhile, in other regions, inner tensions between cities such as Leon Granada in Nicaragua made any sense of unity fleeting at best. Shortly after the annexation, opposition against the monarch from Central American nationalists and republicans continued to grow. These groups pushed for independence from Mexico. Iturbide's unsuccessful leadership of Central America and the seeming collapse of the Mexican Empire caused his party to fail against the uprising rebels and on July 1, 1823, Central America gained its independence.\nAfter independence, officials from the different regions gathered in a junta to decide the future of El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Honduras, and Guatemala. They decided to unite into a federation of five autonomous states, thus creating the UPCA, a term coined by Brigadier General Vicente Filisola, who was stationed in Guatemala City.\nThe UPCA's aims were to be a liberal government with political principles modeled after the United States, and also to remain united. They felt that the \u201cprovinces alone were too small and weak economically to survive as sovereign states\u201d so they \u201cavert[ed] fragmentation of the isthmus\u201d and pushed for union. However, the UPCA soon noticed that there were many political ideals between the regions and conservative parties on the other end of the political spectrum actively showed their discontent under the new liberal regime. Despite this, the beginning of the federation went relatively smoothly and negotiations helped them reform borders, capital cities were moved to accommodate the citizens, and economies of coffee grew high. All the while, tensions between the liberals and conservatives and power struggles within the different economies increasingly grew.\nOne of the most notable key figures of UPCA was Francisco Morazan, a liberal advocate who was chosen president of the UPCA. In the 1820s and through the 1830s Morazan took an active role in liberal movements throughout Central America, especially in Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Honduras against conservative parties. These battles between parties increasingly divided the nation causing sour relationships and distance between them. Differences between liberals who wanted free trade, favored a republic and had anti-clerical views contested those of the conservatives who wanted a monarchy, trade under close control and power to the church. These conflicts, along with cholera outbreaks, foreign intervention, and distress among those in poverty caused many insurgencies, resulting in various civil wars throughout Central America.\nMorazan was captured in Costa Rica by the conservative party and they assassinated him on September 15, 1842, which marked the official end of the UPCA. Upon notification of his death, greater turmoil and fights among the opposing liberal and conservative parties increased. It is said that the conservative-liberal struggles that Morazan campaigned for are still in effect today. In addition, lacking a central authority proved to be unproductive and created more disputes and distrust within the different nations. In fact, foreigners who were looking to make economic and/or political negotiations were told that they had to go to each individual region for consultations and found it inconvenient.\nThe desire for power and their inability to overcome bad relations among each other led to the fall of the UPCA. Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica seceded from the union in 1838. In 1839 Guatemala seceded, and in 1840 El Salvador did the same.\nThe provinces shortly after became their own separate republican nations, of which we are more familiar with today and eventually Panama and Belize came to be seen as part of what we know today as \"Central America.\" Tensions among the different nations, however, continued to grow more aggressive throughout the rest of the 19th century. Despite knowing that unification would overall work better for Central America, they remained separate. Though many attempts to reunite the nations have been attempted throughout the years, none has succeeded. Civil wars continued to be part of Central America through the 20th into the 21st century.\nGreater Republic of Central America.\nVarious attempts were made to reunite Central America in the 19th century, but none succeeded for any length of time. The first attempt was in 1842 by former President Francisco Moraz\u00e1n, who was quickly captured and executed. The abortive attempt proposed to restore the union as the Confederation of Central America and planned to include El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. This first attempt lasted until 1844.\nA second attempt was made and lasted from October to November 1852, when El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua created a Federation of Central America (). Guatemalan President Justo Rufino Barrios attempted to reunite the nation by force of arms in the 1880s and was killed in the process, like his 1842 predecessor.\nThe third union of Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador as the Greater Republic of Central America or \"Republica Mayor de Centroamerica\" lasted from 1896 to 1898. The last attempt occurred between June 1921 and January 1922 when El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Costa Rica formed a (second) Federation of Central America. The treaty establishing this federation was signed at San Jos\u00e9, Costa Rica on January 19, 1921. This second Federation was nearly moribund from the start, having only a provisional Federal Council made up of delegates from each state.\nDespite the failure of a lasting political union, the concept of Central American reunification, though lacking enthusiasm from the leaders of the individual countries, arose from time to time. In 1856\u20131857, the region successfully established a military coalition to repel an invasion by American adventurer William Walker. Today, all five nations fly flags that retain the old federal motif of two outer blue bands bounding an inner white stripe. Costa Rica, traditionally the least committed of the five to regional integration, modified its flag significantly in 1848 by darkening the blue and adding a double-wide inner red band, in honor of the French tricolor.\nTerritorial transfers by the British Empire.\nIn 1850, the British Empire signed the Clayton\u2013Bulwer Treaty with the United States, whereby the two powers undertook to guarantee neutrality, equal use of the proposed future navigable canal, and not to \"occupy, or fortify, or colonize, or assume or exercise any dominion over Nicaragua, Costa Rica, the Mosquito Coast or any part of Central America\", nor make use of any protectorate or alliance, present or future, to such ends.\nAs a result of this treaty, following a long crisis between the British and the Americans, the British Empire finally signed the Treaty of Comayagua with Honduras in 1859, whereby the British government ceded the Bay Islands and the northern part of the Mosquito Coast to Honduras. The following year, in 1860, the British Empire also signed the Treaty of Managua with Nicaragua, whereby the British government handed over the rest of the Mosquitia protectorate to Nicaragua. However, the Mosquito Reserve continued to exist as a quasi-independent state, a situation that lasted until the Nicaragua Crisis of 1894\u20131895, when the Nicaraguan government definitively incorporated it and turned it into the Zelaya Department. Attempts to decide the border between Honduras and Nicaragua over the annexed territory of Costa Mosquitos began in 1869 but would not be resolved until ninety-one years later, when the International Court of Justice ruled in favor of Honduras in 1960.\nThe British Empire continued to maintain the colony of British Honduras until 1981, when it gained independence as Belize.\nThe liberal reforms period.\nEven though the dates for this period change from country to country, they approximately correspond to the years between 1870 and 1930. During this time, political elites in the five Central American countries advanced reforms on agriculture, commerce, and redefined the relationship between the state, society and the economy. The most relevant political figures during this period were the presidents Justo Rufino Barrios in Guatemala, Rafael Zaldivar in El Salvador, Braulio Carrillo Colina and Tomas Guardia in Costa Rica, Marco Aurelio Soto in Honduras, and Jos\u00e9 Santos Zelaya in Nicaragua. The key result of this period in all the Central American countries was a transition from communal to private ownership of land. The extent to which liberals targeted common lands for privatization varied from country to country. Likewise, there were important differences in the size of the commercial landholding estate. Another variation among the policies promoted by the liberal governments was the use of coercion and security organizations in to implement reforms to the land ownership policies.\n20th century.\nIn 1907, a Central American Court of Justice was created. On December 13, 1960, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua established the Central American Common Market (CACM). Costa Rica chose not to participate in the CACM. The goals for the CACM were to create greater political unification and success of import substitution industrialization policies. The project was an immediate economic success but was abandoned after the 1969 \"Football War\" between El Salvador and Honduras.\nBy the 1930s the United Fruit Company owned 3.5 million acres of land in Central America and the Caribbean and was the single largest land owner in Guatemala. Such holdings gave it great power over the governments of small countries. That was one of the factors that led to the coining of the phrase Banana republic.\nOn November 22, 1971, the United States handed over the Swan Islands to Honduras after signing the Treaty of the Swan Islands. Honduras began exercising this sovereignty on September 1, 1972.\nIn 1977, the United States and Panama signed the Torrijos\u2013Carter Treaties, whereby the US handed over the Panama Canal Zone in 1979 and returned the Panama Canal to Panama in 1999.\nA Central American Parliament has operated, as a purely advisory body, since 1991. The regional parliament seat deputies from the four former members of the Union (Nicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras), as well as from Panama and the Dominican Republic.\nAnother initiative is known as Free Movement of people in the CA-4, which has opened the borders between Nicaragua and Guatemala removing the need to carry a passport to cross borders, just a national ID (c\u00e9dula de identidad) is enough to cross borders. This initiative is the result of negotiations of the Central American Commission of Directors of Migration (OCAM) with the support of the International Organization for Migration (IOM). This initiative has been in effect since 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nColonial era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPost-independence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "51366", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51366", "title": "410s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis decade witnessed the continuing decline of the Achaemenid Empire, fierce warfare amongst the Greek city-states during the Peloponnesian War, the ongoing Warring States period in Zhou dynasty China, and the closing years of the Olmec civilization (lasting from c. 1200\u2013400 BC) in modern-day Mexico. \nDecade\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51367", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51367", "title": "46 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 46 BC was the last year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Lepidus (or, less frequently, year 708 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 46 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nThis year marks the change from the pre-Julian Roman calendar to the Julian calendar. The Romans had to periodically add a leap month every few years to keep the calendar year in sync with the solar year but had missed a few with the chaos of the civil wars of the late republic. Julius Caesar added Mercedonius (23 days) and two other intercalary months (33 and 34 days respectively) to the 355-day lunar year, to recalibrate the calendar in preparation for his calendar reform, which went into effect in 45 BC. The resulting calendar year, the longest calendar year in recorded history, lasted 445 days \u2014 nearly 80 days longer than the sidereal year (the orbit of Earth around the Sun) \u2014 and was nicknamed the annus confusionis (\"Year of Confusion\").\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51368", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51368", "title": "220", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 220 (CCXX) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Antonius and Eutychianus (or, less frequently, year 973 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 220 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51369", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51369", "title": "221", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 221 (CCXXI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gratus and Vitellius (or, less frequently, year 974 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 221 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51370", "revid": "38664462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51370", "title": "History of North America", "text": "The History of North America encompasses the past developments of people populating the continent of North America. While it was commonly accepted that the continent first became inhabited by humans when individuals migrated across the Bering Sea 40,000 to 17,000 years ago, more recent discoveries may have pushed those estimates back at least another 90,000 years. People settled throughout the continent and, over time, developed into diverse communities, from the Inuit in the far north to the Mayans and Aztecs in the south. These complex communities each developed their own unique cultures and ways of life.\nRecords of European travel to North America begin with the Norse colonization in the 10th century AD. In 985, they founded a settlement on Greenland that persisted until the early 1400s. They also explored the east coast of Canada, but their settlements there were much smaller and shorter-lived. With the Age of Exploration and the voyages of Christopher Columbus (starting in 1492), Europeans began to arrive in the Americas in large numbers and develop colonial ambitions for both North and South America. An influx of Europeans soon followed Columbus and overwhelmed native populations as North America became a staging ground for ongoing European rivalries. The continent was divided by three prominent European powers: England, France, and Spain. The influence of colonization by these states on North American cultures is still apparent today.\nConflict over resources in North America ensued in various wars between these powers, but the new European colonies gradually developed desires for independence. Revolutions, such as the American Revolution and the Mexican War of Independence, created new, independent states that came to dominate North America. The Canadian Confederation formed in 1867, marking the beginning of the modern political landscape of North America.\nNorth American states have, since the 19th century, developed increasingly deep connections with each other. Although some conflicts have occurred, the continent has enjoyed general peace and cooperation, as well as open commerce and trade, between its states. Modern developments include the opening of free trade agreements in 1994 and heightened emigration rates and drug trafficking concerns in Mexico and Latin America.\nPre-Columbian North America.\nThe specifics of Paleo-Indians' migration to and throughout the Americas, including the exact dates and routes traveled, are subject to ongoing research and discussion. For years, the traditional theory has been that these early migrants moved into the Beringia land bridge between eastern Siberia and present-day Alaska around 40,000\u201317,000 years ago, when sea levels were significantly lowered due to the Quaternary glaciation. These people are believed to have followed herds of now-extinct Pleistocene megafauna along ice-free corridors that stretched between the Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets. Another route proposed is that, either on foot or using primitive boats, they migrated down the Pacific coast to South America. Evidence of the latter would since have been covered by a sea level rise of hundreds of meters following the last ice age.\nArchaeologists contend that Paleo-Indian migration out of Beringia (eastern Alaska), ranges from 40,000 to around 16,500 years ago. This time range is a hot source of debate and promises to continue as such for years to come. The few agreements achieved to date are the origin from Central Asia, with widespread habitation of the Americas during the end of the last glacial period, or more specifically what is known as the late glacial maximum, around 16,000\u201313,000 years before present. However, older alternative theories exist, including migration from Europe.\nStone tools, particularly projectile points and scrapers, are the primary evidence of early human activity in the Americas. Crafted lithic flaked tools are used by archaeologists and anthropologists to classify cultural periods. Scientific evidence links indigenous Americans to Asian peoples, specifically eastern Siberian populations. Indigenous peoples of the Americas have been linked to North Asian populations by linguistic dialects, the distribution of blood types, and in genetic composition as reflected by molecular data, such as DNA. 8,000\u20137,000 BCE (10,000\u20139,000 years ago) the climate stabilized, leading to a rise in population and lithic technology advances, resulting in a more sedentary lifestyle.\nPre-Columbian era.\nBefore contact with Europeans, the indigenous peoples of North America were divided into many different polities, from small bands of a few families to large empires. They lived in numerous culture areas, which roughly correspond to geographic and biological zones. Societies adapted their subsistence strategies to their homelands, and some societies were hunter-gatherers, some horticulturists, some agriculturalists, and many a mix of these. Native groups can also be classified by their language family (e.g. Athapascan or Uto-Aztecan).\nPeople with similar languages did not always share the same material culture, nor were they always allies.\nThe Archaic period in the Americas saw a changing environment featuring a warmer more arid climate and the disappearance of the last megafauna. The majority of population groups at this time were still highly mobile hunter-gatherers; but now individual groups started to focus on resources available to them locally, thus with the passage of time there is a pattern of increasing regional generalization, for example the Southwest, Arctic, Poverty Point culture, Plains Arctic, Dalton, and Plano traditions. This type of regional adaptation became the norm, with reliance less on hunting and gathering among many cultures, with a more mixed economy of small game, fish, seasonally wild vegetables and harvested plant foods. Many groups continued as big game hunters, but their hunting traditions became more varied, and meat procurement methods more sophisticated. The placement of artifacts and materials within an Archaic burial site indicated social differentiation based upon status in some groups.\nAgriculture was invented independently in two regions of North America: the Eastern Woodlands and Mesoamerica. The more southern cultural groups of North America were responsible for the domestication of many common crops now used around the world, such as tomatoes and squash. Perhaps most importantly they domesticated one of the world's major staples, maize (corn). During the Plains Village period, agriculture and bison-hunting were important to Great Plains tribes.\nAs a result of the development of agriculture in the south, many important cultural advances were made there. For example, the Maya civilization developed a writing system, built huge pyramids, had a complex calendar, and developed the concept of zero 500 years before anyone in the Old World. The Mayan culture was still present when the Spanish arrived in Central America, but political dominance in the area had shifted to the Aztec Empire further north.\nIn the Southwest of North America, Hohokam and Ancestral Pueblo societies had been engaged in agricultural production with ditch irrigation and a sedentary village life for at least two millennia before the Spanish arrived in the 1540s. Upon the arrival of the Europeans in the \"New World\", native peoples found their culture changed drastically. As such, their affiliation with political and cultural groups changed as well, several linguistic groups went extinct, and others changed quite quickly. The name and cultures that Europeans recorded for the natives were not necessarily the same as the ones they had used a few generations before, or the ones in use today.\nPopulation estimates.\nAccording to the Maddison Project at the University of Groningen in the Netherlands, the population estimates of North America break down as follows. For the year 1500 AD, Angus Maddison estimates a population of 7.5\u00a0million for pre-Hispanic Mexico. He estimates that the population of what became Canada was probably close to 250,000 and 2 million for what became the United States. Maddison's total for all of pre-contact North America, then, is 9.75\u00a0million.\nIn 2020, indigenous peoples numbered 34 million (25.7\u00a0million for Mexico, 6.7\u00a0million for the United States, and 1.6\u00a0million for Canada), approximately 7 percent of North America's total population of 493.4\u00a0million.\nArrival of Europeans.\nEarly contact.\nThere was limited contact between North American people and the outside world before 1492. Several theoretical contacts have been proposed, but the earliest physical evidence comes from the Norse or Vikings. Erik the Red founded a colony on Greenland in 985 CE. Erik's son Leif Eriksson is believed to have reached the Island of Newfoundland c.\u20091000, naming the discovery Vinland. The only Norse site outside of Greenland yet discovered in North America is at L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland and Labrador in Canada. All of the Norse colonies were eventually abandoned.\nThe Norse voyages did not become common knowledge in the Old World. Even the permanent settlement in Greenland, which persisted until the early 1400s, received little attention and Europeans remained largely ignorant of the existence of the Americas until 1492. As part of a general Age of Discovery, Italian sailor Christopher Columbus proposed a voyage west from Europe to find a shorter route to Asia. He eventually received the backing of Isabella I and Ferdinand II, Queen and King of newly united Spain. In 1492 Columbus reached land in the Bahamas.\nAlmost 500 years after the Norse, John Cabot explored the east coast of what would become Canada in 1497. Giovanni da Verrazzano explored the East Coast of North America from Florida to presumably Newfoundland in 1524. Jacques Cartier made a series of voyages on behalf of the French crown in 1534 and explored the St. Lawrence River.\nEuropean colonization.\nColonization refers to large-scale population movements in which the migrants maintain strong links with their or their ancestors' former country, gaining significant advantages over other inhabitants of the territory by such links. When colonization takes place under the protection of clearly colonial political structures, it may most handily be called \"settler colonialism\". This often involves the settlers' entirely dispossessing earlier inhabitants, or instituting legal and other structures which systematically disadvantage them.\nInitially, European activity consisted mostly of trade and exploration. Eventually Europeans began to establish settlements. The three principal colonial powers in North America were Spain, England, and France, although eventually other powers such as the Netherlands and Sweden also received holdings on the continent.\nSettlement by the Spanish started the European colonization of the Americas. They gained control of most of the largest islands in the Caribbean and conquered the Aztec empire, gaining control of present-day Mexico and Central America. This was the beginning of the Spanish Empire in the New World. The first successful Spanish settlement in continental North America was Veracruz founded by Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s in 1519, followed by many other settlements in colonial New Spain, including Spanish Florida, Central America, New Mexico, and later California. The Spanish claimed all of North and South America (with the exception of Brazil), and no other European power challenged those claims by planting colonies until over a century after Spain's first settlements.\nThe first French settlements were Port Royal (1604) and Quebec City (1608) in what is now Nova Scotia and Quebec. The Fur Trade soon became the primary business on the continent and as a result transformed the indigenous North American ways of life.\nThe first permanent English settlements were at Jamestown (1607) (along with its satellite, Bermuda in 1609) and Plymouth (1620), in what are today Virginia and Massachusetts respectively.\nFurther to the south, plantation slavery became the main industry of the West Indies, and this gave rise to the beginning of the Atlantic slave trade.\nColonial era.\nBy the year 1663 the French crown had taken over control of New France from the fur-trading companies, and the English charter colonies gave way to more metropolitan control. This ushered in a new era of more formalized colonialism in North America.\nRivalry between the European powers created a series of wars on the North American landmass that would have great impact on the development of the colonies. Territory often changed hands multiple times. Peace was not achieved until French forces in North America were vanquished at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham at Quebec City, and France ceded most of her claims outside of the Caribbean. The end of the French presence in North America was a disaster for most Native nations in Eastern North America, who lost their major ally against the expanding Anglo-American settlements. During Pontiac's Rebellion from 1763 to 1766, a confederation of Great Lakes-area tribes fought a somewhat successful campaign to defend their rights over their lands west of the Appalachian Mountains, which had been \"reserved\" for them under the Royal Proclamation of 1763.\nViceroyalty of New Spain (present-day Mexico) was the name of the viceroy-ruled territories of the Spanish Empire in Asia, North America and its peripheries from 1535 to 1821.\nRevolutions.\nThe coming of the American Revolution had a great impact across the continent. Most importantly it directly led to the creation of the United States of America. However, the associated American Revolutionary War was an important war that touched all corners of the region. The flight of the United Empire Loyalists led to the creation of English Canada as a separate community.\nMeanwhile, Spain's hold on Mexico was weakening. Independence was declared in 1810 by Miguel Hidalgo, starting the Mexican War of Independence. In 1813, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Morelos and the Congress of An\u00e1huac signed the Solemn Act of the Declaration of Independence of Northern America, the first legal document where the separation of the New Spain with respect to Spain is proclaimed. Spain finally recognized Mexico's independence in 1821.\nExpansion era.\nFrom the time of independence of the United States, that country expanded rapidly to the west, acquiring the massive Louisiana territory in 1803. Between 1810 and 1811 a Native confederacy under Tecumseh fought unsuccessfully to keep the Americans from pushing them out of the Great Lakes. Tecumseh's followers then went north into Canada, where they helped the British to block an American attempt to seize Canada during the War of 1812. Following the war, British and Irish settlement in Canada increased dramatically.\nUS expansion was complicated by the division between \"free\" and \"slave\" states, which led to the Missouri Compromise in 1820. Likewise, Canada faced a division between French and English communities that led to the outbreak of civil strife in 1837. Mexico faced constant political tensions between liberals and conservatives, as well as the rebellion of the English-speaking region of Texas, which declared itself the Republic of Texas in 1836. In 1845 Texas joined the United States, which would later lead to the Mexican\u2013American War in 1846 that began American imperialism. As a result of conflict with Mexico, the United States made further territorial gains in California and the Southwest.\nConflict, confederation, and invasion.\nThe secession of the Confederate States and the resulting civil war rocked American society. It eventually led to the end of slavery in the United States, the destruction and later reconstruction of most of the South, and tremendous loss of life. From the conflict, the United States emerged as a powerful industrialized nation.\nPartly as a response to the threat of American power, four of the Canadian colonies agreed to federate in 1867, creating the Dominion of Canada. The new nation was not fully sovereign, but enjoyed considerable independence from Britain. With the addition of British Columbia, Canada would expand to the Pacific by 1871 and establish a transcontinental railway, the Canadian Pacific, by 1885.\nIn Mexico, conflicts such as the Reform War left the state weak, and open to foreign influence. This led to the Second French Empire to invade Mexico.\nLate 19th century.\nIn both the United States and Canada, the second half of the 19th century witnessed massive inflows of immigration to settle the West. These lands were not uninhabited however: in the United States the government fought numerous Indian Wars against the native inhabitants. In Canada, relations were more peaceful, as a result of the Numbered Treaties, but two rebellions broke out in 1870 and 1885 on the prairies. The British colony of Newfoundland became a dominion in 1907.\nIn Mexico, the entire era was dominated by the dictatorship of Porfirio D\u00edaz.\nWorld Wars era.\nWorld War I.\nAs a part of the British Empire Canada immediately was at war in 1914. Canada bore the brunt of several major battles during the early stages of the war including the use of poison gas attacks at Ypres. Losses became grave, and the government eventually brought in conscription, despite the fact this was against the wishes of the majority of French Canadians. In the ensuing Conscription Crisis of 1917, riots broke out on the streets of Montreal. In neighboring Newfoundland, the new dominion suffered a devastating loss on July 1, 1916, the First day on the Somme.\nThe United States stayed apart from the conflict until 1917, joining the Entente powers. The United States was then able to play a crucial role at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 that shaped interwar Europe.\nMexico was not part of the war as the country was embroiled in the Mexican Revolution at the time.\nInterwar years.\nThe 1920s brought an age of great prosperity in the United States, and to a lesser degree Canada. But the Wall Street Crash of 1929 combined with drought ushered in a period of economic hardship in the United States and Canada.\nFrom 1937 to 1949, this was a popular uprising against the anti-Catholic Mexican government of the time, set off specifically by the anti-clerical provisions of the Mexican Constitution of 1917.\nWorld War II.\nOnce again Canada found itself at war before her neighbors, however even Canadian contributions were slight before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The entry of the United States into the war helped to tip the balance in favor of the Allies. On August 19, 1942, a force of some 6000, largely Canadian, infantry was landed near the French channel port of Dieppe. The German defenders under General von Rundstedt destroyed the invaders. 907 Canadians were killed and almost 2,500 captured (many wounded). Lessons learned in this abortive raid were put to good use 2 years later in the successful Normandy invasion.\nTwo Mexican tankers, transporting oil to the United States, were attacked and sunk by the Germans in the Gulf of Mexico waters, in 1942. The incident happened in spite of Mexico's neutrality at that time. This led Mexico to declare war on the Axis nations and enter the conflict.\nThe destruction of Europe wrought by the war vaulted all North American countries to more important roles in world affairs. The United States especially emerged as a \"superpower\".\nPostwar.\nThe early Cold War era saw the United States as the most powerful nation in a Western coalition of which Mexico and Canada were also a part. At home, the United States witnessed convulsive change especially in the area of race relations. In Canada this was mirrored by the Quiet Revolution and the emergence of Quebec nationalism.\nMexico experienced an era of huge economic growth after World War II, a heavy industrialization process and a growth of its middle class, a period known in Mexican history as the \"El Milagro Mexicano\" (Mexican miracle).\nThe Caribbean saw the beginnings of decolonization, while on the largest island the Cuban Revolution introduced Cold War rivalries into Latin America.\nIn 1959 the non-contiguous US territories of Alaska and Hawaii became US states.\nVietnam War and stagflation.\nDuring this time the United States became involved in the Vietnam War as part of the global Cold War. This war would later prove to be highly divisive in American society, and American troops were withdrawn from Indochina in 1975 with the Khmer Rouge's capture of Phnom Penh on April 17, the Vietnam People's Army's capture of Saigon on April 30 and the Pathet Lao's capture of Vientiane on December 2.\nCanada during this era was dominated by the leadership of Pierre Elliot Trudeau. Eventually in 1982 at the end of his tenure, Canada received a new constitution.\nBoth the United States and Canada experienced stagflation, which eventually led to a revival in small-government politics.\nThe 1980s.\nMexican presidents Miguel de la Madrid, in the early 1980s and Carlos Salinas de Gortari in the late 1980s, started implementing liberal economic strategies that were seen as a good move. However, Mexico experienced a strong economic recession in 1982 and the Mexican peso suffered a devaluation. Presidential elections held in 1988 were forecast to be very competitive and they were. Leftist candidate Cuauht\u00e9moc C\u00e1rdenas, son of L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas one of the most beloved Mexican presidents, created a successful campaign and was reported as the leader in several opinion polls. On July 6, 1988, the day of the elections, a system shutdown of the IBM AS/400 that the government was using to count the votes occurred, presumably by accident. The government simply stated that \"se cay\u00f3 el sistema\" (\"the system crashed\"), to refer to the incident. When the system was finally restored, the PRI candidate Carlos Salinas was declared the official winner. It was the first time since the Revolution that a non-PRI candidate was so close to winning the presidency.\nIn the United States president Ronald Reagan attempted to move the United States back towards a hard anti-communist line in foreign affairs, in what his supporters saw as an attempt to assert moral leadership (compared to the Soviet Union) in the world community. Domestically, Reagan attempted to bring in a package of privatization and trickle down economics to stimulate the economy.\nCanada's Brian Mulroney ran on a similar platform to Reagan, and also favored closer trade ties with the United States. This led to the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement in January 1989.\nRecent history.\nThe End of the Cold War and the beginning of the era of sustained economic expansion coincided during the 1990s. On January 1, 1994, Canada, Mexico, and the United States signed the North American Free Trade Agreement, creating the world's largest free trade area. Quebec held a referendum in 1995 for national sovereignty in which 51% voted no to 49% yes. In 2000, Vicente Fox became the first non-PRI candidate to win the Mexican presidency in over 70 years.\nThe optimism of the 1990s was shattered by the 9/11 attacks of 2001 on the United States, which prompted the 20-year period of military intervention war in Afghanistan, which Canada also participated in. Meanwhile, Canada and Mexico both did not support the United States later moves to invade Iraq.\nFrom January 2007, drug war in Mexico evolved into an actual military conflict with each year more deadly than the last.\nStarting in early 2008, the Great Recession in the three North American nations began, which eventually triggered a worldwide recession in the Fall of 2008 and did not recover until 2009. In 2009, Barack Obama was inaugurated as the first African American to be President of the United States. On December 18, 2011, the Iraq War was declared formally over once the troops had pulled out.\nIn the 2016 United States presidential election, Donald Trump was elected 45th President of the United States, defeating Hillary Clinton, and in 2017, he was sworn in as president. Between January 2020 and May 2022, the three North American nations were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and Delta cron hybrid variant, which claimed the lives of 1.3\u00a0million people by May 2022.\nIn 2020, Joe Biden was elected 46th President of the United States, who defeated Donald Trump in 2020 presidential election, although Trump refused to concede the election, and on January 6, 2021, a group of his supporters stormed the United States Capitol in an unsuccessful effort to disrupt the presidential Electoral College vote count.\nCanadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called a snap election in 2021 to try and increase the Liberals seat share and reach a majority government. The results of 2021 federal election were mostly unchanged from 2019 federal election, with the Liberals forming another minority government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51372", "revid": "41307770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51372", "title": "History of South America", "text": "The history of South America is the study of the past, particularly the written record, oral histories, and traditions, passed down from generation to generation on the continent of South America. The continent continues to be home to indigenous peoples, some of whom built high civilizations prior to the arrival of Europeans in the late 1400s and early 1500s. South America has a history that has a wide range of human cultures and forms of civilization. The Norte Chico civilization in Peru dating back to about 3500 BCE is the oldest civilization in the Americas and one of the first six independent civilizations in the world; it was contemporaneous with the Egyptian pyramids. It predated the Mesoamerican Olmec by nearly two millennia.\nIndigenous peoples' thousands of years of independent life were disrupted by European colonization from Spain and Portugal and by demographic collapse. The resulting civilizations, however, were very different from those of their colonizers, both in the mestizos and the indigenous cultures of the continent. Through the trans-Atlantic slave trade, South America (especially Brazil) became the home of millions of people of the African diaspora. The mixing of ethnic groups led to new social structures.\nThe tensions between Europeans, indigenous peoples, and African slaves and their descendants shaped South America as a whole, starting in the sixteenth century. Most of Spanish America achieved its independence in the early nineteenth century through hard-fought wars, while Portuguese Brazil first became the seat of the Portuguese empire and then an empire independent of Portugal. With the revolution for independence from the Spanish crown achieved during the 19th century, South America underwent yet more social and political changes. These have included nation building projects, absorbing waves of immigration from Europe in the late 19th and 20th centuries, dealing with increased international trade, colonization of hinterlands, and wars about territory ownership and power balance. During this period there has also been the reorganization of Indigenous rights and duties, subjugation of Indigenous peoples living in the states' frontiers, that lasted until the early 1900s; liberal-conservative conflicts among the ruling classes, and major demographic and environmental changes accompanying the development of sensitive habitats.\nPrehistory.\nIn the Paleozoic and Early Mesozoic eras, South America and Africa were connected in a landmass called Gondwana, as part of the supercontinent Pangaea. In the Albian, around 110 mya, South America and Africa began to diverge along the southern Mid-Atlantic Ridge, giving rise to a landmass of Antarctica and South America. During the late Eocene, around 35 mya, Antarctica and South America separated and South America became a massive, biologically rich island-continent. During approximately 30 million years, the biodiversity of South America was isolated from the rest of the world, leading to the evolution of species within the continent.\nThe event that caused the mass-extinction of dinosaurs 66 Mya gave rise to neotropical rainforest biomes like the Amazonia, replacing species composition and structure of local forests. During ~6 million years of recovery to former levels of plant diversity, they evolved from widely spaced gymnosperm-dominated forests to the forests with thick canopies which block sunlight, prevalent flowering plants and high vertical layering as known today.&lt;ref name=\"10.1126/science.abf1969\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nGeological evidence suggests that approximately 3 million years ago, South America became connected to North America when the Bolivar Trough marine barrier disappeared and the Panamanian land bridge formed. The joining of these two land masses led to the Great American Interchange, in which biota from both continents expanded their ranges. The first species known to have made the northward migration was \"Pliometanastes\", a fossil ground sloth roughly the size of a modern black bear. Migrations to the Southern Hemisphere were undertaken by several North American mammalian carnivores. Fewer species migrated in the opposite direction from south to north. The result of the expansion of a North American fauna was a mass extinction in which hundreds of species disappeared in a relatively short time. About 60% of present-day South American mammals have evolved from North American species. Some South American species were able to adapt and spread into North America. Apart from \"Pliometanastes\", during the Irvingtonian stage of the mammal land stages, around 1.9 mya, species as \"Pampatherium\", a giant armadillo, ground sloth \"Megatherium\", giant anteater \"Myrmecophaga\", a Neogene capybara (\"Hydrochoerus\"), \"Meizonyx\", opossum \"Didelphis\", and \"Mixotoxodon\" followed the route north. The terror bird \"Titanis\", the only large carnivore in South American, dispersed into North America.\nPre-Columbian era.\nEarliest inhabitants.\nThe Americas are thought to have been first inhabited by people from eastern Asia who crossed the Bering Land Bridge to present-day Alaska; the land separated and the continents are divided by the Bering Strait. Over the course of millennia, three waves of migrants spread to all parts of the Americas. Genetic and linguistic evidence has shown that the last wave of migrant peoples settled across the northern tier, and did not reach South America.\nAmongst the oldest evidence for human presence in South America is the Monte Verde II site in Chile, suggested to date to around 14,500 years ago. From around 13,000 years ago, the Fishtail projectile point style became widespread across South America, with its disappearance around 11,000 years ago coincident with the disappearance of South America's megafauna as part of the Quaternary extinction event.\nAgriculture and domestication of animals.\nThe first evidence for the existence of agricultural practices in South America dates back to circa 6500 BCE, when potatoes, chilies and beans began to be cultivated for food in the Amazon Basin. Pottery evidence suggests that manioc, which remains a staple food supply today, was being cultivated as early as 2000 BCE.\nSouth American cultures began domesticating llamas and alpacas in the highlands of the Andes circa 3500 BCE. These animals were used for both transportation and meat; their fur was shorn or collected to use to make clothing. Guinea pigs were also domesticated as a food source at this time.\nBy 2000 BCE, many agrarian village communities had developed throughout the Andes and the surrounding regions. Fishing became a widespread practice along the coast, with fish being the primary source of food for those communities. Irrigation systems were also developed at this time, which aided in the rise of agrarian societies. The food crops were quinoa, corn, lima beans, common beans, peanuts, manioc, sweet potatoes, potatoes, oca and squashes. Cotton was also grown and was particularly important as the only major fiber crop.\nAmong the earliest permanent settlements, dated to 4700 BCE is the Huaca Prieta site on the coast of Peru, and at 3500 BCE the Valdivia culture in Ecuador. Other groups also formed permanent settlements. Among those groups were the Muisca or \"Muysca,\" and the Tairona, located in present-day Colombia. The Ca\u00f1ari of Ecuador, Quechua of Peru, and Aymara of Bolivia were the three most important Native peoples who developed societies of sedentary agriculture in South America. \nIn the last two thousand years, there may have been contact with the Polynesians who sailed to and from the continent across the South Pacific Ocean. The sweet potato, which originated in South America, spread through some areas of the Pacific. There is no genetic legacy of human contact.\nCaral-Supe / Norte Chico.\nOn the north-western coast of present-day Peru, the Caral-Supe civilization, also known as the Norte Chico civilization emerged as one of six civilizations to develop independently in the world. It was roughly contemporaneous with the Egyptian pyramids. It preceded the civilization of Mesoamerica by two millennia. It is believed to have been the only civilization dependent on fishing rather than agriculture to support its population.\nThe Caral Supe complex is one of the larger Norte Chico sites and has been dated to 27th century BCE. It is noteworthy for having absolutely no signs of warfare. It was contemporary with urbanism's rise in Mesopotamia.\nCa\u00f1ari.\nThe Ca\u00f1ari were the indigenous natives of today's Ecuadorian provinces of Ca\u00f1ar and Azuay at the time of European contact. They were an elaborate civilization with advanced architecture and religious belief. Most of their remains were either burned or destroyed from attacks by the Inca and later the Spaniards. Their old city \"Guapondelig\", was replaced twice, first by the Incan city of Tomipamba, and later by the colonial city of Cuenca. The city was believed by the Spanish to be the site of El Dorado, the city of gold from the mythology of Colombia.\nThe Ca\u00f1ari were most notable in having repulsed the Incan invasion with fierce resistance for many years until they fell to Tupac Yupanqui. It is said that the Inca strategically married the Ca\u00f1ari princess Paccha to conquer the people. Many of their descendants still reside in Ca\u00f1ar.\nChibchan Nations.\nThe Chibcha-speaking communities were the most numerous, the most extended by territory, and the most socio-economically developed of the Pre-Hispanic Colombian cultures. They were divided into two linguistic subgroups; the Arwako-Chimila languages, with the Tairona, Kankuamo, Kogi, Arhuaco, Chimila and Chitarero people and the Guna-Colombian languages with Guna, Nutabe, Motilon, U'wa, Lache, Guane, Sutagao and Muisca.\nMuisca.\nOf these indigenous groups, the Muisca were the most advanced and formed one of the four grand civilisations in the Americas. With the Inca in Peru, they constituted the two developed and specialised societies of South America. The Muisca, meaning \"people\" or \"person\" in their version of the Chibcha language; \"Muysccubun\", inhabited the Altiplano Cundiboyacense, the high plateau in the Eastern Ranges of the Colombian Andes and surrounding valleys, such as the Tenza Valley. Commonly set at 800 CE, their history succeeded the Herrera Period. The people were organised in a loose confederation of rulers, later called the Muisca Confederation. At the time of the Spanish conquest, their reign spread across the modern departments Cundinamarca and Boyac\u00e1 with small parts of southern Santander with a surface area of approximately and a total population of between 300,000 and two million individuals.\nThe Muisca were known as \"The Salt People\", thanks to their extraction of and trade in halite from brines in various salt mines of which those in Zipaquir\u00e1 and Nemoc\u00f3n are still the most important. This extraction process was the work of the Muisca women exclusively and formed the backbone of their highly regarded trading with other Chibcha-, Arawak- and Cariban-speaking neighboring indigenous groups. Trading was performed using salt, small cotton cloths and larger mantles and ceramics as barter trade. Their economy was agricultural in nature, profiting from the fertile soils of the Pleistocene Lake Humboldt that existed on the Bogot\u00e1 savanna until around 30,000 years BP. Their crops were cultivated using irrigation and drainage on elevated terraces and mounds. To the Spanish conquistadors they were best known for their advanced gold-working, as represented in the \"tunjos\" (votive offer pieces), spread in museum collections all around the world. The famous Muisca raft, centerpiece in the collection of the Museo del Oro in the Colombian capital Bogot\u00e1, shows the skilled goldworking of the inhabitants of the Altiplano. The Muisca were the only pre-Columbian civilization known in South America to have used coins (\"tejuelos\").\nThe gold and \"tumbaga\" (a gold-silver-copper alloy elaborated by the Muisca) created the legend of \"El Dorado\"; the \"land, city or man of gold\". The Spanish conquistadors who landed in the Caribbean city of Santa Marta were informed of the rich gold culture and led by Gonzalo Jim\u00e9nez de Quesada and his brother Hern\u00e1n P\u00e9rez, organised the most strenuous of the Spanish conquests into the heart of the Andes in April 1536. After an expedition of a year, where 80% of the soldiers died due to the harsh climate, carnivores such as caimans and jaguars and the frequent attacks of the indigenous peoples found along the route, Tisquesusa, the \"zipa\" of Bacat\u00e1, on the Bogot\u00e1 savanna, was beaten by the Spanish on April 20, 1537, and died \"bathing in his own blood\", as prophesied by the mohan Pop\u00f3n.\nThe Amazon.\nFor a long time, scholars believed that Amazon forests were occupied by small numbers of hunter-gatherer tribes. Archeologist Betty J. Meggers was a prominent proponent of this idea, as described in her book \"Amazonia: Man and Culture in a Counterfeit Paradise\". However, recent archeological findings have suggested that the region was densely populated. From the 1970s, numerous geoglyphs have been discovered on deforested land dating between 0\u20131250 CE. Additional finds have led to conclusions that there were highly developed and populous cultures in the forests, organized as Pre-Columbian civilizations. The BBC's \"Unnatural Histories\" claimed that the Amazon rainforest, rather than being a pristine wilderness, has been shaped by man for at least 11,000 years through practices such as forest gardening. The discovery of the Upano Valley sites in present-day eastern Ecuador predate all known complex Amazonian societies.\nThe first European to travel the length of the Amazon River was Francisco de Orellana in 1542. The BBC documentary \"Unnatural Histories\" presents evidence that Francisco de Orellana, rather than exaggerating his claims as previously thought, was correct in his observations that an advanced civilization was flourishing along the Amazon in the 1540s. It is believed that the civilization was later devastated by the spread of infectious diseases from Europe, such as smallpox, to which the natives had no immunity. Some 5 million people may have lived in the Amazon region in 1500, divided between dense coastal settlements, such as that at Maraj\u00f3, and inland dwellers. By 1900 the population had fallen to 1 million, and by the early 1980s, it was less than 200,000.\nResearchers have found that the fertile \"terra preta\" (black earth) is distributed over large areas in the Amazon forest. It is now widely accepted that these soils are a product of indigenous soil management. The development of this soil enabled agriculture and silviculture to be conducted in the previously hostile environment. Large portions of the Amazon rainforest are therefore probably the result of centuries of human management, rather than naturally occurring as has previously been supposed. In the region of the Xinguanos tribe, remains of some of these large, mid-forest Amazon settlements were found in 2003 by Michael Heckenberger and colleagues of the University of Florida. Among those remains were evidence of constructed roads, bridges and large plazas.\nAndean civilizations.\nChav\u00edn.\nThe Chav\u00edn, a South American preliterate civilization, established a trade network and developed agriculture by 900 BCE, according to some estimates and archeological finds. Artifacts were found at a site called Chav\u00edn de Huantar in modern Peru at an elevation of 3,177 meters. Chav\u00edn civilization spanned 900 to 200 BCE.\nMoche.\nThe Moche thrived on the north coast of Peru between the first and ninth century CE. The heritage of the Moche comes down to us through their elaborate burials, excavated by former UCLA professor Christopher B. Donnan in association with the National Geographic Society.\nSkilled artisans, the Moche were a technologically advanced people who traded with faraway peoples, like the Maya. Knowledge about the Moche has been derived mostly from their ceramic pottery, which is carved with representations of their daily lives. They practiced human sacrifice, had blood-drinking rituals, and their religion incorporated non-procreative sexual practices (such as fellatio).\nInca.\nHolding their capital at the great puma-shaped city of Cuzco, the Inca civilization dominated the Andes region from 1438 to 1533. Known as \"Tawantin suyu\", or \"the land of the four regions,\" in Quechua, the Inca civilization was highly distinct and developed. Inca rule extended to nearly a hundred linguistic or ethnic communities, some 9 to 14 million people connected by a 25,000-kilometre road system. Cities were built with precise, unmatched stonework, constructed over many levels of mountain terrain. Terrace farming was a useful form of agriculture. There is evidence of excellent metalwork and successful skull surgery in Inca civilization. The Inca had no written language, but used quipu, a system of knotted strings, to record information. Ongoing Kiphu research suggests that the Inca used a phonetic system as a form of writing in the kiphu. Francisco Pizarro led the Spanish Conquest, which eventually led to the fall of the Incan Empire through the spread of disease and internal strife.\nArawak and Carib civilizations.\nThe Arawak lived along the eastern coast of South America, from present-day Guyana to as far south as what is now Brazil. Explorer Christopher Columbus described them at first encounter as a peaceful people, having already dominated other local groups such as the Ciboney. The Arawak had, however, come under increasing military pressure from the Carib, who are believed to have left the Orinoco river area to settle on islands and the coast of the Caribbean Sea. Over the century leading up to Columbus' arrival in the Caribbean archipelago in 1492, the Carib are believed to have displaced many of the Arawak who previously settled the island chains. The Carib also encroached on Arawak territory in what is modern Guyana.\nThe Carib were skilled boatbuilders and sailors who owed their dominance in the Caribbean basin to their military skills. The Carib war rituals included cannibalism; they had a practice of taking home the limbs of victims as trophies.\nIt is not known how many indigenous peoples lived in Venezuela and Colombia before the Spanish Conquest; it may have been approximately one million, including groups such as the Auak\u00e9, Caquetio, Mariche, and Timoto-cuicas. The number of people fell dramatically after the Conquest, mainly due to high mortality rates in epidemics of infectious Eurasian diseases introduced by the explorers, who carried them as an endemic disease. There were two main north\u2013south axes of pre-Columbian population; producing maize in the west and manioc in the east. Large parts of the llanos plains were cultivated through a combination of slash and burn and permanent settled agriculture.\nEuropean colonization.\nBefore the arrival of Europeans 20\u201330 million people lived in South America.\nBetween 1452 and 1493, a series of papal bulls (\"Dum Diversas\", \"Romanus Pontifex\", and \"Inter caetera\") paved the way for the European colonization and Catholic missions in the New World. These authorized the European Christian nations to \"take possession\" of non-Christian lands and encouraged subduing and converting the non-Christian people of Africa and the Americas.\nIn 1494, Portugal and Spain, the two great maritime powers of that time, signed the Treaty of Tordesillas in the expectation of new lands being discovered in the west. Through the treaty, they agreed that all the land outside Europe should be an exclusive duopoly between the two countries. The treaty established an imaginary line along a north\u2013south meridian 370 leagues west of Cape Verde Islands, roughly 46\u00b0 37' W. In terms of the treaty, all land to the west of the line (which is now known to include most of the South American soil), would belong to Spain, and all land to the east, to Portugal. Because accurate measurements of longitude were not possible at that time, the line was not strictly enforced, resulting in a Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian.\nIn 1498, during his third voyage to the Americas, Christopher Columbus sailed near the Orinoco Delta and then landed in the Gulf of Paria (in what is now Venezuela). Amazed by the great offshore current of freshwater which deflected his course eastward, Columbus stated in his letter to Isabella I and Ferdinand II that he must have reached heaven on Earth (terrestrial paradise): &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Great signs are these of the Terrestrial Paradise, for the site conforms to the opinion of the holy and wise theologians whom I have mentioned. And likewise, the [other] signs conform very well, for I have never read or heard of such a large quantity of fresh water being inside and in such close proximity to salt water; the very mild temperateness also corroborates this; and if the water of which I speak does not proceed from Paradise then it is an even greater marvel, because I do not believe such a large and deep river has ever been known to exist in this world.\nBeginning in 1499, the people and natural resources of South America were repeatedly exploited by foreign conquistadors, first from Spain and later from Portugal. These competing colonial nations claimed the land and resources as their own and divided it into colonies.\nEuropean diseases (smallpox, influenza, measles and typhus) to which the native populations had no resistance were the overwhelming cause of the depopulation of the Native American population. Systems of forced labor (such as encomiendas and mining industries mita) under Spanish control also contributed to depopulation. Lower bound estimates speak of a decline in the population of around 20\u201350 percent, whereas the highest estimates reach 90 percent. Following this, enslaved Africans, who had developed immunity to these diseases, were quickly brought in to replace them.\nThe Spaniards were committed to converting their American subjects to Christianity and were quick to purge any native cultural practices that hindered this end. However, most initial attempts at this were only partially successful; American groups simply blended Catholicism with their traditional beliefs. The Spaniards did not impose their language to the degree they did their religion. In fact, the missionary work of the Roman Catholic Church in Quechua, Nahuatl, and Guarani actually contributed to the expansion of these American languages, equipping them with writing systems.\nEventually, the natives and the Spaniards intermixed, forming a Mestizo class. Mestizos and the Native Americans were often forced to pay unfair taxes to the Spanish government (although all subjects paid taxes) and were punished harshly for disobeying their laws. Many native artworks were considered pagan idols and destroyed by Spanish explorers. This included a great number of gold and silver sculptures, which were melted down before transport to Europe.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nIn 1616, the Dutch, attracted by the legend of El Dorado, founded a fort in Guayana and established three colonies:\nIn 1624 France attempted to settle in the area of modern-day French Guiana, but was forced to abandon it in the face of hostility from the Portuguese, who viewed it as a violation of the Treaty of Tordesillas. However French settlers returned in 1630 and in 1643 managed to establish a settlement at Cayenne along with some small-scale plantations.\nSince the sixteenth century, there were some movements of discontent to the Spanish and Portuguese colonial system. Among these movements, the most famous being that of the Maroons, slaves who escaped their masters and in the shelter of the forest communities organized free communities. Attempts to subject them by the royal army were unsuccessful because the Maroons had learned to master the South American jungles. In a royal decree of 1713, the king gave legality to the first free population of the continent: Palenque de San Basilio in Colombia today, led by Benkos Bioho. Brazil saw the formation of a genuine African kingdom on their soil, with the Quilombo of Palmares.\nBetween 1721 and 1735, the Revolt of the Comuneros of Paraguay arose, because of clashes between the Paraguayan settlers and the Jesuits, who ran the large and prosperous Jesuit Reductions and controlled a large number of Christianized Natives.\nBetween 1742 and 1756, was the insurrection of Juan Santos Atahualpa in the central jungle of Peru. In 1780, the Viceroyalty of Peru was met with the insurrection of curaca Joseph Gabriel Condorcanqui or Tupac Amaru II, which would be continued by Tupac Katari in Upper Peru.\nIn 1763, the African Coffy led a revolt in Guyana which was bloodily suppressed by the Dutch.\nIn 1781, the Revolt of the Comuneros (New Granada), an insurrection of the villagers in the Viceroyalty of New Granada, was a popular revolution that united indigenous people and mestizos. The villagers tried to force concessions from the colonial power and despite an agreement (capitulation) was signed, the Viceroy Manuel Antonio Fl\u00f3rez did not comply, and instead had the main leader Jos\u00e9 Antonio Gal\u00e1n executed.\nIn 1796, the Dutch colony of Essequibo was captured by the British during the French Revolutionary Wars.\nDuring the eighteenth century, the figure of the priest, mathematician and botanist Jos\u00e9 Celestino Mutis (1732\u20131808), was delegated by the Viceroy Antonio Caballero y Gongora to conduct an inventory of the nature of the Nueva Granada, which became known as the Botanical Expedition, which classified plants, wildlife and founded the first astronomical observatory in the city of Santa F\u00e9 de Bogot\u00e1.\nOn August 15, 1801, the Prussian scientist Alexander von Humboldt reached Fontib\u00f3n where Mutis had begun his expedition to New Granada, Quito. The meeting between the two scholars is considered the brightest spot of the botanical expedition.\nHumboldt also visited Venezuela, Mexico, United States, Chile, and Peru.\nThrough his observations of temperature differences between the Pacific Ocean between Chile and Peru in different periods of the year, he discovered cold currents moving from south to north up the coast of Peru, which was named the Humboldt Current in his honor.\nBetween 1806 and 1807, British military forces tried to invade the area of the Rio de la Plata, at the command of Home Riggs Popham and William Carr Beresford, and John Whitelocke. The invasions were repelled, but powerfully affected the Spanish authority.\nIndependence and 19th century.\nThe Spanish colonies won their independence in the first quarter of the 19th century, in the Spanish American wars of independence. Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar (Greater Colombia, Peru, Bolivia), Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn (United Provinces of the River Plate, Chile, and Peru), and Bernardo O'Higgins (Chile) led their independence struggle. Although Bolivar attempted to keep the Spanish-speaking parts of the continent politically unified, they rapidly became independent of one another.\nUnlike the Spanish colonies, the Brazilian independence came as an indirect consequence of the Napoleonic Invasions to Portugal \u2013 French invasion under General Junot led to the capture of Lisbon on 8 December 1807. In order not to lose its sovereignty, the Portuguese Court moved the capital from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro, which was the Portuguese Empire's capital between 1808 and 1821 and rose the relevance of Brazil within the Portuguese Empire's framework. Following the Portuguese Liberal Revolution of 1820, and after several battles and skirmishes were fought in Par\u00e1 and in Bahia, the heir apparent Pedro, son of King John VI of Portugal, proclaimed the country's independence in 1822 and became Brazil's first emperor (He later also reigned as Pedro IV of Portugal). This was one of the most peaceful colonial independences ever seen in human history.\nA struggle for power emerged among the new nations, and several further wars were soon fought thereafter.\nThe first few wars were fought for supremacy in the northern and southern parts of the continent. The Gran Colombia \u2013 Peru War of the north and the Cisplatine War (between the Empire of Brazil and the United Provinces of the River Plate) ended in stalemate, although the latter resulted in the independence of Uruguay (1828). A few years later, after the break-up of Gran Colombia in 1831, the balance of power shifted in favor of the newly formed Peru-Bolivian Confederation (1836\u201339). Nonetheless, this power structure proved temporary and shifted once more as a result of the Northern Peruvian State's victory over the Southern Peruvian State-Bolivia War of the Confederation (1836\u20131839), and the Argentine Confederation's defeat in the Guerra Grande (1839\u20131852).\nLater conflicts between the South American nations continued to define their borders and power status. In the Pacific coast, Chile and Peru continued to exhibit their increasing domination, defeating Spain in the Chincha Islands War. Finally, after precariously defeating Peru during the War of the Pacific (1879\u20131883), Chile emerged as the dominant power of the Pacific Coast of South America. In the Atlantic side, Paraguay attempted to gain a more dominant status in the region, but an alliance of Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay (in the resulting 1864\u20131870 War of the Triple Alliance) ended Paraguayan ambitions. Thereupon, the Southern Cone nations of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile entered the 20th century as the major continental powers.\nA few countries did not gain independence until the 20th century:\nFrench Guiana remains an overseas department of France.\n20th century.\n1900\u20131920.\nBy the start of the century, the United States continued its interventionist attitude, which aimed to directly defend its interests in the region. This was officially articulated in Theodore Roosevelt's Big Stick Doctrine, which modified the old Monroe Doctrine, which had simply aimed to deter European intervention in the hemisphere.\n1930\u20131960.\nThe Great Depression posed a challenge to the region. The collapse of the world economy meant that the demand for raw materials drastically declined, undermining many of the economies of South America. Intellectuals and government leaders in South America turned their backs on the older economic policies and turned toward import substitution industrialization. The goal was to create self-sufficient economies, which would have their own industrial sectors and large middle classes and which would be immune to the ups and downs of the global economy. Despite the potential threats to United States commercial interests, the Roosevelt administration (1933\u20131945) understood that the United States could not wholly oppose import substitution. Roosevelt implemented a good neighbor policy and allowed the nationalization of some American companies in South America. The Second World War also brought the United States and most Latin American nations together.\nThe history of South America during World War II is important because of the significant economic, political, and military changes that occurred throughout much of the region as a result of the war. In order to better protect the Panama Canal, combat Axis influence, and optimize the production of goods for the war effort, the United States through Lend-Lease and similar programs greatly expanded its interests in Latin America, resulting in large-scale modernization and a major economic boost for the countries that participated.\nStrategically, Brazil was of great importance because of its having the closest point in the Americas to Africa where the Allies were actively engaged in fighting the Germans and Italians. For the Axis, the Southern Cone nations of Argentina and Chile were where they found most of their South American support, and they utilised it to the fullest by interfering with internal affairs, conducting espionage, and distributing propaganda.\nBrazil was the only country to send an Expeditionary force to the European theatre; however, several countries had skirmishes with German U-boats and cruisers in the Caribbean and South Atlantic. Mexico sent a fighter squadron of 300 volunteers to the Pacific, the \"Escuadr\u00f3n 201\" were known as the Aztec Eagles (\"Aguilas Aztecas\").\nThe Brazilian active participation on the battle field in Europe was divined after the Casablanca Conference. The President of the U.S., Franklin D. Roosevelt on his way back from Morocco met the President of Brazil, Getulio Vargas, in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, this meeting is known as the Potenji River Conference, and defined the creation of the Brazilian Expeditionary Force.\nEconomics.\nAccording to author Thomas M. Leonard, World War II had a major impact on Latin American economies. Following the December 7, 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, most of Latin America either severed relations with the Axis powers or declared war on them. As a result, many nations (including all of Central America, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Argentina, and Venezuela) suddenly found that they were now dependent on the United States for trade. The United States' high demand for particular products and commodities during the war further distorted trade. For example, the United States wanted all of the platinum produced in Colombia, all the silver of Chile, and all of cotton, gold and copper of Peru. The parties agreed upon set prices, often with a high premium, but the various nations lost their ability to bargain and trade in the open market.\nCold War.\nWars became less frequent in the 20th century, with Bolivia-Paraguay and Peru-Ecuador fighting the last inter-state wars.\nEarly in the 20th century, the three wealthiest South American countries engaged in a vastly expensive naval arms race which was catalyzed by the introduction of a new warship type, the \"dreadnought\". At one point, the Argentine government was spending a fifth of its entire yearly budget for just two dreadnoughts, a price that did not include later in-service costs, which for the Brazilian dreadnoughts was sixty percent of the initial purchase.\nThe continent became a battlefield of the Cold War in the late 20th century. Some democratically elected governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, and Paraguay were overthrown or displaced by military dictatorships in the 1960s and 1970s. To curtail opposition, their governments detained tens of thousands of political prisoners, many of whom were tortured and/or killed on inter-state collaboration. Economically, they began a transition to neoliberal economic policies. They placed their own actions within the US Cold War doctrine of \"National Security\" against internal subversion. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Peru suffered from an internal conflict. South America, like many other continents, became a battlefield for the superpowers during the Cold War in the late 20th century. In the postwar period, the expansion of communism became the greatest political issue for both the United States and governments in the region. The start of the Cold War forced governments to choose between the United States and the Soviet Union.\nLate 20th century military regimes and revolutions.\nBy the 1970s, leftists had acquired a significant political influence which prompted the right-wing, ecclesiastical authorities and a large portion of each individual country's upper class to support coups d'\u00e9tat to avoid what they perceived as a communist threat. This was further fueled by Cuban and United States intervention which led to a political polarisation. Most South American countries were in some periods ruled by military dictatorships that were supported by the United States of America.\nAlso around the 1970s, the regimes of the Southern Cone collaborated in Operation Condor killing many leftist dissidents, including some urban guerrillas.\nHowever, by the early 1990s all countries had restored their democracies.\nColombia has had an ongoing, though diminished internal conflict, which started in 1964 with the creation of Marxist guerrillas (FARC-EP) and then involved several illegal armed groups of leftist-leaning ideology as well as the private armies of powerful drug lords. Many of these are now defunct, and only a small portion of the ELN remains, along with the stronger, though also greatly reduced FARC. These leftist groups smuggle narcotics out of Colombia to fund their operations, while also using kidnapping, bombings, land mines and assassinations as weapons against both elected and non-elected citizens.\nRevolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships became common after World War II, but since the 1980s, a wave of democratisation came through the continent, and democratic rule is widespread now. Nonetheless, allegations of corruption are still very common, and several countries have developed crises which have forced the resignation of their governments, although, in most occasions, regular civilian succession has continued.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, the governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay were overthrown or displaced by U.S.-aligned military dictatorships. These detained tens of thousands of political prisoners, many of whom were tortured and/or killed (on inter-state collaboration, see Operation Condor). Economically, they began a transition to neoliberal economic policies. They placed their own actions within the U.S. Cold War doctrine of\n\"National Security\" against internal subversion. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Peru suffered from an internal conflict (see T\u00fapac Amaru Revolutionary Movement and Shining Path). Revolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships have been common, but starting in the 1980s a wave of democratization came through the continent, and democratic rule is now widespread. Allegations of corruption remain common, and several nations have seen crises which have forced the resignation of their presidents, although normal civilian succession has continued. International indebtedness became a recurrent problem, with examples like the 1980s debt crisis, the mid-1990s Mexican peso crisis and Argentina's 2001 default.\nWashington Consensus.\nThe set of specific economic policy prescriptions that were considered the \"standard\" reform package were promoted for crisis-wracked developing countries by Washington, DC\u2013based institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and the US Treasury Department during the 1980s and '90s.\n21st century.\nA turn to the left.\nAccording to the BBC, a \"common element of the 'pink tide' is a clean break with what was known at the outset of the 1990s as the 'Washington consensus', the mixture of open markets and privatisation pushed by the United States\". According to Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner, a pink tide president herself, Hugo Ch\u00e1vez of Venezuela (inaugurated 1999), Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva of Brazil (inaugurated 2003) and Evo Morales of Bolivia (inaugurated 2006) were \"the three musketeers\" of the left in South America. By 2005, the BBC reported that out of 350 million people in South America, three out of four of them lived in countries ruled by \"left-leaning presidents\" elected during the preceding six years.\nDespite the presence of a number of Latin American governments which profess to embrace a leftist ideology, it is difficult to categorize Latin American states \"according to dominant political tendencies, like a red-blue post-electoral map of the United States.\" According to the Institute for Policy Studies, a liberal non-profit think-tank based in Washington, D.C.: \"a deeper analysis of elections in Ecuador, Venezuela, Nicaragua, and Mexico indicates that the \"pink tide\" interpretation\u2014that a diluted trend leftward is sweeping the continent\u2014may be insufficient to understand the complexity of what's really taking place in each country and the region as a whole\".\nWhile this political shift is difficult to quantify, its effects are widely noticed. According to the Institute for Policy Studies, 2006 meetings of the South American Summit of Nations and the Social Forum for the Integration of Peoples demonstrated that certain discussions that \"used to take place on the margins of the dominant discourse of neoliberalism, (have) now moved to the centre of public debate.\"\nPink tide.\nThe term 'pink tide' (, ) or 'turn to the Left' (Sp.: \"vuelta hacia la izquierda\", Pt.: \"Guinada \u00e0 Esquerda\") are phrases which are used in contemporary 21st century political analysis in the media and elsewhere to describe the perception that leftist ideology in general, and left-wing politics in particular, were increasingly becoming influential in Latin America.\nSince the 2000s or 1990s in some countries, left-wing political parties have risen to power. Hugo Ch\u00e1vez in Venezuela, Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, N\u00e9stor and Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner in Argentina, Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez and Jos\u00e9 Mujica in Uruguay, the Lagos and Bachelet governments in Chile, Evo Morales in Bolivia, and Rafael Correa of Ecuador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who also often declare themselves socialists, Latin Americanists or anti-imperialists.\nPolitics.\nDuring the first decade of the 21st century, South American governments move to the political left, with leftist leaders being elected in Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador, Bolivia, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela. Most South American countries are making an increasing use of protectionist policies, undermining a greater global integration but helping local development.\nIn 2008, the Union of South American Nations (USAN) was founded, which aimed to merge the two existing customs unions, Mercosur and the Andean Community, thus forming the third-largest trade bloc in the world. The organization is planning for political integration in the European Union style, seeking to establish free movement of people, economic development, a common defense policy and the elimination of tariffs. According to Noam Chomsky, USAN represents that \"for the first time since the European conquest, Latin America began to move towards integration\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51373", "revid": "218586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51373", "title": "The Luzhin Defense", "text": ""}
{"id": "51374", "revid": "48191322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51374", "title": "390s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 399 BC \u2013 390 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51375", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51375", "title": "370s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 379 BC \u2013 370 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51376", "revid": "48191322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51376", "title": "380s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 389 BC \u2013 380 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51377", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51377", "title": "47 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 47 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calenius and Vatinius (or, less frequently, year 707 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 47 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51378", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51378", "title": "45 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 45 BC was either a common year starting on Thursday, Friday or Saturday or a leap year starting on Friday or Saturday (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and the first year of the Julian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar without Colleague (or, less frequently, year 709 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 45 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51380", "revid": "47697729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51380", "title": "360s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 369 BC \u2013 360 BC\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51381", "revid": "41865877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51381", "title": "350s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 359 BC \u2013 350 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51382", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51382", "title": "330s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 339 BC \u2013 330 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51383", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51383", "title": "320s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 329 BC \u2013 320 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51384", "revid": "48078754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51384", "title": "310s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 319 BC \u2013 310 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51385", "revid": "41865877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51385", "title": "300s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 309 BC \u2013 300 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51386", "revid": "23891879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51386", "title": "Research Institute of Crop Production", "text": "The Czech Agrifood Research Center (CARC; previously Crop Research Institute and before Research Institute of Crop Production) () was established in 1951. During its 60-year existence, the CRIhas been the leading crop-production research institution within the Czech Republic. After most specialised research institutes in the Czech Republic were privatised in 1993, GRI remained the only state-independent institution pursuing both research and consulting activities focussed on problems associated with growing crop plants.\nThe CARC is a subsidised organisation. Its basic purpose is the development of scientific knowledge in the field of integrated crop production, the production of wholesome foodstuffs, and the development of conditions for sustainable agriculture and conservation of the environment.\nAlthough the main CARC office is in Prague, various parts of the institute (14 experimental or research stations and separate laboratories) are located in different areas in the territory of the Czech Republic.\nIn 2025 the former Crop Research Institute was merged with Research Institute of Agricultural Technology () and Food Research Institute Prague ()\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51387", "revid": "50838679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51387", "title": "2016", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2016 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n2016 was designated as:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51388", "revid": "47856179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51388", "title": "Bioenergy Europe", "text": "European bioenergy organisation\nBioenergy Europe (formerly known as AEBIOM) is a European trade association open to national biomass associations and bioenergy companies active in Europe. It was founded in 1990 under the leadership of French senator Michel Souplet with the aim to promote energy generation from biomass in all its forms: biopower, bioheat, or biofuels for transport.\nBioenergy Europe is the umbrella organisation of the European Pellet Council (EPC), and the International Biomass Torrefaction Council (IBTC).\nBioenergy Europe owns two international certifications for wood fuels. EN\"plus\", certifying wood pellets quality and GoodChips, aiming at guaranteeing wood chips and hog fuel quality.\nGovernance.\nAs a European trade federation, Bioenergy Europe governance is ensured by its members (see list below) and structured around a General Assembly, a board of directors and a Core Groups that decide on the strategic orientations and political lines of the organisation based on the advises of Bioenergy Europe's Working Groups and Secretariat.\nMembers.\nIts members include biomass producers and traders, equipment suppliers, energy producers, boiler and stove manufacturers, research and development institutions, service providers, certification bodies, renewable energy companies, advocacy organizations, and financial and investment entities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51389", "revid": "47056216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51389", "title": "2017", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2017 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n2017 was designated as the International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development by the United Nations General Assembly.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51390", "revid": "28659337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51390", "title": "2018", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2018 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. &lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51391", "revid": "149553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51391", "title": "2019", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2019 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nThis was the year in which the first known human case of COVID-19 was documented, preceding the pandemic which was declared by the World Health Organization the following year.\nUp to that point, 2019 had been described as the \"best year in human history\" by some newspapers and media outlets in the United States, including \"The New York Times\" and \"WNYC\".\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "51392", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51392", "title": "2060s", "text": ""}
{"id": "51393", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51393", "title": "Czech Biomass Association", "text": "The Czech Biomass Association (CZ Biom - ) is a NGO, which supports the development of phytoenergetics (energy from plant material) in the Czech Republic. Members of CZ BIOM are scientists, specialists, entrepreneurs, and activists interested in using biomass as an energy resource. CZ BIOM is a member of the European Biomass Association.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51394", "revid": "49468060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51394", "title": "290s BC", "text": "Decade\nDuring the 290s BC, Hellenistic civilization begins its emergence throughout the successor states of the former Argead Macedonian Empire of Alexander the Great, resulting in the diffusion of Greek culture throughout the Levant and advances in science, mathematics, philosophy, etc. Meanwhile, the Roman Republic is embroiled in war against the Samnites, the Mauryan Empire continues to thrive in Ancient India, and the Kingdom of Qin in Ancient China, the one which in the future will conquer its adversaries and unite China, begins to emerge as a significant power during the Warring States period.\nDecade\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51396", "revid": "50228115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51396", "title": "2020", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2020 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n2020 saw the decade begin with the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to global social and economic disruption, mass cancellations and postponements of events, worldwide lockdowns, and the largest economic recession since the Great Depression in the 1930s. \"Geospatial World\" also called 2020 \"the worst year in terms of climate change\" in part due to major climate disasters worldwide, including major bushfires in Australia and the western United States, as well as extreme tropical cyclone activity affecting large parts of North America. A United Nations progress report published in December 2020 indicated that none of the international Sustainable Development Goals for 2020 were achieved. \nThe year also saw the rise of social protests and activism amidst the ongoing pandemic. The murder of George Floyd was widely condemned and lead to worldwide protests and unrest that lasted until 2023. In addition, elections commenced in numerous nations in 2020. Most notably, the United States Presidential election where Democrat and eventual 46th president Joe Biden won against incumbent Republican Donald Trump, who refused to concede the presidency, leading directly into an attack on the US capitol early the following year.\n\"Time\" magazine used its sixth ever X cover to declare 2020 \"the worst year ever,\" although the cover article itself did not go as far, instead saying, \"There have been worse years in U.S. history, and certainly worse years in world history, but most of us alive today have seen nothing like this one.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHealth.\nThe outbreak of COVID-19 began in Wuhan, China, in December 2019. It spread to other areas of Asia, and then worldwide in early 2020. The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) on 30 January, and assessed the outbreak had become a pandemic on 11 March.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51397", "revid": "28089545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51397", "title": "2021", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2021 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nLike the year 2020, 2021 was also heavily defined by the COVID-19 pandemic, due to the emergence of multiple COVID-19 variants. The major global rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, which began at the end of 2020, continued in 2021. Most major events scheduled for 2020 that were postponed due to the pandemic were hosted in 2021, including the 26th United Nations Climate Change Conference (held in Glasgow, Scotland), Expo 2020 (held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates), and sporting events such as UEFA Euro 2020 (held across 11 European countries), the 2020 Summer Olympics and Paralympics (both held in Tokyo, Japan), as well as the 2021 Copa Am\u00e9rica (held in Brazil). \n2021 additionally witnessed numerous advancements in space exploration, particularly by the United Arab Emirates, NASA and SpaceX, including the launch of the James Webb Space Telescope.\nCivil unrest grew in 2021, with coups occurring in Sudan, Myanmar, Mali and Guinea, and insurrections occurring in Armenia and the United States.&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51398", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51398", "title": "Fundamentalist", "text": ""}
{"id": "51399", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51399", "title": "Buckingham pi theorem", "text": "Theorem in dimensional analysis\nIn engineering, applied mathematics, and physics, the Buckingham \u03c0 theorem is a key theorem in dimensional analysis. It is a formalisation of Rayleigh's method of dimensional analysis. Loosely, the theorem states that if there is a physically meaningful equation involving a certain number \"n\" of physical variables, then the original equation can be rewritten in terms of a set of \"p\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"k\" dimensionless parameters \u03c01, \u03c02, ..., \u03c0\"p\" constructed from the original variables, where \"k\" is the number of physical dimensions involved; it is obtained as the rank of a particular matrix.\nThe theorem provides a method for computing sets of dimensionless parameters from the given variables, or nondimensionalization, even if the form of the equation is still unknown.\nThe Buckingham \u03c0 theorem indicates that validity of the laws of physics does not depend on a specific unit system. A statement of this theorem is that any physical law can be expressed as an identity involving only dimensionless combinations (ratios or products) of the variables linked by the law (for example, pressure and volume are linked by Boyle's law \u2013 they are inversely proportional). If the dimensionless combinations' values changed with the systems of units, then the equation would not be an identity, and the theorem would not hold.\nHistory.\nAlthough named for Edgar Buckingham, the \u03c0 theorem was first proved by the French mathematician Joseph Bertrand in 1878. Bertrand considered only special cases of problems from electrodynamics and heat conduction, but his article contains, in distinct terms, all the basic ideas of the modern proof of the theorem and clearly indicates the theorem's utility for modelling physical phenomena. The technique of using the theorem (\"the method of dimensions\") became widely known due to the works of Rayleigh. The first application of the \u03c0 theorem \"in the general case\" to the dependence of pressure drop in a pipe upon governing parameters probably dates back to 1892, a heuristic proof with the use of series expansions, to 1894.\nFormal generalization of the \u03c0 theorem for the case of arbitrarily many quantities was given first by A. Vaschy in 1892, then in 1911\u2014apparently independently\u2014by both A. Federman and D. Riabouchinsky, and again in 1914 by Buckingham. It was Buckingham's article that introduced the use of the symbol \"formula_1\" for the dimensionless variables (or parameters), and this is the source of the theorem's name.\nStatement.\nMore formally, the number formula_2 of dimensionless terms that can be formed is equal to the nullity of the dimensional matrix, and formula_3 is the rank. For experimental purposes, different systems that share the same description in terms of these dimensionless numbers are equivalent.\nIn mathematical terms, if we have a physically meaningful equation such as\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 are any formula_6 physical variables, and there is a maximal dimensionally independent subset of size formula_3, then the above equation can be restated as\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 are dimensionless parameters constructed from the formula_10 by formula_11 dimensionless equations \u2014 the so-called \"Pi groups\" \u2014 of the form\nformula_12\nwhere the exponents formula_13 are rational numbers. (They can always be taken to be integers by redefining formula_1 as being raised to a power that clears all denominators.) If there are formula_15 fundamental units in play, then formula_16.\nSignificance.\nThe Buckingham \u03c0 theorem provides a method for computing sets of dimensionless parameters from given variables, even if the form of the equation remains unknown. However, the choice of dimensionless parameters is not unique; Buckingham's theorem only provides a way of generating sets of dimensionless parameters and does not indicate the most \"physically meaningful\".\nTwo systems for which these parameters coincide are called \"similar\" (as with similar triangles, they differ only in scale); they are equivalent for the purposes of the equation, and the experimentalist who wants to determine the form of the equation can choose the most convenient one. Most importantly, Buckingham's theorem describes the relation between the number of variables and fundamental dimensions.\nProof.\nFor simplicity, it will be assumed that the space of fundamental and derived physical units forms a vector space over the real numbers, with the fundamental units as basis vectors, and with multiplication of physical units as the \"vector addition\" operation, and raising to powers as the \"scalar multiplication\" operation:\nrepresent a dimensional variable as the set of exponents needed for the fundamental units (with a power of zero if the particular fundamental unit is not present). For instance, the standard gravity formula_17 has units of formula_18 (length over time squared), so it is represented as the vector formula_19 with respect to the basis of fundamental units (length, time). We could also require that exponents of the fundamental units be rational numbers and modify the proof accordingly, in which case the exponents in the pi groups can always be taken as rational numbers or even integers.\nRescaling units.\nSuppose we have quantities formula_20, where the units of formula_10 contain length raised to the power formula_22. If we originally measure length in meters but later switch to centimeters, then the numerical value of formula_10 would be rescaled by a factor of formula_24. Any physically meaningful law should be invariant under an arbitrary rescaling of every fundamental unit; this is the fact that the pi theorem hinges on. \nFormal proof.\nGiven a system of formula_6 dimensional variables formula_5 in formula_15 fundamental (basis) dimensions, the \"dimensional matrix\" is the formula_28 matrix formula_29 whose formula_15 rows correspond to the fundamental dimensions and whose formula_6 columns are the dimensions of the variables: the formula_32th entry (where formula_33 and formula_34) is the power of the formula_35th fundamental dimension in the formula_36th variable. \nThe matrix can be interpreted as taking in a combination of the variable quantities and giving out the dimensions of the combination in terms of the fundamental dimensions. So the formula_37 (column) vector that results from the multiplication\nformula_38\nconsists of the units of\nformula_39\nin terms of the formula_15 fundamental independent (basis) units.\nIf we rescale the formula_35th fundamental unit by a factor of formula_42, then formula_43 gets rescaled by formula_44, where formula_45 is the formula_32th entry of the dimensional matrix. In order to convert this into a linear algebra problem, we take logarithms (the base is irrelevant), yielding formula_47 which is an action of formula_48 on formula_49. We define a physical law to be an arbitrary function formula_50 such that formula_51 is a permissible set of values for the physical system when formula_52. We further require formula_53 to be invariant under this action. Hence it descends to a function formula_54. All that remains is to exhibit an isomorphism between formula_55 and formula_56, the (log) space of pi groups formula_57.\nWe construct an formula_58 matrix formula_59 whose columns are a basis for formula_60. It tells us how to embed formula_56 into formula_49 as the kernel of formula_29. That is, we have an exact sequence\nformula_64\nTaking tranposes yields another exact sequence\nformula_65\nThe first isomorphism theorem produces the desired isomorphism, which sends the coset formula_66 to formula_67. This corresponds to rewriting the tuple formula_68 into the pi groups formula_69 coming from the columns of formula_59.\nThe International System of Units defines seven base units, which are the ampere, kelvin, second, metre, kilogram, candela and mole. It is sometimes advantageous to introduce additional base units and techniques to refine the technique of dimensional analysis. (See orientational analysis and reference.)\nExamples.\nSpeed.\nThis example is elementary but serves to demonstrate the procedure.\nSuppose a car is driving at 100\u00a0km/h; how long does it take to go 200\u00a0km?\nThis question considers formula_71 dimensioned variables: distance formula_72 time formula_73 and speed formula_74 and we are seeking some law of the form formula_75 Any two of these variables are dimensionally independent, but the three taken together are not. Thus there is formula_76 dimensionless quantity.\nThe dimensional matrix is\nformula_77\nin which the rows correspond to the basis dimensions formula_78 and formula_79 and the columns to the considered dimensions formula_80 where the latter stands for the speed dimension. The elements of the matrix correspond to the powers to which the respective dimensions are to be raised. For instance, the third column formula_81 states that formula_82 represented by the column vector formula_83 is expressible in terms of the basis dimensions as formula_84 since formula_85\nFor a dimensionless constant formula_86 we are looking for vectors formula_87 such that the matrix-vector product formula_88 equals the zero vector formula_89 In linear algebra, the set of vectors with this property is known as the kernel (or nullspace) of the dimensional matrix. In this particular case its kernel is one-dimensional. The dimensional matrix as written above is in reduced row echelon form, so one can read off a non-zero kernel vector to within a multiplicative constant:\nformula_90\nIf the dimensional matrix were not already reduced, one could perform Gauss\u2013Jordan elimination on the dimensional matrix to more easily determine the kernel. It follows that the dimensionless constant, replacing the dimensions by the corresponding dimensioned variables, may be written:\nformula_91\nSince the kernel is only defined to within a multiplicative constant, the above dimensionless constant raised to any arbitrary power yields another (equivalent) dimensionless constant.\nDimensional analysis has thus provided a general equation relating the three physical variables:\nformula_92\nor, letting formula_93 denote a zero of function formula_94\nformula_95\nwhich can be written in the desired form (which recall was formula_96) as\nformula_97\nThe actual relationship between the three variables is simply formula_98 In other words, in this case formula_99 has one physically relevant root, and it is unity. The fact that only a single value of formula_93 will do and that it is equal to 1 is not revealed by the technique of dimensional analysis.\nThe simple pendulum.\nWe wish to determine the period formula_101 of small oscillations in a simple pendulum. It will be assumed that it is a function of the length formula_102 the mass formula_103 and the acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the Earth formula_104 which has dimensions of length divided by time squared. The model is of the form\nformula_105\nPeriod, mass, and length are dimensionally independent, but acceleration can be expressed in terms of time and length, which means the four variables taken together are not dimensionally independent. Thus we need only formula_108 dimensionless parameter, denoted by formula_109 and the model can be re-expressed as\nformula_110\nwhere formula_111 is given by\nformula_112\nfor some values of formula_113\nThe dimensions of the dimensional quantities are:\nformula_114\nThe dimensional matrix is:\nformula_115\nWe are looking for a kernel vector formula_122 such that the matrix product of formula_123 on formula_124 yields the zero vector formula_125 The dimensional matrix as written above is in reduced row echelon form, so one can read off a kernel vector within a multiplicative constant:\nformula_126\nWere it not already reduced, one could perform Gauss\u2013Jordan elimination on the dimensional matrix to more easily determine the kernel. It follows that the dimensionless constant may be written:\nformula_127\nIn fundamental terms:\nformula_128\nwhich is dimensionless. Since the kernel is only defined to within a multiplicative constant, if the above dimensionless constant is raised to any arbitrary power, it will yield another equivalent dimensionless constant.\nIn this example, three of the four dimensional quantities are fundamental units, so the last (which is formula_17) must be a combination of the previous. \nNote that if formula_130 (the coefficient of formula_29) had been non-zero then there would be no way to cancel the formula_29 value; therefore formula_130 must be zero. Dimensional analysis has allowed us to conclude that the period of the pendulum is not a function of its mass formula_134 (In the 3D space of powers of mass, time, and distance, we can say that the vector for mass is linearly independent from the vectors for the three other variables. Up to a scaling factor, formula_135 is the only nontrivial way to construct a vector of a dimensionless parameter.)\nThe model can now be expressed as:\nformula_136\nThen this implies that formula_137 for some zero formula_138 of the function formula_139 If there is only one zero, call it formula_140 then formula_141 It requires more physical insight or an experiment to show that there is indeed only one zero and that the constant is in fact given by formula_142\nFor large oscillations of a pendulum, the analysis is complicated by an additional dimensionless parameter, the maximum swing angle. The above analysis is a good approximation as the angle approaches zero.\nElectric power.\nTo demonstrate the application of the \u03c0 theorem, consider the power consumption of a stirrer with a given shape.\nThe power, \"P\", in dimensions [M \u00b7 L2/T3], is a function of the density, \"\u03c1\" [M/L3], and the viscosity of the fluid to be stirred, \"\u03bc\" [M/(L \u00b7 T)], as well as the size of the stirrer given by its diameter, \"D\" [L], and the angular speed of the stirrer, \"n\" [1/T]. Therefore, we have a total of \"n\" = 5 variables representing our example. Those \"n\" = 5 variables are built up from \"k\" = 3 independent dimensions, e.g., length: L (SI units: m), time: T (s), and mass: M (kg).\nAccording to the \u03c0-theorem, the \"n\" = 5 variables can be reduced by the \"k\" = 3 dimensions to form \"p\" = \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" = 5 \u2212 3 = 2 independent dimensionless numbers. Usually, these quantities are chosen as formula_143, commonly named the Reynolds number which describes the fluid flow regime, and formula_144, the power number, which is the dimensionless description of the stirrer.\nNote that the two dimensionless quantities are not unique and depend on which of the \"n\" = 5 variables are chosen as the \"k\" = 3 dimensionally independent basis variables, which, in this example, appear in both dimensionless quantities. The Reynolds number and power number fall from the above analysis if formula_145, \"n\", and \"D\" are chosen to be the basis variables. If, instead, formula_146, \"n\", and \"D\" are selected, the Reynolds number is recovered while the second dimensionless quantity becomes formula_147. We note that formula_148 is the product of the Reynolds number and the power number.\nOther examples.\nAn example of dimensional analysis can be found for the case of the mechanics of a thin, solid and parallel-sided rotating disc. There are five variables involved which reduce to two non-dimensional groups. The relationship between these can be determined by numerical experiment using, for example, the finite element method.\nThe theorem has also been used in fields other than physics, for instance in sports science.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\\right) = \nm_{11} \\\\\n\\vdots \\\\\nm_{\\ell 1} \\\\\n\\end{bmatrix}.&lt;/math&gt;\nFor a concrete example, suppose that the formula_149 fundamental units are meters formula_150 and seconds formula_151 and that there are formula_71 dimensional variables: formula_153 By definition of vector addition and scalar multiplication of units,\nformula_154\nso that \nformula_155 \nBy definition, the dimensionless variables are those whose units are formula_156 which are exactly the vectors in \nformula_157 \nThis can be verified by a direct computation: \nformula_158\nwhich is indeed dimensionless. \nConsequently, if some physical law states that formula_159 are necessarily related by a (presumably unknown) equation of the form formula_160 for some (unknown) function formula_53 with formula_162 (that is, the tuple formula_163 is necessarily a zero of formula_53), then there exists some (also unknown) function formula_165 that depends on only formula_166 variable, the dimensionless variable formula_167 (or any non-zero rational power formula_168 of formula_169 where formula_170), such that formula_171 holds (if formula_168 is used instead of formula_173 then formula_99 can be replaced with formula_175 and once again formula_176 holds). \nThus in terms of the original variables, formula_177 must hold (alternatively, if using formula_178 for instance, then formula_179 must hold). \nIn other words, the Buckingham \u03c0 theorem implies that formula_180 so that if it happens to be the case that this formula_99 has exactly one zero, call it formula_140 then the equation formula_183 will necessarily hold (the theorem does not give information about what the exact value of the constant formula_93 will be, nor does it guarantee that formula_99 has exactly one zero).\n&lt;/ref&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOriginal sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51401", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51401", "title": "Automatism", "text": "Automatism may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51402", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51402", "title": "Low Countries", "text": "Coastal lowland region in northwestern Europe\nThe Low Countries (; ), historically also known as the Netherlands (), is a historical and geographically coastal lowland region in Northwestern Europe forming the lower basin of the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta and consisting today of the three modern \"Benelux\" countries: Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands (, which is singular). Also sometimes included are parts of France (such as Nord and Pas-de-Calais) and the German regions of East Frisia, Guelders and Cleves. Since the creation of the Holy Roman Empire, the region has been divided into numerous different entities.\nHistorically, the regions without access to the sea linked themselves politically and economically to those with access to form various unions of ports and hinterland, stretching inland as far as parts of the German Rhineland. Not only physically-low-altitude areas but also some hilly or elevated regions are now therefore considered part of the Low Countries, including Luxembourg and southern Belgium. Within the European Union, the region's political grouping is still referred to as the Benelux (short for Belgium-Netherlands-Luxembourg).\nDuring the Roman Empire, the region contained a militarised frontier and contact point with the Germanic tribes. The Low Countries were the scene of the early independent trading centres that marked the reawakening of Europe in the 12th century. In that period, they rivalled northern Italy as one of the most densely populated regions of Western Europe. Guilds and councils governed most of the cities along with a figurehead ruler; interaction with their ruler was regulated by a strict set of rules describing what the latter could and could not expect. All of the regions depended mainly on trade, manufacturing and the encouragement of the free flow of goods and craftsmen. Dutch and French dialects were the main languages used in secular city life.\nTerminology.\nHistorically, the term \"Low Countries\" arose at the Court of the Dukes of Burgundy, who used the term ' (\"the lands over here\") for the Low Countries as opposed to ' (\"the lands over there\") for the Duchy of Burgundy and the Free County of Burgundy, which were part of their realm but geographically disconnected from the Low Countries. Governor Mary of Hungary used both the expressions ' and ' (\"lands down here\"), which evolved to \"\" or \"Low Countries\". Today the term is typically fitted to modern political boundaries and used in the same way as the term \"Benelux\".\nThe Netherlands is a country whose name has the same etymology and origin as the name for the region Low Countries since \"nether\" means \"low\". In the Dutch language, is the modern term for Low Countries, \"De Nederlanden\" (plural) is in use for the 16th-century domains of Charles V, the historic Low Countries, and \"Nederland\" (singular) is the normal Dutch name for the country of the Netherlands. However, in official use, the name of the kingdom is still the Kingdom of the Netherlands (plural). The name derives from the 19th-century origins of the kingdom, which originally included present-day Belgium.\nIn Dutch and to a lesser extent English, the Low Countries colloquially means the Netherlands and Belgium or sometimes the Netherlands and Flanders, the Flemish-speaking north of Belgium. For example, a \"\" (\"Derby der Lage Landen\") is a sports event between Belgium and the Netherlands.\nBelgium separated in 1830 from the (northern) Netherlands. The new country took its name from \"Belgica\", the Latinised name for the Low Countries, as it was known during the Eighty Years' War (1568\u20131648). The Low Countries were in that war divided in two parts. On one hand, the northern Federated Netherlands, or \"Belgica Foederata\", rebelled against King Philip\u00a0II of Spain; on the other hand, the southern Royal Netherlands, or \"Belgica Regia\", remained loyal to the Spanish king. The division laid the early foundation for today's states of Belgium and the Netherlands.\nHistory.\nThe region politically had its origins in the Carolingian Empire; more precisely, most of the people were within the Duchy of Lower Lotharingia. After the disintegration of Lower Lotharingia, the Low Countries were brought under the rule of various lordships until they came to be in the hands of the Valois Dukes of Burgundy. Hence, a large part of the Low Countries came to be referred to as the Burgundian Netherlands. After the reign of the Valois Dukes ended, much of the region was controlled by the House of Habsburg. The area was referred to as the Habsburg Netherlands, which was also called the Seventeen Provinces up to 1581. Even after the political secession of the autonomous Dutch Republic (or \"United Provinces\") in the north, the term \"Low Countries\" continued to be used to refer collectively to the region. The region was temporarily united politically between 1815 and 1839, as the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, which later became three countries: the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg.\nEarly history.\nThe Low Countries were part of the Roman provinces of Gallia Belgica and Germania Inferior. They were inhabited by Belgic and Germanic tribes. In the 4th and 5th century, Frankish tribes had entered this Roman region and came to run it increasingly independently. They came to be ruled by the Merovingian dynasty, under which dynasty the southern part (below the Rhine) was re-Christianised.\nFrankish Empire.\nBy the late 8th century, the Low Countries formed a core part of a much-expanded Francia, and the Merovingians were replaced by the Carolingian dynasty. In 800, the Pope crowned and appointed Charlemagne Emperor of the re-established Roman Empire.\nAfter the death of Emperor Louis the Pious, Francia was divided in three parts among his three sons. The middle part, Middle Francia, was ruled by Lothair I and thereby also came to be referred to as \"Lotharingia\" or \"Lorraine\". Apart from the original coastal County of Flanders, which was within West Francia, the rest of the Low Countries were within itas lowland part, \"Lower Lorraine\".\nAfter the death of Lothair, the Low Countries were coveted by the rulers of both West Francia and East Francia. Each tried to swallow the region and to merge it with their spheres of influence. Thus, the Low Countries consisted of fiefs, whose sovereignty resided with either the Kingdom of France or the Holy Roman Empire. While the further history the Low Countries can be seen as the object of a continual struggle between both powers, the title of Duke of Lothier was coveted in the Low Countries for centuries.\nDuchy of Burgundy.\nIn the 14th and the 15th centuries, separate fiefs came gradually to be ruled by a single family through royal intermarriage. The process culminated in the rule of the House of Valois, who were the rulers of the Duchy of Burgundy. At the height of Burgundian influence, the Low Countries became the political, cultural and economic centre of Northern Europe and was noted for its crafts and luxury goods, notably Early Netherlandish painting, the work of artists who were active in the flourishing cities of Bruges, Ghent, Mechelen, Leuven, Tournai and Brussels, all of which are in present-day Belgium. Musicians of the Franco-Flemish School were highly sought by the leading classes of all of Europe. \nSeventeen Provinces.\nIn 1477, the Burgundian holdings in the area passed through an heiress, Mary of Burgundy, to the Habsburgs. Charles V, who inherited the territory in 1506, was named ruler by the States General and styled himself as \"Heer der Nederlanden\" (lit.\u2009'Lord of the Netherlands'). He continued to rule the territories as a multitude of duchies and principalities until the Low Countries were eventually united into one indivisible territory, the Seventeen Provinces, covered by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 and retaining existing customs, laws and forms of government within the provinces.\nThe Pragmatic Sanction transformed the agglomeration of lands into a unified entity of which the Habsburgs would be the heirs. By streamlining the succession law in all Seventeen Provinces and declaring that all of them would be inherited by one heir, Charles effectively united the Netherlands as one entity. After Charles' abdication in 1555, the Seventeen Provinces passed to his son, Philip II of Spain.\nDivision.\nThe Pragmatic Sanction is said to be one example of the Habsburg contest with particularism, which contributed to the Dutch Revolt. Each of the provinces had its own laws, customs and political practices. The new policy, imposed from the outside, angered many inhabitants, who viewed their provinces as distinct entities. It and other monarchical acts, such as the creation of bishoprics and promulgation of laws against heresy, stoked resentments, which fired the eruption of the Dutch Revolt.\nAfter the northern Seven United Provinces declared their independence from Habsburg Spain in 1581, the ten provinces of the Southern Netherlands remained occupied by the Army of Flanders under Spanish service and so became sometimes called the Spanish Netherlands. In 1713, under the Treaty of Utrecht after the War of the Spanish Succession, what was left of the Spanish Netherlands was ceded to Austria and thus became known as the Austrian Netherlands.\nSome states like the Bouillon, Cambr\u00e9sis, East Frisia, Li\u00e8ge and Stavelot-Malmedy did not become part of the wider policies and remained at least nominally independent. Li\u00e8ge was excluded from the Burgundian Circle, was instead incorporated into the Lower Rhenish\u2013Westphalian Circle and later become regularly part of a personal union with bishoprics like the Electorate of Cologne under the Wittelsbach dynasty.\nModern period.\nThe United Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815\u20131830) temporarily united the Low Countries again before it was divided into the three modern countries of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg.\nDuring the early months of World War I in 1914, the Central Powers invaded the Low Countries of Luxembourg and Belgium in what has been come to be known as the German invasion of Belgium, which led to the German occupation of the two countries. However, the German advance into France was quickly halted, causing a military stalemate for most of the war. In the end, a total of approximately 56,000 people were killed in the invasion.\nDuring World War II, when Adolf Hitler's gaze turned his strategy west toward France, the Low Countries were an easy route around the imposing French Maginot Line. He ordered a conquest of the Low Countries with the shortest possible notice to forestall the French and prevent Allied air power from threatening the strategic Ruhr Area of Germany. It would also provide the basis for a long-term air and sea campaign against Britain. As much as possible of the border areas in northern France should be occupied. Germany's Blitzkrieg tactics rapidly overpowered the defences of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.\nAll three countries were occupied from May 1940 to early 1945. During the occupation, their governments were forced into exile in Britain. In 1944, they signed the London Customs Convention, laying the foundation for the eventual Benelux Economic Union, an important forerunner of the EEC (later the EU).\nLiterature.\nOne of the Low Countries' earliest literary figures was the blind poet Bernlef, from c.\u2009800, who sang both Christian psalms and pagan verses. Bernlef is representative of the coexistence of Christianity and Germanic polytheism in the time period.\nThe earliest examples of written literature include the Wachtendonck Psalms, a collection of 25 psalms that originated in the Moselle-Frankish region around the mid- 9th century.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51404", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51404", "title": "Low countries", "text": ""}
{"id": "51408", "revid": "51014777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51408", "title": "Half Dome", "text": "Granitic dome in Yosemite National Park, California\nHalf Dome is a quartz monzonite batholith at the eastern end of Yosemite Valley in Yosemite National Park, California. It is a well-known rock formation in the park, named for its distinct shape. One side is a sheer face while the other three sides are smooth and round, making it appear like a dome cut in half. It stands at over 8,800 feet above sea level and is composed of quartz monzonite, an igneous rock that solidified several thousand feet within the Earth. At its core are the remains of a magma chamber that cooled slowly and crystallized beneath the Earth's surface. The solidified magma chamber was then exposed and cut in half by erosion, therefore leading to the geographic name Half Dome.\nGeology.\nThe impression from the valley floor that this is a round dome that has lost its northwest half, is just an illusion. From Washburn Point, Half Dome can be seen as a thin ridge of rock, an ar\u00eate, that is oriented northeast\u2013southwest, with its southeast side almost as steep as its northwest side except for the very top. Although the trend of this ridge, as well as that of Tenaya Canyon, is probably controlled by master joints, 80 percent of the northwest \"half\" of the original dome may well still be there.\nAscents.\nAs late as the 1870s, Half Dome was described as \"perfectly inaccessible\" by Josiah Whitney of the California Geological Survey. The summit was reached by George Anderson in October 1875, via a route constructed by drilling and placing iron eye bolts into the smooth rock. Anderson had previously tried a variety of methods, including using pitch from nearby pine trees for extra friction.\nAnderson subsequently went on to add ropes to his eye bolts, so that other people could climb. Among those who took advantage was the first woman to climb Half Dome in 1876, S. L. Dutcher, of San Francisco. In 1877 James Mason Hutchings along with Anderson led a climb which included Hutchings' daughter Cosie, his son Willie, his mother-in-law Florence Sproat, aged 65, and two other women.\nToday, Half Dome may be ascended in several different ways. Thousands of hikers reach the top each year by following an trail from the valley floor. After a rigorous approach, including several hundred feet of rock stairs, the final pitch up the peak's steep but somewhat rounded east face is ascended with the aid of a pair of post-mounted steel cables originally constructed close to the Anderson route in 1919.\nAlternatively, over a dozen rock climbing routes lead from the valley up Half Dome's vertical northwest face. The first technical ascent was in 1957 via a route pioneered by Royal Robbins, Mike Sherrick, and Jerry Gallwas, today known as the Regular Northwest Face. Their five-day epic was the first Grade VI climb in the United States. Their route has now been free climbed several times in a few hours' time. Other technical routes ascend the south face and the west shoulder.\nHiking the Cable Route.\nThe Half Dome Cable Route hike runs from the valley floor to the top of the dome in (via the Mist Trail), with of elevation gain. The length and difficulty of the trail used to keep it less crowded than other park trails, but trail traffic grew to as many as 1,000 people a day, and about 50,000 per year, before a permit system was introduced in 2010. The hike can be done from the valley floor in a single long day, but many people break it up by camping overnight in Little Yosemite Valley. The trail climbs past Vernal Fall and Nevada Fall, then continues into Little Yosemite Valley, then north to the base of the northeast ridge of Half Dome itself.\nThe final ascent is steeply up the rock between two steel cables used as handholds. The cables are fixed with bolts in the rock and raised onto a series of metal poles in late May. The poles do not anchor the cables. The cables are taken down from the poles for the winter in early October, but they are still fixed to the rock surface and can be used. The National Park Service recommends against climbing the route when the cables are down, or when the surface of the rock is wet and slippery. The \"Cable Route\" is rated class 3, while the same face away from the cables is rated class 5.\nThe Cable Route can be crowded. Since 2010, all hikers who intend to ascend the Cable Route must first obtain permits when the cables are up between May and October. Permits are limited to 300 per day, and as of 2022[ [update]], more than 70,000 applications were received in the pre-season and daily permit lotteries. Permits are checked by a ranger on the trail. Hikers without permits are not allowed to hike beyond the base of the sub-dome or to the bottom of the cables. Hikers caught bypassing the rangers to visit either the sub-dome or main dome without a permit face fines of up to $5,000, and/or 6 months in jail.\nBackpackers with an appropriate wilderness permit can receive a Half Dome permit when they pick up their wilderness permit with no additional reservation required. Rock climbers who reach the top of Half Dome without entering the subdome area can descend on the Half Dome Trail without a permit.\nThe top of Half Dome is a large, flat area where climbers can relax and enjoy their accomplishment. The summit offers views of the surrounding areas, including Little Yosemite Valley and the Valley Floor. A notable location to one side of Half Dome is the \"Diving Board\", where Ansel Adams took his photograph \"Monolith, the Face of Half Dome\" on April 10, 1927. Often confused with \"the Visor,\" a small overhanging ledge at the summit, the Diving Board is on the shoulder of Half Dome.\nThe Cable Route was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2012.\nIncidents and risks.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there have been 10 confirmed deaths on the cable section since they were erected in 1919. \nOn July 13, 2024, during a sudden rainstorm, a female was descending, when she lost her footing and slid just beyond her father's reach and tumbled 200 feet to her death.&lt;ref name=\"outsideonline/half-dome-cables\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In August 2024, there were calls to double the number of wooden rungs on the climb, to increase safety. Most accidents occur when the rock is wet, and climbers are advised to check the weather before attempting the summit.\nCloud-to-ground lightning strikes can be a risk while on or near the summit. On July 27, 1985, five hikers were struck by lightning, resulting in two fatalities.\nIn culture.\nHalf Dome was originally called \"Tis-sa-ack\", meaning Cleft Rock in the language of the local Ahwahnechee people. Tis-sa-ack is also the name of the fourth route on the formation, ascended by Royal Robbins and Don Peterson over eight days in October 1969. Tis-sa-ack is the name of a mother from a native legend. The face seen in Half Dome is supposed to be hers. Tis-sa-ack is the name of a Mono Lake Paiute girl in the Yosemite Native American legend. John Muir interchangeably used \"Tissiack,\" \"South Dome,\" and \"Half Dome\" in his writings.\nOthers say Ahwahneechee Native Americans named Half Dome \"Face of a Young Woman Stained with Tears\" (\"Tis-se'-yak\") because of the colonies of brown-black lichens that form dark vertical drip-like stripes along drainage tracks in the rock faces.\nJack London's 1900 short story \"Dutch Courage\" tells of a fictional climb of Half Dome.\n\"Monolith, the Face of Half Dome\" is a black and white photograph taken by Ansel Adams in 1927 that depicts the western face of Half Dome as seen from the \"Diving Board\". It was used by the Sierra Club as a visual aid for the environmental movement, and was a part of the portfolio \"Parmelian Prints of the High Sierras\". The ashes of Ansel Adams were later scattered on Half Dome after he died.\nHalf Dome was used as the logo for a software company, Sierra On-Line.\nIn 1971, outdoor recreation and climbing equipment company The North Face created their company logo, based upon a stylized depiction of the Half Dome formation. It is still their logo 50 years later.\nIn 1988, the video for the single \"Just Like Paradise\" was released, featuring clips of singer David Lee Roth rock climbing at Half Dome shot by Emmy Award-winning mountain climbing photographer David Breashears. \nAlso in 1988, Half Dome was featured on a 25 cent United States postage stamp. An image of Half Dome, along with John Muir and the California condor, appears on the California State Quarter, released in January 2005.\nFrom 2010 until the introduction of REAL ID, California driver's licenses featured an illustration of Half Dome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51410", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51410", "title": "Abstract Syntax Notation One", "text": ""}
{"id": "51414", "revid": "50791305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51414", "title": "Fundamental theorem of algebra", "text": "Every polynomial has a real or complex root\nThe fundamental theorem of algebra, also called d'Alembert's theorem or the d'Alembert\u2013Gauss theorem, states that every non-constant single-variable polynomial with complex coefficients has at least one complex root. This includes polynomials with real coefficients, since every real number is a complex number with its imaginary part equal to zero.\nEquivalently (by definition), the theorem states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed.\nThe theorem is also stated as follows: every non-zero, single-variable, degree \"n\" polynomial with complex coefficients has, counted with multiplicity, exactly \"n\" complex roots. The equivalence of the two statements can be proven through the use of successive polynomial division.\nDespite its name, it is not fundamental for modern algebra; it was named when algebra was synonymous with the theory of equations Additionally, the theorem can not be proven in Algebra, requiring higher level mathematics to prove the theorem.\nHistory.\nPeter Roth, in his book \"Arithmetica Philosophica\" (published in 1608, at N\u00fcrnberg, by Johann Lantzenberger), wrote that a polynomial equation of degree \"n\" (with real coefficients) \"may\" have \"n\" solutions. Albert Girard, in his book \"L'invention nouvelle en l'Alg\u00e8bre\" (published in 1629), asserted that a polynomial equation of degree \"n\" has \"n\" solutions, but he did not state that they had to be real numbers. Furthermore, he added that his assertion holds \"unless the equation is incomplete\", where \"incomplete\" means that at least one coefficient is equal to 0. However, when he explains in detail what he means, it is clear that he actually believes that his assertion is always true; for instance, he shows that the equation formula_1 although incomplete, has four solutions (counting multiplicities): 1 (twice), formula_2 and formula_3\nAs will be mentioned again below, it follows from the fundamental theorem of algebra that every non-constant polynomial with real coefficients can be written as a product of polynomials with real coefficients whose degrees are either 1 or 2. However, in 1702 Leibniz erroneously said that no polynomial of the type \"x\"4 + \"a\"4 (with \"a\" real and distinct from 0) can be written in such a way. Later, Nikolaus Bernoulli made the same assertion concerning the polynomial \"x\"4 \u2212 4\"x\"3 + 2\"x\"2 + 4\"x\" + 4, but he got a letter from Euler in 1742 in which it was shown that this polynomial is equal to\nformula_4\nwith formula_5\nEuler also pointed out that\nformula_6\nA first attempt at proving the theorem was made by d'Alembert in 1746, but his proof was incomplete. Among other problems, it assumed implicitly a theorem (now known as Puiseux's theorem), which would not be proved until more than a century later and using the fundamental theorem of algebra. Other attempts were made by Euler (1749), de Foncenex (1759), Lagrange (1772), and Laplace (1795). These last four attempts assumed implicitly Girard's assertion; to be more precise, the existence of solutions was assumed and all that remained to be proved was that their form was \"a\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"bi\" for some real numbers \"a\" and \"b\". In modern terms, Euler, de Foncenex, Lagrange, and Laplace were assuming the existence of a splitting field of the polynomial \"p\"(\"z\").\nAt the end of the 18th century, two new proofs were published which did not assume the existence of roots, but neither of which was complete. One of them, due to James Wood and mainly algebraic, was published in 1798 and it was totally ignored. Wood's proof had an algebraic gap. The other one was published by Gauss in 1799 and it was mainly geometric, but it had a topological gap, only filled by Alexander Ostrowski in 1920, as discussed in Smale (1981).\nThe first rigorous proof was published by Argand, an amateur mathematician, in 1806 (and revisited in 1813); it was also here that, for the first time, the fundamental theorem of algebra was stated for polynomials with complex coefficients, rather than just real coefficients. Gauss produced two other proofs in 1816 and another incomplete version of his original proof in 1849.\nThe first textbook containing a proof of the theorem was Cauchy's \"Cours d'analyse de l'\u00c9cole Royale Polytechnique\" (1821). It contained Argand's proof, although Argand is not credited for it.\nNone of the proofs mentioned so far is constructive. It was Weierstrass who raised for the first time, in the middle of the 19th century, the problem of finding a constructive proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. He presented his solution, which amounts in modern terms to a combination of the Durand\u2013Kerner method with the homotopy continuation principle, in 1891. Another proof of this kind was obtained by Hellmuth Kneser in 1940 and simplified by his son Martin Kneser in 1981.\nWithout using countable choice, it is not possible to constructively prove the fundamental theorem of algebra for complex numbers based on the Dedekind real numbers (which are not constructively equivalent to the Cauchy real numbers without countable choice). However, Fred Richman proved a reformulated version of the theorem that does work.\nEquivalent statements.\nThere are several equivalent formulations of the theorem:\nThe next two statements are equivalent to the previous ones, although they do not involve any nonreal complex number. These statements can be proved from previous factorizations by remarking that, if r is a non-real root of a polynomial with real coefficients, its complex conjugate formula_13 is also a root, and formula_14 is a polynomial of degree two with real coefficients (this is the complex conjugate root theorem). Conversely, if one has a factor of degree two, the quadratic formula gives a root.\nProofs.\nAll proofs below involve some mathematical analysis, or at least the topological concept of continuity of real or complex functions. Some also use differentiable or even analytic functions. This requirement has led to the remark that the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is neither fundamental, nor a theorem of algebra.\nSome proofs of the theorem only prove that any non-constant polynomial with \"real\" coefficients has some complex root. This lemma is enough to establish the general case because, given a non-constant polynomial \"p\" with complex coefficients, the polynomial\nformula_17\nhas only real coefficients, and, if \"z\" is a root of \"q\", then either \"z\" or its conjugate is a root of \"p\". Here, formula_18 is the polynomial obtained by replacing each coefficient of p with its complex conjugate; the roots of formula_18 are exactly the complex conjugates of the roots of p.\nMany non-algebraic proofs of the theorem use the fact (sometimes called the \"growth lemma\") that a polynomial function \"p\"(\"z\") of degree \"n\" whose dominant coefficient is 1 behaves like \"zn\" when |\"z\"| is large enough. More precisely, there is some positive real number \"R\" such that\nformula_20\nwhen |\"z\"|\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"R\".\nReal-analytic proofs.\nEven without using complex numbers, it is possible to show that a real-valued polynomial \"p\"(\"x\"): \"p\"(0) \u2260 0 of degree \"n\" &gt; 2 can always be divided by some quadratic polynomial with real coefficients. In other words, for some real-valued \"a\" and \"b\", the coefficients of the linear remainder on dividing \"p\"(\"x\") by \"x\"2 \u2212 \"ax\" \u2212 \"b\" simultaneously become zero.\n formula_21\nwhere \"q\"(\"x\") is a polynomial of degree \"n\" \u2212 2. The coefficients \"R\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") and \"S\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") are independent of \"x\" and completely defined by the coefficients of \"p\"(\"x\"). In terms of representation, \"R\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") and \"S\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") are bivariate polynomials in \"a\" and \"b\". In the flavor of Gauss's first (incomplete) proof of this theorem from 1799, the key is to show that for any sufficiently large negative value of \"b\", all the roots of both \"R\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") and \"S\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") in the variable \"a\" are real-valued and alternating each other (interlacing property). Utilizing a Sturm-like chain that contain \"R\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") and \"S\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") as consecutive terms, interlacing in the variable \"a\" can be shown for all consecutive pairs in the chain whenever \"b\" has sufficiently large negative value. As \"S\"\"p\"(\"a\", \"b\" = 0) = \"p\"(0) has no roots, interlacing of \"R\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") and \"S\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") in the variable \"a\" fails at \"b\" = 0. Topological arguments can be applied on the interlacing property to show that the locus of the roots of \"R\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") and \"S\"\"p\"(\"x\")(\"a\", \"b\") must intersect for some real-valued \"a\" and \"b\" &lt; 0.\nComplex-analytic proofs.\nFind a closed disk \"D\" of radius \"r\" centered at the origin such that |\"p\"(\"z\")|\u00a0&gt;\u00a0|\"p\"(0)| whenever |\"z\"|\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"r\". The minimum of |\"p\"(\"z\")| on \"D\", which must exist since \"D\" is compact, is therefore achieved at some point \"z\"0 in the interior of \"D\", but not at any point of its boundary. The maximum modulus principle applied to 1/\"p\"(\"z\") implies that \"p\"(\"z\"0)\u00a0=\u00a00. In other words, \"z\"0 is a zero of \"p\"(\"z\").\nA variation of this proof does not require the maximum modulus principle (in fact, a similar argument also gives a proof of the maximum modulus principle for holomorphic functions). Continuing from before the principle was invoked, if \"a\" := \"p\"(\"z\"0) \u2260 0, then, expanding \"p\"(\"z\") in powers of \"z\" \u2212 \"z\"0, we can write\nformula_22\nHere, the \"cj\" are simply the coefficients of the polynomial \"z\" \u2192 \"p\"(\"z\" + \"z\"0) after expansion, and \"k\" is the index of the first non-zero coefficient following the constant term. For \"z\" sufficiently close to \"z\"0 this function has behavior asymptotically similar to the simpler polynomial formula_23. More precisely, the function\nformula_24\nfor some positive constant \"M\" in some neighborhood of \"z\"0. Therefore, if we define formula_25 and let formula_26 tracing a circle of radius \"r\" &gt; 0 around \"z\", then for any sufficiently small \"r\" (so that the bound \"M\" holds), we see that\nformula_27\nWhen \"r\" is sufficiently close to 0 this upper bound for |\"p\"(\"z\")| is strictly smaller than |\"a\"|, contradicting the definition of \"z\"0. Geometrically, we have found an explicit direction \u03b80 such that if one approaches \"z\"0 from that direction one can obtain values \"p\"(\"z\") smaller in absolute value than |\"p\"(\"z\"0)|.\nAnother analytic proof can be obtained along this line of thought observing that, since |\"p\"(\"z\")|\u00a0&gt;\u00a0|\"p\"(0)| outside \"D\", the minimum of |\"p\"(\"z\")| on the whole complex plane is achieved at \"z\"0. If |\"p\"(\"z\"0)|\u00a0&gt;\u00a00, then 1/\"p\" is a bounded holomorphic function in the entire complex plane since, for each complex number \"z\", |1/\"p\"(\"z\")|\u00a0\u2264\u00a0|1/\"p\"(\"z\"0)|. Applying Liouville's theorem, which states that a bounded entire function must be constant, this would imply that 1/\"p\" is constant and therefore that \"p\" is constant. This gives a contradiction, and hence \"p\"(\"z\"0)\u00a0=\u00a00.\nYet another analytic proof uses the argument principle. Let \"R\" be a positive real number large enough so that every root of \"p\"(\"z\") has absolute value smaller than \"R\"; such a number must exist because every non-constant polynomial function of degree \"n\" has at most \"n\" zeros. For each \"r\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"R\", consider the number\nformula_28\nwhere \"c\"(\"r\") is the circle centered at 0 with radius \"r\" oriented counterclockwise; then the argument principle says that this number is the number \"N\" of zeros of \"p\"(\"z\") in the open ball centered at 0 with radius \"r\", which, since \"r\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"R\", is the total number of zeros of \"p\"(\"z\"). On the other hand, the integral of \"n\"/\"z\" along \"c\"(\"r\") divided by 2\u03c0\"i\" is equal to \"n\". But the difference between the two numbers is\nformula_29\nThe numerator of the rational expression being integrated has degree at most \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 and the degree of the denominator is \"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01. Therefore, the number above tends to 0 as \"r\" \u2192 +\u221e. But the number is also equal to \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"n\" and so \"N\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"n\".\nAnother complex-analytic proof can be given by combining linear algebra with the Cauchy theorem. To establish that every complex polynomial of degree \"n\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00 has a zero, it suffices to show that every complex square matrix of size \"n\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00 has a (complex) eigenvalue. The proof of the latter statement is by contradiction.\nLet \"A\" be a complex square matrix of size \"n\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00 and let \"In\" be the unit matrix of the same size. Assume \"A\" has no eigenvalues. Consider the resolvent function\nformula_30\nwhich is a meromorphic function on the complex plane with values in the vector space of matrices. The eigenvalues of \"A\" are precisely the poles of \"R\"(\"z\"). Since, by assumption, \"A\" has no eigenvalues, the function \"R\"(\"z\") is an entire function and Cauchy theorem implies that\nformula_31\nOn the other hand, \"R\"(\"z\") expanded as a geometric series gives:\nformula_32\nThis formula is valid outside the closed disc of radius formula_33 (the operator norm of \"A\"). Let formula_34 Then\nformula_35\n(in which only the summand \"k\"\u00a0=\u00a00 has a nonzero integral). This is a contradiction, and so \"A\" has an eigenvalue.\nFinally, Rouch\u00e9's theorem gives perhaps the shortest proof of the theorem.\nTopological proofs.\nSuppose the minimum of |\"p\"(\"z\")| on the whole complex plane is achieved at \"z\"0; it was seen at the proof which uses Liouville's theorem that such a number must exist. We can write \"p\"(\"z\") as a polynomial in \"z\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"z\"0: there is some natural number \"k\" and there are some complex numbers \"ck\", \"c\"\"k\"\u00a0+\u00a01, ..., \"cn\" such that \"ck\"\u00a0\u2260\u00a00 and:\nformula_36\nIf \"p\"(\"z\"0) is nonzero, it follows that if \"a\" is a \"k\"th root of \u2212\"p\"(\"z\"0)/\"ck\" and if \"t\" is positive and sufficiently small, then |\"p\"(\"z\"0\u00a0+\u00a0\"ta\")|\u00a0&lt;\u00a0|\"p\"(\"z\"0)|, which is impossible, since |\"p\"(\"z\"0)| is the minimum of |\"p\"| on \"D\".\nFor another topological proof by contradiction, suppose that the polynomial \"p\"(\"z\") has no roots, and consequently is never equal to 0. Think of the polynomial as a map from the complex plane into the complex plane. It maps any circle |\"z\"|\u00a0=\u00a0\"R\" into a closed loop, a curve \"P\"(\"R\"). We will consider what happens to the winding number of \"P\"(\"R\") at the extremes when \"R\" is very large and when \"R\" = 0. When \"R\" is a sufficiently large number, then the leading term \"zn\" of \"p\"(\"z\") dominates all other terms combined; in other words,\nformula_37\nWhen \"z\" traverses the circle formula_38 once counter-clockwise formula_39 then formula_40 winds \"n\" times counter-clockwise formula_41 around the origin (0,0), and \"P\"(\"R\") likewise. At the other extreme, with |\"z\"|\u00a0=\u00a00, the curve \"P\"(0) is merely the single point \"p\"(0), which must be nonzero because \"p\"(\"z\") is never zero. Thus \"p\"(0) must be distinct from the origin (0,0), which denotes 0 in the complex plane. The winding number of \"P\"(0) around the origin (0,0) is thus 0. Now changing \"R\" continuously will deform the loop continuously. At some \"R\" the winding number must change. But that can only happen if the curve \"P\"(\"R\") includes the origin (0,0) for some \"R\". But then for some \"z\" on that circle |\"z\"|\u00a0=\u00a0\"R\" we have \"p\"(\"z\") = 0, contradicting our original assumption. Therefore, \"p\"(\"z\") has at least one zero.\nAlgebraic proofs.\nThese proofs of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra must make use of the following two facts about real numbers that are not algebraic but require only a small amount of analysis (more precisely, the intermediate value theorem in both cases):\nThe second fact, together with the quadratic formula, implies the theorem for real quadratic polynomials. In other words, algebraic proofs of the fundamental theorem actually show that if \"R\" is any real-closed field, then its extension \"C\" = \"R\"(\u221a\u22121) is algebraically closed.\nBy induction.\nAs mentioned above, it suffices to check the statement \"every non-constant polynomial \"p\"(\"z\") with real coefficients has a complex root\". This statement can be proved by induction on the greatest non-negative integer \"k\" such that 2\"k\" divides the degree \"n\" of \"p\"(\"z\"). Let \"a\" be the coefficient of \"zn\" in \"p\"(\"z\") and let \"F\" be a splitting field of \"p\"(\"z\") over \"C\"; in other words, the field \"F\" contains \"C\" and there are elements \"z\"1, \"z\"2, ..., \"zn\" in \"F\" such that\nformula_42\nIf \"k\"\u00a0=\u00a00, then \"n\" is odd, and therefore \"p\"(\"z\") has a real root. Now, suppose that \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a02\"km\" (with \"m\" odd and \"k\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00) and that the theorem is already proved when the degree of the polynomial has the form 2\"k\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\"m\"\u2032 with \"m\"\u2032 odd. For a real number \"t\", define:\nformula_43\nThen the coefficients of \"qt\"(\"z\") are symmetric polynomials in the \"zi\" with real coefficients. Therefore, they can be expressed as polynomials with real coefficients in the elementary symmetric polynomials, that is, in \u2212\"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., (\u22121)\"nan\". So \"qt\"(\"z\") has in fact \"real\" coefficients. Furthermore, the degree of \"qt\"(\"z\") is \"n\"(\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)/2\u00a0=\u00a02\"k\"\u22121\"m\"(\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01), and \"m\"(\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01) is an odd number. So, using the induction hypothesis, \"qt\" has at least one complex root; in other words, \"zi\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"zj\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"tzizj\" is complex for two distinct elements \"i\" and \"j\" from {1, ..., \"n\"}. Since there are more real numbers than pairs (\"i\", \"j\"), one can find distinct real numbers \"t\" and \"s\" such that \"zi\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"zj\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"tzizj\" and \"zi\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"zj\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"szizj\" are complex (for the same \"i\" and \"j\"). So, both \"zi\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"zj\" and \"zizj\" are complex numbers. It is easy to check that every complex number has a complex square root, thus every complex polynomial of degree 2 has a complex root by the quadratic formula. It follows that \"zi\" and \"zj\" are complex numbers, since they are roots of the quadratic polynomial \"z\"2\u00a0\u2212\u00a0 (\"zi\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"zj\")\"z\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"zizj\".\nJoseph Shipman showed in 2007 that the assumption that odd degree polynomials have roots is stronger than necessary; any field in which polynomials of prime degree have roots is algebraically closed (so \"odd\" can be replaced by \"odd prime\" and this holds for fields of all characteristics). For axiomatization of algebraically closed fields, this is the best possible, as there are counterexamples if a single prime is excluded. However, these counterexamples rely on \u22121 having a square root. If we take a field where \u22121 has no square root, and every polynomial of degree \"n\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"I\" has a root, where \"I\" is any fixed infinite set of odd numbers, then every polynomial \"f\"(\"x\") of odd degree has a root (since (\"x\"2 + 1)\"k\"\"f\"(\"x\") has a root, where \"k\" is chosen so that deg(\"f\") + 2\"k\" \u2208 \"I\").\nFrom Galois theory.\nAnother algebraic proof of the fundamental theorem can be given using Galois theory. It suffices to show that C has no proper finite field extension. Let \"K\"/C be a finite extension. Since the normal closure of \"K\" over R still has a finite degree over C (or R), we may assume without loss of generality that \"K\" is a normal extension of R (hence it is a Galois extension, as every algebraic extension of a field of characteristic 0 is separable). Let \"G\" be the Galois group of this extension, and let \"H\" be a Sylow 2-subgroup of \"G\", so that the order of \"H\" is a power of 2, and the index of \"H\" in \"G\" is odd. By the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, there exists a subextension \"L\" of \"K\"/R such that Gal(\"K\"/\"L\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"H\". As [\"L\":R]\u00a0=\u00a0[\"G\":\"H\"] is odd, and there are no nonlinear irreducible real polynomials of odd degree, we must have \"L\"\u00a0= R, thus [\"K\":R] and [\"K\":C] are powers of 2. Assuming by way of contradiction that [\"K\":C]\u00a0&gt;\u00a01, we conclude that the 2-group Gal(\"K\"/C) contains a subgroup of index 2, so there exists a subextension \"M\" of C of degree\u00a02. However, C has no extension of degree\u00a02, because every quadratic complex polynomial has a complex root, as mentioned above. This shows that [\"K\":C] = 1, and therefore \"K\" = C, which completes the proof.\nGeometric proofs.\nThere exists still another way to approach the fundamental theorem of algebra, due to J. M. Almira and A. Romero: by Riemannian geometric arguments. The main idea here is to prove that the existence of a non-constant polynomial \"p\"(\"z\") without zeros implies the existence of a flat Riemannian metric over the sphere S2. This leads to a contradiction since the sphere is not flat.\nA Riemannian surface (\"M\", \"g\") is said to be flat if its Gaussian curvature, which we denote by \"Kg\", is identically null. Now, the Gauss\u2013Bonnet theorem, when applied to the sphere S2, claims that\nformula_44\nwhich proves that the sphere is not flat.\nLet us now assume that \"n\" &gt; 0 and\nformula_45\nfor each complex number \"z\". Let us define\nformula_46\nObviously, \"p*\"(\"z\")\u00a0\u2260 0 for all \"z\" in C. Consider the polynomial \"f\"(\"z\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"p\"(\"z\")\"p*\"(\"z\"). Then \"f\"(\"z\")\u00a0\u2260 0 for each \"z\" in C. Furthermore,\nformula_47\nWe can use this functional equation to prove that \"g\", given by\nformula_48\nfor \"w\" in C, and\nformula_49\nfor \"w\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0S2\\{0}, is a well defined Riemannian metric over the sphere S2 (which we identify with the extended complex plane C\u00a0\u222a\u00a0{\u221e}).\nNow, a simple computation shows that\nformula_50\nsince the real part of an analytic function is harmonic. This proves that \"Kg\"\u00a0=\u00a00.\nCorollaries.\nSince the fundamental theorem of algebra can be seen as the statement that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed, it follows that any theorem concerning algebraically closed fields applies to the field of complex numbers. Here are a few more consequences of the theorem, which are either about the field of real numbers or the relationship between the field of real numbers and the field of complex numbers:\nBounds on the zeros of a polynomial.\nWhile the fundamental theorem of algebra states a general existence result, it is of some interest, both from the theoretical and from the practical point of view, to have information on the location of the zeros of a given polynomial. The simplest result in this direction is a bound on the modulus: all zeros \u03b6 of a monic polynomial formula_51 satisfy an inequality |\u03b6| \u2264 \"R\"\u221e, where\nformula_52\nAs stated, this is not yet an existence result but rather an example of what is called an a priori bound: it says that \"if there are solutions\" then they lie inside the closed disk of center the origin and radius \"R\"\u221e. However, once coupled with the fundamental theorem of algebra it says that the disk contains in fact at least one solution. More generally, a bound can be given directly in terms of any p-norm of the \"n\"-vector of coefficients formula_53 that is |\u03b6| \u2264 \"Rp\", where \"Rp\" is precisely the \"q\"-norm of the 2-vector formula_54 \"q\" being the conjugate exponent of \"p\", formula_55 for any 1 \u2264 \"p\" \u2264 \u221e. Thus, the modulus of any solution is also bounded by\nformula_56\nformula_57\nfor 1 &lt; \"p\" &lt; \u221e, and in particular\nformula_58\n(where we define \"an\" to mean 1, which is reasonable since 1 is indeed the \"n\"-th coefficient of our polynomial). The case of a generic polynomial of degree \"n\",\nformula_59\nis of course reduced to the case of a monic, dividing all coefficients by \"an\" \u2260 0. Also, in case that 0 is not a root, i.e. \"a\"0 \u2260 0, bounds from below on the roots \u03b6 follow immediately as bounds from above on formula_60, that is, the roots of\nformula_61\nFinally, the distance formula_62 from the roots \u03b6 to any point formula_63 can be estimated from below and above, seeing formula_64 as zeros of the polynomial formula_65, whose coefficients are the Taylor expansion of \"P\"(\"z\") at formula_66\nLet \u03b6 be a root of the polynomial\nformula_67\nin order to prove the inequality |\u03b6| \u2264 \"Rp\" we can assume, of course, |\u03b6| &gt; 1. Writing the equation as\nformula_68\nand using the H\u00f6lder's inequality we find\nformula_69\nNow, if \"p\" = 1, this is\nformula_70\nthus\nformula_71\nIn the case 1 &lt; \"p\" \u2264 \u221e, taking into account the summation formula for a geometric progression, we have\nformula_72\nthus\nformula_73\nand simplifying,\nformula_74\nTherefore\nformula_75\nholds, for all 1 \u2264 \"p\" \u2264 \u221e.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51415", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51415", "title": "Twin prime conjecture", "text": ""}
{"id": "51417", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51417", "title": "Twin prime constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "51418", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51418", "title": "Nikos Kazantzakis", "text": "Greek writer and philosopher (1883\u20131957)\nNikos Kazantzakis (; ; 2 March [OS 18 February] 1883\u00a0\u2013 26 October 1957) was a Greek writer, journalist, politician, poet and philosopher. Widely considered a giant of modern Greek literature, he was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in nine different years, and remains the most translated Greek author worldwide.\nKazantzakis's novels include \"Zorba the Greek\" (published in 1946 as \"Life and Times of Alexis Zorbas\"), \"Christ Recrucified\" (1948), \"Captain Michalis\" (1950, translated as \"Freedom or Death\"), and \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1955). He also wrote plays, travel books, memoirs, and philosophical essays, such as \"The Saviors of God: Spiritual Exercises\". His fame spread in the English-speaking world due to cinematic adaptations of \"Zorba the Greek\" (1964) and \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1988).\nHe also translated a number of notable works into Modern Greek, such as the \"Divine Comedy\", \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", \"On the Origin of Species\", and Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\".\nBiography.\nNikos Kazantzakis was born in the town of Kandiye (now Heraklion) in Crete, with origins from the village of Myrtia. Crete had not yet joined the modern Greek state (which had been established in 1832), and was still under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. Based on family records, Kazantzakis was born on 18 February 1883 (OS), in contrast to the census of Heraklion which listed his birthyear as 1881; this discrepancy was settled by Kazantzakis himself in one of his epistles.\nFrom 1902 to 1906 Kazantzakis studied law at the University of Athens; his 1906 Juris Doctor thesis was titled (\"Friedrich Nietzsche on the Philosophy of Right and the State\"). Now also an initiated freemason he went to the Sorbonne in 1907 to study philosophy and fell under the spell of Henri Bergson. In 1909 he graduated with a reworked doctoral dissertation: \"Friedrich Nietzsche dans la philosophie du droit et de la cit\u00e9\". \nUpon his return to Greece Kazantzakis began translating philosophical works. In 1914 he met the writer Angelos Sikelianos. Together they travelled for two years through places where Greek Orthodox Christian culture flourished, largely due to the enthusiastic nationalism of Sikelianos.\nNikos Kazantzakis married Galateia Alexiou in 1911; they divorced in 1926. Two years earlier Kazantzakis had met Eleni Samiou (Helen). A romantic relationship between them began in 1928 but they did not marry until November 1945. Samiou helped Kazantzakis with his work, typing drafts, accompanying him on his travels, and managing his business affairs. They remained married until Nikos' death in 1957. Samiou died in 2004.\nBetween 1922 and his death in 1957, he sojourned in Paris and Berlin (from 1922 to 1924), Italy, Russia (in 1925), Spain (in 1932), and then later in Cyprus, Aegina, Egypt, Mount Sinai, Czechoslovakia, Nice (he later bought a villa in nearby Antibes, in the Old Town section near the famed seawall), China, and Japan.\nWhile in Berlin, where the political situation was explosive, Kazantzakis discovered communism and became an admirer of Vladimir Lenin. He never became a committed communist but visited the Soviet Union and stayed with the Left Opposition politician and writer Victor Serge. He witnessed the rise of Joseph Stalin, and became disillusioned with Soviet-style communism. Around this time, his earlier nationalist beliefs were gradually replaced by a more universalist ideology. As a journalist, in 1926 he interviewed Prime Minister of Spain Miguel Primo de Rivera and the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini.\nDuring the Second World War he was in Athens, where he and the philologist Ioannis Kakridis translated the \"Iliad\". In 1945 Kazantzakis became the leader of a small party on the non-communist left, and entered the Greek government as Minister without Portfolio. He resigned this post the following year. In 1946 he became the head of the UNESCO Bureau of Translations, the organisation which promoted translations of literary works. However, he resigned in 1947 to concentrate on writing, and indeed produced most of his literary output during the last ten years of his life.\nIn 1946 the Society of Greek Writers recommended that Kazantzakis and Angelos Sikelianos should be awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature. In 1957 he lost the Prize to Albert Camus by a single vote. Camus later said that Kazantzakis deserved the honour \"a hundred times more\" than himself. In total, Kazantzakis was nominated in nine different years.\nDeath.\nLate in 1957, even though suffering from leukaemia, Kazantzakis set out on one last trip to China and Japan. According to one theory, while in China he had to be vaccinated, possibly due to symptoms of smallpox and cholera. The vaccine, however, caused gangrene, and at the expense of the Chinese government he was transported first to Copenhagen and then to Freiburg im Breisgau in West Germany. His gangrene was cured, but he had contracted a severe form of Asian flu in China, which eventually led to his death.\nKazantzakis died on 26 October 1957 in Freiburg at the age of 74. He is buried at the highest point of the Walls of Heraklion, the \"Martinengo Bastion\", looking out over the mountains and sea of Crete. His epitaph reads \"I hope for nothing. I fear nothing. I am free.\" ( ) Kazantzakis developed this famously pithy phrasing of the philosophical ideal of cynicism, which dates back to at least the second century CE.\nThe 50th anniversary of his death was selected as the main motif for a high-value euro collectors' coin; the \u20ac10 Greek Nikos Kazantzakis commemorative coin, minted in 2007. His image is on the obverse of the coin, while the reverse carries the National Emblem of Greece, with his signature.\nLiterary work.\nKazantzakis's first published work was the 1906 narrative, \"Serpent and Lily\" (\u038c\u03c6\u03b9\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u039a\u03c1\u03af\u03bd\u03bf), which he signed with the pen name Karma Nirvami (\u039a\u03ac\u03c1\u03bc\u03b1 \u039d\u03b9\u03c1\u03b2\u03b1\u03bc\u03ae). In 1907 he went to Paris for his graduate studies and was deeply influenced by the philosophy of Henri Bergson, primarily the idea that a true understanding of the world comes from the combination of intuition, personal experience, and rational thought. The theme of rationalism mixed with irrationality later became central to many of Kazantzakis's later stories, characters, and personal philosophies. Later, in 1909, he wrote a one-act play titled \"Comedy\", which was filled with existential themes, predating the post-Second World War existentialist movement in Europe spearheaded by writers like Jean-Paul Sartre and Camus. After completing his studies in Paris, he wrote the tragedy, \"The Master Builder\" (), based on a popular Greek folkloric myth.\nThrough the next several decades, from the 1910s through the 1930s, Kazantzakis traveled around Greece, much of Europe, northern Africa, and to several countries in Asia. Countries he visited include: Germany, Italy, France, The Netherlands, Romania, Egypt, Russia, Japan, and China, among others. These journeys put Kazantzakis in contact with different philosophies, ideologies, lifestyles, and people, all of which influenced him and his writings. Kazantzakis would often write about his influences in letters to friends, citing Sigmund Freud, the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, Buddhist theology, and communist ideology as major influences. While he continued to travel later in life, the bulk of his travel writing came from this time period.\nKazantzakis began writing \"\" in 1924, and completed it in 1938 after fourteen years of writing and revision. The poem follows the hero of Homer's \"Odyssey\", Odysseus, as he undertakes a final journey after the end of the original poem. Following the structure of Homer's \"Odyssey\", it is divided into 24 rhapsodies and consists of 33,333 lines. While Kazantzakis felt this poem held his cumulative wisdom and experience, and that it was his greatest literary experience, literary critics were split, \"some praised it as an unprecedented epic, [while] many simply viewed it as a hybristic act,\" with many scholars still being split to this day. A common criticism of \"The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel\" was aimed at Kazantzakis's over-reliance on flowery and metaphorical verse, a criticism that is also aimed at his works of fiction.\nMany of Kazantzakis's most famous novels were published between 1940 and 1961, including \"Zorba the Greek\" (1946), \"Christ Recrucified\" (1948), \"Captain Michalis\" (1953), \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1955), and \"Report to Greco\" (1961).\nThe scholar Peter Bien argues that each story presents different aspects of post-World War II Greek culture such as religion, nationalism, political beliefs, the Greek Civil War, gender roles, immigration, and general cultural practices and beliefs. These works also explore what Kazantzakis believed to be the unique physical and spiritual location of Greece, a nation that belongs to neither the East nor the West, an idea he put forth in many of his letters to friends. Bien writes: \"Kazantzakis viewed Greece's special mission as the reconciliation of Eastern instinct with Western reason,\" thus echoing the Bergsonian themes found in many of his novels where \"logos\" is balanced against emotion.\nTwo of these works of fiction, \"Zorba the Greek\" and \"The Last Temptation of Christ\", had major motion picture adaptations in 1964 and in 1988 respectively.\nLanguage and use of Demotic Greek.\nDuring the time when Kazantzakis was writing his novels, poems, and plays, the majority of \"serious\" Greek artistic work was written in Katharevousa, a \"pure\" form of the Greek language that was created to bridge Ancient Greek with Modern, Demotic Greek, in order to \"purify\" Demotic Greek. The use of Demotic, among writers, gradually started to gain the upper hand only at the turn of the 20th century, under the influence of the New Athenian School (or Palamian).\nIn his letters to friends and correspondents, Kazantzakis wrote that he chose to write in Demotic Greek to capture the spirit of the people and to make his writing resonate with the common Greek citizen. Moreover, he wanted to prove that the common spoken language of Greek was able to produce artistic, literary works. \"Why not show off all the possibilities of Demotic Greek?\" he argued. Furthermore, he felt that it was important to record the vernacular of the everyday person, including Greek peasants, and often tried to include expressions, metaphors, and idioms he would hear while traveling throughout Greece and incorporate them into his writing for posterity. At the time of writing, some scholars and critics condemned his work because it was not written in Katharevousa, while others praised it precisely because it was written in Demotic Greek.\nSeveral critics have argued that Kazantzakis's writing was too flowery, filled with obscure metaphors, and difficult to read despite being written in Demotic Greek. The Kazantzakis scholar Peter Bien argues that the metaphors and language Kazantzakis used were taken directly from the peasants he encountered when travelling through Greece. Bien asserts that, since Kazantzakis was trying to preserve the language of the people, he used their local metaphors and phrases to give his narrative an air of authenticity and preserve these phrases so that they were not lost.\nSocialism.\nThroughout his life, Kazantzakis reiterated his belief that \"only socialism as the goal and democracy as the means\" could provide an equitable solution to the \"frightfully urgent problems of the age in which we are living.\" He saw the need for socialist parties throughout the world to put aside their bickering and unite so that the programme of \"socialist democracy\" could prevail not just in Greece but throughout the civilised world. He described socialism as a social system that \"does not permit the exploitation of one person by another\" and that \"must guarantee every freedom.\"\nKazantzakis was anathema to the right-wing in Greece both before and after the Second World War. The right waged war against his books and called him \"immoral\" and a \"Bolshevik troublemaker\" and accused him of being a \"Russian agent\". He was also distrusted by both the Communist Party of Greece and the Soviet Union as a \"bourgeois\" thinker. However, upon his death in 1957, he was honoured by the Chinese Communist Party as a \"great writer\" and \"devotee of peace.\" Following the war, he was temporarily leader of a minor Greek leftist party, while in 1945 he was, among others, a founding member of the Greek-Soviet friendship union.\nReligious beliefs and relationship with the Greek Orthodox Church.\nWhile Kazantzakis was deeply spiritual, he often discussed his struggle with religious faith, specifically his Greek Orthodoxy. Baptised Greek Orthodox as a child, he was fascinated by the lives of saints from a young age. As a young man he took a month long trip to Mount Athos, a monastic retreat and major spiritual center for Greek Orthodoxy. Most critics and scholars of Kazantzakis agree that the struggle to find truth in religion and spirituality was central to many of his works, and that some novels, like \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" and \"Christ Recrucified\" focus completely on questioning Christian morals and values. As he traveled Europe, he was influenced by various philosophers, cultures, and religions, like Buddhism, causing him to question his Christian beliefs. While never claiming to be an atheist, his public questioning and critique put him at odds with some in the Greek Orthodox Church and many of his critics. Scholars theorise that Kazantzakis's difficult relationship with many members of the clergy and with more religiously conservative literary critics, came from his questioning. In his book \"Broken Hallelujah: Nikos Kazantzakis and Christian Theology\", author Darren Middleton theorises that, \"Where the majority of Christian writers focus on God's immutability, Jesus' deity, and our salvation through God's grace, Kazantzakis emphasized divine mutability, Jesus' humanity, and God's own redemption through our effort,\" highlighting Kazantzakis's uncommon interpretation of traditional Orthodox Christian beliefs.\nMany Orthodox Church clergy condemned Kazantzakis's work and a campaign was started to excommunicate him. His reply was: \"You gave me a curse, Holy fathers, I give you a blessing: may your conscience be as clear as mine and may you be as moral and religious as I\" (\"\"). While the excommunication was rejected by the top leadership of the Orthodox Church, it became emblematic of the persistent disapprobation from many Christian authorities for his political and religious views.\nModern scholarship tends to dismiss the idea that Kazantzakis was being sacrilegious or blasphemous with the content of his novels and beliefs. These scholars argue that, if anything, Kazantzakis was acting in accordance to a long tradition of Christians who publicly struggled with their faith, and grew a stronger and more personal connection to God through their doubt. Moreover, scholars like Darren J. N. Middleton argue that Kazantzakis's interpretation of the Christian faith predated the more modern, personalised interpretation of Christianity that has become popular in the years after Kazantzakis's death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51420", "revid": "43548939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51420", "title": "Carbonic acid", "text": "Chemical compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nCarbonic acid is a chemical compound with the chemical formula . The molecule rapidly converts to water and carbon dioxide in the presence of water. The interconversion of carbon dioxide and carbonic acid is related to the breathing cycle of animals and the acidification of natural waters.\nIn biochemistry and physiology, the name \"carbonic acid\" is sometimes applied to aqueous solutions of carbon dioxide. These chemical species play an important role in the bicarbonate buffer system, used to maintain acid\u2013base homeostasis.\nTerminology in biochemical literature.\nIn chemistry, the term \"carbonic acid\" strictly refers to the chemical compound with the formula H2CO3. Some biochemistry literature effaces the distinction between carbonic acid and carbon dioxide dissolved in extracellular fluid. \nIn physiology, carbon dioxide excreted by the lungs may be called \"volatile acid\" or \"respiratory acid\".\nAnhydrous carbonic acid.\nAccording to quantum chemical calculations, at room temperature (300 K), pure carbonic acid is expected to be a kinetically stable gas. There are two main methods to produce anhydrous carbonic acid: reaction of hydrogen chloride and potassium bicarbonate at 100\u00a0K in methanol and proton irradiation of pure solid carbon dioxide. Chemically, it behaves as a diprotic Br\u00f8nsted acid.\nCarbonic acid monomers exhibit three conformational isomers: cis\u2013cis, cis\u2013trans, and trans\u2013trans.\nAt low temperature and atmospheric pressure, solid carbonic acid is amorphous and lacks Bragg peaks in X-ray diffraction. But at high pressure, carbonic acid crystallizes, and modern analytical spectroscopy can measure its geometry.\nAccording to neutron diffraction of dideuterated carbonic acid (D2CO3) in a hybrid clamped cell (Russian alloy/copper-beryllium) at 1.85\u00a0GPa, the molecules are planar and form dimers joined by pairs of hydrogen bonds. All three C-O bonds are nearly equidistant at 1.34\u00a0\u00c5, intermediate between typical C-O and C=O distances (respectively 1.43 and 1.23\u00a0\u00c5). The unusual C-O bond lengths are attributed to delocalized \u03c0 bonding in the molecule's center and extraordinarily strong hydrogen bonds. The same effects also induce a very short O\u2014O separation (2.13\u00a0\u00c5), through the 136\u00b0 O-H-O angle imposed by the doubly hydrogen-bonded 8-membered rings. Longer O\u2014O distances are observed in strong intramolecular hydrogen bonds, e.g. in oxalic acid, where the distances exceed 2.4\u00a0\u00c5.\nIn aqueous solution.\nIn the presence of even a slight amount of water, carbonic acid dehydrates to carbon dioxide and water, which then catalyzes further decomposition. \nThe hydration equilibrium constant at 25\u00a0\u00b0C is in pure water and \u2248\u00a01.2\u00d710\u22123 in seawater. Hence the majority of carbon dioxide at geophysical or biological air-water interfaces does not convert to carbonic acid, remaining dissolved CO2 gas. However, the uncatalyzed equilibrium is reached quite slowly: the rate constants are 0.039\u00a0s\u22121 for hydration and 23\u00a0s\u22121 for dehydration.\nIn biological solutions.\nIn the presence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, equilibrium is instead reached rapidly, and the following reaction takes precedence: &lt;chem display=block&gt;HCO3^- {+} H^+ &lt;=&gt; CO2 {+} H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nWhen the created carbon dioxide exceeds its solubility, gas evolves and a third equilibrium &lt;chem display=block&gt;CO_2 (soln) &lt;=&gt; CO_2 (g)&lt;/chem&gt; must also be taken into consideration. The equilibrium constant for this reaction is defined by Henry's law. \nThe two reactions can be combined for the equilibrium in solution: formula_1 When Henry's law is used to calculate the denominator care is needed with regard to units since Henry's law constant can be commonly expressed with 8 different dimensionalities.\nIn water pH control.\nIn wastewater treatment and agriculture irrigation, carbonic acid is used to acidify the water similar to sulfuric acid and sulfurous acid produced by sulfur burners.\nUnder high CO2 partial pressure.\nIn the beverage industry, sparkling or \"fizzy water\" is usually referred to as carbonated water. It is made by dissolving carbon dioxide under a small positive pressure in water. Many soft drinks treated the same way effervesce.\nSignificant amounts of molecular H2CO3 exist in aqueous solutions subjected to pressures of multiple gigapascals (tens of thousands of atmospheres) in planetary interiors. Pressures of 0.6\u20131.6\u00a0GPa at 100\u00a0K, and 0.75\u20131.75\u00a0GPa at 300\u00a0K are attained in the cores of large icy satellites such as Ganymede, Callisto, and Titan, where water and carbon dioxide are present. Pure carbonic acid, being denser than the ice, is expected to have sunk beneath the ice layers and to separate them from the rocky cores of these moons.\nRelationship to bicarbonate and carbonate.\nCarbonic acid is the formal Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry conjugate acid of the bicarbonate anion, stable in alkaline solution. The protonation constants have been measured to great precision, but depend on overall ionic strength I. The two equilibria most easily measured are as follows: formula_2 where brackets indicate the concentration of species. At 25\u00a0\u00b0C, these equilibria empirically satisfyformula_3log(\"\u03b2\"1) decreases with increasing I, as does log(\"\u03b2\"2). In a solution absent other ions (e.g. \"I\" \n 0), these curves imply the following stepwise dissociation constants:formula_4 Direct values for these constants in the literature include \"p\"K1 \n 6.35 and \"p\"K2 - \"p\"K1 \n 3.49.\nTo interpret these numbers, note that two chemical species in an acid equilibrium are equiconcentrated when \"p\"K \n \"p\"H. In particular, the extracellular fluid (cytosol) in biological systems exhibits \"p\"H &amp;approx; 7.2, so that carbonic acid will be almost 50%-dissociated at equilibrium.\nOcean acidification.\nThe Bjerrum plot shows typical equilibrium concentrations, in solution, in seawater, of carbon dioxide and the various species derived from it, as a function of pH. As human industrialization has increased the proportion of carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere, the proportion of carbon dioxide dissolved in sea- and freshwater as carbonic acid is also expected to increase. This rise in dissolved acid is also expected to acidify those waters, generating a decrease in pH. It has been estimated that the increase in dissolved carbon dioxide has already caused the ocean's average surface pH to decrease by about 0.1 from pre-industrial levels."}
{"id": "51421", "revid": "45807063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51421", "title": "Integer sequence", "text": "Ordered list of whole numbers\nIn mathematics, an integer sequence is a sequence (i.e., an ordered list) of integers.\nAn integer sequence may be specified \"explicitly\" by giving a formula for its \"n\"th term, or \"implicitly\" by giving a relationship between its terms. For example, the sequence 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13,\u00a0... (the Fibonacci sequence) is formed by starting with 0 and 1 and then adding any two consecutive terms to obtain the next one: an implicit description (sequence in the OEIS). The sequence 0, 3, 8, 15,\u00a0... is formed according to the formula \"n\"2\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 for the \"n\"th term: an explicit definition.\nAlternatively, an integer sequence may be defined by a property which members of the sequence possess and other integers do not possess. For example, we can determine whether a given integer is a perfect number, (sequence in the OEIS), even though we do not have a formula for the \"n\"th perfect number.\nComputable and definable sequences.\nAn integer sequence is computable if there exists an algorithm that, given \"n\", calculates \"a\"\"n\", for all \"n\" &gt; 0. The set of computable integer sequences is countable. The set of all integer sequences is uncountable (with cardinality equal to that of the continuum), and so not all integer sequences are computable.\nAlthough some integer sequences have definitions, there is no systematic way to define what it means for an integer sequence to be definable in the universe or in any absolute (model independent) sense.\nSuppose the set \"M\" is a transitive model of ZFC set theory. The transitivity of M implies that the integers and integer sequences inside M are actually integers and sequences of integers. An integer sequence is a definable sequence relative to \"M\" if there exists some formula \"P\"(\"x\") in the language of set theory, with one free variable and no parameters, which is true in \"M\" for that integer sequence and false in \"M\" for all other integer sequences. In each such \"M\", there are definable integer sequences that are not computable, such as sequences that encode the Turing jumps of computable sets.\nFor some transitive models \"M\" of ZFC, every sequence of integers in \"M\" is definable relative to \"M\"; for others, only some integer sequences are. There is no systematic way to define in \"M\" itself the set of sequences definable relative to \"M\" and that set may not even exist in some such \"M\". Similarly, the map from the set of formulas that define integer sequences in \"M\" to the integer sequences they define is not definable in \"M\" and may not exist in \"M\". However, in any model that does possess such a definability map, some integer sequences in the model will not be definable relative to the model.\nIf \"M\" contains all integer sequences, then the set of integer sequences definable in \"M\" will exist in \"M\" and be countable and countable in \"M\".\nComplete sequences.\nA sequence of positive integers is called a complete sequence if every positive integer can be expressed as a sum of values in the sequence, using each value at most once.\nExamples.\nInteger sequences that have their own name include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51423", "revid": "18993858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51423", "title": "P-adic number", "text": "Number system extending the rational numbers\nIn number theory, given a prime number p, the p-adic numbers form an extension of the rational numbers that is distinct from the real numbers, though with some similar properties; p-adic numbers can be written in a form similar to (possibly infinite) decimals, but with digits based on a prime number p rather than ten, and extending to the left rather than to the right.\nFor example, comparing the expansion of the rational number formula_1 in base 3 vs. the 3-adic expansion,\nformula_2\nFormally, given a prime number p, a p-adic number can be defined as a series\nformula_3\nwhere k is an integer (possibly negative), and each formula_4 is an integer such that formula_5 A p-adic integer is a p-adic number such that formula_6\nIn general the series that represents a p-adic number is not convergent in the usual sense, but it is convergent for the p-adic absolute value formula_7 where k is the least integer i such that formula_8 (if all formula_4 are zero, one has the zero p-adic number, which has 0 as its p-adic absolute value).\nEvery rational number can be uniquely expressed as the sum of a series as above, with respect to the p-adic absolute value. This allows considering rational numbers as special p-adic numbers, and alternatively defining the p-adic numbers as the completion of the rational numbers for the p-adic absolute value, exactly as the real numbers are the completion of the rational numbers for the usual absolute value.\np-adic numbers were first described by Kurt Hensel in 1897, though, with hindsight, some of Ernst Kummer's earlier work can be interpreted as implicitly using p-adic numbers.\nMotivation.\nRoughly speaking, modular arithmetic modulo a positive integer n consists of \"approximating\" every integer by the remainder of its division by n, called its \"residue modulo\" n. The main property of modular arithmetic is that the residue modulo n of the result of a succession of operations on integers is the same as the result of the same succession of operations on residues modulo n.\nWhen studying Diophantine equations, it's sometimes useful to reduce the equation modulo a prime p, since this usually provides more insight about the equation itself. Unfortunately, doing this loses some information because the reduction formula_10 is not injective.\nOne way to preserve more information is to use larger moduli, such as higher prime powers, \"p\"2, \"p\"3, ... However, this has the disadvantage of formula_11 not being a field, which loses a lot of the algebraic properties that formula_12 has.\nKurt Hensel discovered a method which consists of using a prime modulus p, and applying Hensel's lemma to lift solutions modulo p to modulo \"p\"2, \"p\"3, ... This process creates an infinite sequence of residues, and a p-adic number is defined as the \"limit\" of such a sequence.\nEssentially, p-adic numbers allows \"taking modulo \"p\"\"e\" for all e at once\". A distinguishing feature of p-adic numbers from ordinary modulo arithmetic is that the set of p-adic numbers formula_13 forms a field, making division by p possible (unlike when working modulo \"p\"\"e\"). Furthermore, the mapping formula_14 is injective, so not much information is lost when reducing to p-adic numbers.\nInformal description.\nThere are multiple ways to understand p-adic numbers.\nAs a base-\"p\" expansion.\nOne way to think about p-adic integers is using \"base p\". For example, every integer can be written in base p,\nformula_15\nInformally, p-adic integers can be thought of as integers in base-p, but the digits extend \"infinitely to the left\".\nformula_16\nAddition and multiplication on p-adic integers can be carried out similarly to integers in base-p.\nWhen adding together two p-adic integers, for example formula_17, their digits are added with carries being propagated from right to left.\nformula_18\nMultiplication of p-adic integers works similarly via long multiplication. Since addition and multiplication can be performed with p-adic integers, they form a ring, denoted formula_19 or formula_20.\nNote that some rational numbers can also be p-adic integers, even if they aren't integers in a real sense. For example, the rational number is a 3-adic integer, and has the 3-adic expansion formula_21. However, some rational numbers, such as formula_22, cannot be written as a p-adic integer. Because of this, p-adic integers are generalized further to p-adic numbers:\np-adic numbers can be thought of as p-adic integers with \"finitely many digits after the decimal point\". An example of a 3-adic number is\nformula_23\nEquivalently, every p-adic number is of the form formula_24, where x is a p-adic integer.\nFor any p-adic number x, its multiplicative inverse formula_25 is also a p-adic number, which can be computed using a variant of long division. For this reason, the p-adic numbers form a field, denoted formula_13 or formula_27.\nAs a sequence of residues mod p\"k\".\nAnother way to define p-adic integers is by representing it as a sequence of residues formula_28 mod formula_29 for each integer formula_30,\nformula_31\nsatisfying the compatibility relations formula_32 for formula_33. In this notation, addition and multiplication of p-adic integers are defined component-wise:\nformula_34\nformula_35\nThis is equivalent to the base-p definition, because the last k digits of a base-p expansion uniquely define its value mod p\"k\", and vice versa.\nThis form can also explain why some rational numbers are p-adic integers, even if they are not integers. For example, is a 3-adic integer, because its 3-adic expansion consists of the multiplicative inverses of 5 mod 3, 32, 33, ...\nformula_36\nDefinition.\nThere are several equivalent definitions of p-adic numbers. The two approaches given below are relatively elementary.\nAs formal series in base p.\nA p-adic integer is often defined as a formal power series of the form\nformula_37\nwhere each formula_38 represents a \"digit in base p\".\nA p-adic unit is a p-adic integer whose first digit is nonzero, i.e. formula_39. The set of all p-adic integers is usually denoted formula_19.\nA p-adic number is then defined as a formal Laurent series of the form\nformula_41\nwhere v is a (possibly negative) integer, and each formula_38. Equivalently, a p-adic number is anything of the form formula_43, where x is a p-adic integer.\nThe first index v for which the digit formula_44 is nonzero in r is called the p-adic valuation of r, denoted formula_45. If formula_46, then such an index does not exist, so by convention formula_47.\nIn this definition, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of p-adic numbers are carried out similarly to numbers in base p, with \"carries\" or \"borrows\" moving from left to right rather than right to left. As an example in formula_48,\nformula_49\nDivision of p-adic numbers may also be carried out \"formally\" via division of formal power series, with some care about having to \"carry\".\nWith these operations, the set of p-adic numbers form a field, denoted formula_13.\nAs equivalence classes.\nThe p-adic numbers may also be defined as equivalence classes, in a similar way as the definition of real numbers as equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences. It is fundamentally based on the following lemma:\n\"Every nonzero rational number r can be written formula_51 where v, m, and n are integers and neither m nor n is divisible by p.\"\nThe exponent v is uniquely determined by r and is called its p-adic valuation, denoted formula_45. The proof of the lemma results directly from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.\nA p-adic series is a formal Laurent series of the form\nformula_53\nwhere formula_54 is a (possibly negative) integer and the formula_55 are rational numbers that either are zero or have a nonnegative valuation (that is, the denominator of formula_55 is not divisible by p).\nEvery rational number may be viewed as a p-adic series with a single nonzero term, consisting of its factorization of the form formula_57 with m and n both coprime with p.\nTwo p-adic series formula_58 and formula_59\nare \"equivalent\" if there is an integer N such that, for every integer formula_60 the rational number\nformula_61\nis zero or has a p-adic valuation greater than n.\nA p-adic series formula_62 is \"normalized\" if either all formula_4 are integers such that formula_64 or all formula_4 are zero. In the latter case, the series is called the \"zero series\".\nEvery p-adic series is equivalent to exactly one normalized series. This normalized series is obtained by a sequence of transformations, which are equivalences of series; see \u00a7 Normalization of a p-adic series, below.\nIn other words, the equivalence of p-adic series is an equivalence relation, and each equivalence class contains exactly one normalized p-adic series.\nThe usual operations of series (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) are compatible with equivalence of p-adic series. That is, denoting the equivalence with ~, if S, T and U are nonzero p-adic series such that formula_66 one has\nformula_67\nWith this, the p-adic numbers are defined as the \"equivalence classes\" of p-adic series.\nThe uniqueness property of normalization, allows uniquely representing any p-adic number by the corresponding normalized p-adic series. The compatibility of the series equivalence leads almost immediately to basic properties of p-adic numbers:\nNormalization of a \"p\"-adic series.\nStarting with the series formula_72 we wish to arrive at an equivalent series such that the p-adic valuation of formula_73 is zero. For that, one considers the first nonzero formula_74 If its p-adic valuation is zero, it suffices to change v into i, that is to start the summation from v. Otherwise, the p-adic valuation of formula_55 is formula_76 and formula_77 where the valuation of formula_78 is zero; so, one gets an equivalent series by changing formula_55 to 0 and formula_80 to formula_81 Iterating this process, one gets eventually, possibly after infinitely many steps, an equivalent series that either is the zero series or is a series such that the valuation of formula_73 is zero.\nThen, if the series is not normalized, consider the first nonzero formula_55 that is not an integer in the interval formula_84 Using B\u00e9zout's lemma, write this as formula_85, where formula_86 and formula_78 has nonnegative valuation. Then, one gets an equivalent series by replacing formula_55 with formula_89 and adding formula_78 to formula_91 Iterating this process, possibly infinitely many times, provides eventually the desired normalized p-adic series.\nOther equivalent definitions.\nOther equivalent definitions use completion of a discrete valuation ring (see ), completion of a metric space (see ), or inverse limits (see ).\nA p-adic number can be defined as a \"normalized p-adic series\". Since there are other equivalent definitions that are commonly used, one says often that a normalized p-adic series \"represents\" a p-adic number, instead of saying that it \"is\" a p-adic number.\nOne can say also that any p-adic series represents a p-adic number, since every p-adic series is equivalent to a unique normalized p-adic series. This is useful for defining operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) of p-adic numbers: the result of such an operation is obtained by normalizing the result of the corresponding operation on series. This well defines operations on p-adic numbers, since the series operations are compatible with equivalence of p-adic series.\nWith these operations, p-adic numbers form a field called the field of \"p\"-adic numbers and denoted formula_92 or formula_93 There is a unique field homomorphism from the rational numbers into the p-adic numbers, which maps a rational number to its p-adic expansion. The image of this homomorphism is commonly identified with the field of rational numbers. This allows considering the \"p\"-adic numbers as an extension field of the rational numbers, and the rational numbers as a subfield of the \"p\"-adic numbers.\nThe \"valuation\" of a nonzero p-adic number x, commonly denoted formula_94 is the exponent of p in the first nonzero term of every p-adic series that represents x. By convention, formula_95 that is, the valuation of zero is formula_96 This valuation is a discrete valuation. The restriction of this valuation to the rational numbers is the p-adic valuation of formula_97 that is, the exponent v in the factorization of a rational number as formula_98 with both n and d coprime with p.\nNotation.\nThere are several different conventions for writing p-adic expansions. So far this article has used a notation for p-adic expansions in which powers of p increase from right to left. With this right-to-left notation the 3-adic expansion of formula_99 for example, is written as\nformula_100\nWhen performing arithmetic in this notation, digits are carried to the left. It is also possible to write p-adic expansions so that the powers of p increase from left to right, and digits are carried to the right. With this left-to-right notation the 3-adic expansion of formula_1 is\nformula_102\np-adic expansions may be written with other sets of digits instead of {0,\u20091,\u2009...,\u2009\"p\"\u2009\u2212\u20091}. For example, the 3-adic expansion of formula_1 can be written using balanced ternary digits {1,\u20090,\u20091}, with 1 representing negative one, as\nformula_104\nIn fact any set of p integers which are in distinct residue classes modulo p may be used as p-adic digits. In number theory, Teichm\u00fcller representatives are sometimes used as digits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Quote notation is a variant of the p-adic representation of rational numbers that was proposed in 1979 by Eric Hehner and Nigel Horspool for implementing on computers the (exact) arithmetic with these numbers. It can be used as a compact way to represent rational numbers, which have an infinite periodic sequence of digits. In this notation, a quote mark (') is used to separate the repeating part from the nonrepeating part.\nformula_105\n\"p\"-adic expansion of rational numbers.\nThe decimal expansion of a positive rational number formula_106 is its representation as a series\nformula_107\nwhere formula_108 is an integer and each formula_4 is also an integer such that formula_110 This expansion can be computed by long division of the numerator by the denominator, which is itself based on the following theorem: If formula_111 is a rational number such that formula_112 there is an integer formula_113 such that formula_114 and formula_115 with formula_116 The decimal expansion is obtained by repeatedly applying this result to the remainder formula_117 which in the iteration assumes the role of the original rational number formula_106.\nThe p-\"adic expansion\" of a rational number can be computed similarly, but with a different division step. Suppose that formula_119 is a rational number with nonnegative valuation (that is, d is not divisible by p). The division step consists of writing\nformula_120\nwhere formula_113 is an integer such that &lt;math&gt;0\\le a and formula_117 has nonnegative valuation.\nThe integer a can be computed as a modular multiplicative inverse: formula_123. Because of this, writing r in this way is always possible, and such a representation is unique.\nThe p-adic expansion of a rational number is eventually periodic. Conversely, a series formula_124 with formula_125 We can write this number as formula_126. Thus we use formula_127 for the first step.\nformula_128\nFor the next step, we can write the \"remainder\" formula_129 as formula_130. Thus we use formula_131.\nformula_132\nWe can write the \"remainder\" formula_133 as formula_134. Thus we use formula_135.\nformula_136\nNotice that we obtain the \"remainder\" formula_129 again, which means the digits can only repeat from this point on.\nformula_138\nIn the standard 5-adic notation, we can write this as\nformula_139\nwith the ellipsis formula_140 on the left hand side.\n\"p\"-adic integers.\nThe p-adic integers are the p-adic numbers with a nonnegative valuation.\nA formula_141-adic integer can be represented as a sequence\nformula_31\nof residues formula_28 mod formula_29 for each integer formula_30, satisfying the compatibility relations formula_32 for formula_33.\nEvery integer is a formula_141-adic integer (including zero, since formula_149). The rational numbers of the form formula_150 with formula_151 coprime with formula_141 and formula_153 are also formula_141-adic integers (for the reason that formula_151 has an inverse mod formula_29 for every formula_30).\nThe p-adic integers form a commutative ring, denoted formula_158 or formula_20, that has the following properties.\nThe last property provides a definition of the p-adic numbers that is equivalent to the above one: the field of the p-adic numbers is the field of fractions of the completion of the localization of the integers at the prime ideal generated by p.\nTopological properties.\nThe p-adic valuation allows defining an absolute value on p-adic numbers: the p-adic absolute value of a nonzero p-adic number x is\nformula_164\nwhere formula_68 is the p-adic valuation of x. The p-adic absolute value of formula_166 is formula_167 This is an absolute value that satisfies the strong triangle inequality since, for every x and y:\nMoreover, if formula_172 then formula_173\nThis makes the p-adic numbers a metric space, and even an ultrametric space, with the p-adic distance defined by\nformula_174\nAs a metric space, the p-adic numbers form the completion of the rational numbers equipped with the p-adic absolute value. This provides another way for defining the p-adic numbers.\nAs the metric is defined from a discrete valuation, every open ball is also closed. More precisely, the open ball formula_175 equals the closed ball formula_176 where v is the least integer such that formula_177 Similarly, formula_178 where w is the greatest integer such that formula_179\nThis implies that the p-adic numbers formula_13 form a locally compact space (locally compact field), and the p-adic integers formula_19\u2014that is, the ball formula_182\u2014form a compact space.\nThe space of 2-adic integers formula_183 is homeomorphic to the Cantor set formula_184. This can be seen by considering the continuous 1-to-1 mapping formula_185 defined by\nformula_186\nMoreover, for any p, formula_19 is homeomorphic to formula_183, and therefore also homeomorphic to the Cantor set.\nThe Pontryagin dual of the group of p-adic integers is the Pr\u00fcfer p-group formula_189, and the Pontryagin dual of the Pr\u00fcfer p-group is the group of p-adic integers.\nModular properties.\nThe quotient ring formula_190 may be identified with the ring formula_191 of the integers modulo formula_192 This can be shown by remarking that every p-adic integer, represented by its normalized p-adic series, is congruent modulo formula_193 with its partial sum formula_194 whose value is an integer in the interval formula_195 A straightforward verification shows that this defines a ring isomorphism from formula_190 to formula_197\nThe inverse limit of the rings formula_190 is defined as the ring formed by the sequences formula_199 such that formula_200 and formula_201 for every i.\nThe mapping that maps a normalized p-adic series to the sequence of its partial sums is a ring isomorphism from formula_158 to the inverse limit of the formula_203 This provides another way for defining p-adic integers (up to an isomorphism).\nThis definition of p-adic integers is specially useful for practical computations, as allowing building p-adic integers by successive approximations.\nFor example, for computing the p-adic (multiplicative) inverse of an integer, one can use Newton's method, starting from the inverse modulo p; then, each Newton step computes the inverse modulo formula_204 from the inverse modulo formula_205\nThe same method can be used for computing the p-adic square root of an integer that is a quadratic residue modulo p. This seems to be the fastest known method for testing whether a large integer is a square: it suffices to test whether the given integer is the square of the value found in formula_190. Applying Newton's method to find the square root requires formula_207 to be larger than twice the given integer, which is quickly satisfied.\nHensel lifting is a similar method that allows to \"lift\" the factorization modulo p of a polynomial with integer coefficients to a factorization modulo formula_207 for large values of n. This is commonly used by polynomial factorization algorithms.\nCardinality.\nBoth formula_158 and formula_92 are uncountable and have the cardinality of the continuum. For formula_211 this results from the p-adic representation, which defines a bijection of formula_158 on the power set formula_213 For formula_92 this results from its expression as a countably infinite union of copies of formula_158:\nformula_216\nAlgebraic closure.\nformula_92 contains formula_218 and is a field of characteristic 0.\nBecause 0 can be written as sum of squares, formula_92 cannot be turned into an ordered field.\nThe field of real numbers formula_220 has only a single proper algebraic extension: the complex numbers formula_221. In other words, this quadratic extension is already algebraically closed. By contrast, the algebraic closure of formula_92, denoted formula_223 has infinite degree, that is, formula_92 has infinitely many inequivalent algebraic extensions. Also contrasting the case of real numbers, although there is a unique extension of the p-adic valuation to formula_223 the latter is not (metrically) complete.\nIts (metric) completion is denoted formula_226 or formula_227, and sometimes called the complex p-adic numbers by analogy to the complex numbers. Here an end is reached, as formula_226 is algebraically closed. However unlike formula_221 this field is not locally compact.\nformula_226 and formula_221 are isomorphic as rings, so we may regard formula_226 as formula_221 endowed with an exotic metric. The proof of existence of such a field isomorphism relies on the axiom of choice, and does not provide an explicit example of such an isomorphism (that is, it is not constructive).\nIf formula_234 is any finite Galois extension of formula_235 the Galois group formula_236 is solvable. Thus, the Galois group formula_237 is prosolvable.\nMultiplicative group.\nformula_92 contains the n-th cyclotomic field (\"n\" &gt; 2) if and only if \"n\"\u2009| \"p\" \u2212 1. For instance, the n-th cyclotomic field is a subfield of formula_239 if and only if \"n\" \n 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, or 12. In particular, there is no multiplicative p-torsion in formula_92 if \"p\" &gt; 2. Also, \u22121 is the only non-trivial torsion element in formula_241.\nGiven a natural number k, the index of the multiplicative group of the k-th powers of the non-zero elements of formula_92 in formula_243 is finite.\nThe number e, defined as the sum of reciprocals of factorials, is not a member of any p-adic field; but formula_244 for formula_245. For \"p\" \n 2 one must take at least the fourth power. (Thus a number with similar properties as e \u2014 namely a p-th root of \"ep\" \u2014 is a member of formula_92 for all p.)\nLocal\u2013global principle.\nHelmut Hasse's local\u2013global principle is said to hold for an equation if it can be solved over the rational numbers if and only if it can be solved over the real numbers and over the p-adic numbers for every prime\u00a0p. This principle holds, for example, for equations given by quadratic forms, but fails for higher polynomials in several indeterminates.\nApplications.\nThe \"p\"-adic numbers have appeared in several fields of mathematics as well as physics.\nAnalysis.\nSimilar to the more classical fields of real and complex analysis, which deal, respectively, with functions on the real and complex numbers, \"p\"-adic analysis studies functions on \"p\"-adic numbers. The theory of complex-valued numerical functions on the \"p\"-adic numbers is part of the theory of locally compact groups (abstract harmonic analysis). The usual meaning taken for \"p\"-adic analysis is the theory of \"p\"-adic-valued functions on spaces of interest.\nApplications of \"p\"-adic analysis have mainly been in number theory, where it has a significant role in diophantine geometry and diophantine approximation. Some applications have required the development of \"p\"-adic functional analysis and spectral theory. In many ways \"p\"-adic analysis is less subtle than classical analysis, since the ultrametric inequality means, for example, that convergence of infinite series of \"p\"-adic numbers is much simpler. Topological vector spaces over \"p\"-adic fields show distinctive features; for example aspects relating to convexity and the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem are different.\nTwo important concepts from \"p\"-adic analysis are Mahler's theorem, which characterizes every continuous \"p\"-adic function in terms of polynomials, and Volkenborn integral, which provides a method of integration for \"p\"-adic functions.\nHodge theory.\n\"p\"-adic Hodge theory is a theory that provides a way to classify and study \"p\"-adic Galois representations of characteristic 0 local fields with residual characteristic \"p\" (such as Q\"p\"). The theory has its beginnings in Jean-Pierre Serre and John Tate's study of Tate modules of abelian varieties and the notion of Hodge\u2013Tate representation. Hodge\u2013Tate representations are related to certain decompositions of \"p\"-adic cohomology theories analogous to the Hodge decomposition, hence the name \"p\"-adic Hodge theory. Further developments were inspired by properties of \"p\"-adic Galois representations arising from the \u00e9tale cohomology of varieties. Jean-Marc Fontaine introduced many of the basic concepts of the field.\nTeichm\u00fcller theory.\n\"p\"-adic Teichm\u00fcller theory describes the \"uniformization\" of \"p\"-adic curves and their moduli, generalizing the usual Teichm\u00fcller theory that describes the uniformization of Riemann surfaces and their moduli. It was introduced and developed by Shinichi Mochizuki.\nQuantum physics.\np\"-adic quantum mechanics is a collection of related research efforts in quantum physics that replace real numbers with \"p\"-adic numbers. Historically, this research was inspired by the discovery that the Veneziano amplitude of the open bosonic string, which is calculated using an integral over the real numbers, can be generalized to the \"p\"-adic numbers. This observation initiated the study of p\"-adic string theory.\nGeneralizations and related concepts.\nThe reals and the p-adic numbers are the completions of the rationals; it is also possible to complete other fields, for instance general algebraic number fields, in an analogous way. This will be described now.\nSuppose \"D\" is a Dedekind domain and \"E\" is its field of fractions. Pick a non-zero prime ideal \"P\" of \"D\". If \"x\" is a non-zero element of \"E\", then \"xD\" is a fractional ideal and can be uniquely factored as a product of positive and negative powers of non-zero prime ideals of \"D\". We write ord\"P\"(\"x\") for the exponent of \"P\" in this factorization, and for any choice of number \"c\" greater than 1 we can set\nformula_247\nCompleting with respect to this absolute value |\u22c5|\"P\" yields a field \"E\"\"P\", the proper generalization of the field of \"p\"-adic numbers to this setting. The choice of \"c\" does not change the completion (different choices yield the same concept of Cauchy sequence, so the same completion). It is convenient, when the residue field \"D\"/\"P\" is finite, to take for \"c\" the size of \"D\"/\"P\".\nFor example, when \"E\" is a number field, Ostrowski's theorem says that every non-trivial non-Archimedean absolute value on \"E\" arises as some |\u22c5|\"P\". The remaining non-trivial absolute values on \"E\" arise from the different embeddings of \"E\" into the real or complex numbers. (In fact, the non-Archimedean absolute values can be considered as simply the different embeddings of \"E\" into the fields C\"p\", thus putting the description of all\nthe non-trivial absolute values of a number field on a common footing.)\nOften, one needs to simultaneously keep track of all the above-mentioned completions when \"E\" is a number field (or more generally a global field), which are seen as encoding \"local\" information. This is accomplished by adele rings and idele groups.\n\"p\"-adic integers can be extended to \"p\"-adic solenoids formula_248. There is a map from formula_248 to the circle group whose fibers are the \"p\"-adic integers formula_250, in analogy to how there is a map from formula_251 to the circle whose fibers are formula_252.\nThe \"p\"-adic integers can also be extended to profinite integers formula_253, which can be understood as the direct product of rings\nformula_254\nUnlike the \"p\"-adic integers which only generalize the modulo over prime powers \"p\"k, the profinite integers generalizes the modulo over \"all\" natural numbers \"n\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51425", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51425", "title": "Somaliland", "text": "Self-declared state in the Horn of Africa\nSomaliland, officially the Republic of Somaliland, is an unrecognised state in the Horn of Africa. It is located on the southern coast of the Gulf of Aden and bordered by Djibouti to the northwest, Ethiopia to the south and west, and Somalia to the east. Its claimed territory has an area of , with approximately 6.2\u00a0million people as of 2024. The capital and largest city is Hargeisa.\nVarious Somali Muslim kingdoms were established in the area during the early Islamic period, including in the 14th to 15th centuries the Zeila-based Adal Sultanate. In the early modern period, successor states to the Adal Sultanate emerged, including the Isaaq Sultanate, which was established in the middle of the 18th century. In the late 19th century, the United Kingdom signed agreements with various clans in the area, establishing the Somaliland Protectorate, which was formally granted independence by the United Kingdom as the State of Somaliland on 26 June 1960. Five days later, the State of Somaliland voluntarily united with the Trust Territory of Somaliland (the former Italian Somalia) to form the Somali Republic. The union of the two states proved problematic early on, and in response to the harsh policies enacted by Somalia's Barre regime against the main clan family in Somaliland, the Isaaq, shortly after the conclusion of the disastrous Ogaden War, a 10-year war of independence concluded with the declaration of Somaliland's independence in 1991. The Government of Somaliland regards itself as the successor state to British Somaliland.\nSince 1991, the territory has been governed by democratically elected governments that seek international recognition as the government of the Republic of Somaliland. The central government maintains informal ties with some foreign governments, which have sent delegations to Hargeisa; Somaliland hosts representative offices from several countries, including Ethiopia and Taiwan. However, as of 2010, Somaliland's self-proclaimed independence had not been officially recognised by any UN member state or international organisation. It is the largest unrecognised state in the world by \"de facto\" controlled land area. It is a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization, an advocacy group whose members consist of indigenous peoples, minorities, and unrecognised or occupied territories. Following the Las Anod conflict that emerged in 2022, Somaliland lost control of a significant portion of its eastern territory to pro-unionist forces who established the SSC-Khatumo administration.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Somaliland\" is derived from two words: \"Somali\" and \"land\". The area was named when Britain took control from the Egyptian administration in 1884, after signing successive treaties with the ruling Somali Sultans of the Isaaq, Issa, Gadabursi, and Warsangali clans. The British established a protectorate in the region referred to as British Somaliland. In 1960, when the protectorate became independent from Britain, it was called the State of Somaliland. Five days later, on 1 July 1960, Somaliland united with the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian Administration (the former Italian Somaliland). The name \"Republic of Somaliland\" was adopted upon the declaration of independence following the Somali Civil War in 1991.\nAt the grand conference in Burao held in 1991, many names for the country were suggested, including \"Puntland\", in reference to Somaliland's location in the ancient Land of Punt, and which is now the name of the Puntland state in neighbouring Somalia, and \"Shankaroon\", meaning \"better than five\" in Somali, in reference to the five regions of Greater Somalia.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe area of Somaliland was inhabited around 10,000 years ago during the Neolithic age. The ancient shepherds raised cows and other livestock and created vibrant rock art paintings. During the Stone Age, the Doian and Hargeisan cultures flourished here. The oldest evidence of burial customs in the Horn of Africa comes from cemeteries in Somaliland dating back to the 4th millennium BCE. The stone implements from the Jalelo site in the north were also characterised in 1909 as important artefacts demonstrating the archaeological universality during the Paleolithic between the East and the West.\nAccording to linguists, the first Afroasiatic-speaking populations arrived in the region during the ensuing Neolithic period from the family's proposed urheimat (\"original homeland\") in the Nile Valley, or the Near East.\nThe Laas Geel complex on the outskirts of Hargeisa dates back around 5,000 years, and has rock art depicting both wild animals and decorated cows. Other cave paintings are found in the northern Dhambalin region, which feature one of the earliest known depictions of a hunter on horseback. The rock art is in the distinctive Ethiopian-Arabian style, dated to 1,000 to 3,000 BCE. Additionally, between the towns of Las Khorey and El Ayo in eastern Somaliland lies Karinhegane, the site of numerous cave paintings of real and mythical animals. Each painting has an inscription below it, which collectively has been estimated to be around 2,500 years old.\nAntiquity and classical era.\nAncient pyramidical structures, mausoleums, ruined cities, and stone walls, such as the Wargaade Wall, are evidence of civilisations thriving in the Somali peninsula. Ancient Somaliland had trading relationships with ancient Egypt and Mycenaean Greece dating back to at least the second millennium BCE, supporting the hypothesis that Somalia or adjacent regions were the location of the ancient Land of Punt. The Puntites traded myrrh, spices, gold, ebony, short-horned cattle, ivory, and frankincense with the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Babylonians, Indians, Chinese, and Romans through their commercial ports. An Egyptian expedition sent to Punt by the 18th dynasty Queen Hatshepsut is recorded on the temple reliefs at Deir el-Bahari, during the reign of the Puntite King Parahu and Queen Ati. In 2015, isotopic analysis of ancient baboon mummies from Punt that had been brought to Egypt as gifts indicated that the specimens likely originated from an area encompassing eastern Somalia and the Eritrea-Ethiopia corridor.\nThe camel is believed to have been domesticated in the Horn region sometime between the 2nd and 3rd millennium BCE. From there, it spread to Egypt and the Maghreb. During the classical period, the northern Barbara city-states of Mosylon, Opone, Mundus, Isis, Malao, Avalites, Essina, Nikon, and Sarapion developed a lucrative trade network, connecting with merchants from Ptolemaic Egypt, Ancient Greece, Phoenicia, Parthian Persia, Saba, the Nabataean Kingdom, and the Roman Empire. They used the ancient Somali maritime vessel known as the \"beden\" to transport their cargo.\nAfter the Roman conquest of the Nabataean Empire and the establishment of a Roman naval presence at Aden to curb piracy, Arab and Somali merchants cooperated with the Romans to bar Indian ships from trading in the free port cities of the Arabian peninsula to protect the interests of Somali and Arab merchants in the lucrative commerce between the Red and Mediterranean Seas. However, Indian merchants continued to trade in the port cities of the Somali peninsula, which was free from Roman interference.\nFor centuries, Indian merchants brought large quantities of cinnamon to Somalia and Arabia from Ceylon and the Spice Islands. The source of the spices is said to have been the best-kept secret of Arab and Somali merchants in their trade with the Roman and Greek world; the Romans and Greeks believed the source to have been the Somali peninsula. The collaboration between Somali and Arab traders inflated the price of Indian and Chinese cinnamon in North Africa, the Near East, and Europe, and made the spice trade profitable, especially for the Somali merchants through whose hands large quantities were shipped across sea and land routes.\nIn 2007, more rock art sites with Sabaean and Himyarite writings in and around Hargeisa were found, but some were bulldozed by developers.\nBirth of Islam and the Middle Ages.\nThe Isaaq people traditionally claim to have descended from Sheikh Ishaaq bin Ahmed, an Islamic scholar who purportedly traveled to Somaliland in the 12th or 13th century and married two women; one from the local Dir clan and the other from the neighbouring Harari people. He is said to have sired eight sons who are the common ancestors of the clans of the Isaaq clan-family. He remained in Maydh until his death.\nAs the Isaaq clan-family grew in size and numbers during the 12th century, the clan-family migrated and spread from their core area in Mait (Maydh) and the wider Sanaag region in a southwestward expansion over a wide portion of present-day Somaliland by the 15th and 16th centuries. As the Isaaq expanded, the earlier Dir communities of Mait and the wider Sanaag region were driven westwards and to the south towards their present positions. In this general expansion, the Isaaq split up into their present component segments; however, one fraction of the Habar Yunis clan, the Muse 'Arre, remains behind in Mait as the custodians of the tomb of Sheikh Ishaaq. By the 1300s, the Isaaq clans united to defend their inhabited territories and resources during clan conflicts against migrating clans.\nAfter the war, the Isaaq clans (along with other tribes like the Daarood) grew in numbers and territory in the northeast, causing them to began to vie with their Oromo neighbours, who were expanding northwards themselves after the Great Oromo Migrations, thus creating a general thrust toward the southwest. The Isaaq, along with the Darood subclans, pushed westwards into the plains of Jigjiga and further, beyond where they played an important role in the Adal Sultanate's campaigns against Christian Abyssinia. By the 16th to 17th century, the movements that followed seem to have established the Isaaqs on coastal Somaliland.\nVarious Somali Muslim kingdoms were established in the area in the early Islamic period. In the 14th century, the Zeila-based Adal Sultanate battled the forces of the Ethiopian emperor Amda Seyon I. The Ottoman Empire later occupied Berbera and environs in the 1500s. Muhammad Ali, Pasha of Egypt, subsequently established a foothold in the area between 1821 and 1841.\nThe Sanaag region is home to the ruined Islamic city of Maduna near El Afweyn, which is considered the most substantial and accessible ruin of its type in Somaliland. The main feature of the ruined city is a large rectangular mosque, its 3-metre-high walls still standing, which includes a mihrab and possibly several smaller arched niches. Swedish-Somali archaeologist Sada Mire dates the ruined city to the 15th\u201317th centuries.\nEarly modern sultanates.\nIsaaq Sultanate.\nIn the early modern period, successor states to the Adal Sultanate began to flourish in Somaliland. These included the Isaaq Sultanate and Habr Yunis Sultanate. The Isaaq Sultanate was a Somali kingdom that ruled parts of the Horn of Africa during the 18th and 19th centuries. It spanned the territories of the Isaaq clan, descendants of the Banu Hashim clan, in modern-day Somaliland and Ethiopia. The sultanate was governed by the Rer Guled branch established by the first sultan, Sultan Guled Abdi, of the Eidagale clan. The sultanate is the pre-colonial predecessor to the modern Republic of Somaliland.\nAccording to oral tradition, before the Guled dynasty, the Isaaq clan-family was ruled by a dynasty of the Tolje'lo branch descending from Ahmed nicknamed Tol Je'lo, the eldest son of Sheikh Ishaaq's Harari wife. There were eight Tolje'lo rulers in total, starting with Boqor Harun (), who ruled the Isaaq Sultanate for centuries starting from the 13th century. The last Tolje'lo ruler, Garad Dhuh Barar (), was overthrown by a coalition of Isaaq clans. The once-strong Tolje'lo clan was scattered and took refuge among the Habr Awal, with whom they still mostly live.\nThe Sultan of Isaaq regularly convened \"shirs\" (meetings) where he would be informed and advised by leading elders or religious figures on what decisions to make. In the case of the Dervish movement, Sultan Deria Hassan had chosen not to join after receiving counsel from Sheikh Madar. He addressed early tensions between the Saad Musa and Eidagale following the former's settlement into the growing town of Hargeisa in the late 19th century. The Sultan was also responsible for organising grazing rights and, in the late 19th century, new agricultural spaces. The allocation of resources and sustainable use of them was also a matter that Sultans concerned themselves with, and was crucial in this arid region. In the 1870s, at a famous meeting between Sheikh Madar and Sultan Deria, it was proclaimed that hunting and tree cutting in the vicinity of Hargeisa would be banned, and that the holy relics from Aw Barkhadle would be brought and oaths would be sworn on them by the Isaaqs in the presence of the Sultan whenever internal combat broke out.\nAside from the leading Sultan of Isaaq, there were numerous Akils, Garaads, and subordinate Sultans alongside religious authorities that constituted the Sultanate; occasionally, these would declare their independence or simply break from its authority.\nThe Isaaq Sultanate had 5 rulers before the creation of British Somaliland in 1884. Historically, Sultans would be chosen by a committee of several important members of the various Isaaq subclans. Sultans were usually buried at Toon, south of Hargeisa, which was a significant site and the capital of the Sultanate during Farah Guled's rule.\nBattle of Berbera.\nThe first engagement between Somalis of the region and the British was in 1825 and led to hostilities, ending in the Battle of Berbera and a subsequent trade agreement between the Habr Awal and the United Kingdom. This was followed by a British treaty with the Governor of Zeila in 1840. An engagement was then started between the British and the elders of Habar Garhajis and Habar Toljaala clans of the Isaaq in 1855, followed a year later by the conclusion of the \"Articles of Peace and Friendship\" between the Habar Awal and the East India Company. These engagements between the British and Somali clans culminated in the formal treaties the British signed with the henceforth 'British Somaliland' clans, which took place between 1884 and 1886 (treaties were signed with the Habar Awal, Gadabursi, Habar Toljaala, Habar Garhajis, Esa, and the Warsangali clans), and paved the way for the British to establish a protectorate in the region referred to as British Somaliland. The British garrisoned the protectorate from Aden and administered it as part of British India until 1898. British Somaliland was then administered by the Foreign Office until 1905, and afterwards by the Colonial Office.\nSomaliland campaign.\nThe Somaliland Campaign, also called the Anglo-Somali War or the Dervish War, was a series of military expeditions that took place between 1900 and 1920 in the Horn of Africa, pitting the Dervishes led by Mohammed Abdullah Hassan (nicknamed the \"Mad Mullah\") against the British. The British were assisted in their offensives by the Ethiopians and Italians. During the First World War (1914\u20131918), Hassan also received aid from the Ottomans, Germans, and, for a time, from Emperor Iyasu V of Ethiopia. The conflict ended when the British aerially bombed the Dervish capital of Taleh in February 1920.\nThe Fifth Expedition of the Somaliland campaign in 1920 was the final British expedition against the Dervish forces of Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, the Somali religious leader. Although most of the combat took place in January of the year, British troops had begun preparations for the assault as early as November 1919. The British forces included elements of the Royal Air Force and the Somaliland Camel Corps. After three weeks of battle, Hassan's Dervishes were defeated, bringing an effective end to their 20-year resistance. It was one of the bloodiest and longest militant movements in sub-Saharan Africa during the colonial era, one that overlapped with World War I. The battles between various sides over two decades killed nearly a third of Somaliland's population and ravaged the local economy.\nThe Italian conquest of British Somaliland was a military campaign in East Africa, which took place in August 1940 between the forces of Italy and those of several British and Commonwealth countries. The Italian attack was part of the East African campaign.\nAnti-colonial resistance.\nBurao Tax Revolt and RAF bombing.\nThe people of Burao clashed with the British in 1922. They revolted in opposition to a new tax that was imposed upon them, rioting and attacking British government officials. This led to a shootout between the British and Burao residents in which Captain Allan Gibb, a Dervish war veteran and district commissioner, was shot and killed. The British requested Sir Winston Churchill, then Secretary of State for the Colonies, to send troops from Aden and Air Force bombers to Burao to destroy the revolting clans' livestock. The RAF planes arrived at Burao within two days and proceeded to bomb the town with incendiaries, effectively burning the entire settlement to the ground.\nTelegram from Sir Geoffrey Archer, Governor of British Somaliland, to Sir Winston Churchill, the Secretary of State for the Colonies:\nI deeply regret to inform you that during an affray at Burao yesterday between Rer Sugulleh and Akils of other tribes, Captain Gibb was shot dead. Having called out Camel corps company to quell the disturbance, he went forward himself with his interpreter, whereupon fire opened on him by some Rer segulleh riflemen and he was instantly killed..Miscreants then disappeared under the cover of darkness.\nTo meet the situation created by the Murder of Gibb, we require two aeroplanes for about fourteen days. I have arranged with the resident, Aden, for these. And made a formal application, which please confirm. It is proposed that they fly via Perim, confining the sea crossing to 12 miles. We propose to inflict a fine of 2,500 camels on the implicated sections, who are practically isolated and demand the surrender of the man who killed Gibbs. He is known. Fine to be doubled in failure to comply with latter conditions, and aeroplanes to be used to bomb stock on grazing grounds.\nSir Winston Churchill reporting on the Burao incident at the House of Commons:\nOn 25th February, the Governor of Somaliland telegraphed that an affray between tribesmen had taken place at Burao on the previous day, in the course of which Captain Allan Gibb, D.S.O., D.C.M., the District Commissioner at Burao, had been shot dead. Captain Gibb had advanced with his interpreter to quell the disturbance, when, in 1954, fire was opened upon him by some riflemen, and he was instantly killed. The murderers escaped under the cover of falling darkness.\nCaptain Gibb was an officer of long and valued service in Somaliland, whose loss I deeply regret. From the information available, his murder does not appear to have been premeditated, but it inevitably had a disturbing effect upon the surrounding tribes, and immediate dispositions of troops became necessary to ensure the apprehension and punishment of those responsible for the murder. On 27th February, the Governor telegraphed that, to meet the situation which had arisen, he required two aeroplanes for purposes of demonstration, and suggested that two aeroplanes from the Royal Air Force Detachment at Aden should fly over to Berber from Aden. He also telegraphed that, in certain circumstances, it might become necessary to ask for reinforcements of troops to be sent to the Protectorate.\nJames Lawrence, author of \"Imperial Rearguard: Wars of Empire\", writes\n[Gibb]..was murdered by rioters during a protest against taxation at Burao. Governor Archer immediately called for aircraft that were at Burao within two days. The inhabitants of the native township were turned out of their houses, and the entire area was razed by a combination of bombing, machine-gun fire, and burning.\nAfter the RAF aircraft bombed Burao to the ground, the leaders of the rebellion acquiesced, agreeing to pay a fine for Gibb's death, but they refused to identify and apprehend the accused individuals. Most of the men responsible for Gibb's shooting evaded capture. In light of the failure to implement the taxation without provoking a violent response, the British abandoned the policy altogether.\n1945 Sheikh Bashir Rebellion.\nThe 1945 Sheikh Bashir Rebellion was a rebellion waged by tribesmen of the Habr Je'lo clan in the former British Somaliland protectorate against British authorities in July 1945, led by Sheikh Bashir, a Somali religious leader.\nOn 2 July, Sheikh Bashir collected 25 of his followers in the town of Wadamago and transported them on a lorry to the vicinity of Burao, where he distributed arms to half of his followers. On the evening of 3 July, the group entered Burao and opened fire on the police guard of the central prison in the city, which was filled with prisoners arrested for previous demonstrations. The group also attacked the house of the district commissioner of Burao District, Major Chambers, resulting in the death of Major Chambers' police guard before escaping to Bur Dhab, a strategic mountain southeast of Burao, where Sheikh Bashir's small unit occupied a fort and took up a defensive position in anticipation of a British counterattack.\nThe British campaign against Sheikh Bashir's troops proved abortive after several defeats, as his forces kept moving from place to place and avoiding any permanent location. No sooner had the expedition left the area than the news travelled fast among the Somali nomads across the plain. The war had exposed the British administration to humiliation. The government concluded that another expedition against him would be useless; that they must build a railway, make roads, and effectively occupy the whole of the protectorate, or else abandon the interior completely. The latter course was decided upon, and during the first months of 1945, the advance posts were withdrawn, and the British administration confined to the coast town of Berbera.\nSheikh Bashir settled many disputes among the tribes in the vicinity, which kept them from raiding each other. He was generally thought to settle disputes through the use of Islamic Sharia and gathered around him a strong following.\nThe British administration recruited Indian and South African troops, led by police general James David, to fight against Sheikh Bashir and had intelligence plans to capture him alive. The British authorities mobilised a police force, and eventually, on 7 July, found Sheikh Bashir and his unit in defensive positions behind their fortifications in the mountains of Bur Dhab. After clashes, Sheikh Bashir and his second-in-command, Alin Yusuf Ali, nicknamed Qaybdiid, were killed. A third rebel was wounded and captured along with two other rebels. The rest fled the fortifications and dispersed. On the British side, the police general leading the British troops, as well as a number of Indian and South African troops, perished in the clashes, and a policeman was injured.\nAfter his death, Sheikh Bashir was widely hailed by locals as a martyr and was held in great reverence. His family took quick action to remove his body from the place of his death at Geela-eeg mountain, about 20 miles from Burao.\nState of Somaliland (Independence).\nInitially, the British government planned to delay the protectorate of British Somaliland's independence in favour of a gradual transfer of power. The arrangement would allow local politicians to gain more political experience in running the protectorate before official independence. However, strong pan-Somali nationalism and a landslide victory in the earlier elections encouraged them to demand independence and unification with the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian Administration (the former Italian Somalia).\nIn May 1960, the British government stated that it would be prepared to grant independence to the then protectorate of British Somaliland, with the intention that the territory would unite with the Italian-administered Trust Territory of Somaliland. The Legislative Council of British Somaliland passed a resolution in April 1960 requesting independence and union with the Trust Territory of Somaliland, which was scheduled to gain independence on 1 July that year. The legislative councils of both territories agreed to this proposal following a joint conference in Mogadishu.\nOn 26 June 1960, the former British Somaliland protectorate briefly obtained independence as the State of Somaliland, with the Trust Territory of Somaliland following suit five days later. During its brief period of independence, the State of Somaliland garnered formal recognition from thirty-five sovereign states that included China, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, Israel, Libya, and the Soviet Union. However, the United States merely acknowledged Somaliland\u2019s declaration of independence by sending a congratulatory message to its Council of Ministers at the time, without extending formal recognition, since its period of independence was anticipated to be extremely short-lived. \nThe following day, on 27 June 1960, the newly convened Somaliland Legislative Assembly approved a bill that would formally allow for the union of the State of Somaliland with the Trust Territory of Somaliland on 1 July 1960.\nSomali Republic (union with Somalia).\nOn 1 July 1960, the State of Somaliland and the Trust Territory of Somaliland (the former Italian Somaliland) united as planned to form the Somali Republic. Inspired by Somali nationalism, the northerners were initially enthusiastic about the union. A government was formed by Abdullahi Issa, with Aden Abdullah Osman Daar as President and Abdirashid Ali Shermarke as Prime Minister (later becoming president, from 1967 to 1969). On 20 July 1961, through a popular referendum, the Somali people ratified a new constitution, which was first drafted in 1960. The constitution had little support in the former Somaliland and was believed to favour the south. Many northerners boycotted the referendum in protest, and over 60% of those who voted in the north were against the new constitution. Regardless, the referendum passed, and Somaliland became quickly dominated by southerners. As a result, dissatisfaction became widespread in the north, and support for the union plummeted. British-trained Somaliland officers attempted a revolt to end the union in December 1961. Their uprising failed, and Somaliland continued to be marginalised by the south during the next decades.\nIn 1967, Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister, a position to which he was appointed by Shermarke. Shermarke was assassinated two years later by one of his own bodyguards. His murder was quickly followed by a military coup d'\u00e9tat on 21 October 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somalian Army seized power without encountering armed opposition. The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army. The new regime would go on to rule Somalia for the next 22 years.\nSomali National Movement, Barre persecution.\nThe moral authority of Barre's government was gradually eroded, as many Somalis became disillusioned with life under military rule. By the mid-1980s, resistance movements supported by Ethiopia's communist Derg administration had sprung up across the country, which led to the Somaliland War of Independence. Barre responded by ordering punitive measures against those he perceived as locally supporting the guerrillas, especially in the northern regions. The clampdown included bombing of cities, with the northwestern administrative centre of Hargeisa, a Somali National Movement (SNM) stronghold, among the targeted areas in 1988. The bombardment was led by General Mohammed Said Hersi Morgan, Barre's son-in-law.\nIn May 1988, the SNM launched a major offensive against the cities of Hargeisa and Burao, then the second and third largest cities of Somalia. The SNM captured Burao on 27 May within two hours, while the SNM entered Hargeisa on 29 May, overrunning most of the city apart from its airport by 1 June.\nAccording to Abou Jeng and other scholars, the Barre regime's rule was marked by a targeted brutal persecution of the Isaaq clan. Mohamed Haji Ingiriis and Chris Mullin state that the clampdown by the Barre regime against the Hargeisa-based Somali National Movement targeted the Isaaq clan, to which most members of the SNM belonged. They refer to the clampdown as the Isaaq Genocide or \"Hargeisa Holocaust\". A United Nations investigation concluded that the crime of genocide was \"conceived, planned and perpetrated by the Somali Government against the Isaaq people.\" The number of civilian casualties is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000 according to various sources, while some reports estimate the total civilian deaths to be upwards of 200,000 Isaaq civilians. Along with the deaths, the Barre regime bombarded and razed the second and third largest cities in Somalia, Hargeisa and Burao, respectively. This displaced an estimated 400,000 local residents to Hart Sheik in Ethiopia; another 400,000 individuals were also internally displaced.\nThe counterinsurgency by the Barre regime against the SNM targeted the rebel group's civilian base of support, escalating into a genocidal onslaught against the Isaaq clan. This led to anarchy and violent campaigns by fragmented militias, which then wrested power at a local level. The Barre regime's persecution was not limited to the Isaaq, as it targeted other clans such as the Hawiye. The Barre regime collapsed in January 1991. Thereafter, as the political situation in Somaliland stabilised, the displaced people returned to their homes, the militias were demobilised or incorporated into the army, and tens of thousands of houses and businesses were reconstructed from rubble.\nRestoration of sovereignty (end of the unity with Somalia).\nAlthough the SNM at its inception had a unionist constitution, it eventually began to pursue independence, looking to secede from the rest of Somalia. Under the leadership of Abdirahman Ahmed Ali Tuur, the local administration declared the northwestern Somali territories independent at a conference held in Burao between 27 April 1991 and 15 May 1991. Tuur then became the newly established Somaliland polity's first President, but subsequently renounced the separatist platform in 1994 and began instead to publicly seek and advocate reconciliation with the rest of Somalia under a power-sharing federal system of governance. A brief armed conflict had begun in January 1992 against rebels against Tuur in the period that he was in power, lasting until August 1992, when it was settled by a conference at the town of Sheikh.\nMuhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal was appointed as Tuur's successor in 1993 by the Grand Conference of National Reconciliation in Borama, which met for four months, leading to a gradual improvement in security, as well as a consolidation of the new territory. Another armed conflict between the Somaliland government, now under Egal, and rebels began, as militias of the Eidagalley clan occupied Hargeisa airport for some time. Conflict re-erupted when troops of the government attacked the airport to drive out the Eidagalley militias in October 1994, sparking a new war that would spread out of Hargeisa and last until around April 1995, with a rebel defeat. Around the same time, Djiboutian-backed forces of the Issa-dominated United Somali Front attempted and failed to carve out Issa-inhabited areas of Somaliland. Egal was re-appointed in 1997 and remained in power until his death on 3 May 2002. The vice-president, Dahir Riyale Kahin, who was during the 1980s the highest-ranking National Security Service (NSS) officer in Berbera in Siad Barre's government, was sworn in as president shortly afterward. In 2003, Kahin became the first elected president of Somaliland.\nThe war in southern Somalia between Islamist insurgents on the one hand, and the Federal Government of Somalia and its African Union allies on the other, has for the most part not directly affected Somaliland, which, like neighbouring Puntland, has remained relatively stable.\n2001 constitutional referendum.\nIn August 2000, Egal's government distributed thousands of copies of the proposed constitution throughout Somaliland for consideration and review by the people. One critical clause of the 130 individual articles of the constitution would ratify Somaliland's self-declared independence and final separation from Somalia, restoring the nation's independence for the first time since 1960. In late March 2001, Egal set the date for the referendum on the Constitution for 31 May 2001. 99.9% of eligible voters took part in the referendum, and 97.1% of them voted in favour of the constitution.\nGovernment and politics.\nConstitution.\nThe Constitution of Somaliland defines the political system; the Republic of Somaliland is a unitary state and a Presidential Republic, based on peace, co-operation, democracy, and a multi-party system.\nPresident and cabinet.\nThe executive is led by an elected president, whose government includes a vice-president and a Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers, which is responsible for the normal running of government, are nominated by the President and approved by the Parliament's House of Representatives. The President must approve bills passed by the Parliament before they come into effect. Presidential elections are confirmed by the National Electoral Commission of Somaliland. The President can serve a maximum of two five-year terms. The official residence and administrative headquarters of the President is the Somaliland Presidential Palace or State House in the capital city of Hargeisa.\nParliament.\nLegislative power is held by the Parliament, which is bicameral. Its upper house is the House of Elders, chaired by Suleiman Mohamoud Adan, and the lower house is the House of Representatives, chaired by Yasin Haji Mohamoud. Each house has 82 members. Members of the House of Elders are elected indirectly by local communities for six-year terms. The House of Elders shares power in passing laws with the House of Representatives, and also has the role of solving internal conflicts, and exclusive power to extend the terms of the President and representatives under circumstances that make an election impossible. Members of the House of Representatives are directly elected by the people for five-year terms. The House of Representatives shares voting power with the House of Elders, though it can pass a law that the House of Elders rejects if it votes for the law by a two-thirds majority, and has absolute power in financial matters and confirmation of Presidential appointments (except for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court).\nLaw.\nThe judicial system is divided into district courts (which deal with matters of family law and succession, lawsuits for amounts up to 3 million SLSH, criminal cases punishable by up to 3 years' imprisonment or 3 million SL fines, and crimes committed by juveniles), regional courts (which deal with lawsuits and criminal cases not within the jurisdiction of district courts, labour and employment claims, and local government elections), regional appeals courts (which deal with all appeals from the district and regional courts), and the Supreme court (which deals with issues between courts and in government, and reviews its own decisions), which is the highest court and also functions as the Constitutional Court.\nSomaliland nationality law defines who is a Somaliland citizen, as well as the procedures by which one may be naturalised into Somaliland citizenship or renounce it.\nThe Somaliland government continues to apply the 1962 penal code of the Somali Republic. As such, homosexual acts are illegal in the territory.\nParties and elections.\nThe \"guurti\" worked with rebel leaders to set up a new government, and was incorporated into the governance structure, becoming the Parliament's House of Elders. The government became, in essence, a \"power-sharing coalition of Somaliland's main clans\", with seats in the Upper and Lower houses proportionally allocated to clans according to a predetermined formula, although not all clans are satisfied with their representation. In 2002, after several extensions of this interim government, Somaliland transitioned to a multi-party democracy. The election was limited to three parties in an attempt to create ideology-based elections rather than clan-based elections. As of December 2014, Somaliland has three political parties: the Peace, Unity, and Development Party, the Justice and Development Party, and Wadani. Under the Somaliland Constitution, a maximum of three political parties at the national level is allowed. The minimum age required to vote is 15.\nFreedom House ranks the Somaliland government as partly free. Seth Kaplan (2011) argues that in contrast to southern Somalia and adjacent territories, Somaliland, the secessionist northwestern portion of Somalia, has built a more democratic mode of governance from the bottom up, with virtually no foreign assistance. Specifically, Kaplan suggests that Somaliland has the most democratic political system in the Horn of Africa because it has been largely insulated from the extremist elements in the rest of Somalia and has viable electoral and legislative systems as well as a robust private sector-dominated economy, unlike neighbouring authoritarian governments. He largely attributes this to Somaliland's integration of customary laws and tradition with modern state structures, which he indicates most post-colonial states in Africa and the Middle East have not had the opportunity to do. Kaplan asserts that this has facilitated cohesiveness and conferred greater governmental legitimacy in Somaliland, as has the territory's comparatively homogeneous population, relatively equitable income distribution, a common fear of the south, and absence of interference by outside forces, which has obliged local politicians to observe a degree of accountability.\nForeign relations.\nSomaliland has political contacts with its neighbours, Ethiopia and Djibouti, non-UN member state Republic of China (Taiwan), as well as with South Africa, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. On 17 January 2007, the European Union (EU) sent a delegation for foreign affairs to discuss future cooperation. The African Union (AU) has also sent a foreign minister to discuss the future of international acknowledgment, and on 29 and 30 January 2007, the ministers stated that they would discuss acknowledgement with the organisation's member states.\nIn early 2006, the National Assembly for Wales extended an official invitation to the Somaliland government to attend the royal opening of the Senedd building in Cardiff. The move was seen as an act of recognition by the Welsh Assembly of the breakaway government's legitimacy. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office made no comment on the invitation. Wales is home to a significant Somali expatriate community from Somaliland.\nIn 2007, a delegation led by President Kahin was present at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kampala, Uganda. Although Somaliland has applied to join the Commonwealth under observer status, its application is still pending.\nOn 24 September 2010, Johnnie Carson, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, stated that the United States would be modifying its strategy in Somalia and would seek deeper engagement with the governments of Somaliland and Puntland while continuing to support the Somali Transitional Government. Carson said the US would send aid workers and diplomats to Puntland and Somaliland and alluded to the possibility of future development projects. However, Carson emphasised that the US would not extend formal recognition to either region.\nThe then-UK Minister for Africa, Henry Bellingham MP, met President Silanyo of Somaliland in November 2010 to discuss ways in which to increase the UK's engagement with Somaliland. President Silanyo said during his visit to London: \"We have been working with the international community and the international community has been engaging with us, giving us assistance and working with us in our democratisation and development programmes. And we are very happy with the way the international community has been dealing with us, particularly the UK, the US, other European nations, and our neighbours who continue to seek recognition.\"\nRecognition of Somaliland by the UK was also supported by the UK Independence Party, which came third in the popular vote at the 2015 general election, though only electing a single MP. The former leader of UKIP, Nigel Farage, met with Ali Aden Awale, Head of the Somaliland UK Mission, on Somaliland's national day, 18 May, in 2015, to express UKIP's support for Somaliland.\nIn 2011, Somaliland and the neighbouring Puntland region each entered a security-related memorandum of understanding with the Seychelles. Following the framework of an earlier agreement signed between the Transitional Federal Government and Seychelles, the memorandum is \"for the transfer of convicted persons to prisons in 'Puntland' and 'Somaliland'.\"\nOn 1 July 2020, Somaliland and Taiwan signed an agreement to set up representative offices to promote cooperation between the two countries. Cooperation between the two polities on education, maritime security, and medicine began in 2009, and Taiwanese staff entered Somaliland in February 2020 to prepare for the representative office. As of 2023, Taiwan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs refers to Somaliland as a country.\nOn 1 January 2024, a memorandum of understanding was signed between Ethiopia and Somaliland, where Ethiopia will lease the port of Berbera on the Gulf of Aden, and a 20-kilometre stretch of the Gulf of Aden coastline, for 20 years, in exchange for eventual recognition of Somaliland as an independent state and a stake in Ethiopian Airlines. If this agreement is honoured, Ethiopia would become the first United Nations member state to recognise the breakaway nation.\nBorder disputes.\nSomaliland continues to claim the entire area of the former British Somaliland which gained independence in 1960 in the name of State of Somaliland. It is currently in control of the vast majority of the former State of Somaliland.\nPuntland, a federal member state of Somalia, disputes the Harti-inhabited territory in the former British Somaliland protectorate based on kinship. In 1998, the northern Darod clans established the state, and the Dhulbahante and Warsangali clans wholly participated in its foundation.\nThe Harti were the second most powerful clan confederation in Somaliland until the 1993 Borama Conference, when they were replaced in importance by the Gadabursi. The Dhulbahante and Warsangali clans established two separate administrations in the early 1990s. First, the former was to hold the Boocame I conference in May 1993, while the later held a conference in Hadaaftimo in September 1992. In both conferences the desire to remain part of Somalia was expressed.\nTensions between Puntland and Somaliland escalated into violence several times between 2002 and 2009. In October 2004, and again in April and October 2007, armed forces of Somaliland and Puntland clashed near the town of Las Anod, the capital of Sool region. In October 2007, Somaliland troops took control of the town. While celebrating Puntland's 11th anniversary on 2 August 2009, Puntland officials vowed to recapture Las Anod. While Somaliland claims independent statehood and therefore \"split up\" the \"old\" Somalia, Puntland works for the re-establishment of a united but federal Somali state.\nSomaliland forces took control of the town of Las Qorey in eastern Sanaag on 10 July 2008, along with positions east of the town. The defence forces completed their operations on 9 July 2008 after the Maakhir and Puntland militia in the area left their positions.\nIn the late 2000s, SSC Movement (Hoggaanka Badbaadada iyo Mideynta SSC), a local unionist group based in Sanaag was formed with the goal to establish its own regional administration (Sool, Sanaag and Cayn, or SSC). This later evolved into Khatumo State, which was established in 2012. The local administration and its constituents does not recognise the Somaliland government's claim to sovereignty or to its territory.\nOn 20 October 2017 in Aynabo, an agreement was signed with the Somaliland government that stipulated the amendment of Somaliland's constitution and integrating the organisation into the Somaliland government. This signalled the end of the organisation even though it was an unpopular event among the Dhulbahante community.\nMilitary.\nThe Somaliland Armed Forces are the main military command in Somaliland. Along with the Somaliland Police and all other internal security forces, they are overseen by Somaliland's Ministry of Defence. The current head of Somaliland's Armed Forces is the Minister of Defence, Abdiqani Mohamoud Aateye. Following the declaration of independence, various pre-existing militia affiliated with different clans were absorbed into a centralised military structure. The resultant large military takes up around half of the country's budget, but the action served to help prevent inter-clan violence.\nThe Somaliland Army consists of twelve divisions equipped primarily with light weaponry, though it is equipped with some howitzers and mobile rocket launchers. Its armoured vehicles and tanks are mostly of Soviet design, though there are some ageing Western vehicles and tanks in its arsenal. The Somaliland Navy (often referred to as a Coast Guard by the Associated Press), despite a crippling lack of equipment and formal training, has apparently had some success at curbing both piracy and illegal fishing within Somaliland waters.\nHuman rights.\nAccording to the 2023 Freedom House report, Somaliland has seen a consistent erosion of political rights and civic space. Public figures and journalists face pressure from authorities. Minority clans are subject to economic and political marginalisation, and violence against women remains a serious problem.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Republic of Somaliland is divided into six administrative regions: Awdal, Sahil, Maroodi Jeeh, Togdheer, Sanaag and Sool. The regions are divided into eighteen administrative districts.\nRegions and districts.\nThe following regions are taken from \"Michael Walls: State Formation in Somaliland: Bringing Deliberation to Institutionalism\" from 2011, \"Somaliland: The Strains of Success\" from 2015 and ActionAID, a humanitarian organisation currently active in Somaliland.\nIn 2019, the local government law passed in 2019 (Lr. 23/2019, hereinafter referred to as the 2019 local government law), regions that \"Somaliland is divided into six regions (Article 9 of the same law)\". The 2019 Local Government Act came into force on 4 January 2020.\nUnder Article 11, Section 1 of the Act, the regional boundaries are supposed to correspond to the boundaries of the six districts under the Somaliland protectorate; however, the Siad Barre era boundaries subsist as the de facto boundaries.\nGeography.\nLocation and habitat.\nSomaliland is situated in the northwest of recognised Somalia. It lies between 08\u00b0N and 11\u00b030'N, and between 42\u00b030'E and 49\u00b000'E. It is bordered by Djibouti to the west, Ethiopia to the south, and Somalia to the east. Somaliland has an coastline with the majority lying along the Gulf of Aden. In terms of landmass, Somaliland has an area of .\nSomaliland's climate is a mixture of wet and dry conditions. The northern part of the region is hilly, and in many places the altitude ranges between above sea level. The Awdal, Sahil and Maroodi Jeex regions are fertile and mountainous, while Togdheer is mostly semi-desert with little fertile greenery around. The Awdal region is also known for its offshore islands, coral reefs and mangroves.\nA scrub-covered, semi-desert plain referred as the \"Guban\" lies parallel to the Gulf of Aden littoral. With a width of in the west to as little as in the east, the plain is bisected by watercourses that are essentially beds of dry sand except during the rainy seasons. When the rains arrive, the Guban's low bushes and grass clumps transform into lush vegetation. This coastal strip is part of the Ethiopian xeric grasslands and shrublands ecoregion.\nCal Madow is a mountain range in the eastern part of the country. Extending from the northwest of Erigavo to several kilometres west of the city of Bosaso in neighbouring Somalia, it features Somaliland's highest peak, Shimbiris, which sits at an elevation of about . The rugged east\u2013west ranges of the Karkaar Mountains also lie to the interior of the Gulf of Aden littoral. In the central regions, the northern mountain ranges give way to shallow plateaus and typically dry watercourses that are referred to locally as the \"Ogo\". The Ogo's western plateau, in turn, gradually merges into the Haud, an important grazing area for livestock. In the east, the Haud is separated from the Ain and Nugal valleys by the Buur Dhaab mountain range.\nClimate.\nSomaliland is located north of the equator. It is semi-arid. The average daily temperatures range from . The sun passes vertically overhead twice a year, in April and in August or September. Somaliland consists of three main topographic zones: a coastal plain (Guban), the coastal range (Ogo), and a plateau (Hawd). The coastal plain is a zone with high temperatures and low rainfall. Summer temperatures in the region easily average over . However, temperatures come down during the winter, and both human and livestock populations increase dramatically in the region.\nThe coastal range (Ogo) is a high plateau to the immediate south of Guban. Its elevation ranges from above sea level in the West to in the East. Rainfall is heavier there than in Guban, although it varies considerably within the zone. The plateau (Hawd) region lies to the south of Ogo range. It is generally more heavily populated during the wet season, when surface water is available. It is also an important area for grazing. Somalilanders recognise four seasons in the year; GU and Hagaa comprise spring and summer in that order, and Dayr and Jiilaal correspond to autumn and winter, respectively.\nThe average annual rainfall is in some parts of country according to availability of rain gauge, and most of it comes during Gu and Dayr. Gu, which is the first, or major, rainy season (late March, April, May, and early June), is where Ogo range and Hawd experience the heaviest rainfall. This constitutes the period of fresh grazing and abundant surface water. It is also the breeding season for livestock. Hagaa (from late June through August) is usually dry although there are often some scattered showers in the Ogo range, these are known as Karan rains. Hagaa tends to be hot and windy in most parts of the country. Dayr (September, October, and early November), which roughly corresponds to autumn, is the second, or minor, wet season; the amount of precipitation is generally less than that of Gu. Jilaal, or winter, falls in the coolest and driest months of the year (from late November to early March). It is a season of thirst. Hawd receive virtually no rainfall in winter. The rainfall in the Guban zone, known as \"Hays\", comes from December to February. The humidity of the country varies from 63% in the dry season to 82% in the wet season.\nEconomy.\nSomaliland has the fourth-lowest GDP per capita in the world, and there are huge socio-economic challenges for Somaliland, with an unemployment rate between 60 and 70% among youth, if not higher. According to ILO, illiteracy exists up to 70% in several areas of Somaliland, especially among females and the elder population.\nSince Somaliland is unrecognised, international donors have found it difficult to provide aid. As a result, the government relies mainly upon tax receipts and remittances from the large Somali diaspora, which contribute significantly to the Somaliland economy. Remittances come to Somaliland through money transfer companies, the largest of which is Dahabshiil, one of the few Somali money transfer companies that conform to modern money-transfer regulations. The World Bank estimates that remittances worth approximately US$1\u00a0billion reach Somalia annually from \u00e9migr\u00e9s working in the Gulf states, Europe and the United States. Analysts say that Dahabshiil may handle around two-thirds of that figure and as much as half of it reaches Somaliland alone.\nSince the late 1990s, service provisions have significantly improved through limited government provisions and contributions from non-governmental organisations, religious groups, the international community (especially the diaspora), and the growing private sector. Local and municipal governments have been developing key public service provisions such as water in Hargeisa and education, electricity, and security in Berbera. In 2009, the Banque pour le Commerce et l'Industrie \u2013 Mer Rouge (BCIMR), based in Djibouti, opened a branch in Hargeisa and became the first bank in the country since the 1990 collapse of the Commercial and Savings Bank of Somalia. In 2014, Dahabshil Bank International became the country's first commercial bank. In 2017 Premier Bank from Mogadishu opened a branch in Hargeisa.\nMonetary and payment system.\nThe Somaliland shilling, which cannot easily be exchanged outside of Somaliland on account of the nation's lack of recognition, is regulated by the Bank of Somaliland, the central bank, which was established constitutionally in 1994.\nThe most popular and used payment system in the country is the ZAAD service, which is a mobile money transfer service that was launched in Somaliland in 2009 by the largest mobile operator Telesom.\nTelecommunications.\nTelecommunications companies serving Somaliland include Telesom, Somtel, Telcom and NationLink.\nThe state-run Somaliland National TV is the main national public service television channel, and was launched in 2005. Its radio counterpart is Radio Hargeisa.\nAgriculture.\nLivestock is the backbone of Somaliland's economy. Sheep, camels, and cattle are shipped from the Berbera port and sent to Gulf Arab countries, such as Saudi Arabia. The country is home to some of the largest livestock markets, known in Somali as \"seylad\", in the Horn of Africa, with as many as 10,000 heads of sheep and goats sold daily in the markets of Burao and Yirowe, many of whom shipped to Gulf states via the port of Berbera. The markets handle livestock from all over the Horn of Africa.\nAgriculture is generally considered to be a potentially successful industry, especially in the production of cereals and horticulture. Mining also has potential, though simple quarrying represents the extent of current operations, despite the presence of diverse quantities of mineral deposits.\nThe primary method of agricultural production is rain-fed farming. Cereals are the primary crops cultivated. About 70% of the rain-fed agricultural land is used for the main crop, sorghum, while maize occupies another 25% of the land. Scattered marginal lands are also used to grow other crops like barley, millet, groundnuts, beans, and cowpeas. The majority of farms are located near riverbanks, along the banks of streams (\"togs\") and other water sources. The primary methods of channelling water from the source to the farm are floods or crude earth canals that divert perennial water (springs) to the farm. Fruits and vegetables are grown for commercial use on the majority of irrigated farms.\nTourism.\nThe rock art and caves at Laas Geel, situated on the outskirts of Hargeisa, are a popular local tourist attraction. Totalling ten caves, they were discovered by a French archaeological team in 2002 and are believed to date back around 5,000 years. The government and locals keep the cave paintings safe and only a restricted number of tourists are allowed entry. Other notable sights include the Freedom Arch in Hargeisa and the War Memorial in the city centre. Natural attractions are very common around the region. The Naasa Hablood are twin hills located on the outskirts of Hargeisa that Somalis in the region consider to be a majestic natural landmark.\nThe Ministry of Tourism has also encouraged travellers to visit historic towns and cities in Somaliland. The historic town of Sheekh is located near Berbera and is home to old British colonial buildings that have remained untouched for over forty years. Berbera also houses historic Ottoman architectural buildings. Another equally famous historic city is Zeila. Zeila was once part of the Ottoman Empire, a dependency of Yemen and Egypt and a major trade city during the 19th century. The city has been visited for its old colonial landmarks, offshore mangroves and coral reefs, towering cliffs, and beach. The nomadic culture of Somaliland has also attracted tourists. Most nomads live in the countryside.\nTransport.\nBus services operate in Hargeisa, Burao, Gabiley, Berbera and Borama. There are also road transportation services between the major towns and adjacent villages, which are operated by different types of vehicles. Among these are taxis, four-wheel drives, minibuses and light goods vehicles (LGV).\nThe most prominent airlines serving Somaliland is Daallo Airlines, a Somali-owned private carrier with regular international flights that emerged after Somali Airlines ceased operations. African Express Airways and Ethiopian Airlines also fly from airports in Somaliland to Djibouti City, Addis Ababa, Dubai and Jeddah, and offer flights for the Hajj and Umrah pilgrimages via the Egal International Airport in Hargeisa. Other major airports in the region include the Berbera Airport.\nPorts.\nIn June 2016, the Somaliland government signed an agreement with DP World to manage the strategic port of Berbera with the aim of enhancing productive capacity and acting as an alternative port for landlocked Ethiopia.\nOil exploration.\nIn 1958, the first test well was dug by Standard Vacuum (Exxon Mobil and Shell) in Dhagax Shabeel, Saaxil region. These wells were selected without field data or seismic testing and were solely based on the geological makeup of the region. Three of the four test wells were successful in producing of light crude oil.\nIn August 2012, the Somaliland government awarded Genel Energy a licence to explore oil within its territory. Results of a surface seep study completed early in 2015 confirmed the outstanding potential offered in the SL-10B, SL-13, and Oodweyne blocks, with estimated oil reserves of 1\u00a0billion barrels each. Genel Energy is set to drill an exploration well for SL-10B and SL-13 block in Buur-Dhaab, 20 kilometres northwest of Aynaba by the end of 2018. In December 2021, Genel Energy signed a farm-out deal with OPIC Somaliland Corporation, backed by Taiwan's CPC Corporation, on the SL10B/13 block neary Aynaba. According to Genel, the block could contain more than 5\u00a0billion barrels of prospective resources. Drilling in SL-10B and SL-13 is scheduled to begin in late 2023, or early 2024 according to Genel.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere has not been an official census conducted in Somaliland since the Somalia census in 1975, while the results from a 1986 census were never released into public domain. A population estimate was conducted by UNFPA in 2014 primarily for the purpose of distributing United Nations funding among the regions and to offer a reliable population estimate in lieu of a census. This population estimate puts the combined population of the regions of Somaliland at 3.5\u00a0million. The Somaliland government estimates that there are 6,200,000 residents as of 2024, an increase from a 2021 government estimate of 5,700,000.\nThe last British population estimate on the basis of clan in Somaliland occurred before independence in 1960, according to which, out of some 650,000 ethnic Somalis belonging to three major clans residing in the protectorate, the Isaaq, Darod and Dir made up 66%, 19% and 16% of the population, respectively.\nThe largest clan family in Somaliland is the Isaaq, currently making up 80% of Somaliland's population. The populations of the five largest cities in Somaliland \u2013 Hargeisa, Burao, Berbera, Erigavo and Gabiley \u2013 are predominantly Isaaq. The second largest clan is the Gadabursi of the Dir clan followed by the Harti of the Darod. Other small clans are often not accounted for in such estimates, however, clans including Gabooye, Gahayle, Jibrahil, Magaadle, Fiqishini, and Akisho settle in Somaliland.\nSomaliland in addition has an estimated 600,000 to a million strong diaspora, mainly residing in Western Europe, the Middle East, North America, and several other African countries.\nClan groups.\nThe Gadabursi subclan of the Dir are the predominant clan of the Awdal region, where there is also a sizeable minority of the Issa subclan of the Dir who mainly inhabit the Zeila District.\nThe Habr Awal subclan of the Isaaq form the majority of the population living in both the northern and western portions of the Maroodi Jeex region, including the cities and towns of northern Hargeisa, Berbera, Gabiley, Madheera, Wajaale, Arabsiyo, Bulhar and Kalabaydh. The Habr Awal also have a strong presence in the Saaxil region as well, principally around the city of Berbera and the town of Sheikh.\nThe Arap subclan of the Isaaq predominantly live in the southern portion of the Maroodi Jeex region including the capital city of Hargeisa. Additionally, they form the majority of communities living in the Hawd region including Baligubadle. The Arap are also well represented in Sahil and Togdheer regions.\nThe Garhajis subclan of the Isaaq have a sizeable presence among the population inhabiting the southern and eastern portions of Maroodi Jeex region including Southern Hargeisa and Salahlay. The Garhajis are also represented well in western Togdheer region, mainly in Oodweyne and Burao, as well as Sheekh and Berbera in Sahil region. The Garhajis also have a significant presence in the western and central areas of Sanaag region as well, including the regional capital Erigavo as well as Maydh.\nThe Habr Je'lo subclan of the Isaaq have a large presence in the western parts of Sool, eastern Togdheer region and western Sanaag as well, The Habr Je'lo form a majority of the population living in Burao as well as in the Togdheer region, western Sanaag, including the towns of Garadag, Xiis and Ceel Afweyn and the Aynabo District in Sool. The clan also has a significant presence in the Sahil region, particularly in the towns of Karin and El-Darad, and also inhabit the regional capital Berbera.\nEastern Sool region residents mainly hail from the Dhulbahante, a subdivision of the Harti confederation of Darod sub-clans, and are concentrated at majority of Sool region districts. The Dhulbahante clans also settle in the Buuhoodle District in the Togdheer region, and the southern and eastern parts of Erigavo District in Sanaag.\nThe Warsangali, another Harti Darod sub-clan, live in the eastern parts of Sanaag, with their population being mainly concentrated in Las Qorey district.\nLanguages.\nMany people in Somaliland speak at least two of the three national languages: Somali, Arabic and English, although the rate of bilingualism is lower in rural areas. Article 6 of the Constitution of 2001 designates the official language of Somaliland to be Somali, though Arabic is a mandatory subject in school and is used in mosques around the region and English is spoken and taught in schools.\nThe Somali language is the mother tongue of the Somali people, the nation's most populous ethnic group. It is a member of the Cushitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family, and its nearest relatives are the Oromo, Afar and Saho languages. Somali is the best documented of the Cushitic languages, with academic studies of it dating from before 1900.\nNorthern Somali is the main dialect spoken in the country, in contrast to Benadiri Somali which is the main dialect spoken in Somalia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReligion.\nWith few exceptions, Somalis in Somaliland and elsewhere are Muslims, the majority belonging to the Sunni branch of Islam and the Shafi'i school of Islamic jurisprudence. As with southern Somali coastal towns such as Mogadishu and Merca, there is also a presence of Sufism, Islamic mysticism; particularly the Arab Rifa'iya tariiqa. Through the influence of the diaspora from Yemen and the Gulf states, stricter Wahhabism also has a noticeable presence. Though traces of pre-Islamic traditional religion exist in Somaliland, Islam is dominant to the Somali sense of national identity. Many of the Somali social norms come from their religion. For example, most Somali women wear a hijab when they are in public. In addition, religious Somalis abstain from pork and alcohol, and also try to avoid receiving or paying any form of interest (usury). Muslims generally congregate on Friday afternoons for a sermon and group prayer.\nUnder the Constitution of Somaliland, Islam is the state religion, and no laws may violate the principles of Sharia. The promotion of any religion other than Islam is illegal, and the state promotes Islamic tenets and discourages behaviour contrary to \"Islamic morals\".\nSomaliland has very few Christians. In 1913, during the early part of the colonial era, there were virtually no Christians in the Somali territories, with about 100\u2013200 followers coming from the schools and orphanages of the handful of Catholic missions in the British Somaliland protectorate. The small number of Christians in the region today mostly come from similar Catholic institutions in Aden, Djibouti, and Berbera.\nSomaliland falls within the Episcopal Area of the Horn of Africa as part of Somalia, under the Anglican Diocese of Egypt. However, there are no current congregations in the territory. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Mogadishu is designated to serve the area as part of Somalia. However, since 1990 there has been no Bishop of Mogadishu, and the Bishop of Djibouti acts as Apostolic Administrator. The Adventist Mission also indicates that there are no Adventist members.\nHealth.\nWhile 40.5% of households in Somaliland have access to improved water sources, almost a third of households lie at least an hour away from their primary source of drinking water. 1 in 11 children die before their first birthday, and 1 in 9 die before their fifth birthday.\nThe UNICEF multiple indicator cluster survey (MICS) in 2006 found that 94.8% of women in Somaliland had undergone some form of female genital mutilation; in 2018 the Somaliland government issued a fatwa condemning the two most severe forms of FGM, but no laws are present to punish those responsible for the practice.\nEducation.\nSomaliland has an urban literacy rate of 59% and a rural literacy rate of 47%, according to a 2015 World Bank assessment.\nCulture.\nThe main clans of Somaliland: Isaaq (Garhajis, Habr Je'lo, Habr Awal, Arap, Ayub), Harti (Dhulbahante, Warsangali, Kaskiqabe, Gahayle), Dir (Gadabuursi, Issa, Magaadle) and Madhiban. Other smaller clans include: Jibraahil, Akisho, and others.\nThe clan groupings of the Somali people are important social units, and have a central role in Somali culture and politics. Clans are patrilineal and are often divided into sub-clans, sometimes with many sub-divisions.\nSomali society is traditionally ethnically endogamous. To extend ties of alliance, marriage is often to another ethnic Somali from a different clan. Thus, for example, a 1954 study observed that in 89 marriages contracted by men of the Dhulbahante clan, 55 (62%) were with women of Dhulbahante sub-clans other than those of their husbands; 30 (33.7%) were with women of surrounding clans of other clan families (Isaaq, 28; Hawiye, 3); and 3 (4.3%) were with women of other clans of the Darod clan family (Majerteen 2, Ogaden 1).\nArts.\nIslam and poetry have been described as the twin pillars of Somali culture. Somali poetry is mainly oral, with both male and female poets. They use things that are common in the Somali language as metaphors. Almost all Somalis are Sunni Muslims and Islam is vitally important to the Somali sense of national identity. Most Somalis do not belong to a specific mosque or sect and can pray in any mosque they find.\nCelebrations come in the form of religious festivities. Two of the most important are Eid ul-Adha and Eid ul-Fitr, which marks the end of the fasting month. Families get dressed up to visit one another, and money is donated to the poor. Other holidays include 26 June and 18 May, which celebrate British Somaliland's independence and the Somaliland region's establishment, respectively; the latter, however, is not recognised by the international community.\nIn the nomadic culture, where one's possessions are frequently moved, there is little reason for the plastic arts to be highly developed. Somalis embellish and decorate their woven and wooden milk jugs (\"haamo\"; the most decorative jugs are made in Ceerigaabo) as well as wooden headrests. Traditional dance is also important, though mainly as a form of courtship among young people. One such dance known as \"Ciyaar Soomaali\" is a local favourite.\nAn important form of art in Somali culture is henna art. The custom of applying henna dates back to antiquity. During special occasions, a Somali woman's hands and feet are expected to be covered in decorative mendhi. Girls and women usually apply or decorate their hands and feet in henna on festive celebrations like Eid or weddings. The henna designs vary from very simple to highly intricate. Somali designs vary, with some more modern and simple while others are traditional and intricate. Traditionally, only women apply it as body art, as it is considered a feminine custom. Henna is not only applied on the hands and feet but is also used as a dye. Somali men and women alike use henna as a dye to change their hair colour. Women are free to apply henna on their hair as most of the time they are wearing a hijab.\nSport.\nPopular sports in Somaliland include football, track, field, and basketball. Somaliland has a national football team, though it is not a member of FIFA or the Confederation of African Football.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51426", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51426", "title": "Cantor's diagonal argument", "text": "Proof in set theory\nCantor's diagonal argument (among various similar names) is a mathematical proof that there are infinite sets which cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with the infinite set of natural numbers\u00a0\u2013 informally, that there are sets which in some sense contain more elements than there are positive integers. Such sets are now called uncountable sets, and the size of infinite sets is treated by the theory of cardinal numbers, which Cantor began.\nGeorg Cantor published this proof in 1891, but it was not his first proof of the uncountability of the real numbers, which appeared in 1874.\nHowever, it demonstrates a general technique that has since been used in a wide range of proofs, including the first of G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems and Turing's answer to the \"Entscheidungsproblem\". Diagonalization arguments are often also the source of contradictions like Russell's paradox and Richard's paradox.\nUncountable set.\nCantor considered the set \"T\" of all infinite sequences of binary digits (i.e. each digit is zero or one).\nHe begins with a constructive proof of the following lemma:\nIf \"s\"1, \"s\"2, ... , \"s\"\"n\", ... is any enumeration of elements from \"T\", then an element \"s\" of \"T\" can be constructed that doesn't correspond to any \"s\"\"n\" in the enumeration.\nThe proof starts with an enumeration of elements from \"T\", for example\nNext, a sequence \"s\" is constructed by choosing the 1st digit as complementary to the 1st digit of \"s\"\"1\" (swapping 0s for 1s and vice versa), the 2nd digit as complementary to the 2nd digit of \"s\"\"2\", the 3rd digit as complementary to the 3rd digit of \"s\"\"3\", and generally for every \"n\", the \"n\"-th digit as complementary to the \"n\"-th digit of \"s\"\"n\". For the example above, this yields\nBy construction, \"s\" is a member of \"T\" that differs from each \"s\"\"n\", since their \"n\"-th digits differ (highlighted in the example).\nHence, \"s\" cannot occur in the enumeration.\nBased on this lemma, Cantor then uses a proof by contradiction to show that:\nThe set \"T\" is uncountable.\nThe proof starts by assuming that \"T\" is countable.\nThen all its elements can be written in an enumeration \"s\"1, \"s\"2, ... , \"s\"\"n\", ... .\nApplying the previous lemma to this enumeration produces a sequence \"s\" that is a member of \"T\", but is not in the enumeration. However, if \"T\" is enumerated, then every member of \"T\", including this \"s\", is in the enumeration. This contradiction implies that the original assumption is false. Therefore, \"T\" is uncountable.\nReal numbers.\nThe uncountability of the real numbers was already established by Cantor's first uncountability proof, but it also follows from the above result. To prove this, an injection will be constructed from the set \"T\" of infinite binary strings to the set R of real numbers. Since \"T\" is uncountable, the image of this function, which is a subset of R, is uncountable. Therefore, R is uncountable. Also, by using a method of construction devised by Cantor, a bijection will be constructed between \"T\" and R. Therefore, \"T\" and R have the same cardinality, which is called the \"cardinality of the continuum\" and is usually denoted by formula_1 or formula_2.\nAn injection from \"T\" to R is given by mapping binary strings in \"T\" to decimal fractions, such as mapping \"t\"\u00a0=\u00a00111... to the decimal 0.0111... This function, defined by \"f\"\u200a\n (\"t\") \n 0.\"t\", is an injection because it maps different strings to different numbers.\nConstructing a bijection between \"T\" and R is slightly more complicated.\nInstead of mapping 0111... to the decimal 0.0111..., it can be mapped to the base-\"b\" number: 0.0111...\"b\". This leads to the family of functions: \"f\"\"b\"\u200a\n (\"t\") \n 0.\"t\"\"b\". The functions \"f\"\u200a\n \"b\"(\"t\") are injections, except for \"f\"\u200a\n 2(\"t\"). This function will be modified to produce a bijection between \"T\" and R.\nGeneral sets.\nA generalized form of the diagonal argument was used by Cantor to prove Cantor's theorem: for every set \"S\", the power set of \"S\"\u2014that is, the set of all subsets of \"S\" (here written as P(\"S\"))\u2014cannot be in bijection with \"S\" itself. This proof proceeds as follows:\nLet \"f\" be any function from \"S\" to P(\"S\"). It suffices to prove that \"f\" cannot be surjective. This means that some member \"T\" of P(\"S\"), i.e. some subset of \"S\", is not in the image of \"f\". As a candidate consider the set\n formula_3\nFor every \"s\" in \"S\", either \"s\" is in \"T\" or not. If \"s\" is in \"T\", then by definition of \"T\", \"s\" is not in \"f\"(\"s\"), so \"T\" is not equal to \"f\"(\"s\"). On the other hand, if \"s\" is not in \"T\", then by definition of \"T\", \"s\" is in \"f\"(\"s\"), so again \"T\" is not equal to \"f\"(\"s\"); see picture.\nFor a more complete account of this proof, see Cantor's theorem.\nConsequences.\nOrdering of cardinals.\nWith equality defined as the existence of a bijection between their underlying sets, Cantor also defines binary predicate of cardinalities formula_4 and formula_5 in terms of the existence of injections between formula_6 and formula_7. It has the properties of a preorder and is here written \"formula_8\". One can embed the naturals into the binary sequences, thus proving various \"injection existence\" statements explicitly, so that in this sense formula_9, where formula_10 denotes the function space formula_11. But following from the argument in the previous sections, there is \"no surjection\" and so also no bijection, i.e. the set is uncountable. For this one may write formula_12, where \"formula_13\" is understood to mean the existence of an injection together with the proven absence of a bijection (as opposed to alternatives such as the negation of Cantor's preorder, or a definition in terms of assigned ordinals). Also formula_14 in this sense, as has been shown, and at the same time it is the case that formula_15, for all sets formula_6.\nAssuming the law of excluded middle, characteristic functions surject onto powersets, and then formula_17. So the uncountable formula_10 is also not enumerable and it can also be mapped onto formula_19. Classically, the Schr\u00f6der\u2013Bernstein theorem is valid and says that any two sets which are in the injective image of one another are in bijection as well. Here, every unbounded subset of formula_19 is then in bijection with formula_19 itself, and every subcountable set (a property in terms of surjections) is then already countable, i.e. in the surjective image of formula_19. In this context the possibilities are then exhausted, making \"formula_8\" a non-strict partial order, or even a total order when assuming choice. The diagonal argument thus establishes that, although both sets under consideration are infinite, there are actually \"more\" infinite sequences of ones and zeros than there are natural numbers.\nCantor's result then also implies that the notion of the set of all sets is inconsistent: If formula_6 were the set of all sets, then formula_25 would at the same time be bigger than formula_6 and a subset of formula_6.\nIn the absence of excluded middle.\nAlso in constructive mathematics, there is no surjection from the full domain formula_19 onto the space of functions formula_29 or onto the collection of subsets formula_30, which is to say these two collections are uncountable. Again using \"formula_13\" for proven injection existence in conjunction with bijection absence, one has formula_32 and formula_33. Further, formula_34, as previously noted. Likewise, formula_35, formula_36 and of course formula_37, also in constructive set theory.\nIt is however harder or impossible to order ordinals and also cardinals, constructively. For example, the Schr\u00f6der\u2013Bernstein theorem requires the law of excluded middle. In fact, the standard ordering on the reals, extending the ordering of the rational numbers, is not necessarily decidable either. Neither are most properties of interesting classes of functions decidable, by Rice's theorem, i.e. the set of counting numbers for the subcountable sets may not be recursive and can thus fail to be countable. The elaborate collection of subsets of a set is constructively not exchangeable with the collection of its characteristic functions. In an otherwise constructive context (in which the law of excluded middle is not taken as axiom), it is consistent to adopt non-classical axioms that contradict consequences of the law of excluded middle. Uncountable sets such as formula_10 or formula_29 may be asserted to be subcountable.\nThis is a notion of size that is redundant in the classical context, but otherwise need not imply countability. The existence of injections from the uncountable formula_10 or formula_29 into formula_19 is here possible as well. So the cardinal relation fails to be antisymmetric. Consequently, also in the presence of function space sets that are even classically uncountable, intuitionists do not accept this relation to constitute a hierarchy of transfinite sizes.\nWhen the axiom of powerset is not adopted, in a constructive framework even the subcountability of all sets is then consistent. That all said, in common set theories, the non-existence of a set of all sets also already follows from Predicative Separation.\nIn a set theory, theories of mathematics are modeled. Weaker logical axioms mean fewer constraints and so allow for a richer class of models. A set may be identified as a model of the field of real numbers when it fulfills some axioms of real numbers or a constructive rephrasing thereof. Various models have been studied, such as the Cauchy reals or the Dedekind reals, among others. The former relate to quotients of sequences while the later are well-behaved cuts taken from a powerset, if they exist. In the presence of excluded middle, those are all isomorphic and uncountable. Otherwise, variants of the Dedekind reals can be countable or inject into the naturals, but not jointly. When assuming countable choice, constructive Cauchy reals even without an explicit modulus of convergence are then Cauchy-complete and Dedekind reals simplify so as to become isomorphic to them. Indeed, here choice also aids diagonal constructions and when assuming it, Cauchy-complete models of the reals are uncountable.\nDiagonalization in broader context.\nRussell's paradox has shown that set theory that includes an unrestricted comprehension scheme is contradictory. Note that there is a similarity between the construction of \"T\" and the set in Russell's paradox. Therefore, depending on how we modify the axiom scheme of comprehension in order to avoid Russell's paradox, arguments such as the non-existence of a set of all sets may or may not remain valid.\nAnalogues of the diagonal argument are widely used in mathematics to prove the existence or nonexistence of certain objects. For example, the conventional proof of the unsolvability of the halting problem is essentially a diagonal argument. Also, diagonalization was originally used to show the existence of arbitrarily hard complexity classes and played a key role in early attempts to prove P does not equal NP.\nVersion for Quine's New Foundations.\nThe above proof fails for W. V. Quine's \"New Foundations\" set theory (NF). In NF, the naive axiom scheme of comprehension is modified to avoid the paradoxes by introducing a kind of \"local\" type theory. In this axiom scheme,\n{ \"s\" \u2208 \"S\": \"s\" \u2209 \"f\"(\"s\") }\nis \"not\" a set \u2014 i.e., does not satisfy the axiom scheme. On the other hand, we might try to create a modified diagonal argument by noticing that\n{ \"s\" \u2208 \"S\": \"s\" \u2209 \"f\"({\"s\"}) }\n\"is\" a set in NF. In which case, if P1(\"S\") is the set of one-element subsets of \"S\" and \"f\" is a proposed bijection from P1(\"S\") to P(\"S\"), one is able to use proof by contradiction to prove that |P1(\"S\")| &lt; |P(\"S\")|.\nThe proof follows by the fact that if \"f\" were indeed a map \"onto\" P(\"S\"), then we could find \"r\" in \"S\", such that \"f\"({\"r\"}) coincides with the modified diagonal set, above. We would conclude that if \"r\" is not in \"f\"({\"r\"}), then \"r\" is in \"f\"({\"r\"}) and vice versa.\nIt is \"not\" possible to put P1(\"S\") in a one-to-one relation with \"S\", as the two have different types, and so any function so defined would violate the typing rules for the comprehension scheme."}
{"id": "51427", "revid": "20306027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51427", "title": "British Somaliland", "text": "British protectorate from 1884 to 1960\nBritish Somaliland, officially the Somaliland Protectorate (), was a protectorate of the United Kingdom in the territory of modern Somaliland. It was bordered by Italian Somalia, French Somali Coast, and the Ethiopian Empire (later part of Italian East Africa from 1936 to 1941).\nThe territory consisted of self ruled sultanates under British protectorate From 1884 to 1920 before coming under direct Colonial Office administration. Following the defeat of the Dervish forces in 1920, the protectorate was formally established as a Crown colony.\nDuring World War II, British Somaliland was occupied by Italy from 3 August 1940 until 8 April 1941, when British forces recaptured the territory.\nOn 26 June 1960, British Somaliland gained independence as the State of Somaliland. Five days later, on 1 July 1960, it voluntarily united with the Trust Territory of Somalia (former Italian Somaliland) to form the Somali Republic.\nThe government of Somaliland, an unrecognised state recognised internationally as an autonomous region of Somalia, regards itself as the successor state to British Somaliland.\nHistory.\nProtectorate Treaties.\nThe British, the Isaaq Sultanate and the Isaaq clan in Somaliland had come into contact in 1825, when a British ship named the \"Mary Anne\" was attacked, sacked, and plundered by Isaaq forces in the port city of Berbera.\nThe attack led to a British attack of the city and subsequent negotiations with the Sultanate. Further incidents occurred in the 1850s, notably with the Attack on British exploring expeditions and the Blockade of Berbera (1855), which were key points of friction between the British and the Isaaq.Not until 1888 could the British establish the British Somaliland Protectorate, after signing treaties, but tensions continued between the Isaaq and British authorities.\nIn the late 19th century, the United Kingdom signed agreements with the Gadabuursi, Issa, Habr Awal, Garhajis, Arap, Habr Je'lo and Warsangeli clans establishing a protectorate.\nNot until the late 19th century did the United Kingdom sign agreements with the Isaaq Sultanate establishing a protectorate. Many of these clans had signed the protection treaties with the British in response to Ethiopian Emperor Menelik's Invasions. The agreements dictated the protection of Somali rights and the maintenance of independence. The British garrisoned the protectorate from Aden and administered it from their British India colony until 1898. British Somaliland was then administered by the Foreign Office until 1905 and afterwards by the Colonial Office.\nGenerally, the British did not have much interest in the resource-barren region. The stated purposes of the establishment of the protectorate were to \"secure a supply market, check the traffic in slaves, and to exclude the interference of foreign powers.\" The British principally viewed the protectorate as a source for supplies of meat for their British Indian outpost in Aden through the maintenance of order in the coastal areas and protection of the caravan routes from the interior. Hence, the region's nickname of \"Aden's butcher's shop\". Colonial administration during this period did not extend administrative infrastructure beyond the coast, and contrasted with the more interventionist colonial experience of Italian Somalia.\nDervish war.\nBeginning in 1899, the British were forced to expend considerable human and military capital to contain a decades-long resistance mounted by the Dervish movement. The movement was led by Sayyid Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, a Somali religious leader referred to colloquially by the British as the \"Mad Mullah\". Repeated military expeditions were unsuccessfully launched against Hassan and his Dervishes before the First World War.\nSultan Nur Ahmed Aman the 5th Sultan of the Habr Yunis Sultanate was one of the main leaders behind the Somali Dervish movement (1899\u20131920) along with another Isaaq leader Haji Sudi. Nur Ahmed Aman was the principal agitator rallying the followers of the Kob Fardod Tariqa behind his anti-French Roman Catholic Mission campaign that would become the cause of the Dervish uprising. He assisted in assembling men and arms and hosted the revolting tribesmen in his quarter at Burao in August 1899, declaring the Dervish rebellion. He fought and led the war throughout the early years of the conflict from 1899\u20131904. He and his brother Geleh Ahmed (Kila Ahmed) were the main signatories of the Dervish peace treaty with the British, Ethiopians and Italian colonial powers on March 5, 1905, known as the Ilig Treaty or the Pestalozza agreement.\nIn 1908, the Dervishes again entered British Somaliland and began inflicting major losses to the British in the interior regions of the Horn of Africa. From 1908 onwards until the end of the World War I the British retreated to the few remaining coastal regions after suffering heavy losses in the interior, where the dervish continued to operate independently and leaving the interior regions in the hands of the Dervishes.\nOn 9 August 1913, the Somaliland Camel Constabulary suffered a serious defeat at the Battle of Dul Madoba at the hands of the Dervishes. Hassan had already evaded several attempts to capture him. At Dul Madoba, his forces killed or wounded 57 members of the 110-man Constabulary unit, including the British commander, Colonel Richard Corfield.\nIn 1914, the British created the Somaliland Camel Corps to assist in maintaining order in British Somaliland.\nIn 1920, the British launched their fifth and final expedition against Hassan and his followers. Employing the then-new technology of military aircraft, the British finally managed to quell Hassan's twenty-year-long struggle. The British tricked Hassan into preparing for an official visit, then launched bombing raids in the city of Taleh where most of his troops were stationed, causing the mullah to retreat into the desert. Hassan and his Dervish supporters fled to the Ogaden, where Hassan died in 1921.\nBritish Somaliland 1920\u20131930.\nFollowing the defeat of the Dervish resistance, the two fundamental goals of British policy in British Somaliland were the preservation of stability and the economic self-sufficiency of the protectorate. The second goal remained particularly elusive because of local resistance to taxation that might have been used to support the protectorate's administration. By the 1930s, the British presence had extended to other parts of British Somaliland. Growth in commercial trade motivated some livestock herders to subsequently leave the pastoral economy and settle in urban areas. Customs taxes also helped pay for British India's patrol of Somalia's Red Sea coast.Among military units in British Somaliland during the interwar period was a battalion of the Indian Army 4th Bombay Grenadiers.\nItalian invasion.\nIn August 1940, during the East African campaign in World War II, British Somaliland was invaded by Italy. The few British forces that were present attempted to defend the main road to Berbera, but were dislodged from their positions and retreated after losing the Battle of Tug Argan. During this period, the British rounded up soldiers and governmental officials to evacuate them from the territory through Berbera. In total, 7,000 people, including civilians, were evacuated. The Somalis serving in the Somaliland Camel Corps were given the choice of evacuation or disbandment; the majority chose to remain and were allowed to retain their arms.\nIn March 1941, after a six-month Italian occupation, British forces recaptured the protectorate during Operation Appearance. The final remnants of the Italian guerrilla movement discontinued all resistance in British Somaliland by the autumn of 1943.\n1945 Sheikh Bashir rebellion.\nThe 1945 Sheikh Bashir Rebellion was an uprising by tribesmen of the Habr Je'lo clan in the cities of Burao and Erigavo in the former British Somaliland protectorate against British authorities in July 1945 led by Sheikh Bashir, a Somali religious leader belonging to the Yeesif sub-division.\nOn 2 July, Sheikh Hamza collected 25 of his followers in the town of Wadamago and transported them on a lorry to the vicinity of Burao, where he distributed arms to half of his followers. On the evening of 3 July, the group entered Burao and opened fire on the police guard of the central prison in the city, which was filled with prisoners arrested for previous demonstrations. The group also attacked the house of the district commissioner of Burao District, Major Chambers, resulting in the death of Major Chamber's police guard. Hamza's group escaped to Bur Dhab, a strategic mountain south-east of Burao, where Sheikh Bashir's small unit occupied a fort and took up a defensive position in anticipation of a British counterattack.\nThe British campaign against Sheikh Hamza's troops proved abortive after several defeats as his forces kept on the move. No sooner had the expedition left the area, than the news travelled fast among the Somali nomads across the plain. The war had exposed the British administration to humiliation. The government came to a conclusion that another expedition against Hamza would be useless; that they must build a railway, make roads and effectively occupy the whole of the protectorate, or else abandon the interior. The latter course was decided upon and during the first months of 1945, the advance posts were withdrawn and the British administration confined to the coast town of Berbera.\nSheikh Bashir settled many disputes among the tribes in the vicinity, which kept them from raiding each other. He was generally thought to settle disputes through the use of Islamic Sharia and gathered around him a strong following.\nSheikh Bashir sent a message to the religious figures in the town of Erigavo, calling upon them to join the rebellion he led. The religious leaders, as well as the people of Erigavo, heeded his call. A substantial number of people armed themselves with rifles and spears to stage the revolt. The British authorities responded rapidly and severely, sending reinforcements to the town. In two \"local actions\", the British reinforcements fired openly against the armed mobs and arrested some minor religious leaders.\nThe British administration recruited Indian and South African troops to fight against Sheikh Bashir. Led by Police General James David, the British police force mobilized with intelligence plans to capture Bashir alive.\nEventually, on 7 July, they found Sheikh Bashir with his unit in defensive positions behind their fortifications in the mountains of Bur Dhab. After the clashes, Sheikh Bashir was killed, along with his second-in-command, Alin Yusuf Ali, nicknamed Qaybdiid. A third rebel was wounded and captured along with two other rebels. The rest of Bashir's people fled the fortifications and dispersed. On the British side, Police General James David perished. A number of Indian and South African troops also lost their lives, and a policeman was injured.\nDespite the death of Sheikh Bashir and many of his followers, the resistance against British authorities continued in Somaliland, especially in Erigavo, where his death occurred. Further resistance arose in the town of Badhan leading to attacks on British colonial troops throughout the district and the seizing of arms from the rural constabulary.\nAlthough most of the rebels had died, the British authorities were not finished with their counter-insurgency campaign. They quickly learned the identities of all the followers of Sheikh Bashir and tried to convince the locals to turn them in. When the locals refused, the authorities invoked the \"Collective Punishment Ordinance\", under which the authorities seized and impounded a total of 6,000 camels owned by the Habr Je'lo, the clan that Sheikh Bashir belonged to. The British authorities made the return of the livestock dependent on the turning over and arrest of the escaped rebels. The remaining rebels were subsequently found and arrested, and transported to the Saad-ud-Din archipelago, off the coast of Zeila in northwestern Somaliland.\nIndependence and union with the Trust Territory of Somaliland.\nIn 1947, the entire budget for the administration of the British Somaliland protectorate was only \u00a3213,139.\nIn May 1960, the British Government stated that it would be prepared to grant independence to the then Somaliland protectorate. The Legislative Council of British Somaliland passed a resolution in April 1960 requesting independence. The legislative councils of the territory agreed to this proposal.\nIn April 1960, leaders of the two territories met in Mogadishu and agreed to form a unitary state. An elected president was to be head of state. Full executive powers would be held by a prime minister answerable to an elected National Assembly of 123 members representing the two territories.\nOn 26 June 1960, the British Somaliland protectorate gained independence as the State of Somaliland. Five days later, on 1 July 1960, Somaliland officially merged with the Trust Territory of Somaliland to create the Somali Republic.\nOn 1 July 1960 the legislature elected Haji Bashir, the old speaker of the Somaliland Assembly, as the first President of the new Republic of Somalia National Assembly, and also on that same day Aden Adde was elected as the President of the newly formed Somali Republic.\nPolitics.\nUntil 1898, Somaliland was administered by the British resident at Aden as a dependency of the Government of India. From 1898 it was under the purview of the Foreign Office, and from 1905 onward (with the exception of a period of military administration until 1948 following the Italian invasion) it was administered by the Colonial Office.\nUntil 1957, executive and legislative power were solely vested in the Governor, although he had a non-statutory council to advise him and in 1947, a Protectorate Advisory Council was established on a tribal basis, with representatives of other communities and official members as well. In 1957, a Legislative Council and an Executive Council were created. From 1959, there were elections to the Legislative Council. A new constitution was introduced in 1960, shortly before independence.\nRepublic of Somaliland.\nIn 1991, after a bloody civil war for independence in the northern part of the Somali Democratic Republic, the area which formerly encompassed British Somaliland declared independence. In May 1991, the formation of the \"Republic of Somaliland\" was proclaimed, with the local government regarding it as the successor to the former British Somaliland as well as to the State of Somaliland. However, Somaliland\u2019s independence remains unrecognised by any United Nations member state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51429", "revid": "44625601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51429", "title": "Hyperreal number", "text": "Element of a nonstandard model of the reals, which can be infinite or infinitesimal\nIn mathematics, the hyperreal numbers, denoted formula_1, are an extension of the real numbers to include certain classes of infinite and infinitesimal numbers. A hyperreal number formula_2 is said to be finite when formula_3 for some integer formula_4. Similarly, formula_2 is said to be infinitesimal when formula_6 for all positive integers formula_4. The term \"hyper-real\" was introduced by Edwin Hewitt in 1948.\nThe hyperreal numbers satisfy the transfer principle, a rigorous version of Leibniz's heuristic law of continuity. The transfer principle states that true first-order statements about formula_8 are also valid in formula_9. For example, the commutative law of addition, formula_10, holds for the hyperreals just as it does for the reals; since formula_8 is a real closed field, so is formula_9. Similarly, since formula_13 for all integers formula_4, one also has formula_15 for all hyperintegers formula_16. The transfer principle for ultrapowers is a consequence of \u0141o\u015b's theorem of 1955.\nConcerns about the soundness of arguments involving infinitesimals date back to ancient Greek mathematics, with Archimedes replacing such proofs with ones using other techniques such as the method of exhaustion. In the 1960s, Abraham Robinson proved that the hyperreals were logically consistent if and only if the reals were. This put to rest the fear that any proof involving infinitesimals might be unsound, provided that they were manipulated according to the logical rules that Robinson outlined.\nThe application of hyperreal numbers and in particular the transfer principle to problems of analysis is called nonstandard analysis. One immediate application is the definition of the basic concepts of analysis such as the derivative and integral in a direct fashion, without passing via logical complications of multiple quantifiers. Thus, the derivative of formula_17 becomes\nformula_18\nfor an infinitesimal formula_19, where formula_20 denotes the standard part function, which \"rounds off\" each finite hyperreal to the nearest real. Similarly, the integral is defined as the standard part of a suitable infinite sum.\nTransfer principle.\nThe idea of the hyperreal system is to extend the real numbers formula_8 to form a system formula_9 that includes infinitesimal and infinite numbers, but without changing any of the elementary axioms of algebra. Any statement of the form \"for any number formula_23\" that is true for the reals must also be true for the hyperreals. For example, the axiom that states \"for any number formula_2, formula_25 still applies. The same is true for quantification over several numbers, e.g., \"for any numbers formula_2 and formula_27, formula_28.\" This ability to carry over statements from the reals to the hyperreals is called the transfer principle. However, statements of the form \"for any \"set\" of numbers formula_29\" may not carry over. The only properties that differ between the reals and the hyperreals are those that rely on quantification over sets, or other higher-level structures such as functions and relations, which are typically constructed out of sets. Each real set, function, and relation has its natural hyperreal extension, satisfying the same first-order properties. The kinds of logical sentences that obey this restriction on quantification are referred to as statements in first-order logic.\nThe transfer principle, however, does not mean that formula_8 and formula_9 have identical behavior. For instance, in formula_9 there exists an element \"\u03c9\" such that\n formula_33\nbut there is no such number in formula_8. (In other words, formula_9 is not Archimedean.) This is possible because the nonexistence of formula_36 cannot be expressed as a first-order statement.\nUse in analysis.\nInformal notations for non-real quantities have historically appeared in calculus in two contexts: as infinitesimals, like formula_37, and as the symbol formula_38, used, for example, in limits of integration of improper integrals.\nAs an example of the transfer principle, the statement that for any nonzero number formula_2, formula_40, is true for the real numbers, and it is in the form required by the transfer principle, so it is also true for the hyperreal numbers. This shows that it is not possible to use a generic symbol such as formula_38 for all the infinite quantities in the hyperreal system; infinite quantities differ in magnitude from other infinite quantities, and infinitesimals from other infinitesimals.\nSimilarly, the casual use of formula_42 is invalid, since the transfer principle applies to the statement that zero has no multiplicative inverse. The rigorous counterpart of such a calculation would be that if formula_43 is a non-zero infinitesimal, then formula_44 is infinite.\nFor any finite hyperreal number formula_2, the standard part, formula_46, is defined as the unique closest real number to formula_2; it necessarily differs from formula_2 only infinitesimally. The standard part function can also be defined for infinite hyperreal numbers as follows: If formula_2 is a positive infinite hyperreal number, set formula_46 to be the extended real number formula_51, and likewise, if formula_2 is a negative infinite hyperreal number, set formula_46 to be formula_54 (the idea is that an infinite hyperreal number should be smaller than the \"true\" absolute infinity but closer to it than any real number is).\nDifferentiation.\nOne of the key uses of the hyperreal number system is to give a precise meaning to the differential operator formula_55 as used by Leibniz to define the derivative and the integral.\nFor any real-valued function formula_56 the differential formula_57 is defined as a map which sends every ordered pair formula_58 (where formula_2 is real and formula_37 is nonzero infinitesimal) to an infinitesimal\n formula_61\nNote that the very notation \"formula_37\" used to denote any infinitesimal is consistent with the above definition of the operator formula_63 for if one interprets formula_2 (as is commonly done) to be the function formula_65 then for every formula_58 the differential formula_67 will equal the infinitesimal formula_37.\nA real-valued function formula_69 is said to be differentiable at a point formula_2 if the quotient\n formula_71\nis the same for all nonzero infinitesimals formula_72 If so, this quotient is called the derivative of formula_69 at formula_2.\nFor example, to find the derivative of the function formula_75, let formula_37 be a non-zero infinitesimal. Then,\nThe use of the standard part in the definition of the derivative is a rigorous alternative to the traditional practice of neglecting the square of an infinitesimal quantity. Dual numbers are a number system based on this idea. After the third line of the differentiation above, the typical method from Newton through the 19th century would have been simply to discard the formula_77 term. In the hyperreal system,\nformula_78, since formula_37 is nonzero, and the transfer principle can be applied to the statement that the square of any nonzero number is nonzero. However, the quantity formula_77 is infinitesimally small compared to formula_37; that is, the hyperreal system contains a hierarchy of infinitesimal quantities.\nUsing hyperreal numbers for differentiation allows for a more algebraically manipulable approach to derivatives. In standard differentiation, partial differentials and higher-order differentials are not independently manipulable through algebraic techniques. However, using the hyperreals, a system can be established for doing so, though resulting in a slightly different notation.\nIntegration.\nAnother key use of the hyperreal number system is to give a precise meaning to the integral sign \u222b used by Leibniz to define the definite integral.\nFor any infinitesimal function formula_82, one may define the integral formula_83 as a map sending any ordered triple formula_84 (where formula_85 and formula_86 are real, and formula_37 is infinitesimal of the same sign as formula_88) to the value\nformula_89,\nwhere formula_90 is any hyperinteger satisfying\nformula_91.\nA real-valued function formula_69 is then said to be integrable over a closed intervalformula_93if for any nonzero infinitesimalformula_94the integral\n formula_95\nis independent of the choice offormula_96 If so, this integral is called the definite integral (or antiderivative) of formula_69 onformula_98\nThis shows that using hyperreal numbers, Leibniz's notation for the definite integral can actually be interpreted as a meaningful algebraic expression (just as the derivative can be interpreted as a meaningful quotient).\nProperties.\nThe hyperreals formula_9 form an ordered field containing the reals formula_8 as a subfield. Unlike the reals, the hyperreals do not form a standard metric space, but by virtue of their order they carry an order topology.\nThe use of the definite article \"the\" in the phrase \"the hyperreal numbers\" is somewhat misleading in that there is not a unique ordered field that is referred to in most treatments. However, a 2003 paper by Vladimir Kanovei and Saharon Shelah shows that there is a definable, countably saturated (meaning \u03c9-saturated but not countable) elementary extension of the reals, which therefore has a good claim to the title of \"the\" hyperreal numbers. Furthermore, the field obtained by the ultrapower construction from the space of all real sequences, is unique up to isomorphism if one assumes the continuum hypothesis.\nThe condition of being a hyperreal field is a stronger one than that of being a real closed field strictly containing formula_8. It is also stronger than that of being a superreal field in the sense of Dales and Woodin.\nDevelopment.\nThe hyperreals can be developed either axiomatically or by more constructively oriented methods. The essence of the axiomatic approach is to assert (1) the existence of at least one infinitesimal number, and (2) the validity of the transfer principle. In the following subsection we give a detailed outline of a more constructive approach. This method allows one to construct the hyperreals if given a set-theoretic object called an ultrafilter, but the ultrafilter itself cannot be explicitly constructed.\nFrom Leibniz to Robinson.\nWhen Newton and (more explicitly) Leibniz introduced differentials, they used infinitesimals and these were still regarded as useful by later mathematicians such as Euler and Cauchy. Nonetheless these concepts were from the beginning seen as suspect, notably by George Berkeley. Berkeley's criticism centered on a perceived shift in hypothesis in the definition of the derivative in terms of infinitesimals (or fluxions), where \"dx\" is assumed to be nonzero at the beginning of the calculation, and to vanish at its conclusion (see Ghosts of departed quantities for details). When in the 1800s calculus was put on a firm footing through the development of the (\u03b5, \u03b4)-definition of limit by Bolzano, Cauchy, Weierstrass, and others, infinitesimals were largely abandoned, though research in non-Archimedean fields continued (Ehrlich 2006).\nHowever, in the 1960s Abraham Robinson showed how infinitely large and infinitesimal numbers can be rigorously defined and used to develop the field of nonstandard analysis. Robinson developed his theory nonconstructively, using model theory; however it is possible to proceed using only algebra and topology, and proving the transfer principle as a consequence of the definitions. In other words hyperreal numbers \"per se\", aside from their use in nonstandard analysis, have no necessary relationship to model theory or first order logic, although they were discovered by the application of model theoretic techniques from logic. Hyper-real fields were in fact originally introduced by Hewitt (1948) by purely algebraic techniques, using an ultrapower construction.\nUltrapower construction.\nWe are going to construct a hyperreal field via sequences of reals. In fact we can add and multiply sequences componentwise; for example:\n formula_102\nand analogously for multiplication.\nThis turns the set of such sequences into a commutative ring, which is in fact a real algebra A. We have a natural embedding of formula_8 in A by identifying the real number \"r\" with the sequence (\"r\", \"r\", \"r\", \u2026) and this identification preserves the corresponding algebraic operations of the reals. The intuitive motivation is, for example, to represent an infinitesimal number using a sequence that approaches zero. The inverse of such a sequence would represent an infinite number. As we will see below, the difficulties arise because of the need to define rules for comparing such sequences in a manner that, although inevitably somewhat arbitrary, must be self-consistent and well defined. For example, we may have two sequences that differ in their first \"n\" members, but are equal after that; such sequences should clearly be considered as representing the same hyperreal number. Similarly, most sequences oscillate randomly forever, and we must find some way of taking such a sequence and interpreting it as, say, formula_104, where formula_105 is a certain infinitesimal number.\nComparing sequences is thus a delicate matter. We could, for example, try to define a relation between sequences in a componentwise fashion:\n formula_106\nbut here we run into trouble, since some entries of the first sequence may be bigger than the corresponding entries of the second sequence, and some others may be smaller. It follows that the relation defined in this way is only a partial order. To get around this, we have to specify which positions matter. Since there are infinitely many indices, we don't want finite sets of indices to matter. A consistent choice of index sets that matter is given by any free ultrafilter \"U\" on the natural numbers; these can be characterized as ultrafilters that do not contain any finite sets. (The good news is that Zorn's lemma guarantees the existence of many such \"U\"; the bad news is that they cannot be explicitly constructed.) We think of \"U\" as singling out those sets of indices that \"matter\": We write (\"a\"0, \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ...) \u2264 (\"b\"0, \"b\"1, \"b\"2, ...) if and only if the set of natural numbers { \"n\" : \"a\"\"n\" \u2264 \"b\"\"n\" } is in \"U\".\nThis is a total preorder and it turns into a total order if we agree not to distinguish between two sequences \"a\" and \"b\" if \"a\" \u2264 \"b\" and \"b\" \u2264 \"a\". With this identification, the ordered field formula_9 of hyperreals is constructed. From an algebraic point of view, \"U\" allows us to define a corresponding maximal ideal I in the commutative ring A (namely, the set of the sequences that vanish in some element of \"U\"), and then to define formula_9 as A/I; as the quotient of a commutative ring by a maximal ideal, formula_9 is a field. This is also notated A/\"U\", directly in terms of the free ultrafilter \"U\"; the two are equivalent. The maximality of I follows from the possibility of, given a sequence \"a\", constructing a sequence \"b\" inverting the non-null elements of \"a\" and not altering its null entries. If the set on which \"a\" vanishes is not in \"U\", the product \"ab\" is identified with the number 1, and any ideal containing 1 must be \"A\". In the resulting field, these \"a\" and \"b\" are inverses.\nThe field A/\"U\" is an ultrapower of formula_8.\nSince this field contains formula_8 it has cardinality at least that of the continuum. Since A has cardinality\n formula_112\nit is also no larger than formula_113, and hence has the same cardinality as formula_8.\nOne question we might ask is whether, if we had chosen a different free ultrafilter \"V\", the quotient field A/\"U\" would be isomorphic as an ordered field to A/\"V\". This question turns out to be equivalent to the continuum hypothesis; in ZFC with the continuum hypothesis we can prove this field is unique up to order isomorphism, and in ZFC with the negation of continuum hypothesis we can prove that there are non-order-isomorphic pairs of fields that are both countably indexed ultrapowers of the reals.\nFor more information about this method of construction, see ultraproduct.\nAn intuitive approach to the ultrapower construction.\nThe following is an intuitive way of understanding the hyperreal numbers. The approach taken here is very close to the one in the book by Goldblatt. Recall that the sequences converging to zero are sometimes called infinitely small. These are almost the infinitesimals in a sense; the true infinitesimals include certain classes of sequences that contain a sequence converging to zero.\nLet us see where these classes come from. Consider first the sequences of real numbers. They form a ring, that is, one can multiply, add and subtract them, but not necessarily divide by a non-zero element. The real numbers are considered as the constant sequences, the sequence is zero if it is identically zero, that is, \"a\"\"n\"\u00a0=\u00a00 for all \"n\".\nIn our ring of sequences one can get \"ab\"\u00a0=\u00a00 with neither \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a00 nor \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a00. Thus, if for two sequences formula_115 one has \"ab\"\u00a0=\u00a00, at least one of them should be declared zero. Surprisingly enough, there is a consistent way to do it. As a result, the equivalence classes of sequences that differ by some sequence declared zero will form a field, which is called a hyperreal field. It will contain the infinitesimals in addition to the ordinary real numbers, as well as infinitely large numbers (the reciprocals of infinitesimals, including those represented by sequences diverging to infinity). Also every hyperreal that is not infinitely large will be infinitely close to an ordinary real, in other words, it will be the sum of an ordinary real and an infinitesimal.\nThis construction is parallel to the construction of the reals from the rationals given by Cantor. He started with the ring of the Cauchy sequences of rationals and declared all the sequences that converge to zero to be zero. The result is the reals. To continue the construction of hyperreals, consider the zero sets of our sequences, that is, the formula_116, that is, formula_117 is the set of indexes formula_118 for which formula_119. It is clear that if formula_120, then the union of formula_117 and formula_122 is formula_123 (the set of all natural numbers), so:\nNow the idea is to choose a collection \"U\" of subsets of formula_123 and to declare that formula_131 if and only if formula_117 belongs to \"U\". From the above conditions one can see that:\nAny family of sets that satisfies (2\u20134) is called a filter (an example: the complements to the finite sets, it is called the Fr\u00e9chet filter and it is used in the usual limit theory). If (1) also holds, U is called an ultrafilter (because you can add no more sets to it without breaking it). The only explicitly known example of an ultrafilter is the family of sets containing a given element (in our case, say, the number 10). Such ultrafilters are called trivial, and if we use it in our construction, we come back to the ordinary real numbers. Any ultrafilter containing a finite set is trivial. It is known that any filter can be extended to an ultrafilter, but the proof uses the axiom of choice. The existence of a nontrivial ultrafilter (the ultrafilter lemma) can be added as an extra axiom, as it is weaker than the axiom of choice.\nNow if we take a nontrivial ultrafilter (which is an extension of the Fr\u00e9chet filter) and do our construction, we get the hyperreal numbers as a result.\nIf formula_69 is a real function of a real variable formula_2 then formula_69 naturally extends to a hyperreal function of a hyperreal variable by composition:\n formula_136\nwhere formula_137 means \"the equivalence class of the sequence formula_138 relative to our ultrafilter\", two sequences being in the same class if and only if the zero set of their difference belongs to our ultrafilter.\nAll the arithmetical expressions and formulas make sense for hyperreals and hold true if they are true for the ordinary reals. It turns out that any finite (that is, such that formula_139 for some ordinary real formula_85) hyperreal formula_2 will be of the form formula_142 where formula_27 is an ordinary (called standard) real and formula_55 is an infinitesimal. It can be proven by bisection method used in proving the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, the property (1) of ultrafilters turns out to be crucial.\nProperties of infinitesimal and infinite numbers.\nThe finite elements F of formula_9 form a local ring, and in fact a valuation ring, with the unique maximal ideal S being the infinitesimals; the quotient F/S is isomorphic to the reals. Hence we have a homomorphic mapping, st(\"x\"), from F to formula_8 whose kernel consists of the infinitesimals and which sends every element \"x\" of F to a unique real number whose difference from x is in S; which is to say, is infinitesimal. Put another way, every \"finite\" nonstandard real number is \"very close\" to a unique real number, in the sense that if \"x\" is a finite nonstandard real, then there exists one and only one real number st(\"x\") such that \"x\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0st(\"x\") is infinitesimal. This number st(\"x\") is called the standard part of \"x\", conceptually the same as \"x\" \"to the nearest real number\". This operation is an order-preserving homomorphism and hence is well-behaved both algebraically and order theoretically. It is order-preserving though not isotonic; i.e. formula_147 implies formula_148, but formula_149 does not imply formula_150.\nThe map st is continuous with respect to the order topology on the finite hyperreals; in fact it is locally constant.\nHyperreal fields.\nSuppose \"X\" is a Tychonoff space, also called a T3.5 space, and C(\"X\") is the algebra of continuous real-valued functions on \"X\". Suppose \"M\" is a maximal ideal in C(\"X\"). Then the factor algebra \"A\" = C(\"X\")/\"M\" is a totally ordered field \"F\" containing the reals. If \"F\" strictly contains formula_8 then \"M\" is called a hyperreal ideal (terminology due to Hewitt (1948)) and \"F\" a hyperreal field. Note that no assumption is being made that the cardinality of \"F\" is greater than formula_8; it can in fact have the same cardinality.\nAn important special case is where the topology on \"X\" is the discrete topology; in this case \"X\" can be identified with a cardinal number formula_157 and C(\"X\") with the real algebra formula_158 of functions from formula_157 to formula_8. The hyperreal fields we obtain in this case are called ultrapowers of formula_8 and are identical to the ultrapowers constructed via free ultrafilters in model theory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51431", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51431", "title": "Nonstandard real number", "text": ""}
{"id": "51432", "revid": "17678816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51432", "title": "Surreal number", "text": "Generalization of the real numbers\nIn mathematics, the surreal number system is a totally ordered proper class containing not only the real numbers but also infinite and infinitesimal numbers, respectively larger or smaller in absolute value than any positive real number. Research on the Go endgame by John Horton Conway led to the original definition and construction of surreal numbers. Conway's construction was introduced in Donald Knuth's 1974 book \"Surreal Numbers: How Two Ex-Students Turned On to Pure Mathematics and Found Total Happiness\". \nThe surreals share many properties with the reals, including the usual arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division); as such, they form an ordered field. If formulated in von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del set theory, the surreal numbers are a universal ordered field in the sense that all other ordered fields, such as the rationals, the reals, the rational functions, the Levi-Civita field, the superreal numbers (including the hyperreal numbers) can be realized as subfields of the surreals. The surreals also contain all transfinite ordinal numbers; the arithmetic on them is given by the natural operations. It has also been shown (in von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del set theory) that the maximal class hyperreal field is isomorphic to the maximal class surreal field.\nHistory of the concept.\nResearch on the Go endgame by John Horton Conway led to the original definition and construction of the surreal numbers. Conway's construction was introduced in Donald Knuth's 1974 book \"Surreal Numbers: How Two Ex-Students Turned On to Pure Mathematics and Found Total Happiness\". In his book, which takes the form of a dialogue, Knuth coined the term \"surreal numbers\" for what Conway had called simply \"numbers\". Conway later adopted Knuth's term, and used surreals for analyzing games in his 1976 book \"On Numbers and Games\".\nA separate route to defining the surreals began in 1907, when Hans Hahn introduced Hahn series as a generalization of formal power series, and Felix Hausdorff introduced certain ordered sets called \"\u03b7\"\"\u03b1\"-sets for ordinals \u03b1 and asked if it was possible to find a compatible ordered group or field structure. In 1962, Norman Alling used a modified form of Hahn series to construct such ordered fields associated to certain ordinals \u03b1 and, in 1987, he showed that taking \u03b1 to be the class of all ordinals in his construction gives a class that is an ordered field isomorphic to the surreal numbers.\nIf the surreals are considered as 'just' a proper-class-sized real closed field, Alling's 1962 paper handles the case of strongly inaccessible cardinals which can naturally be considered as proper classes by cutting off the cumulative hierarchy of the universe one stage above the cardinal, and Alling accordingly deserves much credit for the discovery/invention of the surreals in this sense. There is an important additional field structure on the surreals that is not visible through this lens, however, namely the notion of a 'birthday' and the corresponding natural description of the surreals as the result of a cut-filling process along their birthdays given by Conway. This additional structure has become fundamental to a modern understanding of the surreal numbers, and Conway is thus given credit for discovering the surreals as we know them today\u2014Alling himself gives Conway full credit in a 1985 paper preceding his book on the subject.\nDescription.\nNotation.\nIn the context of surreal numbers, an ordered pair of sets L and R, which is written as (\"L\", \"R\") in many other mathematical contexts, is instead written {\"L\" | \"R\"} including the extra space adjacent to each brace. When a set is empty, it is often simply omitted. When a set is explicitly described by its elements, the pair of braces that encloses the list of elements is often omitted. When a union of sets is taken, the operator that represents that is often a comma. For example, instead of (\"L\"1 \u222a \"L\"2 \u222a {0, 1, 2}, \u2205), which is common notation in other contexts, we typically write {\"L\"1, \"L\"2, 0, 1, 2 |}.\nOutline of construction.\nIn the Conway construction, the surreal numbers are constructed in stages, along with an ordering \u2264 such that for any two surreal numbers a and b, \"a\" \u2264 \"b\" or \"b\" \u2264 \"a\". (Both may hold, in which case a and b are equivalent and denote the same number.) Each number is formed from an ordered pair of subsets of numbers already constructed: given subsets L and R of numbers such that all the members of L are strictly less than all the members of R, then the pair {\"L\" | \"R\"} represents a number intermediate in value between all the members of L and all the members of R.\nDifferent subsets may end up defining the same number: {\"L\" | \"R\"} and {\"L\u2032\" | \"R\u2032\"} may define the same number even if \"L\" \u2260 \"L\u2032\" and \"R\" \u2260 \"R\u2032\". (A similar phenomenon occurs when rational numbers are defined as quotients of integers: and are different representations of the same rational number.) Each surreal number is an equivalence class of representations of the form {\"L\" | \"R\"} that designate the same number, noting that each equivalence class is a proper class rather than a set.\nIn the first stage of construction, there are no previously existing numbers so the only representation must use the empty set: and =.\nDivision.\nThe definition of division is done in terms of the reciprocal and multiplication:\nformula_1\nwhere\nformula_2\nfor positive y. Only positive \"y\"\"L\" are permitted in the formula, with any nonpositive terms being ignored (and \"y\"\"R\" are always positive). This formula involves not only recursion in terms of being able to divide by numbers from the left and right sets of y, but also recursion in that the members of the left and right sets of itself. 0 is always a member of the left set of , and that can be used to find more terms in a recursive fashion. For example, if \"y\" = 3 = { 2 |}, then we know a left term of will be 0. This in turn means = is a right term. This means\nformula_3\nis a left term. This means\nformula_4\nwill be a right term. Continuing, this gives\nformula_5\nFor negative y, is given by\nformula_6\nIf \"y\" = 0, then is undefined.\nConsistency.\nIt can be shown that the definitions of negation, addition and multiplication are consistent, in the sense that:\nWith these rules one can now verify that the numbers found in the first few generations were properly labeled. The construction rule is repeated to obtain more generations of surreals:\n \"S\"0 = {0}\n \"S\"1 = {\u22121 &lt; 0 &lt; 1}\n \"S\"2 = {\u22122 &lt; \u22121 &lt; \u2212 &lt; 0 &lt; &lt; 1 &lt; 2}\n \"S\"3 = {\u22123 &lt; \u22122 &lt; \u2212 &lt; \u22121 &lt; \u2212 &lt; \u2212 &lt; \u2212 &lt; 0 &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; 1 &lt; &lt; 2 &lt; 3}\n \"S\"4 = {\u22124 &lt; \u22123 &lt; ... &lt; \u2212 &lt; 0 &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; 1 &lt; &lt; &lt; &lt; 2 &lt; &lt; 3 &lt; 4}\nArithmetic closure.\nFor each natural number (finite ordinal) n, all numbers generated in \"S\"\"n\" are dyadic fractions, i.e., can be written as an irreducible fraction , where a and b are integers and 0 \u2264 \"b\" &lt; \"n\".\nThe set of all surreal numbers that are generated in some \"S\"\"n\" for finite n may be denoted as formula_7. One may form the three classes\nformula_8\nof which \"S\"\"\u2217\" is the union. No individual \"S\"\"n\" is closed under addition and multiplication (except \"S\"0), but \"S\"\u2217 is; it is the subring of the rationals consisting of all dyadic fractions.\nThere are infinite ordinal numbers \u03b2 for which the set of surreal numbers with birthday less than \u03b2 is closed under the different arithmetic operations. For any ordinal \u03b1, the set of surreal numbers with birthday less than \"\u03b2\" = \"\u03c9\"\"\u03b1\" (using powers of \u03c9) is closed under addition and forms a group; for birthday less than \u03c9\u03c9\u03b1 it is closed under multiplication and forms a ring; and for birthday less than an (ordinal) epsilon number \u03b5\u03b1 it is closed under multiplicative inverse and forms a field. The latter sets are also closed under the exponential function as defined by Kruskal and Gonshor.ch. 10\nHowever, it is always possible to construct a surreal number that is greater than any member of a set of surreals (by including the set on the left side of the constructor) and thus the collection of surreal numbers is a proper class. With their ordering and algebraic operations they constitute an ordered field, with the caveat that they do not form a set. In fact, it is a very special ordered field: the biggest one, in that every ordered field is a subfield of the surreal numbers. The class of all surreal numbers is denoted by the symbol formula_9.\nInfinity.\nDefine \"S\"\"\u03c9\" as the set of all surreal numbers generated by the construction rule from subsets of \"S\"\u2217. (This is the same inductive step as before, since the ordinal number \u03c9 is the smallest ordinal that is larger than all natural numbers; however, the set union appearing in the inductive step is now an infinite union of finite sets, and so this step can be performed only in a set theory that allows such a union.) A unique infinitely large positive number occurs in \"S\"\"\u03c9\":\nformula_10\n\"S\"\"\u03c9\" also contains objects that can be identified as the rational numbers. For example, the \u03c9-complete form of the fraction is given by:\nformula_11\nThe product of this form of with any form of 3 is a form whose left set contains only numbers less than 1 and whose right set contains only numbers greater than 1; the birthday property implies that this product is a form of 1.\nNot only do all the rest of the rational numbers appear in \"S\"\"\u03c9\"; the remaining finite real numbers do too. For example,\nformula_12\nThe only infinities in \"S\"\"\u03c9\" are \u03c9 and \u2212\"\u03c9\"; but there are other non-real numbers in \"S\"\"\u03c9\" among the reals. Consider the smallest positive number in \"S\"\"\u03c9\":\nformula_13\nThis number is larger than zero but less than all positive dyadic fractions. It is therefore an infinitesimal number, often labeled \u03b5. The \u03c9-complete form of \u03b5 (respectively \u2212\"\u03b5\") is the same as the \u03c9-complete form of 0, except that 0 is included in the left (respectively right) set. The only \"pure\" infinitesimals in \"S\"\"\u03c9\" are \u03b5 and its additive inverse \u2212\"\u03b5\"; adding them to any dyadic fraction y produces the numbers \"y\" \u00b1 \"\u03b5\", which also lie in \"S\"\"\u03c9\".\nOne can determine the relationship between \u03c9 and \u03b5 by multiplying particular forms of them to obtain:\n \"\u03c9\" \u00b7 \"\u03b5\" = {\"\u03b5\" \u00b7 \"S\"+ | \"\u03c9\" \u00b7 \"S\"+ + \"S\"\u2217 + \"\u03b5\" \u00b7 \"S\"\u2217}.\nThis expression is well-defined only in a set theory which permits transfinite induction up to \"S\"\"\u03c9\"2. In such a system, one can demonstrate that all the elements of the left set of \"\u03c9S\"\"\u03c9\"\u200a\u00b7\u200d\"S\"\"\u03c9\"\"\u03b5\" are positive infinitesimals and all the elements of the right set are positive infinities, and therefore \"\u03c9S\"\"\u03c9\"\u200a\u00b7\u200d\"S\"\"\u03c9\"\"\u03b5\" is the oldest positive finite number, 1. Consequently, = \"\u03c9\". Some authors systematically use \"\u03c9\"\u22121 in place of the symbol \u03b5.\nContents of \"S\"\"\u03c9\".\nGiven any \"x\" = {\"L\" | \"R\"} in \"S\"\"\u03c9\", exactly one of the following is true:\n\"S\"\"\u03c9\" is not an algebraic field, because it is not closed under arithmetic operations; consider \"\u03c9\" + 1, whose form\nformula_16\ndoes not lie in any number in \"S\"\"\u03c9\". The maximal subset of \"S\"\"\u03c9\" that is closed under (finite series of) arithmetic operations is the field of real numbers, obtained by leaving out the infinities \u00b1\"\u03c9\", the infinitesimals \u00b1\"\u03b5\", and the infinitesimal neighbors \"y\" \u00b1 \"\u03b5\" of each nonzero dyadic fraction y.\nThis construction of the real numbers differs from the Dedekind cuts of standard analysis in that it starts from dyadic fractions rather than general rationals and naturally identifies each dyadic fraction in \"S\"\"\u03c9\" with its forms in previous generations. (The \u03c9-complete forms of real elements of \"S\"\"\u03c9\" are in one-to-one correspondence with the reals obtained by Dedekind cuts, under the proviso that Dedekind reals corresponding to rational numbers are represented by the form in which the cut point is omitted from both left and right sets.) The rationals are not an identifiable stage in the surreal construction; they are merely the subset Q of \"S\"\"\u03c9\" containing all elements x such that \"x\" \"b\" = \"a\" for some a and some nonzero b, both drawn from \"S\"\u2217. By demonstrating that Q is closed under individual repetitions of the surreal arithmetic operations, one can show that it is a field; and by showing that every element of Q is reachable from \"S\"\u2217 by a finite series (no longer than two, actually) of arithmetic operations \"including multiplicative inversion\", one can show that Q is strictly smaller than the subset of \"S\"\"\u03c9\" identified with the reals.\nThe set \"S\"\"\u03c9\" has the same cardinality as the real numbers R. This can be demonstrated by exhibiting surjective mappings from \"S\"\"\u03c9\" to the closed unit interval I of R and vice versa. Mapping \"S\"\"\u03c9\" onto I is routine; map numbers less than or equal to \u03b5 (including \u2212\"\u03c9\") to 0, numbers greater than or equal to 1 \u2212 \"\u03b5\" (including \u03c9) to 1, and numbers between \u03b5 and 1 \u2212 \"\u03b5\" to their equivalent in I (mapping the infinitesimal neighbors \"y\"\u00b1\"\u03b5\" of each dyadic fraction y, along with y itself, to y). To map I onto \"S\"\"\u03c9\", map the (open) central third (, ) of I onto = 1; and so forth. This maps a nonempty open interval of I onto each element of \"S\"\u2217, monotonically. The residue of I consists of the Cantor set \"2\"\"\u03c9\", each point of which is uniquely identified by a partition of the central-third intervals into left and right sets, corresponding precisely to a form {\"L\" | \"R\"} in \"S\"\"\u03c9\". This places the Cantor set in one-to-one correspondence with the set of surreal numbers with birthday \u03c9.\nTransfinite induction.\nContinuing to perform transfinite induction beyond \"S\"\"\u03c9\" produces more ordinal numbers \u03b1, each represented as the largest surreal number having birthday \u03b1. (This is essentially a definition of the ordinal numbers resulting from transfinite induction.) The first such ordinal is \"\u03c9\" + 1 = {\"\u03c9\" |}. There is another positive infinite number in generation \"\u03c9\" + 1:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe surreal number \"\u03c9\" \u2212 1 is not an ordinal; the ordinal \"\u03c9\" is not the successor of any ordinal. This is a surreal number with birthday \"\u03c9\" + 1, which is labeled \"\u03c9\" \u2212 1 on the basis that it coincides with the sum of \"\u03c9\" \n {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ... |} and \u22121 \n and 2 \n {1 |}. It is the second limit ordinal; reaching it from \"\u03c9\" via the construction step requires a transfinite induction on\nformula_17\nThis involves an infinite union of infinite sets, which is a \"stronger\" set theoretic operation than the previous transfinite induction required.\nNote that the \"conventional\" addition and multiplication of ordinals does not always coincide with these operations on their surreal representations. The sum of ordinals 1 + \"\u03c9\" equals \"\u03c9\", but the surreal sum is commutative and produces 1 + \"\u03c9\" = \"\u03c9\" + 1 &gt; \"\u03c9\". The addition and multiplication of the surreal numbers associated with ordinals coincides with the natural sum and natural product of ordinals.\nJust as 2\"\u03c9\" is bigger than \"\u03c9\" + \"n\" for any natural number \"n\", there is a surreal number that is infinite but smaller than \"\u03c9\" \u2212 \"n\" for any natural number \"n\". That is, is defined by\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere on the right hand side the notation \"x\" \u2212 \"Y\" is used to mean {\"x\" \u2212 \"y\" : \"y\" \u2208 \"Y\"}. It can be identified as the product of \"\u03c9\" and the form {0 | 1} of . The birthday of is the limit ordinal \"\u03c9\"2.\nPowers of \"\u03c9\" and the Conway normal form.\nTo classify the \"orders\" of infinite and infinitesimal surreal numbers, also known as archimedean classes, Conway associated to each surreal number x the surreal number\nwhere r and s range over the positive real numbers. If \"x\" &lt; \"y\" then \"\u03c9\"\"y\" is \"infinitely greater\" than \"\u03c9\"\"x\", in that it is greater than \"r\" \"\u03c9\"\"x\" for all real numbers r. Powers of \u03c9 also satisfy the conditions\nso they behave the way one would expect powers to behave.\nEach power of \u03c9 also has the redeeming feature of being the \"simplest\" surreal number in its archimedean class; conversely, every archimedean class within the surreal numbers contains a unique simplest member. Thus, for every positive surreal number x there will always exist some positive real number r and some surreal number y so that \"x\" \u2212 \"r\u03c9\"\"y\" is \"infinitely smaller\" than x. The exponent y is the \"base \u03c9 logarithm\" of x, defined on the positive surreals; it can be demonstrated that log\"\u03c9\" maps the positive surreals onto the surreals and that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis gets extended by transfinite induction so that every surreal number has a \"normal form\" analogous to the Cantor normal form for ordinal numbers. This is the Conway normal form: Every surreal number x may be uniquely written as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere every \"r\"\"\u03b1\" is a nonzero real number and the \"y\"\"\u03b1\"s form a strictly decreasing sequence of surreal numbers. This \"sum\", however, may have infinitely many terms, and in general has the length of an arbitrary ordinal number. (Zero corresponds of course to the case of an empty sequence, and is the only surreal number with no leading exponent.)\nLooked at in this manner, the surreal numbers resemble a power series field, except that the decreasing sequences of exponents must be bounded in length by an ordinal and are not allowed to be as long as the class of ordinals. This is the basis for the formulation of the surreal numbers as a Hahn series.\nGaps and continuity.\nIn contrast to the real numbers, a (proper) subset of the surreal numbers does not have a least upper (or lower) bound unless it has a maximal (minimal) element. Conway defines a gap as {\"L\" | \"R\"} such that every element of \"L\" is less than every element of \"R\", and formula_18; this is not a number because at least one of the sides is a proper class. Though similar, gaps are not quite the same as Dedekind cuts, but we can still talk about a completion formula_19 of the surreal numbers with the natural ordering which is a (proper class-sized) linear continuum.\nFor instance there is no least positive infinite surreal, but the gap\nformula_20\nis greater than all real numbers and less than all positive infinite surreals, and is thus the least upper bound of the reals in formula_19. Similarly the gap formula_22 is larger than all surreal numbers. (This is an esoteric pun: In the general construction of ordinals, \u03b1 \"is\" the set of ordinals smaller than \u03b1, and we can use this equivalence to write in the surreals; formula_23 denotes the class of ordinal numbers, and because formula_23 is cofinal in formula_9 we have formula_26 by extension.)\nWith a bit of set-theoretic care, formula_9 can be equipped with a topology where the open sets are unions of open intervals (indexed by proper sets) and continuous functions can be defined. An equivalent of Cauchy sequences can be defined as well, although they have to be indexed by the class of ordinals; these will always converge, but the limit may be either a number or a gap that can be expressed as\nformula_28\nwith \"a\"\"\u03b1\" decreasing and having no lower bound in formula_9. (All such gaps can be understood as Cauchy sequences themselves, but there are other types of gap that are not limits, such as \u221e and formula_23).\nExponential function.\nBased on unpublished work by Kruskal, a construction (by transfinite induction) that extends the real exponential function exp(\"x\") (with base e) to the surreals was carried through by Gonshor.ch. 10\nOther exponentials.\nThe powers of \u03c9 function is also an exponential function, but does not have the properties desired for an extension of the function on the reals. It will, however, be needed in the development of the base-e exponential, and it is this function that is meant whenever the notation \u03c9x is used in the following.\nWhen y is a dyadic fraction, the power function formula_31, \"x\" \u21a6 \"x\"\"y\" may be composed from multiplication, multiplicative inverse and square root, all of which can be defined inductively. Its values are completely determined by the basic relation \"x\"\"y\"+\"z\" = \"xy\" \u00b7 \"xz\", and where defined it necessarily agrees with any other exponentiation that can exist.\nBasic induction.\nThe induction steps for the surreal exponential are based on the series expansion for the real exponential,\nformula_32\nmore specifically those partial sums that can be shown by basic algebra to be positive but less than all later ones. For x positive these are denoted [\"x\"]\"n\" and include all partial sums; for x negative but finite, [\"x\"]2\"n\"+1 denotes the odd steps in the series starting from the first one with a positive real part (which always exists). For x negative infinite the odd-numbered partial sums are strictly decreasing and the [\"x\"]2\"n\"+1 notation denotes the empty set, but it turns out that the corresponding elements are not needed in the induction.\nThe relations that hold for real are then\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nand this can be extended to the surreals with the definition\nformula_33\nThis is well-defined for all surreal arguments (the value exists and does not depend on the choice of zL and zR).\nResults.\nUsing this definition, the following hold:\nExamples.\nThe surreal exponential is essentially given by its behaviour on positive powers of \u03c9, i.e., the function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, combined with well-known behaviour on finite numbers. Only examples of the former will be given. In addition, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; holds for a large part of its range, for instance for any finite number with positive real part and any infinite number that is less than some iterated power of \u03c9 (\u03c9\u03c9\u00b7\u00b7\u03c9 for some number of levels).\nExponentiation.\nA general exponentiation can be defined as , giving an interpretation to expressions like . Again it is essential to distinguish this definition from the \"powers of \u03c9\" function, especially if \u03c9 may occur as the base.\nSurcomplex numbers.\nA surcomplex number is a number of the form \"a\" + \"b\"i, where a and b are surreal numbers and i is the square root of \u22121. The surcomplex numbers form an algebraically closed field (except for being a proper class), isomorphic to the algebraic closure of the field generated by extending the rational numbers by a proper class of algebraically independent transcendental elements. Up to field isomorphism, this fact characterizes the field of surcomplex numbers within any fixed set theory.\nGames.\nThe definition of surreal numbers contained one restriction: each element of L must be strictly less than each element of R. If this restriction is dropped we can generate a more general class known as games. All games are constructed according to this rule:\nAddition, negation, and comparison are all defined the same way for both surreal numbers and games.\nEvery surreal number is a game, but not all games are surreal numbers, e.g. the game {0 | 0} is not a surreal number. The class of games is more general than the surreals, and has a simpler definition, but lacks some of the nicer properties of surreal numbers. The class of surreal numbers forms a field, but the class of games does not. The surreals have a total order: given any two surreals, they are either equal, or one is greater than the other. The games have only a partial order: there exist pairs of games that are neither equal, greater than, nor less than each other. Each surreal number is either positive, negative, or zero. Each game is either positive, negative, \"zero\", or \"fuzzy\" (incomparable with zero, such as {1 | \u22121}).\nA move in a game involves the player whose move it is choosing a game from those available in L (for the left player) or R (for the right player) and then passing this chosen game to the other player. A player who cannot move because the choice is from the empty set has lost. A positive game represents a win for the left player, a negative game for the right player, a zero game for the second player to move, and a fuzzy game for the first player to move.\nIf x, y, and z are surreals, and \"x\" = \"y\", then \"x\" \"z\" = \"y\" \"z\". However, if x, y, and z are games, and \"x\" = \"y\", then it is not always true that \"x\" \"z\" = \"y\" \"z\". Note that\u00a0\"=\" here means equality, not identity.\nApplication to combinatorial game theory.\nThe surreal numbers were originally motivated by studies of the game Go, and there are numerous connections between popular games and the surreals. In this section, we will use a capitalized \"Game\" for the mathematical object {\"L\" | \"R\"}, and the lowercase \"game\" for recreational games like Chess or Go.\nWe consider games with these properties:\nFor most games, the initial board position gives no great advantage to either player. As the game progresses and one player starts to win, board positions will occur in which that player has a clear advantage. For analyzing games, it is useful to associate a Game with every board position. The value of a given position will be the Game {L|R}, where L is the set of values of all the positions that can be reached in a single move by Left. Similarly, R is the set of values of all the positions that can be reached in a single move by Right.\nThe zero Game (called 0) is the Game where L and R are both empty, so the player to move next (L or R) immediately loses. The sum of two Games G = {L1 | R1} and H = {L2 | R2} is defined as the Game G + H = {} where the player to move chooses which of the Games to play in at each stage, and the loser is still the player who ends up with no legal move. One can imagine two chess boards between two players, with players making moves alternately, but with complete freedom as to which board to play on. If G is the Game {L | R}, \u2212G is the Game {\u2212R | \u2212L}, i.e. with the role of the two players reversed. It is easy to show G \u2212 G = 0 for all Games G (where G \u2212 H is defined as G + (\u2212H)).\nThis simple way to associate Games with games yields a very interesting result. Suppose two perfect players play a game starting with a given position whose associated Game is x. We can classify all Games into four classes as follows:\nMore generally, we can define G &gt; H as G \u2212 H &gt; 0, and similarly for &lt;, = and ||.\nThe notation G || H means that G and H are incomparable. G || H is equivalent to G \u2212 H || 0, i.e. that G &gt; H, G &lt; H and G = H are all false. Incomparable games are sometimes said to be \"confused\" with each other, because one or the other may be preferred by a player depending on what is added to it. A game confused with zero is said to be fuzzy, as opposed to positive, negative, or zero. An example of a fuzzy game is star (*).\nSometimes when a game nears the end, it will decompose into several smaller games that do not interact, except in that each player's turn allows moving in only one of them. For example, in Go, the board will slowly fill up with pieces until there are just a few small islands of empty space where a player can move. Each island is like a separate game of Go, played on a very small board. It would be useful if each subgame could be analyzed separately, and then the results combined to give an analysis of the entire game. This doesn't appear to be easy to do. For example, there might be two subgames where whoever moves first wins, but when they are combined into one big game, it is no longer the first player who wins. Fortunately, there is a way to do this analysis. The following theorem can be applied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA game composed of smaller games is called the disjunctive sum of those smaller games, and the theorem states that the method of addition we defined is equivalent to taking the disjunctive sum of the addends.\nHistorically, Conway developed the theory of surreal numbers in the reverse order of how it has been presented here. He was analyzing Go endgames, and realized that it would be useful to have some way to combine the analyses of non-interacting subgames into an analysis of their disjunctive sum. From this he invented the concept of a Game and the addition operator for it. From there he moved on to developing a definition of negation and comparison. Then he noticed that a certain class of Games had interesting properties; this class became the surreal numbers. Finally, he developed the multiplication operator, and proved that the surreals are actually a field, and that it includes both the reals and ordinals.\nAlternative realizations.\nAlternative approaches to the surreal numbers complement the original exposition by Conway in terms of games.\nSign expansion.\nDefinitions.\nIn what is now called the \"sign-expansion\" or \"sign-sequence\" of a surreal number, a surreal number is a function whose domain is an ordinal and whose codomain is {\u22121, +1}.ch. 2 This notion has been introduced by Conway himself in the equivalent formulation of L-R sequences.\nDefine the binary predicate \"simpler than\" on numbers by: x is simpler than y if x is a proper subset of y, i.e. if dom(\"x\") &lt; &lt;templatestyles src=\"If mobile/styles.css\" /&gt;dom(\"y\") and \"x\"(\"\u03b1\") = \"y\"(\"\u03b1\") for all \"\u03b1\" &lt; dom(\"x\").\nFor surreal numbers define the binary relation &lt; to be lexicographic order (with the convention that \"undefined values\" are greater than \u22121 and less than 1). So \"x\" &lt; \"y\" if one of the following holds:\nEquivalently, let \"\u03b4\"(\"x\",\u200a\"y\") = min({ dom(\"x\"), dom(\"y\")} \u222a { \"\u03b1\" :&lt;templatestyles src=\"If mobile/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u03b1\" &lt; dom(\"x\") \u2227 \"\u03b1\" &lt; dom(\"y\") \u2227 \"x\"(\"\u03b1\") \u2260 \"y\"(\"\u03b1\") }),\nso that \"x\" = \"y\" if and only if \"\u03b4\"(\"x\",\u200a\"y\") = dom(\"x\") = dom(\"y\"). Then, for numbers x and y, \"x\" &lt; \"y\" if and only if one of the following holds:\nFor numbers x and y, \"x\" \u2264 \"y\" if and only if \"x\" &lt; \"y\" \u2228 \"x\" = \"y\", and \"x\" &gt; \"y\" if and only if \"y\" &lt; \"x\". Also \"x\" \u2265 \"y\" if and only if \"y\" \u2264 \"x\".\nThe relation &lt; is transitive, and for all numbers x and y, exactly one of \"x\" &lt; \"y\", \"x\" = \"y\", \"x\" &gt; \"y\", holds (law of trichotomy). This means that &lt; is a linear order (except that &lt; is a proper class).\nFor sets of numbers L and R such that \u2200\"x\" \u2208 \"L\" \u2200\"y\" \u2208 &lt;templatestyles src=\"If mobile/styles.css\" /&gt;\"R\" (\"x\" &lt; \"y\"), there exists a unique number z such that\nFurthermore, z is constructible from L and R by transfinite induction. z is the simplest number between L and R. Let the unique number z be denoted by \"\u03c3\"(\"L\",\u200d\"R\").\nFor a number x, define its left set \"L\"(\"x\") and right set \"R\"(\"x\") by\nthen \"\u03c3\"(\"L\"(\"x\"),\u200a\"R\"(\"x\")) = \"x\".\nOne advantage of this alternative realization is that equality is identity, not an inductively defined relation. Unlike Conway's original realization of the surreal numbers, however, the sign-expansion requires a prior construction of the ordinals, while in Conway's realization, the ordinals are constructed as particular cases of surreals.\nHowever, similar definitions can be made that eliminate the need for prior construction of the ordinals. For instance, we could let the surreals be the (recursively-defined) class of functions whose domain is a subset of the surreals satisfying the transitivity rule \u2200\"g\" \u2208 dom \"f\" (\u2200\"h\" \u2208 dom \"g\" (\"h\" \u2208 dom \"f\" )) and whose range is {\u2212, +}. \"Simpler than\" is very simply defined now: x is simpler than y if \"x\" \u2208 dom \"y\". The total ordering is defined by considering x and y as sets of ordered pairs (as a function is normally defined): Either \"x\" = \"y\", or else the surreal number \"z\" = \"x\" \u2229 \"y\" is in the domain of x or the domain of y (or both, but in this case the signs must disagree). We then have \"x\" &lt; \"y\" if \"x\"(\"z\") = \u2212 or \"y\"(\"z\") = + (or both). Converting these functions into sign sequences is a straightforward task; arrange the elements of dom \"f\"\u200a in order of simplicity (i.e., inclusion), and then write down the signs that \"f\" assigns to each of these elements in order. The ordinals then occur naturally as those surreal numbers whose range is {+}.\nAddition and multiplication.\nThe sum \"x\" + \"y\" of two numbers x and y is defined by induction on dom(\"x\") and dom(\"y\") by \"x\" + \"y\" = \"\u03c3\"(\"L\",\u200d\"R\"), where\nThe additive identity is given by the number 0 = { }, i.e. the number 0 is the unique function whose domain is the ordinal 0, and the additive inverse of the number x is the number \u2212\"x\", given by dom(\u2212\"x\") = dom(\"x\"), and, for \"\u03b1\" &lt; dom(\"x\"), (\u2212\"x\")(\"\u03b1\") = \u22121 if \"x\"(\"\u03b1\") = +1, and (\u2212\"x\")(\"\u03b1\") = +1 if \"x\"(\"\u03b1\") = \u22121.\nIt follows that a number x is positive if and only if 0 &lt; dom(\"x\") and \"x\"(0) = +1, and x is negative if and only if 0 &lt; dom(\"x\") and \"x\"(0) = \u22121.\nThe product xy of two numbers, x and y, is defined by induction on dom(\"x\") and dom(\"y\") by \"xy\" = \"\u03c3\"(\"L\",\u200d\"R\"), where\nThe multiplicative identity is given by the number 1 = {(0, +1)}, i.e. the number 1 has domain equal to the ordinal 1, and 1(0) = +1.\nCorrespondence with Conway's realization.\nThe map from Conway's realization to sign expansions is given by \"f\"\u200a({\"L\" | \"R\"}) = \"\u03c3\"(\"M\",\u200d\"S\"), where \"M\" = {\"f\"\u200a(\"x\") : \"x\" \u2208 \"L\"} and \"S\" = {\"f\"\u200a(\"x\") : \"x\" \u2208 \"R\"}.\nThe inverse map from the alternative realization to Conway's realization is given by \"g\"(\"x\") = {\"L\" | \"R\"}, where \"L\" = {\"g\"(\"y\") : \"y\" \u2208 \"L\"(\"x\")} and \"R\" = {\"g\"(\"y\") : \"y\" \u2208 \"R\"(\"x\")}.\nAxiomatic approach.\nIn another approach to the surreals, given by Alling, explicit construction is bypassed altogether. Instead, a set of axioms is given that any particular approach to the surreals must satisfy. Much like the axiomatic approach to the reals, these axioms guarantee uniqueness up to isomorphism.\nA triple formula_36 is a surreal number system if and only if the following hold:\nBoth Conway's original construction and the sign-expansion construction of surreals satisfy these axioms.\nGiven these axioms, Alling derives Conway's original definition of \u2264 and develops surreal arithmetic.\nSimplicity hierarchy.\nA construction of the surreal numbers as a maximal binary pseudo-tree with simplicity (ancestor) and ordering relations is due to Philip Ehrlich. The difference from the usual definition of a tree is that the set of ancestors of a vertex is well-ordered, but may not have a maximal element (immediate predecessor); in other words the order type of that set is a general ordinal number, not just a natural number. This construction fulfills Alling's axioms as well and can easily be mapped to the sign-sequence representation. Ehrlich additionally constructed an isomorphism between Conway's maximal surreal number field and the maximal hyperreals in von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del set theory. \nHahn series.\nAllingth. 6.55, p. 246 also proves that the field of surreal numbers is isomorphic (as an ordered field) to the field of Hahn series with real coefficients on the value group of surreal numbers themselves (the series representation corresponding to the normal form of a surreal number, as defined above). This provides a connection between surreal numbers and more conventional mathematical approaches to ordered field theory.\nNote that the support of the Hahn series must be a set, not a proper class; for instance, the Hahn series formula_43 summed over all ordinals \"\u03b1\" has no surreal counterpart.\nThis isomorphism makes the surreal numbers into a valued field where the valuation is the additive inverse of the exponent of the leading term in the Conway normal form, e.g., \"\u03bd\"(\"\u03c9\") = \u22121. The valuation ring then consists of the finite surreal numbers (numbers with a real and/or an infinitesimal part). The reason for the sign inversion is that the exponents in the Conway normal form constitute a reverse well-ordered set, whereas Hahn series are formulated in terms of (non-reversed) well-ordered subsets of the value group.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51434", "revid": "6350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51434", "title": "Sedenion", "text": "Hypercomplex number system\nIn abstract algebra, the sedenions form a 16-dimensional noncommutative and nonassociative algebra over the real numbers, usually represented by the capital letter S, boldface S or blackboard bold formula_1.\nThe sedenions are obtained by applying the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction to the octonions, which can be mathematically expressed as formula_2. As such, the octonions are isomorphic to a subalgebra of the sedenions. Unlike the octonions, the sedenions are not an alternative algebra. Applying the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction to the sedenions yields a 32-dimensional algebra, called the trigintaduonions or sometimes the 32-nions.\nThe term \"sedenion\" is also used for other 16-dimensional algebraic structures, such as a tensor product of two copies of the biquaternions, or the algebra of 4 \u00d7 4 matrices over the real numbers, or that studied by .\nArithmetic.\nEvery sedenion is a linear combination of the unit sedenions formula_3, formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, ..., formula_7,\nwhich form a basis of the vector space of sedenions. Every sedenion can be represented in the form\nformula_8\nAddition and subtraction are defined by the addition and subtraction of corresponding coefficients and multiplication is distributive over addition.\nLike other algebras based on the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction, the sedenions contain the algebra they were constructed from. So they contain the octonions (generated by formula_3 to formula_10 in the table below), and therefore also the quaternions (generated by formula_3 to formula_6), complex numbers (generated by formula_3 and formula_4) and real numbers (generated by formula_3).\nMultiplication.\nLike octonions, multiplication of sedenions is neither commutative nor associative. However, in contrast to the octonions, the sedenions do not even have the property of being alternative. They do, however, have the property of power associativity, which can be stated as that, for any element formula_16 of formula_17, the power formula_18 is well defined. They are also flexible.\nThe sedenions have a multiplicative identity element formula_3 and multiplicative inverses, but they are not a division algebra because they have zero divisors: two nonzero sedenions can be multiplied to obtain zero, for example formula_20. All hypercomplex number systems after sedenions that are based on the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction also contain zero divisors.\nThe sedenion multiplication table is shown below:\nSedenion properties.\nFrom the above table, we can see that:\nformula_21\nformula_22 and\nformula_23\nAnti-associative.\nThe sedenions are not fully anti-associative. Choose any four generators, formula_24 and formula_25. The following 5-cycle shows that these five relations cannot all be anti-associative.\nformula_26\nIn particular, in the table above, using formula_27 and formula_28 the last expression associates.\nformula_29\nQuaternionic subalgebras.\nThe particular sedenion multiplication table shown above is represented by 35 triads. The table and its triads have been constructed from an octonion represented by the bolded set of 7 triads using Cayley\u2013Dickson construction. It is one of 480 possible sets of 7 triads (one of two shown in the octonion article) and is the one based on the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction of quaternions from two possible quaternion constructions from the complex numbers. The binary representations of the indices of these triples bitwise XOR to 0. These 35 triads are:\nZero divisors.\nThe list of 84 sets of zero divisors formula_30, where\nformula_31:\nformula_32\nSpace of Zero Divisors.\nIt has been shown that the pairs of zero divisors in the unit sedonions form a manifold isomorphic to the Lie group G2 in the space formula_33. \nApplications.\n showed that the space of pairs of norm-one sedenions that multiply to zero is homeomorphic to the compact form of the exceptional Lie group G2. (Note that in his paper, a \"zero divisor\" means a \"pair\" of elements that multiply to zero.)\n demonstrated that the three generations of leptons and quarks that are associated with unbroken gauge symmetry formula_34 can be represented using the algebra of the complexified sedenions formula_35. Their reasoning follows that a primitive idempotent projector formula_36 \u2014 where formula_7 is chosen as an imaginary unit akin to formula_38 for formula_39 in the Fano plane \u2014 that acts on the standard basis of the sedenions uniquely divides the algebra into three sets of split basis elements for formula_40, whose adjoint left actions \"on themselves\" generate three copies of the Clifford algebra formula_41 which in-turn contain minimal left ideals that describe a single generation of fermions with unbroken formula_34 gauge symmetry. In particular, they note that tensor products between normed division algebras generate zero divisors akin to those inside formula_43, where for formula_40 the lack of alternativity and associativity does not affect the construction of minimal left ideals since their underlying split basis requires only two basis elements to be multiplied together, in-which associativity or alternativity are uninvolved. Still, these ideals constructed from an adjoint algebra of left actions of the algebra on itself remain associative, alternative, and isomorphic to a Clifford algebra. Altogether, this permits three copies of formula_45 to exist inside formula_46. Furthermore, these three complexified octonion subalgebras are not independent; they share a common formula_47 subalgebra, which the authors note could form a theoretical basis for CKM and PMNS matrices that, respectively, describe quark mixing and neutrino oscillations.\nSedenion neural networks provide a means of efficient and compact expression in machine learning applications and have been used in solving multiple time-series and traffic forecasting problems.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51436", "revid": "2707674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51436", "title": "Octonion", "text": "Hypercomplex number system\nIn mathematics, the octonions are a normed division algebra over the real numbers, a kind of hypercomplex number system. The octonions are usually represented by the capital letter O, using boldface O or blackboard bold formula_1. Octonions have eight dimensions; twice the number of dimensions of the quaternions, of which they are an extension. They are noncommutative and nonassociative, but satisfy a weaker form of associativity; namely, they are alternative. They are also power associative.\nOctonions are not as well known as the quaternions and complex numbers, which are much more widely studied and used. Octonions are related to exceptional structures in mathematics, among them the exceptional Lie groups. Octonions have applications in fields such as string theory, special relativity and quantum logic. Applying the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction to the octonions produces the sedenions.\nHistory.\nThe octonions were discovered in December 1843 by John T. Graves, inspired by his friend William Rowan Hamilton's discovery of quaternions. Shortly before Graves' discovery of octonions, Graves wrote in a letter addressed to Hamilton on October 26, 1843, \"If with your alchemy you can make three pounds of gold, why should you stop there?\"\nGraves called his discovery \"octaves\", and mentioned them in a letter to Hamilton dated 26 December 1843. He first published his result slightly later than Arthur Cayley's article. The octonions were discovered independently by Cayley and are sometimes referred to as Cayley numbers or the Cayley algebra. Hamilton described the early history of Graves's discovery.\nDefinition.\nThe octonions can be thought of as octets (or 8-tuples) of real numbers. Every octonion is a real linear combination of the unit octonions:\nformula_2\nwhere \"e\"0 is the scalar or real element; it may be identified with the real number That is, every octonion x can be written in the form\nformula_3\nwith real coefficients xi.\nCayley\u2013Dickson construction.\nA more systematic way of defining the octonions is via the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction. Applying the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction to the quaternions produces the octonions, which can be expressed as formula_4.\nMuch as quaternions can be defined as pairs of complex numbers, the octonions can be defined as pairs of quaternions. Addition is defined pairwise. The product of two pairs of quaternions (\"a\", \"b\") and (\"c\", \"d\") is defined by\nformula_5\nwhere \"z\"* denotes the conjugate of the quaternion z. This definition is equivalent to the one given above when the eight unit octonions are identified with the pairs\n(1, 0), (\"i\", 0), (\"j\", 0), (\"k\", 0), (0, 1), (0, \"i\"), (0, \"j\"), (0, \"k\")\nArithmetic and operations.\nAddition and subtraction.\nAddition and subtraction of octonions is done by adding and subtracting corresponding terms and hence their coefficients, like quaternions.\nMultiplication.\nMultiplication of octonions is more complex. Multiplication is distributive over addition, so the product of two octonions can be calculated by summing the products of all the terms, again like quaternions. The product of each pair of terms can be given by multiplication of the coefficients and a multiplication table of the unit octonions, like this one (given both by Arthur Cayley in 1845 and John T. Graves in 1843):\nMost off-diagonal elements of the table are antisymmetric, making it almost a skew-symmetric matrix except for the elements on the main diagonal, as well as the row and column for which \"e\"0 is an operand.\nThe table can be summarized as follows:\n formula_6\nwhere \u03b4\u2113m is the Kronecker delta (equal to 1 if \"\u2113\" \n \"m\", and 0 for \"\u2113\" \u2260 \"m\"), and \u03b5\u2113mn is a completely antisymmetric tensor with value +1 when and any even number of permutations of the indices, but \u22121 for any odd permutations of the listed triples (e.g. formula_7 but formula_8 however, formula_9 again). Whenever any two of the three indices are the same, \nThe above definition is not unique, however; it is only one of 480\u00a0possible definitions for octonion multiplication with \"e\"0 \n 1. The others can be obtained by permuting and changing the signs of the non-scalar basis elements The 480\u00a0different algebras are isomorphic, and there is rarely a need to consider which particular multiplication rule is used.\nEach of these 480\u00a0definitions is invariant up to signs under some 7\u00a0cycle of the points and for each 7\u00a0cycle there are four definitions, differing by signs and reversal of order. A common choice is to use the definition invariant under the 7\u00a0cycle (1234567) with \"e\"1\"e\"2 \n \"e\"4 by using the triangular multiplication diagram, or Fano plane below that also shows the sorted list of 1 2 4 based 7-cycle triads and its associated multiplication matrices in both \"e\"\"n\" and formula_10 format. \nA variant of this sometimes used is to label the elements of the basis by the elements \u221e, 0, 1, 2, ..., 6, of the projective line over the finite field of order 7. The multiplication is then given by \"e\"\u221e \n 1 and \"e\"1\"e\"2 \n \"e\"4, and all equations obtained from this one by adding a constant (modulo 7) to all subscripts: In other words using the seven triples (1 2 4), (2 3 5), (3 4 6), (4 5 0), (5 6 1), (6 0 2), (0 1 3) . These are the nonzero codewords of the quadratic residue code of length\u00a07 over the Galois field of two elements, \"GF\"(2). There is a symmetry of order\u00a07 given by adding a constant mod\u00a07 to all subscripts, and also a symmetry of order 3 given by multiplying, modulo\u00a07, all subscripts by one of the quadratic residues 1, 2, and 4.\nThese seven triples can also be considered as the seven translates of the set {1,2,4} of non-zero squares \nforming a cyclic (7,3,1)-difference set in the finite field GF(7) of seven elements. \nThe Fano plane shown above with formula_11 and IJKL multiplication matrices also includes the geometric algebra basis with signature and is given in terms of the following 7\u00a0quaternionic triples (omitting the scalar identity element):\n(\"I\" , \"j\" , \"k\" ) , ( \"i\" , \"J\" , \"k\") , ( \"i\" , \"j\" , \"K\"), (\"I\" , \"J\" , \"K\"),\n(\u2605\"I\" , \"i\" , \"l\" ) , (\u2605\"J\" , \"j\" , \"l\" ), (\u2605\"K\" , \"k\" , \"l\")\nor alternatively\nformula_12\n(\u2605formula_13\u2605formula_14\u2605formula_15\nin which the lower case items \"{i, j, k, l}\" are vectors (e.g. {formula_16}, respectively) and the upper case ones {\"I,J,K\"}={\"\u03c31,\u03c32,\u03c33\"} are bivectors (e.g. formula_17, respectively) and the Hodge star operator \u2605 \n \"i j k l\" is the pseudo-scalar element. If the \u2605 is forced to be equal to the identity, then the multiplication ceases to be associative, but the \u2605 may be removed from the multiplication table resulting in an octonion multiplication table.\nIn keeping \u2605 \n \"i j k l\" associative and thus not reducing the 4\u00a0dimensional geometric algebra to an octonion one, the whole multiplication table can be derived from the equation for \u2605. Consider the gamma matrices in the examples given above. The formula defining the fifth gamma matrix (formula_18) shows that it is the \u2605 of a four-dimensional geometric algebra of the gamma matrices.\nFano plane mnemonic.\nA convenient mnemonic for remembering the products of unit octonions is given by the diagram, which represents the multiplication table of Cayley and Graves.\nThis diagram with seven points and seven lines (the circle through 1, 2, and 3 is considered a line) is called the Fano plane. The lines are directional. The seven points correspond to the seven standard basis elements of formula_19 (see definition below). Each pair of distinct points lies on a unique line and each line runs through exactly three points.\nLet (\"a\", \"b\", \"c\") be an ordered triple of points lying on a given line with the order specified by the direction of the arrow. Then multiplication is given by\n\"ab\" \n \"c\" and \"ba\" \n \u2212\"c\"\ntogether with cyclic permutations. These rules together with\ncompletely defines the multiplicative structure of the octonions. Each of the seven lines generates a subalgebra of formula_21 isomorphic to the quaternions H.\nConjugate, norm, and inverse.\nThe \"conjugate\" of an octonion\nformula_22\nis given by\nformula_23\nConjugation is an involution of formula_21 and satisfies (\"xy\")* \n \"y\"*\"x\"* (note the change in order).\nThe \"real part\" of x is given by\nformula_25\nand the \"imaginary part\" (sometimes called the \"pure part\") by\nformula_26\nThe set of all purely imaginary octonions spans a 7\u00a0dimensional subspace of formula_27 denoted formula_28\nConjugation of octonions satisfies the equation\nformula_29\nThe product of an octonion with its conjugate, is always a nonnegative real number:\nformula_30\nUsing this, the norm of an octonion is defined as\nformula_31\nThis norm agrees with the standard 8\u00a0dimensional Euclidean norm on \u211d8.\nThe existence of a norm on formula_21 implies the existence of inverses for every nonzero element of formula_33 The inverse of which is the unique octonion \"x\"\u22121 satisfying is given by\nformula_34\nExponentiation and polar form.\nAny octonion x can be decomposed into its real part and imaginary part:\nformula_35\nalso sometimes called scalar and vector parts.\nWe define the \"unit vector\" u corresponding to x as\nformula_36. It is a pure octonion of norm 1.\nIt can be proved that any non-zero octonion can be written as:\nformula_37\nthus providing a polar form.\nProperties.\nOctonionic multiplication is neither commutative:\n\"ei ej\" \n \u2212\"ej ei\" \u2260 \"ej ei\" if i, j are distinct and non-zero,\nnor associative:\n(\"ei ej\") \"ek\" \n \u2212\"ei\" (\"ej ek\") \u2260 \"ei\"(\"ej ek\") if i, j, k are distinct, non-zero and \"ei ej\" \u2260 \u00b1\"ek\".\nThe octonions do satisfy a weaker form of associativity: they are alternative. This means that the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative. Actually, one can show that the subalgebra generated by any two elements of formula_21 is isomorphic to \u211d, \u2102, or \u210d, all of which are associative. Because of their non-associativity, octonions cannot be represented by a subalgebra of a matrix ring over \u211d, unlike the real numbers, complex numbers, and quaternions.\nThe octonions do retain one important property shared by \u211d, \u2102, and \u210d: the norm on formula_21 satisfies\nformula_40\nThis equation means that the octonions form a composition algebra. The higher-dimensional algebras defined by the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction (starting with the sedenions) all fail to satisfy this property. They all have zero divisors.\nWider number systems exist which have a multiplicative modulus (for example, 16\u00a0dimensional conic sedenions). Their modulus is defined differently from their norm, and they also contain zero divisors.\nAs shown by Hurwitz, \u211d, \u2102, or \u210d, and formula_21 are the only normed division algebras over the real numbers. These four algebras also form the only alternative, finite-dimensional division algebras over the real numbers (up to an isomorphism).\nNot being associative, the nonzero elements of formula_21 do not form a group. They do, however, form a loop, specifically a Moufang loop.\nCommutator and cross product.\nThe commutator of two octonions x and y is given by\nformula_43\nThis is antisymmetric and imaginary. If it is considered only as a product on the imaginary subspace formula_19 it defines a product on that space, the seven-dimensional cross product, given by\nformula_45\nLike the cross product in three dimensions this is a vector orthogonal to x and y with magnitude\nformula_46\nBut like the octonion product it is not uniquely defined. Instead there are many different cross products, each one dependent on the choice of octonion product.\nAutomorphisms.\nAn automorphism, A, of the octonions is an invertible linear transformation of formula_21 which satisfies\nformula_48\nThe set of all automorphisms of formula_21 forms a group called The group \"G\"2 is a simply connected, compact, real Lie group of dimension\u00a014. This group is the smallest of the exceptional Lie groups and is isomorphic to the subgroup of Spin(7) that preserves any chosen particular vector in its 8\u00a0dimensional real spinor representation. The group Spin(7) is in turn a subgroup of the group of isotopies described below.\n\"See also\": PSL(2,7) \u2013 the automorphism group of the Fano plane.\nIsotopies.\nAn isotopy of an algebra is a triple of bijective linear maps a, b, c such that if \"xy\" \n \"z\" then \"a\"(\"x\")\"b\"(\"y\") \n \"c\"(\"z\"). For \"a\" \n \"b\" \n \"c\" this is the same as an automorphism. The isotopy group of an algebra is the group of all isotopies, which contains the group of automorphisms as a subgroup.\nThe isotopy group of the octonions is the group Spin8(\u211d), with a, b, c acting as the three 8\u00a0dimensional representations. The subgroup of elements where c fixes the identity is the subgroup Spin7(\u211d), and the subgroup where a, b, c all fix the identity is the automorphism group \nMatrix representation.\nJust as quaternions can be represented as matrices, octonions can be represented as tables of quaternions. Specifically, because any octonion can be defined a pair of quaternions, we represent the octonion formula_50 as:\nformula_51\nUsing a slightly modified (non-associative) quaternionic matrix multiplication:\nformula_52\nwe can translate octonion addition and multiplication to the respective operations on quaternionic matrices.\nApplications.\nThe octonions play a significant role in the classification and construction of other mathematical entities. For example, the exceptional Lie group \"G\"2 is the automorphism group of the octonions, and the other exceptional Lie groups \"F\"4, \"E\"6, \"E\"7 and \"E\"8 can be understood as the isometries of certain projective planes defined using the octonions. The set of self-adjoint 3\u2009\u00d7\u20093 octonionic matrices, equipped with a symmetrized matrix product, defines the Albert algebra. In discrete mathematics, the octonions provide an elementary derivation of the Leech lattice, and thus they are closely related to the sporadic simple groups.\nApplications of the octonions to physics have largely been conjectural. For example, in the 1970s, attempts were made to understand quarks by way of an octonionic Hilbert space. It is known that the octonions, and the fact that only four normed division algebras can exist, relates to the spacetime dimensions in which supersymmetric quantum field theories can be constructed. Also, attempts have been made to obtain the Standard Model of elementary particle physics from octonionic constructions, for example using the \"Dixon algebra\" formula_53\nOctonions have also arisen in the study of black hole entropy, quantum information science, string theory, and image processing.\nOctonions have been used in solutions to the hand eye calibration problem in robotics.\nDeep octonion networks provide a means of efficient and compact expression in machine learning applications.\nIntegral octonions.\nThere are several natural ways to choose an integral form of the octonions. The simplest is just to take the octonions whose coordinates are integers. This gives a nonassociative algebra over the integers called the Gravesian octonions. However it is not a maximal order (in the sense of ring theory); there are exactly seven maximal orders containing it. These seven maximal orders are all equivalent under automorphisms. The phrase \"integral octonions\" usually refers to a fixed choice of one of these seven orders.\nThese maximal orders were constructed by , Dickson and Bruck as follows. Label the eight basis vectors by the points of the projective line over the field with seven elements. First form the \"Kirmse integers\" : these consist of octonions whose coordinates are integers or half integers, and that are half integers (that is, halves of odd integers) on one of the 16 sets\n\u2205 (\u221e124) (\u221e235) (\u221e346) (\u221e450) (\u221e561) (\u221e602) (\u221e013) (\u221e0123456) (0356) (1460) (2501) (3612) (4023) (5134) (6245)\nof the extended quadratic residue code of length 8 over the field of two elements, given by \u2205, (\u221e124) and its images under adding a constant modulo 7, and the complements of these eight sets. Then switch infinity and any one other coordinate; this operation creates a bijection of the Kirmse integers onto a different set, which is a maximal order. There are seven ways to do this, giving seven maximal orders, which are all equivalent under cyclic permutations of the seven coordinates 0123456. (Kirmse incorrectly claimed that the Kirmse integers also form a maximal order, so he thought there were eight maximal orders rather than seven, but as pointed out they are not closed under multiplication; this mistake occurs in several published papers.)\nThe Kirmse integers and the seven maximal orders are all isometric to the \"E\"8 lattice rescaled by a factor of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20441. In particular there are 240 elements of minimum nonzero norm 1 in each of these orders, forming a Moufang loop of order 240.\nThe integral octonions have a \"division with remainder\" property: given integral octonions a and \"b\" \u2260 0, we can find q and r with \"a\" \n \"qb\" + \"r\", where the remainder r has norm less than that of b.\nIn the integral octonions, all left ideals and right ideals are 2-sided ideals, and the only 2-sided ideals are the principal ideals nO where n is a non-negative integer.\nThe integral octonions have a version of factorization into primes, though it is not straightforward to state because the octonions are not associative so the product of octonions depends on the order in which one does the products. The irreducible integral octonions are exactly those of prime norm, and every integral octonion can be written as a product of irreducible octonions. More precisely an integral octonion of norm mn can be written as a product of integral octonions of norms m and n.\nThe automorphism group of the integral octonions is the group \"G\"2(F2) of order 12,096, which has a simple subgroup of index 2 isomorphic to the unitary group 2\"A\"2(32). The isotopy group of the integral octonions is the perfect double cover of the group of rotations of the \"E\"8 lattice.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51438", "revid": "50818972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51438", "title": "Hypercomplex number", "text": "Element of a unital algebra over the field of real numbers\nIn mathematics, hypercomplex number is a traditional term for an element of a finite-dimensional unital algebra over the field of real numbers. \nThe study of hypercomplex numbers in the late 19th century forms the basis of modern group representation theory.\nHistory.\nIn the nineteenth century, number systems called quaternions, tessarines, coquaternions, biquaternions, and octonions became established concepts in mathematical literature, extending the real and complex numbers. The concept of a hypercomplex number covered them all, and called for a discipline to explain and classify them.\nThe cataloguing project began in 1872 when Benjamin Peirce first published his \"Linear Associative Algebra\", and was carried forward by his son Charles Sanders Peirce. Most significantly, they identified the nilpotent and the idempotent elements as useful hypercomplex numbers for classifications. The Cayley\u2013Dickson construction used involutions to generate complex numbers, quaternions, and octonions out of the real number system. Hurwitz and Frobenius proved theorems that put limits on hypercomplexity: Hurwitz's theorem says finite-dimensional real composition algebras are the reals formula_1, the complexes formula_2, the quaternions formula_3, and the octonions formula_4, and the Frobenius theorem says the only real associative division algebras are formula_1, formula_2, and formula_3. In 1958 J. Frank Adams published a further generalization in terms of Hopf invariants on \"H\"-spaces which still limits the dimension to 1, 2, 4, or 8.\nIt was matrix algebra that harnessed the hypercomplex systems. For instance, 2 x 2 real matrices were found isomorphic to coquaternions. Soon the matrix paradigm began to explain several others as they were represented by matrices and their operations. In 1907 Joseph Wedderburn showed that associative hypercomplex systems could be represented by square matrices, or direct products of algebras of square matrices. From that date the preferred term for a \"hypercomplex system\" became \"associative algebra\", as seen in the title of Wedderburn's thesis at University of Edinburgh. Note, however, that non-associative systems like octonions and hyperbolic quaternions represent another type of hypercomplex number.\nAs Thomas Hawkins explains, the hypercomplex numbers are stepping stones to learning about Lie groups and group representation theory. For instance, in 1929 Emmy Noether wrote on \"hypercomplex quantities and representation theory\". In 1973 Kantor and Solodovnikov published a textbook on hypercomplex numbers which was translated in 1989.\nKaren Parshall has written a detailed exposition of the heyday of hypercomplex numbers, including the role of mathematicians including Theodor Molien and Eduard Study. For the transition to modern algebra, Bartel van der Waerden devotes thirty pages to hypercomplex numbers in his \"History of Algebra\".\nDefinition.\nA definition of a hypercomplex number is given by as an element of a unital, but not necessarily associative or commutative, finite-dimensional algebra over the real numbers. Elements are generated with real number coefficients formula_8 for a basis formula_9. Where possible, it is conventional to choose the basis so that formula_10. A technical approach to hypercomplex numbers directs attention first to those of dimension two.\nTwo-dimensional real algebras.\nTheorem: Up to isomorphism, there are exactly three 2-dimensional unital algebras over the reals: the ordinary complex numbers, the split-complex numbers, and the dual numbers. In particular, every 2-dimensional unital algebra over the reals is associative and commutative.\nProof: Since the algebra is 2-dimensional, we can pick a basis {1, \"u\"}. Since the algebra is closed under squaring, the non-real basis element \"u\" squares to a linear combination of 1 and \"u\":\n formula_11\nfor some real numbers \"a\"0 and \"a\"1.\nUsing the common method of completing the square by subtracting \"a\"1\"u\" and adding the quadratic complement \"a\"\u202f/\u202f4 to both sides yields\n formula_12\nRewriting the left half of the above equation as formula_13 and then substituting in new element \"\u0169\" where formula_14, one obtains\n formula_15\nThe three cases depend on this real value:\nThe complex numbers are the only quadratic algebra that is a field. Split algebras such as the split-complex numbers that include non-real roots of 1 also contain idempotents formula_24 and zero divisors formula_25, so such algebras cannot be division algebras. However, these properties can turn out to be very meaningful, for instance in representing a light cone with a null cone.\nIn a 2004 edition of \"Mathematics Magazine\" the 2-dimensional real algebras have been styled the \"generalized complex numbers\". The idea of cross-ratio of four complex numbers can be extended to the 2-dimensional real algebras.\nHigher-dimensional examples (more than one non-real axis).\nClifford algebras.\nA Clifford algebra is the unital associative algebra generated over an underlying vector space equipped with a quadratic form. Over the real numbers this is equivalent to being able to define a symmetric scalar product, \"u\" \u22c5 \"v\" = (\"uv\" + \"vu\") that can be used to orthogonalise the quadratic form, to give a basis {\"e\"1, ..., \"e\"\"k\"} such that:\nformula_26\nImposing closure under multiplication generates a multivector space spanned by a basis of 2\"k\" elements, {1, \"e\"1, \"e\"2, \"e\"3, ..., \"e\"1\"e\"2, ..., \"e\"1\"e\"2\"e\"3, ...}. These can be interpreted as the basis of a hypercomplex number system. Unlike the basis {\"e\"1, ..., \"e\"\"k\"}, the remaining basis elements need not anti-commute, depending on how many simple exchanges must be carried out to swap the two factors. So \"e\"1\"e\"2 = \u2212\"e\"2\"e\"1, but \"e\"1(\"e\"2\"e\"3) = +(\"e\"2\"e\"3)\"e\"1.\nPutting aside the bases which contain an element \"e\"\"i\" such that \"e\"\"i\"2 = 0 (i.e. directions in the original space over which the quadratic form was degenerate), the remaining Clifford algebras can be identified by the label Cl\"p\",\"q\"(formula_1), indicating that the algebra is constructed from \"p\" simple basis elements with \"e\"\"i\"2 = +1, \"q\" with \"e\"\"i\"2 = \u22121, and where formula_1 indicates that this is to be a Clifford algebra over the reals\u2014i.e. coefficients of elements of the algebra are to be real numbers.\nThese algebras, called geometric algebras, form a systematic set, which turn out to be very useful in physics problems which involve rotations, phases, or spins, notably in classical and quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory and relativity.\nExamples include: the complex numbers Cl0,1(formula_1), split-complex numbers Cl1,0(formula_1), quaternions Cl0,2(formula_1), split-biquaternions Cl0,3(formula_1), split-quaternions Cl1,1(formula_1) \u2248 Cl2,0(formula_1) (the natural algebra of two-dimensional space); Cl3,0(formula_1) (the natural algebra of three-dimensional space, and the algebra of the Pauli matrices); and the spacetime algebra Cl1,3(formula_1).\nThe elements of the algebra Cl\"p\",\"q\"(formula_1) form an even subalgebra Cl(formula_1) of the algebra Cl\"q\"+1,\"p\"(formula_1), which can be used to parametrise rotations in the larger algebra. There is thus a close connection between complex numbers and rotations in two-dimensional space; between quaternions and rotations in three-dimensional space; between split-complex numbers and (hyperbolic) rotations (Lorentz transformations) in 1+1-dimensional space, and so on.\nWhereas Cayley\u2013Dickson and split-complex constructs with eight or more dimensions are not associative with respect to multiplication, Clifford algebras retain associativity at any number of dimensions.\nIn 1995 Ian R. Porteous wrote on \"The recognition of subalgebras\" in his book on Clifford algebras. His Proposition 11.4 summarizes the hypercomplex cases:\n Let \"A\" be a real associative algebra with unit element 1. Then\n* 1 generates formula_1 (algebra of real numbers),\n* any two-dimensional subalgebra generated by an element \"e\"0 of \"A\" such that \"e\"02 = \u22121 is isomorphic to formula_2 (algebra of complex numbers),\n* any two-dimensional subalgebra generated by an element \"e\"0 of \"A\" such that \"e\"02 = 1 is isomorphic to formula_12 (pairs of real numbers with component-wise product, isomorphic to the algebra of split-complex numbers),\n* any four-dimensional subalgebra generated by a set {\"e\"0, \"e\"1} of mutually anti-commuting elements of \"A\" such that formula_43 is isomorphic to formula_3 (algebra of quaternions),\n* any four-dimensional subalgebra generated by a set {\"e\"0, \"e\"1} of mutually anti-commuting elements of \"A\" such that formula_45 is isomorphic to M2(formula_1) (2 \u00d7 2 real matrices, coquaternions),\n* any eight-dimensional subalgebra generated by a set {\"e\"0, \"e\"1, \"e\"2} of mutually anti-commuting elements of \"A\" such that formula_47 is isomorphic to 2formula_3 (split-biquaternions),\n* any eight-dimensional subalgebra generated by a set {\"e\"0, \"e\"1, \"e\"2} of mutually anti-commuting elements of \"A\" such that formula_49 is isomorphic to M2(formula_2) (2 \u00d7 2 complex matrices, biquaternions, Pauli algebra).\nCayley\u2013Dickson construction.\nAll of the Clifford algebras Cl\"p\",\"q\"(formula_1) apart from the real numbers, complex numbers and the quaternions contain non-real elements that square to +1; and so cannot be division algebras. A different approach to extending the complex numbers is taken by the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction. This generates number systems of dimension 2\"n\", \"n\" = 2, 3, 4, ..., with bases formula_52, where all the non-real basis elements anti-commute and satisfy formula_53. In 8 or more dimensions (\"n\" \u2265 3) these algebras are non-associative. In 16 or more dimensions (\"n\" \u2265 4) these algebras also have zero-divisors.\nThe first algebras in this sequence include the 4-dimensional quaternions, 8-dimensional octonions, and 16-dimensional sedenions. An algebraic symmetry is lost with each increase in dimensionality: quaternion multiplication is not commutative, octonion multiplication is non-associative, and the norm of sedenions is not multiplicative. After the sedenions are the 32-dimensional trigintaduonions (or 32-nions), the 64-dimensional sexagintaquatronions (or 64-nions), the 128-dimensional centumduodetrigintanions (or 128-nions), the 256-dimensional ducentiquinquagintasexions (or 256-nions), and \"ad infinitum\", as summarized in the table below.\nThe Cayley\u2013Dickson construction can be modified by inserting an extra sign at some stages. It then generates the \"split algebras\" in the collection of composition algebras instead of the division algebras:\n split-complex numbers with basis formula_54 satisfying formula_55,\n split-quaternions with basis formula_56 satisfying formula_57, and\n split-octonions with basis formula_58 satisfying formula_59, formula_60\nUnlike the complex numbers, the split-complex numbers are not algebraically closed, and further contain nontrivial zero divisors and nontrivial idempotents. As with the quaternions, split-quaternions are not commutative, but further contain nilpotents; they are isomorphic to the square matrices of dimension two. Split-octonions are non-associative and contain nilpotents.\nTensor products.\nThe tensor product of any two algebras is another algebra, which can be used to produce many more examples of hypercomplex number systems.\nIn particular taking tensor products with the complex numbers (considered as algebras over the reals) leads to four-dimensional bicomplex numbers formula_61 (isomorphic to tessarines formula_62), eight-dimensional biquaternions formula_63, and 16-dimensional complex octonions formula_64.\nAnother example is the tensor product of two quaternion algebras formula_65 (isomorphic to the Clifford algebra formula_66 and to formula_67 real matrices formula_68) leading to applications in relativistic physics.\nMore generally, one defines formula_69 (and its subalgebras) as \u201dhyperquaternion algebras\u201d. In particular, formula_70 yields a quaternionic matrix and its even subalgebra formula_71 (Dirac algebra).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51440", "revid": "51065941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51440", "title": "Quaternion", "text": "Noncommutative extension of the complex numbers\nIn mathematics, the quaternion number system extends the complex numbers. Quaternions were first described by the Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton in 1843 and applied to mechanics in three-dimensional space. The set of all quaternions is conventionally denoted by formula_1 ('H' for \"Hamilton\") or by Quaternions are not quite a \"field\" because, in general, multiplication of quaternions is not commutative. Quaternions provide a definition of the quotient of two vectors in a three-dimensional space. Quaternions are generally represented in the form\nformula_2\nwhere the coefficients a, b, c, d are real numbers, and 1, i, j, k are the \"basis vectors\" or \"basis elements\".\nQuaternions are used in pure mathematics, but also have practical uses in applied mathematics, particularly for calculations involving three-dimensional rotations, such as in three-dimensional computer graphics, computer vision, robotics, magnetic resonance imaging and crystallographic texture analysis. They can be used alongside other methods of rotation, such as Euler angles and rotation matrices, or as an alternative to them, depending on the application.\nIn modern terms, quaternions form a four-dimensional associative normed division algebra over the real numbers, and therefore a ring, also a division ring and a domain. It is a special case of a Clifford algebra, classified as formula_3 It was the first noncommutative division algebra to be discovered.\nAccording to the Frobenius theorem, the algebra formula_4 is one of only two finite-dimensional division rings containing a proper subring isomorphic to the real numbers; the other being the complex numbers. These rings are also Euclidean Hurwitz algebras, of which the quaternions are the largest associative algebra (and hence the largest ring). Further extending the quaternions yields the non-associative octonions, which is the last normed division algebra over the real numbers. The next extension gives the sedenions, which have zero divisors and so cannot be a normed division algebra.\nThe unit quaternions give a group structure on the 3-sphere S3 isomorphic to the groups Spin(3) and SU(2), i.e. the universal cover group of SO(3). The positive and negative basis vectors form the eight-element quaternion group.\nHistory.\nQuaternions were introduced by Hamilton in 1843. Important precursors to this work included Euler's four-square identity (1748) and Olinde Rodrigues' parameterization of general rotations by four parameters (1840), but neither of these writers treated the four-parameter rotations as an algebra. Gauss had discovered quaternions in 1819, but this work was not published until 1900.\nHamilton knew that the complex numbers could be interpreted as points in a plane, and he was looking for a way to do the same for points in three-dimensional space. Points in space can be represented by their coordinates, which are triples of numbers, and for many years he had known how to add and subtract triples of numbers. However, for a long time, he had been stuck on the problem of multiplication and division. He could not figure out how to calculate the quotient of the coordinates of two points in space. In fact, Ferdinand Georg Frobenius later proved in 1877 that for a division algebra over the real numbers to be finite-dimensional and associative, it cannot be three-dimensional, and there are only three such division algebras: formula_5 (complex numbers) and formula_4 (quaternions) which have dimension 1, 2, and 4 respectively.\nThe great breakthrough in quaternions finally came on Monday 16\u00a0October 1843 in Dublin, when Hamilton was on his way to the Royal Irish Academy to preside at a council meeting. As he walked along the towpath of the Royal Canal with his wife, the concepts behind quaternions were taking shape in his mind. When the answer dawned on him, Hamilton could not resist the urge to carve the defining formula for the quaternions into the stone of Brougham Bridge with his pocket knife:\nformula_7\nAlthough the carving has since faded away, there has been an annual pilgrimage since 1989, called the \"Hamilton Walk\", for scientists and mathematicians who process from the Dunsink Observatory to the Royal Canal bridge in remembrance of Hamilton's discovery.\nOn the following day, Hamilton wrote a letter to his friend and fellow mathematician, J.T. Graves, describing the train of thought that led to his discovery. The letter was later published in a letter to the \"Philosophical Magazine\"; Hamilton states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And here there dawned on me the notion that we must admit, in some sense, a fourth dimension of space for the purpose of calculating with triples ... An electric circuit seemed to close, and a spark flashed forth.\nHamilton called a quadruple with these rules of multiplication a \"quaternion\", and he devoted most of the remainder of his life to studying and teaching them. Hamilton's treatment is more geometric than the modern approach, which emphasizes quaternions' algebraic properties. He founded a school of \"quaternionists\", and he tried to popularize quaternions in several books. The last and longest of his books, \"Elements of Quaternions\", was 800\u00a0pages long; it was edited by his son and published shortly after his death.\nAfter Hamilton's death, the Scottish mathematical physicist Peter Tait became the chief exponent of quaternions. At this time, quaternions were a mandatory examination topic in Dublin. Topics in physics and geometry that would now be described using vectors, such as kinematics in space and Maxwell's equations, were described entirely in terms of quaternions. There was even a professional research association, the Quaternion Association, devoted to the study of quaternions and other hypercomplex number systems.\nFrom the mid-1880s, quaternions began to be displaced by vector analysis, which had been developed by Josiah Willard Gibbs, Oliver Heaviside, and Hermann von Helmholtz. Vector analysis described the same phenomena as quaternions, so it borrowed some ideas and terminology liberally from the literature on quaternions. However, vector analysis was conceptually simpler and notationally cleaner, and eventually quaternions were relegated to a minor role in mathematics and physics. A side-effect of this transition is that Hamilton's work is difficult to comprehend for many modern readers. Hamilton's original definitions are unfamiliar and his writing style was wordy and difficult to follow.\nHowever, quaternions have had a revival since the late 20th\u00a0century, primarily due to their utility in describing spatial rotations. The representations of rotations by quaternions are more compact and quicker to compute than the representations by matrices. In addition, unlike Euler angles, they are not susceptible to \"gimbal lock\". For this reason, quaternions are used in computer graphics, computer vision, robotics, nuclear magnetic resonance image sampling, control theory, signal processing, attitude control, physics, bioinformatics, molecular dynamics, computer simulations, and orbital mechanics. For example, it is common for the attitude control systems of spacecraft to be commanded in terms of quaternions. Quaternions also have contributed to number theory, because of their relationships with the quadratic forms.\nQuaternions in physics.\nHamilton had introduced biquaternions in his \"Lectures on Quaternions\", and these were used by Ludwik Silberstein in 1914 to exhibit the Lorentz transformations of special relativity. This representation of Lorentz transformations was also used by Cornelius Lanczos in 1949.\nThe finding of 1924 that in quantum mechanics the spin of an electron and other matter particles (known as spinors) can be described using quaternions (in the form of the famous Pauli spin matrices) furthered their interest; quaternions helped to understand how rotations of electrons by 360\u00b0 can be discerned from those by 720\u00b0 (the \"Plate trick\"). As of 2018[ [update]], their use has not yet overtaken rotation groups.\nW. K. Clifford (1845 \u2212 1879) introduced his algebras as a tensor product (\u201dcompound of algebras\u201d) of quaternion algebras (and its even sub-algebra), a concept introduced by B. Peirce (1809 \u2212 1880). R. Lipschitz (1832 \u2212 1903) rediscovered independently the even subalgebra. In 1922, C. L. E. Moore (1876 \u2212 1931) was to call Lipschitz\u2019 algebras \u201dhyperquaternions\u201d. The term \u201dhyperquaternion\u201d designates nowadays both the tensor product of formula_8 quaternion algebras formula_9 and its even subalgebra formula_10.\nExamples of hyperquaternions are: formula_11 (isomorphic to the Clifford algebra formula_12 and to formula_13 real matrices formula_14) leading to applications in special relativity. Its even subalgebra is formula_15 (biquaternions).\nAnother example is formula_16 yielding a quaternionic matrix and its even subalgebra formula_17 (Dirac algebra).\nDefinition.\nA \"quaternion\" is an expression of the form\nformula_18\nwhere a, b, c, d, are real numbers, and i, j, k, are symbols that can be interpreted as unit-vectors pointing along the three spatial axes. In practice, if one of a, b, c, d is 0, the corresponding term is omitted; if a, b, c, d are all zero, the quaternion is the \"zero quaternion\", denoted 0; if one of b, c, d equals 1, the corresponding term is written simply i, j, or k.\nA quaternion formula_19, can be decomposed into its \"scalar part\" &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (sometimes \"real part\") and its \"vector part\" formula_20 (sometimes \"imaginary part\"). A quaternion that equals its real part (that is, its vector part is zero) is called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;scalar quaternion (sometimes \"real quaternion\" or simply \"scalar\"), and is identified with the corresponding real number. That is, the real numbers are \"embedded\" in the quaternions. A quaternion that equals its vector part is called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;vector quaternion (sometimes \"right quaternion\").\nQuaternions form a 4-dimensional vector space over the real numbers, with formula_21 as a basis, by the component-wise addition\nformula_22\nand the component-wise scalar multiplication\nformula_23\nA multiplicative group structure, called the \"Hamilton product\", denoted by juxtaposition, can be defined on the quaternions in the following way:\n \"qa\" for every quaternion q and every scalar quaternion a. In algebraic terminology this is to say that the field of the scalar quaternions is the \"center\" of the quaternion algebra.\nThus the quaternions form a division algebra.\nMultiplication of basis elements.\nThe multiplication with 1 of the basis elements i, j, and k is defined by the fact that 1 is a multiplicative identity, that is,\nformula_25\nThe products of other basis elements are\nformula_26\nCombining these rules,\nformula_27\nCenter.\nThe \"center\" of a noncommutative ring is the subring of elements c such that \"cx\" = \"xc\" for every x. The center of the quaternion algebra is the subfield of scalar quaternions. In fact, it is a part of the definition that the scalar quaternions belong to the center. Conversely, if \"q\" \n \"a\" + \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k belongs to the center, then\nformula_28\nand \"c\" \n \"d\" \n 0. A similar computation with j instead of i shows that one has also \"b\" \n 0. Thus \"q\" \n \"a\" is a scalar quaternion.\nThe quaternions form a division algebra. This means that the non-commutativity of multiplication is the only property that makes quaternions different from a field. This non-commutativity has some unexpected consequences, among them that a polynomial equation over the quaternions can have more distinct solutions than the degree of the polynomial. For example, the equation has infinitely many quaternion solutions, which are the quaternions \"z\" \n \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k such that \"b\"2 + \"c\"2 + \"d\"2 \n 1. Thus these imaginary units form a unit sphere in the three-dimensional space of quaternion vectors.\nHamilton product.\nFor two elements \"a\"1 + \"b\"1i + \"c\"1j + \"d\"1k and \"a\"2 + \"b\"2i + \"c\"2j + \"d\"2k, their product, called the Hamilton product (\"a\"1 + \"b\"1i + \"c\"1j + \"d\"1k) (\"a\"2 + \"b\"2i + \"c\"2j + \"d\"2k), is determined by the products of the basis elements and the distributive law. The distributive law makes it possible to expand the product so that it is a sum of products of basis elements. This gives the following expression:\nformula_29\nNow the basis elements can be multiplied using the rules given above to get:\nformula_30\nScalar and vector parts.\nA quaternion of the form \"a\" + 0 i + 0 j + 0 k, where a is a real number, is called a \"scalar quaternion\" (sometimes \"real quaternion\"), and a quaternion of the form 0 + \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k, where b, c, and d are real numbers, and at least one of b, c, or d is nonzero, is called a \"vector quaternion\" (sometimes \"right quaternion\". If \"a\" + \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k is any quaternion, then a is called its \"scalar part\" and \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k is called its \"vector part\". Even though every quaternion can be viewed as a vector in a four-dimensional vector space, it is common to refer to the vector part as vectors in three-dimensional space. With this convention, a vector is the same as an element of the vector space formula_31\nHamilton also called vector quaternions \"right quaternions\" and real numbers (considered as quaternions with zero vector part) \"scalar quaternions\".\nIf a quaternion is divided up into its scalar part and its vector part, that is,\nformula_32\nthen the formulas for addition, multiplication, and multiplicative inverse are\nformula_33\nwhere \"formula_34\" and \"formula_35\" denote respectively the dot product and the cross product.\nConjugation, the norm, and reciprocal.\nConjugation of quaternions is analogous to conjugation of complex numbers and to transposition (also known as reversal) of elements of Clifford algebras. To define it, let formula_36 be a quaternion. The conjugate of q is the quaternion formula_37. It is denoted by \"q\"\u2217, \"qt\", formula_38, or \"q\". Conjugation is an involution, meaning that it is its own inverse, so conjugating an element twice returns the original element. The conjugate of a product of two quaternions is the product of the conjugates \"in the reverse order\". That is, if p and q are quaternions, then (\"pq\")\u2217 = \"q\"\u2217\"p\"\u2217, not \"p\"\u2217\"q\"\u2217.\nThe conjugation of a quaternion, in contrast to the complex setting, can be expressed with multiplication and addition of quaternions:\nformula_39\nConjugation can be used to extract the scalar and vector parts of a quaternion. The scalar part of p is (\"p\" + \"p\"\u2217), and the vector part of p is (\"p\" \u2212 \"p\"\u2217).\nThe square root of the product of a quaternion with its conjugate is called its \"norm\" and is denoted (Hamilton called this quantity the \"tensor\" of \"q\", but this conflicts with the modern meaning of \"tensor\"). In formulas, this is expressed as follows:\nformula_40\nThis is always a non-negative real number, and it is the same as the Euclidean norm on formula_4 considered as the vector space formula_42. Multiplying a quaternion by a real number scales its norm by the absolute value of the number. That is, if \u03b1 is real, then\nformula_43\nThis is a special case of the fact that the norm is \"multiplicative\", meaning that\nformula_44\nfor any two quaternions p and q. Multiplicativity is a consequence of the formula for the conjugate of a product.\nAlternatively it follows from the identity\nformula_45\n(where i denotes the usual imaginary unit) and hence from the multiplicative property of determinants of square matrices.\nThis norm makes it possible to define the distance \"d\"(\"p\", \"q\") between p and q as the norm of their difference:\nformula_46\nThis makes formula_4 a metric space.\nAddition and multiplication are continuous in regard to the associated metric topology.\nThis follows with exactly the same proof as for the real numbers formula_48 from the fact that formula_4 is a normed algebra.\nUnit quaternion.\nA unit quaternion is a quaternion of norm one. Dividing a nonzero quaternion q by its norm produces a unit quaternion U\"q\" called the \"versor\" of q:\nformula_50\nEvery nonzero quaternion has a unique polar decomposition formula_51 while the zero quaternion can be formed from any unit quaternion.\nUsing conjugation and the norm makes it possible to define the reciprocal of a nonzero quaternion. The product of a quaternion with its reciprocal should equal 1, and the considerations above imply that the product of formula_52 and formula_53 is 1 (for either order of multiplication). So the \"reciprocal\" of q is defined to be\nformula_54\nSince the multiplication is non-commutative, the quotient quantities \"p\u2009q\"\u22121 or \"q\"\u22121\"p\" are different (except if p and q have parallel vector parts): the notation is ambiguous and should not be used.\nAlgebraic properties.\nThe set formula_4 of all quaternions is a vector space over the real numbers with dimension\u00a04. Multiplication of quaternions is associative and distributive over vector addition, but it is not commutative. Therefore, the quaternions, formula_56 are a non-commutative, associative algebra over the real numbers. Even though formula_1 embeds multiple \"copies\" of the complex numbers, it is not itself an \"associative algebra\" over the complex numbers.\nBecause it is possible to divide quaternions, they form a division algebra. This is a structure similar to a field except that it admits non-commutative multiplication. \"Finite-dimensional associative division algebras\" over the real numbers are very rare: The Frobenius theorem states that there are exactly three. Those are formula_58 formula_59 and formula_60 The norm makes the quaternions into a \"normed algebra\", and normed division algebras over the real numbers are also very rare: Hurwitz's theorem says that there are only four: formula_58 formula_59 formula_56 and formula_64 (the octonions). The quaternions are also an example of a composition algebra and of a unital Banach algebra.\nBecause the product of any two basis vectors is plus or minus another basis vector, the set {\u00b11, \u00b1i, \u00b1j, \u00b1k} forms a group under multiplication. This non-abelian group is called the quaternion group and is denoted Q8. The real group ring of Q8 is a ring formula_65 which is also an eight-dimensional vector space over formula_66 It has one basis vector for each element of formula_67 The quaternions are isomorphic to the quotient ring of formula_65 by the ideal generated by the elements 1 + (\u22121), i + (\u2212i), j + (\u2212j), and k + (\u2212k). Here the first term in each of the sums is one of the basis elements 1, i, j, and k, and the second term is one of basis elements \u22121, \u2212i, \u2212j, and \u2212k, not the additive inverses of 1, i, j, and k.\nQuaternions and three-dimensional geometry.\nThe vector part of a quaternion can be interpreted as a coordinate vector in formula_69 therefore, the algebraic operations of the quaternions reflect the geometry of formula_31 Operations such as the vector dot and cross products can be defined in terms of quaternions, and this makes it possible to apply quaternion techniques wherever spatial vectors arise. A useful application of quaternions has been to interpolate the orientations of key-frames in computer graphics.\nFor the remainder of this section, i, j, and k will denote both the three imaginary basis vectors of formula_4 and a basis for formula_31 Replacing i by \u2212i, j by \u2212j, and k by \u2212k sends a vector to its additive inverse, so the additive inverse of a vector is the same as its conjugate as a quaternion. For this reason, conjugation is sometimes called the \"spatial inverse\".\nFor two vector quaternions and their dot product, by analogy to vectors in formula_73 is\nformula_74\nIt can also be expressed in a component-free manner as\nformula_75\nThis is equal to the scalar parts of the products \"pq\"\u2217, \"qp\"\u2217, \"p\"\u2217\"q\", and \"q\"\u2217\"p\". Note that their vector parts are different.\nThe cross product of p and q relative to the orientation determined by the ordered basis i, j, and k is\nformula_76\n(Recall that the orientation is necessary to determine the sign.) This is equal to the vector part of the product \"pq\" (as quaternions), as well as the vector part of \u2212\"q\"\u2217\"p\"\u2217. It also has the formula\nformula_77\nFor the commutator, [\"p\", \"q\"] \n \"pq\" \u2212 \"qp\", of two vector quaternions one obtains\nformula_78\nwhich gives the commutation relationship\nformula_79\nIn general, let p and q be quaternions and write\nformula_80\nwhere \"p\"s and \"q\"s are the scalar parts, and \"p\"v and \"q\"v are the vector parts of p and q. Then we have the formula\nformula_81\nThis shows that the noncommutativity of quaternion multiplication comes from the multiplication of vector quaternions. It also shows that two quaternions commute if and only if their vector parts are collinear. Hamilton showed that this product computes the third vertex of a spherical triangle from two given vertices and their associated arc-lengths, which is also an algebra of points in Elliptic geometry.\nUnit quaternions can be identified with rotations in formula_82 and were called versors by Hamilton. Also see Quaternions and spatial rotation for more information about modeling three-dimensional rotations using quaternions.\nSee Hanson (2005) for visualization of quaternions.\nMatrix representations.\nJust as complex numbers can be represented as matrices, so can quaternions. There are at least two ways of representing quaternions as matrices in such a way that quaternion addition and multiplication correspond to matrix addition and matrix multiplication. One is to use 2 \u00d7 2 complex matrices, and the other is to use 4 \u00d7 4 real matrices. In each case, the representation given is one of a family of linearly related representations. These are injective homomorphisms from formula_4 to the matrix rings M(2,C) and M(4,R), respectively.\nRepresentation as complex 2 \u00d7 2 matrices.\nThe quaternion \"a\" + \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k can be represented using a complex 2 \u00d7 2 matrix as\nformula_84\nThis representation has the following properties:\nThe representation in M(2,\u2102) is not unique: A different convention, that preserves the direction of cyclic ordering between the quaternions and the Pauli matrices, is to choose formula_93This gives an alternative representation,\nformula_94\nRepresentation as real 4 \u00d7 4 matrices.\nUsing 4 \u00d7 4 real matrices, that same quaternion can be written as\nformula_95\nHowever, the representation of quaternions in M(4,\u211d) is not unique. For example, the same quaternion can also be represented as\nformula_96\nThere are 48\u00a0distinct matrix representations of this form, in which one of the matrices represents the scalar part and the other three are all skew-symmetric. More precisely, there are 48\u00a0sets of quadruples of matrices with these symmetry constraints, such that a function sending 1, i, j, and k to the matrices in the quadruple is a homomorphism, that is, it sends sums and products of quaternions to sums and products of matrices. \nIn this representation, the conjugate of a quaternion corresponds to the transpose of the matrix. The fourth power of the norm of a quaternion is the determinant of the corresponding matrix. The scalar part of a quaternion is one quarter of the matrix trace. As with the 2 \u00d7 2 complex representation above, complex numbers can again be produced by constraining the coefficients suitably; for example, as block diagonal matrices with two 2 \u00d7 2 blocks by setting \"c\" = \"d\" = 0.\nEach 4\u00d74 matrix representation of quaternions corresponds to a multiplication table of unit quaternions. For example, the last matrix representation given above corresponds to the multiplication table\nwhich is isomorphic \u2014 through formula_97 \u2014 to\nConstraining any such multiplication table to have the identity in the first row and column and for the signs of the row headers to be opposite to those of the column headers, then there are 3\u00a0possible choices for the second column (ignoring sign), 2\u00a0possible choices for the third column (ignoring sign), and 1 possible choice for the fourth column (ignoring sign); that makes 6\u00a0possibilities. Then, the second column can be chosen to be either positive or negative, the third column can be chosen to be positive or negative, and the fourth column can be chosen to be positive or negative, giving 8 possibilities for the sign. Multiplying the possibilities for the letter positions and for their signs yields 48. Then replacing 1 with a, i with b, j with c, and k with d and removing the row and column headers yields a matrix representation of \"a\" + \"b\" i + \"c\" j + \"d\" k.\nLagrange's four-square theorem.\nQuaternions are also used in one of the proofs of Lagrange's four-square theorem in number theory, which states that every nonnegative integer is the sum of four integer squares. As well as being an elegant theorem in its own right, Lagrange's four square theorem has useful applications in areas of mathematics outside number theory, such as combinatorial design theory. The quaternion-based proof uses Hurwitz quaternions, a subring of the ring of all quaternions for which there is an analog of the Euclidean algorithm.\nQuaternions as pairs of complex numbers.\nQuaternions can be represented as pairs of complex numbers. From this perspective, quaternions are the result of applying the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction to the complex numbers. This is a generalization of the construction of the complex numbers as pairs of real numbers.\nLet formula_98 be a two-dimensional vector space over the complex numbers. Choose a basis consisting of two elements 1 and j. A vector in formula_98 can be written in terms of the basis elements 1 and j as\nformula_100\nIf we define j2 = \u22121 and \"i\" j = \u2212j \"i\", then we can multiply two vectors using the distributive law. Using k as an abbreviated notation for the product \"i\" j leads to the same rules for multiplication as the usual quaternions. Therefore, the above vector of complex numbers corresponds to the quaternion \"a\" + \"b i\" + \"c\" j + \"d\" k. If we write the elements of formula_98 as ordered pairs and quaternions as quadruples, then the correspondence is\nformula_102\nSquare roots.\nSquare roots of \u22121.\nIn the complex numbers, formula_103 there are exactly two numbers, i and \u2212\"i\", that give \u22121 when squared. In formula_4 there are infinitely many square roots of minus one: the quaternion solution for the square root of \u22121 is the unit sphere in formula_31 To see this, let be a quaternion, and assume that its square is \u22121. In terms of a, b, c, and d, this means\nformula_106\nTo satisfy the last three equations, either or b, c, and d are all 0. The latter is impossible because \"a\" is a real number and the first equation would imply that Therefore, and In other words: A quaternion squares to \u22121 if and only if it is a vector quaternion with norm 1. By definition, the set of all such vectors forms the unit sphere.\nOnly negative real quaternions have infinitely many square roots. All others have just two (or one in the case of 0).\nAs a union of complex planes.\nEach antipodal pair of square roots of \u22121 creates a distinct copy of the complex numbers inside the quaternions. If then the copy is the image of the function\nformula_107\nThis is an injective ring homomorphism from formula_108 to formula_109 which defines a field isomorphism from formula_110 onto its image. The images of the embeddings corresponding to q and \u2212q are identical.\nEvery non-real quaternion generates a subalgebra of the quaternions that is isomorphic to formula_103 and is thus a planar subspace of formula_112 write q as the sum of its scalar part and its vector part:\nformula_113\nDecompose the vector part further as the product of its norm and its versor:\nformula_114\n(This is not the same as formula_115.) The versor of the vector part of q, formula_116, is a right versor with \u20131 as its square. A straightforward verification shows that\nformula_117\ndefines an injective homomorphism of normed algebras from formula_108 into the quaternions. Under this homomorphism, q is the image of the complex number formula_119.\nAs formula_4 is the union of the images of all these homomorphisms, one can view the quaternions as a pencil of planes intersecting on the real line. Each of these complex planes contains exactly one pair of antipodal points of the sphere of square roots of minus one.\nCommutative subrings.\nThe relationship of quaternions to each other within the complex subplanes of formula_4 can also be identified and expressed in terms of commutative subrings. Specifically, since two quaternions p and q commute (i.e., \"p q\" \n \"q p\") only if they lie in the same complex subplane of formula_4, the profile of formula_4 as a union of complex planes arises when one seeks to find all commutative subrings of the quaternion ring.\nSquare roots of arbitrary quaternions.\nAny quaternion formula_124 (represented here in scalar\u2013vector representation) has at least one square root formula_125 which solves the equation formula_126. Looking at the scalar and vector parts in this equation separately yields two equations, which when solved gives the solutions\nformula_127\nwhere formula_128 is the norm of formula_129 and formula_130 is the norm of formula_131. For any scalar quaternion formula_131, this equation provides the correct square roots if formula_133 is interpreted as an arbitrary unit vector.\nTherefore, nonzero, non-scalar quaternions, or positive scalar quaternions, have exactly two roots, while 0 has exactly one root (0), and negative scalar quaternions have infinitely many roots, which are the vector quaternions located on formula_134, i.e., where the scalar part is zero and the vector part is located on the 2-sphere with radius formula_135.\nFunctions of a quaternion variable.\nLike functions of a complex variable, functions of a quaternion variable suggest useful physical models. For example, the original electric and magnetic fields described by Maxwell were functions of a quaternion variable. Examples of other functions include the extension of the Mandelbrot set and Julia sets into 4-dimensional space.\nExponential, logarithm, and power functions.\nA function of a quaternion can be defined from a power series with real coefficients. For example, given a quaternion,\nformula_136\nthe exponential is computed as\nformula_137\nand the logarithm is\nformula_138\nIt follows that the polar decomposition of a quaternion may be written\nformula_139\nwhere the angle formula_140\nformula_141\nand the unit vector formula_142 is defined by:\nformula_143\nAny unit quaternion may be expressed in polar form as:\nformula_144\nThe power of a quaternion raised to an arbitrary (real) exponent x is given by:\nformula_145\nGeodesic norm.\nThe geodesic distance between unit quaternions p and q is defined as:\nformula_146\nand amounts to the absolute value of half the angle subtended by p and q along a great arc of the S3 sphere.\nThis angle can also be computed from the quaternion dot product without the logarithm as:\nformula_147\nThree-dimensional and four-dimensional rotation groups.\nThe word \"conjugation\", besides the meaning given above, can also mean taking an element a to \"r\u202fa\u202fr\"\u22121 where r is some nonzero quaternion. All elements that are conjugate to a given element (in this sense of the word conjugate) have the same real part and the same norm of the vector part. (Thus the conjugate in the other sense is one of the conjugates in this sense.)\nThus the multiplicative group of nonzero quaternions acts by conjugation on the copy of formula_82 consisting of quaternions with real part equal to zero. Conjugation by a unit quaternion (a quaternion of absolute value 1) with real part cos(\"\u03c6\") is a rotation by an angle 2\"\u03c6\", the axis of the rotation being the direction of the vector part. The advantages of quaternions are:\nThe set of all unit quaternions (versors) forms a 3-sphere \"S\"3 and a group (a Lie group) under multiplication, double covering the group formula_149 of real orthogonal 3\u00d73\u00a0matrices of determinant\u00a01 since \"two\" unit quaternions correspond to every rotation under the above correspondence. See plate trick.\nThe image of a subgroup of versors is a point group, and conversely, the preimage of a point group is a subgroup of versors. The preimage of a finite point group is called by the same name, with the prefix binary. For instance, the preimage of the icosahedral group is the binary icosahedral group.\nThe versors' group is isomorphic to SU(2), the group of complex unitary 2\u00d72\u00a0matrices of determinant 1.\nLet A be the set of quaternions of the form where a, b, c, and d are either all integers or all half-integers. The set A is a ring (in fact a domain) and a lattice and is called the ring of Hurwitz quaternions. There are 24 unit quaternions in this ring, and they are the vertices of a regular 24 cell with Schl\u00e4fli symbol {3,4,3}. They correspond to the double cover of the rotational symmetry group of the regular tetrahedron. Similarly, the vertices of a regular 600 cell with Schl\u00e4fli symbol {3,3,5} can be taken as the unit icosians, corresponding to the double cover of the rotational symmetry group of the regular icosahedron. The double cover of the rotational symmetry group of the regular octahedron corresponds to the quaternions that represent the vertices of the disphenoidal 288-cell.\nQuaternion algebras.\nThe Quaternions can be generalized into further algebras called \"quaternion algebras\". Take F to be any field with characteristic different from 2, and a and b to be elements of F; a four-dimensional unitary associative algebra can be defined over F with basis 1, i, j, and i j, where , and (so ).\nQuaternion algebras are isomorphic to the algebra of 2\u00d72 matrices over F or form division algebras over F, depending on the choice of a and b.\nQuaternions as the even part of Cl3,0(R).\nThe usefulness of quaternions for geometrical computations can be generalised to other dimensions by identifying the quaternions as the even part formula_150 of the Clifford algebra formula_151 This is an associative multivector algebra built up from fundamental basis elements \"\u03c3\"1, \"\u03c3\"2, \"\u03c3\"3 using the product rules\nformula_152\nformula_153\nIf these fundamental basis elements are taken to represent vectors in 3D space, then it turns out that the \"reflection\" of a vector r in a plane perpendicular to a unit vector w can be written:\nformula_154\nTwo reflections make a rotation by an angle twice the angle between the two reflection planes, so\nformula_155\ncorresponds to a rotation of 180\u00b0 in the plane containing \"\u03c3\"1 and \"\u03c3\"2. This is very similar to the corresponding quaternion formula,\nformula_156\nIndeed, the two structures formula_150 and formula_4 are isomorphic. One natural identification is\nformula_159\nand it is straightforward to confirm that this preserves the Hamilton relations\nformula_160\nIn this picture, so-called \"vector quaternions\" (that is, pure imaginary quaternions) correspond not to vectors but to bivectors \u2013 quantities with magnitudes and orientations associated with particular 2D\u00a0\"planes\" rather than 1D\u00a0\"directions\". The relation to complex numbers becomes clearer, too: in 2D, with two vector directions \"\u03c3\"1 and \"\u03c3\"2, there is only one bivector basis element \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2, so only one imaginary. But in 3D, with three vector directions, there are three bivector basis elements \"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"3, \"\u03c3\"3\"\u03c3\"1, \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2, so three imaginaries.\nThis reasoning extends further. In the Clifford algebra formula_161 there are six bivector basis elements, since with four different basic vector directions, six different pairs and therefore six different linearly independent planes can be defined. Rotations in such spaces using these generalisations of quaternions, called rotors, can be very useful for applications involving homogeneous coordinates. But it is only in 3D that the number of basis bivectors equals the number of basis vectors, and each bivector can be identified as a pseudovector.\nThere are several advantages for placing quaternions in this wider setting:\nFor further detail about the geometrical uses of Clifford algebras, see Geometric algebra.\nBrauer group.\nThe quaternions are \"essentially\" the only (non-trivial) central simple algebra (CSA) over the real numbers, in the sense that every CSA over the real numbers is Brauer equivalent to either the real numbers or the quaternions. Explicitly, the Brauer group of the real numbers consists of two classes, represented by the real numbers and the quaternions, where the Brauer group is the set of all CSAs, up to equivalence relation of one CSA being a matrix ring over another. By the Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem (specifically, Wedderburn's part), CSAs are all matrix algebras over a division algebra, and thus the quaternions are the only non-trivial division algebra over the real numbers.\nCSAs \u2013 finite dimensional rings over a field, which are simple algebras (have no non-trivial 2-sided ideals, just as with fields) whose center is exactly the field \u2013 are a noncommutative analog of extension fields, and are more restrictive than general ring extensions. The fact that the quaternions are the only non-trivial CSA over the real numbers (up to equivalence) may be compared with the fact that the complex numbers are the only non-trivial finite field extension of the real numbers.\nQuotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I regard it as an inelegance, or imperfection, in quaternions, or rather in the state to which it has been hitherto unfolded, whenever it becomes or seems to become necessary to have recourse to x, y, z, etc.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Time is said to have only one dimension, and space to have three dimensions. ... The mathematical quaternion partakes of both these elements; in technical language it may be said to be \"time plus space\", or \"space plus time\": And in this sense it has, or at least involves a reference to, four dimensions. ... \"And how the One of Time, of Space the Three, Might in the Chain of Symbols girdled be\".\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Quaternions came from Hamilton after his really good work had been done; and, though beautifully ingenious, have been an unmixed evil to those who have touched them in any way, including Clerk Maxwell.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was a time, indeed, when I, although recognizing the appropriateness of vector analysis in electromagnetic theory (and in mathematical physics generally), did think it was harder to understand and to work than the Cartesian analysis. But that was before I had thrown off the quaternionic old-man-of-the-sea who fastened himself about my shoulders when reading the only accessible treatise on the subject \u2013 Prof. Tait's \"Quaternions\". But I came later to see that, so far as the vector analysis I required was concerned, the quaternion was not only not required, but was a positive evil of no inconsiderable magnitude; and that by its avoidance the establishment of vector analysis was made quite simple and its working also simplified, and that it could be conveniently harmonised with ordinary Cartesian work. There is not a ghost of a quaternion in any of my papers (except in one, for a special purpose). The vector analysis I use may be described either as a convenient and systematic abbreviation of Cartesian analysis; or else, as Quaternions without the quaternions, ...\u00a0. \"Quaternion\" was, I think, defined by an American schoolgirl to be \"an ancient religious ceremony\". This was, however, a complete mistake: The ancients \u2013 unlike Prof. Tait \u2013 knew not, and did not worship Quaternions.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Neither matrices nor quaternions and ordinary vectors were banished from these ten [additional] chapters. For, in spite of the uncontested power of the modern Tensor Calculus, those older mathematical languages continue, in my opinion, to offer conspicuous advantages in the restricted field of special relativity. Moreover, in science as well as in everyday life, the mastery of more than one language is also precious, as it broadens our views, is conducive to criticism with regard to, and guards against hypostasy [weak-foundation] of, the matter expressed by words or mathematical symbols.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0quaternions appear to exude an air of nineteenth century decay, as a rather unsuccessful species in the struggle-for-life of mathematical ideas. Mathematicians, admittedly, still keep a warm place in their hearts for the remarkable algebraic properties of quaternions but, alas, such enthusiasm means little to the harder-headed physical scientist.\u2014\u200a\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks and publications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLinks and monographs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51441", "revid": "2821695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51441", "title": "Zero divisor", "text": "Ring element that can be multiplied by a non-zero element to equal 0\nIn abstract algebra, an element \"a\" of a ring \"R\" is called a left zero divisor if there exists a nonzero \"x\" in \"R\" such that \"ax\" = 0, or equivalently if the map from \"R\" to \"R\" that sends \"x\" to \"ax\" is not injective. Similarly, an element \"a\" of a ring is called a right zero divisor if there exists a nonzero \"y\" in \"R\" such that \"ya\" = 0. This is a partial case of divisibility in rings. An element that is a left or a right zero divisor is simply called a zero divisor. An element\u00a0\"a\" that is both a left and a right zero divisor is called a two-sided zero divisor (the nonzero \"x\" such that \"ax\" = 0 may be different from the nonzero \"y\" such that \"ya\" = 0). If the ring is commutative, then the left and right zero divisors are the same.\nAn element of a ring that is not a left zero divisor (respectively, not a right zero divisor) is called left regular or left cancellable (respectively, right regular or right cancellable).\nAn element of a ring that is left and right cancellable, and is hence not a zero divisor, is called regular or cancellable, or a non-zero-divisor. (\"N.B.:\" In \"non-zero-divisor\", the prefix \"non-\" is understood to modify \"zero-divisor\" as a whole rather than just the word \"zero\". In some texts, \"zero divisor\" is written as \"zerodivisor\" and \"non-zero-divisor\" as \"nonzerodivisor\" or \"non-zerodivisor\" for clarity.) A zero divisor that is nonzero is called a nonzero zero divisor or a nontrivial zero divisor. A non-zero ring with no nontrivial zero divisors is called a domain.\nExamples.\nformula_8 formula_9\nZero as a zero divisor.\nThere is no need for a separate convention for the case \"a\" = 0, because the definition applies also in this case: \n 1, then 0 is not a zero divisor, because there is no \"nonzero\" element that when multiplied by 0 yields 0.\nSome references include or exclude 0 as a zero divisor in \"all\" rings by convention, but they then suffer from having to introduce exceptions in statements such as the following:\nZero divisor on a module.\nLet R be a commutative ring, let M be an R-module, and let a be an element of R. One says that a is M-regular if the \"multiplication by a\" map formula_56 is injective, and that a is a zero divisor on M otherwise. The set of M-regular elements is a multiplicative set in R.\nSpecializing the definitions of \"M-regular\" and \"zero divisor on M\" to the case \"M\" = \"R\" recovers the definitions of \"regular\" and \"zero divisor\" given earlier in this article.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51442", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51442", "title": "Zorn's lemma", "text": "Mathematical proposition equivalent to the axiom of choice\nZorn's lemma, also known as the Kuratowski\u2013Zorn lemma, is a proposition of set theory. It states that a partially ordered set containing upper bounds for every chain (that is, every totally ordered subset) necessarily contains at least one maximal element.\nThe lemma was proven (assuming the axiom of choice) by Kazimierz Kuratowski in 1922 and independently by Max Zorn in 1935. It occurs in the proofs of several theorems of crucial importance, for instance the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem in functional analysis, the theorem that every vector space has a basis, Tychonoff's theorem in topology stating that every product of compact spaces is compact, and the theorems in abstract algebra that in a ring with identity every proper ideal is contained in a maximal ideal and that every field has an algebraic closure.\nZorn's lemma is equivalent to the well-ordering theorem and also to the axiom of choice, in the sense that within ZF (Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice) any one of the three is sufficient to prove the other two. An earlier formulation of Zorn's lemma is the Hausdorff maximal principle which states that every totally ordered subset of a given partially ordered set is contained in a maximal totally ordered subset of that partially ordered set.\nMotivation.\nTo prove the existence of a mathematical object that can be viewed as a maximal element in some partially ordered set in some way, one can try proving the existence of such an object by assuming there is no maximal element and using transfinite induction and the assumptions of the situation to get a contradiction. Zorn's lemma tidies up the conditions a situation needs to satisfy in order for such an argument to work and enables mathematicians to not have to repeat the transfinite induction argument by hand each time, but just check the conditions of Zorn's lemma.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you are building a mathematical object in stages and find that (i) you have not finished even after infinitely many stages, and (ii) there seems to be nothing to stop you continuing to build, then Zorn\u2019s lemma may well be able to help you.\u2014\u200a\nStatement of the lemma.\nPreliminary notions:\nZorn's lemma can then be stated as:\nIn fact, property (1) is redundant, since property (2) says, in particular, that the empty chain has an upper bound in formula_1, implying formula_1 is nonempty. However, in practice, one often checks (1) and then verifies (2) only for nonempty chains, since the case of the empty chain is taken care by (1).\nIn the terminology of Bourbaki, a partially ordered set is called inductive if each chain has an upper bound in the set (in particular, the set is then nonempty). Then the lemma can be stated as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nZorn's lemma\u2014 Each inductive set has a maximal element.\nFor some applications, the following variant may be useful.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCorollary\u2014 Let formula_1 be a partially ordered set in which every chain has an upper bound and formula_4 an element in formula_1. Then there exists a maximal element formula_6 in formula_1 such that formula_8.\nIndeed, let formula_9 with the partial ordering from formula_1. Then, for a chain in formula_11, an upper bound in formula_1 is in formula_11 and so formula_11 satisfies the hypothesis of Zorn's lemma and a maximal element in formula_11 is a maximal element in formula_1 as well.\nExample applications.\nEvery vector space has a basis.\nZorn's lemma can be used to show that every vector space \"V\" has a basis.\nIf \"V\" = {0}, then the empty set is a basis for \"V\". Now, suppose that \"V\" \u2260 {0}. Let \"P\" be the set consisting of all linearly independent subsets of \"V\". Since \"V\" is not the zero vector space, there exists a nonzero element v of \"V\", so \"P\" contains the linearly independent subset {v}. Furthermore, \"P\" is partially ordered by set inclusion (see inclusion order). Finding a maximal linearly independent subset of \"V\" is the same as finding a maximal element in \"P\".\nTo apply Zorn's lemma, take a chain \"T\" in \"P\" (that is, \"T\" is a subset of \"P\" that is totally ordered). If \"T\" is the empty set, then {v} is an upper bound for \"T\" in \"P\". Suppose then that \"T\" is non-empty. We need to show that \"T\" has an upper bound, that is, there exists a linearly independent subset \"B\" of \"V\" containing all the members of \"T\".\nTake \"B\" to be the union of all the sets in \"T\". We wish to show that \"B\" is an upper bound for \"T\" in \"P\". To do this, it suffices to show that \"B\" is a linearly independent subset of \"V\".\nSuppose otherwise, that \"B\" is not linearly independent. Then there exists vectors v1, v2, ..., vk \u2208 \"B\" and scalars \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., \"a\"k, not all zero, such that\nformula_17\nSince \"B\" is the union of all the sets in \"T\", there are some sets \"S\"1, \"S\"2, ..., \"S\"k \u2208 \"T\" such that vi \u2208 \"S\"i for every \"i\" = 1, 2, ..., \"k\". As \"T\" is totally ordered, one of the sets \"S\"1, \"S\"2, ..., \"S\"k must contain the others, so there is some set \"S\"i that contains all of v1, v2, ..., vk. This tells us there is a linearly dependent set of vectors in \"S\"i, contradicting that \"S\"i is linearly independent (because it is a member of \"P\").\nThe hypothesis of Zorn's lemma has been checked, and thus there is a maximal element in \"P\", in other words a maximal linearly independent subset \"B\" of \"V\".\nFinally, we show that \"B\" is indeed a basis of \"V\". It suffices to show that \"B\" is a spanning set of \"V\". Suppose for the sake of contradiction that \"B\" is not spanning. Then there exists some v \u2208 \"V\" not covered by the span of \"B\". This says that \"B\" \u222a {v} is a linearly independent subset of \"V\" that is larger than \"B\", contradicting the maximality of \"B\". Therefore, \"B\" is a spanning set of \"V\", and thus, a basis of \"V\".\nEvery nontrivial ring with unity contains a maximal ideal.\nZorn's lemma can be used to show that every nontrivial ring \"R\" with unity contains a maximal ideal.\nLet \"P\" be the set consisting of all \"proper\" ideals in \"R\" (that is, all ideals in \"R\" except \"R\" itself). Since \"R\" is non-trivial, the set \"P\" contains the trivial ideal {0}. Furthermore, \"P\" is partially ordered by set inclusion. Finding a maximal ideal in \"R\" is the same as finding a maximal element in \"P\".\nTo apply Zorn's lemma, take a chain \"T\" in \"P\". If \"T\" is empty, then the trivial ideal {0} is an upper bound for \"T\" in \"P\". Assume then that \"T\" is non-empty. It is necessary to show that \"T\" has an upper bound, that is, there exists an ideal \"I\" \u2286 \"R\" containing all the members of \"T\" but still smaller than \"R\" (otherwise it would not be a proper ideal, so it is not in \"P\").\nTake \"I\" to be the union of all the ideals in \"T\". We wish to show that \"I\" is an upper bound for \"T\" in \"P\". We will first show that \"I\" is an ideal of \"R\". For \"I\" to be an ideal, it must satisfy three conditions:\nBecause \"T\" contains at least one element, and that element contains at least 0, the union \"I\" contains at least 0 and is not empty. Every element of \"T\" is a subset of \"R\", so the union \"I\" only consists of elements in \"R\".\nSuppose \"x\" and \"y\" are elements of \"I\". Then there exist two ideals \"J\", \"K\" \u2208 \"T\" such that \"x\" is an element of \"J\" and \"y\" is an element of \"K\". Since \"T\" is totally ordered, we know that \"J\" \u2286 \"K\" or \"K\" \u2286 \"J\". Without loss of generality, assume the first case. Both \"x\" and \"y\" are members of the ideal \"K\", therefore their sum \"x\" + \"y\" is a member of \"K\", which shows that \"x\" + \"y\" is a member of \"I\".\nSuppose \"x\" is an element of \"I\". Then there exists an ideal \"J\" \u2208 \"T\" such that \"x\" is in \"J\". If \"r\" \u2208 \"R\", then \"rx\" is an element of \"J\" and hence an element of \"I\". Thus, \"I\" is an ideal in \"R\".\nNow, we show that \"I\" is a \"proper\" ideal. An ideal is equal to \"R\" if and only if it contains 1. (It is clear that if it is \"R\" then it contains 1; on the other hand, if it contains 1 and \"r\" is an arbitrary element of \"R\", then \"r\"1 = \"r\" is an element of the ideal, and so the ideal is equal to \"R\".) So, if \"I\" were equal to \"R\", then it would contain 1, and that means one of the members of \"T\" would contain 1 and would thus be equal to \"R\" \u2013 but \"R\" is explicitly excluded from \"P\".\nThe hypothesis of Zorn's lemma has been checked, and thus there is a maximal element in \"P\", in other words a maximal ideal in \"R\".\nProof sketch.\nA sketch of the proof of Zorn's lemma follows, assuming the axiom of choice. Suppose the lemma is false. Then there exists a partially ordered set, or poset, \"P\" such that every totally ordered subset has an upper bound, and that for every element in \"P\" there is another element bigger than it. For every totally ordered subset \"T\" we may then define a bigger element \"b\"(\"T\"), because \"T\" has an upper bound, and that upper bound has a bigger element. To actually define the function \"b\", we need to employ the axiom of choice (explicitly: let formula_18, that is, the set of upper bounds for \"T\". The axiom of choice furnishes formula_19).\nUsing the function \"b\", we are going to define elements \"a\"0 &lt; \"a\"1 &lt; \"a\"2 &lt; \"a\"3 &lt; ... &lt; a\u03c9 &lt; a\u03c9+1 &lt;\u2026, in \"P\". This uncountable sequence is really long: the indices are not just the natural numbers, but all ordinals. In fact, the sequence is too long for the set \"P\"; there are too many ordinals (a proper class), more than there are elements in any set (in other words, given any set of ordinals, there exists a larger ordinal), and the set \"P\" will be exhausted before long and then we will run into the desired contradiction.\nThe \"ai\" are defined by transfinite recursion: we pick \"a\"0 in \"P\" arbitrary (this is possible, since \"P\" contains an upper bound for the empty set and is thus not empty) and for any other ordinal \"w\" we set \"a\"\"w\" = \"b\"({\"a\"\"v\" : \"v\" &lt; \"w\"}). Because the \"a\"\"v\" are totally ordered, this is a well-founded definition.\nThe above proof can be formulated without explicitly referring to ordinals by considering the initial segments {\"a\"\"v\" : \"v\" &lt; \"w\"} as subsets of \"P\". Such sets can be easily characterized as well-ordered chains \"S\" \u2286 \"P\" where each \"x\" \u2208 \"S\" satisfies \"x\" = \"b\"({\"y\" \u2208 \"S\" : \"y\" &lt; \"x\"}). Contradiction is reached by noting that we can always find a \"next\" initial segment either by taking the union of all such \"S\" (corresponding to the limit ordinal case) or by appending \"b\"(\"S\") to the \"last\" \"S\" (corresponding to the successor ordinal case).\nThis proof shows that actually a slightly stronger version of Zorn's lemma is true:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLemma\u2014If \"P\" is a poset in which every well-ordered subset has an upper bound, and if \"x\" is any element of \"P\", then \"P\" has a maximal element greater than or equal to \"x\". That is, there is a maximal element which is comparable to \"x\".\nAlternatively, one can use the same proof for the Hausdorff maximal principle. This is the proof given for example in Halmos' \"Naive Set Theory\" or in below.\nFinally, the Bourbaki\u2013Witt theorem can also be used to give a proof.\nProof.\nThe basic idea of the proof is to reduce the proof to proving the following weak form of Zorn's lemma:\n(Note that, strictly speaking, (1) is redundant since (2) implies the empty set is in formula_20.) Note the above is a weak form of Zorn's lemma since Zorn's lemma says in particular that any set of subsets satisfying the above (1) and (2) has a maximal element ((3) is not needed). The point is that, conversely, Zorn's lemma follows from this weak form. Indeed, let formula_20 be the set of all chains in formula_1. Then it satisfies all of the above properties (it is nonempty since the empty subset is a chain.) Thus, by the above weak form, we find a maximal element formula_23 in formula_20; i.e., a maximal chain in formula_1. By the hypothesis of Zorn's lemma, formula_23 has an upper bound formula_27 in formula_1. Then this formula_27 is a maximal element since if formula_30, then formula_31 is larger than or equal to formula_23 and so formula_33. Thus, formula_34.\nThe proof of the weak form is given in Hausdorff maximal principle#Proof. Indeed, the existence of a maximal chain is exactly the assertion of the Hausdorff maximal principle.\nThe same proof also shows the following equivalent variant of Zorn's lemma:\nIndeed, trivially, Zorn's lemma implies the above lemma. Conversely, the above lemma implies the aforementioned weak form of Zorn's lemma, since a union gives a least upper bound.\nZorn's lemma implies the axiom of choice.\nA proof that Zorn's lemma implies the axiom of choice illustrates a typical application of Zorn's lemma. (The structure of the proof is exactly the same as the one for the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem.)\nGiven a set formula_35 of nonempty sets and its union formula_36 (which exists by the axiom of union), we want to show there is a function\nformula_37\nsuch that formula_38 for each formula_39. For that end, consider the set\nformula_40.\nIt is partially ordered by extension; i.e., formula_41 if and only if formula_42 is the restriction of formula_43. If formula_44 is a chain in formula_1, then we can define the function formula_42 on the union formula_47 by setting formula_48 when formula_49. This is well-defined since if formula_50, then formula_51 is the restriction of formula_52. The function formula_42 is also an element of formula_1 and is a common extension of all formula_51's. Thus, we have shown that each chain in formula_1 has an upper bound in formula_1. Hence, by Zorn's lemma, there is a maximal element formula_42 in formula_1 that is defined on some formula_60. We want to show formula_61. Suppose otherwise; then there is a set formula_62. As formula_63 is nonempty, it contains an element formula_64. We can then extend formula_42 to a function formula_43 by setting formula_67 and formula_68. (Note this step does not need the axiom of choice.) The function formula_43 is in formula_1 and formula_71, a contradiction to the maximality of formula_42. formula_73\nEssentially the same proof also shows that Zorn's lemma implies the well-ordering theorem: take formula_1 to be the set of all well-ordered subsets of a given set formula_35 and then shows a maximal element of formula_1 is formula_35.\nHistory.\nThe Hausdorff maximal principle is an early statement similar to Zorn's lemma.\nKazimierz Kuratowski proved in 1922 a version of the lemma close to its modern formulation (it applies to sets ordered by inclusion and closed under unions of well-ordered chains). Essentially the same formulation (weakened by using arbitrary chains, not just well-ordered) was independently given by Max Zorn in 1935, who proposed it as a new axiom of set theory replacing the well-ordering theorem, exhibited some of its applications in algebra, and promised to show its equivalence with the axiom of choice in another paper, which never appeared.\nThe name \"Zorn's lemma\" appears to be due to John Tukey, who used it in his book \"Convergence and Uniformity in Topology\" in 1940. Bourbaki's \"Th\u00e9orie des Ensembles\" of 1939 refers to a similar maximal principle as \"le th\u00e9or\u00e8me de Zorn\". The name \"\" prevails in Poland and Russia.\nEquivalent forms of Zorn's lemma.\nZorn's lemma is equivalent (in ZF) to three main results:\nA well-known joke alluding to this equivalency (which may defy human intuition) is attributed to Jerry Bona:\n\"The Axiom of Choice is obviously true, the well-ordering principle obviously false, and who can tell about Zorn's lemma?\"\nZorn's lemma is also equivalent to the strong completeness theorem of first-order logic.\nMoreover, Zorn's lemma (or one of its equivalent forms) implies some major results in other mathematical areas. For example,\nIn this sense, Zorn's lemma is a powerful tool, applicable to many areas of mathematics.\nAnalogs under weakenings of the axiom of choice.\nA weakened form of Zorn's lemma can be proven from ZF + DC (Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice replaced by the axiom of dependent choice). Zorn's lemma can be expressed straightforwardly by observing that the set having no maximal element would be equivalent to stating that the set's ordering relation would be entire, which would allow us to apply the axiom of dependent choice to construct a countable chain. As a result, any partially ordered set with exclusively finite chains must have a maximal element.\nMore generally, strengthening the axiom of dependent choice to higher ordinals allows us to generalize the statement in the previous paragraph to higher cardinalities. In the limit where we allow arbitrarily large ordinals, we recover the proof of the full Zorn's lemma using the axiom of choice in the preceding section.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 1970 film \"Zorns Lemma\" is named after the lemma.\nThe lemma was referenced on \"The Simpsons\" in the episode \"Bart's New Friend\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51450", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51450", "title": "Pythagoras' Theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "51451", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51451", "title": "Pythagoras' theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "51453", "revid": "50216419", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51453", "title": "Singular function", "text": "Type of function\nIn mathematics, a real-valued function \"f\" on the interval [\"a\", \"b\"] is said to be singular if it has the following properties:\nA standard example of a singular function is the Cantor function, which is sometimes called the devil's staircase (a term also used for singular functions in general). There are, however, other functions that have been given that name. One is defined in terms of the circle map.\nIf \"f\"(\"x\") = 0 for all \"x\" \u2264 \"a\" and \"f\"(\"x\") = 1 for all \"x\" \u2265 \"b\", then the function can be taken to represent a cumulative distribution function for a random variable which is neither a discrete random variable (since the probability is zero for each point) nor an absolutely continuous random variable (since the probability density is zero everywhere it exists).\nSingular functions occur, for instance, as sequences of spatially modulated phases or structures in solids and magnets, described in a prototypical fashion by the Frenkel\u2013Kontorova model and by the ANNNI model, as well as in some dynamical systems. Most famously, perhaps, they lie at the center of the fractional quantum Hall effect.\nWhen referring to functions with a singularity.\nWhen discussing mathematical analysis in general, or more specifically real analysis or complex analysis or differential equations, it is common for a function which contains a mathematical singularity to be referred to as a 'singular function'. This is especially true when referring to functions which diverge to infinity at a point or on a boundary. For example, one might say, \"\"1/x\" becomes singular at the origin, so \"1/x\" is a singular function.\"\nAdvanced techniques for working with functions that contain singularities have been developed in the subject called distributional or generalized function analysis. A weak derivative is defined that allows singular functions to be used in partial differential equations, etc.\nReferences.\n(**) This condition depends on the references"}
{"id": "51456", "revid": "50880149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51456", "title": "Mohammad Daoud Khan", "text": "Afghan military officer and politician (1909\u20131978)\nMohammad Daoud Khan, (18July 1909\u00a0\u2013 28April 1978), also romanized as Daud Khan or Dawood Khan, was an Afghan military officer and politician who served as prime minister of Afghanistan from 1953 to 1963 and, as leader of the 1973 Afghan coup d'\u00e9tat which overthrew the monarchy, served as the first president of Afghanistan from 1973 until he himself was deposed in a coup and killed in the Saur Revolution.\nBorn into the Afghan royal family and addressed by the prefix \"Sardar\", Khan started as a provincial governor and later a military officer before being appointed as prime minister by his cousin, King Mohammad Zahir Shah, serving for a decade. Having failed to persuade the King to implement a one-party system, Khan overthrew the monarchy in a virtually bloodless coup with the backing of Afghan Army officers, and proclaimed himself the first president of the Republic of Afghanistan, establishing an autocratic one-party system under his National Revolutionary Party.\nKhan was known for his autocratic rule, and for his educational and progressive social reforms. Under his regime, he headed a purge of communists in the government, and many of his policies also displeased religious conservatives and liberals who were in favor of restoring the multiparty system that existed under the monarchy. Social and economic reforms implemented under his ruling were successful, but his foreign policy led to tense relations with neighboring countries. In 1978, he was deposed and assassinated during the 1978 Afghan coup d'\u00e9tat, led by the Afghan military and the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA). His body was discovered 30 years later and was identified by a small golden Quran gifted by King Khalid of Saudi Arabia he always carried. He received a state funeral.\nEarly life.\nMohammad Daoud Khan was born in Kabul, Emirate of Afghanistan, into a Barakzai Pashtun family and was the eldest son of the diplomat Prince Mohammad Aziz Khan (1877\u20131933; an older half-brother of King Mohammad Nadir Shah) and his wife, Khurshid Begum. His father was assassinated in 1933 in Berlin, while serving as the Afghan Ambassador to Germany. He and his brother Prince Naim Khan (1911\u20131978) then came under the tutelage of their uncle Mohammad Hashim Khan (1884\u20131953). Daoud proved to be an apt student of politics.\nEducated in France, he served as a senior administrator in the Kingdom of Afghanistan, serving as Governor of the Eastern Province in 1934\u201335 and in 1938\u201339, and was Governor of Kandahar Province from 1935 to 1938.\nIn 1939, Khan was promoted to Commander of the Central Forces. As commander, he led Afghan forces against the Safi during the Afghan tribal revolts of 1944\u20131947, and thereby came to national attention. Daoud's military victories contributed to his rise to power, including his later assumption of the office of prime minister.\nFrom 1946 to 1948, he served as Defense Minister, then Interior Minister from 1949 to 1951. In 1948, he served as Afghan Ambassador to France.\nIn 1951, he was promoted to General and served in that capacity as Commander of the Central Corps of the Afghan Armed Forces in Kabul from 1951 to 1953.\nRoyal Prime Minister.\nKhan was appointed prime minister in September 1953 through an intra-family transfer of power, replacing Shah Mahmud Khan. His ten-year tenure was noted for his foreign policy turn to the Soviet Union, the completion of the Helmand Valley project, which dramatically improved living conditions in southwestern Afghanistan, as well as tentative steps towards the emancipation of women, giving women a higher public presence, which led to significant amounts of freedom and educational opportunities for them.\nWith the creation of an independent Pakistan in August 1947, Prime Minister Daoud Khan had rejected the Durand Line, which had been accepted as international border by successive Afghan governments for over a half a century. Khan supported a nationalistic reunification of the Pakistani Pashtun people with Afghanistan, but this would have involved taking a considerable amount of territory from the new nation of Pakistan and was in direct opposition to an older plan of the 1940s whereby a confederation between the two countries was proposed. The move further worried the non-Pashtun populations of Afghanistan such as the minority Hazara, Tajik, and Uzbek, who suspected his intention was to increase the Pashtuns' disproportionate hold on political power.\nAbdul Ghaffar Khan (founder of Khudai Khidmatgar movement), stated \"that Daoud Khan only exploited the idea of reunification of Pashtun people to meet his own political ends. The idea of reunification of Pashtun people never helped Pashtuns and it only caused trouble for Pakistan. In fact it was never a reality\". Moreover, Daoud Khan's project for the reunification of the Pashtun people failed to gain support from the majority of Pashtuns in Pakistan.\nIn 1960, Khan sent troops across the poorly-marked Durand Line into the Bajaur Agency of Pakistan in an attempt to manipulate events in that area and to press the Pashtunistan issue, but the Afghan forces were defeated by the Pashtun Tribal militias. During this period, the propaganda war from Afghanistan, carried on by radio, was relentless. In 1961, Daoud Khan made another attempt to invade Bajaur with larger Afghan army this time. However, Pakistan employed F-86 Sabres jets which inflicted heavy casualties against the Afghan army unit and the tribesmen from Kunar province who were supporting the Afghan army. Several Afghan soldiers were also captured and were paraded in front of international media, which in turn caused embarrassment for Daoud Khan.\nIn 1961, as a result of his policies and support to militias in areas along the Durand Line, Pakistan closed its borders with Afghanistan and the latter severed ties, causing an economic crisis and greater dependence on the USSR. The USSR became Afghanistan's principal trading partner. Within a few months, the USSR sent jet airplanes, tanks, heavy and light artillery, for a heavily discounted price tag of $25 million, to Afghanistan. That same year he attended the 1st Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in Belgrade making Afghanistan one of the founding members of the Non-Aligned Movement.\nAs a result of continued resentment against Daoud's autocratic rule, close ties with the USSR and economic downturn because of the blockade imposed by Pakistan, Daoud Khan was asked to resign. Instead of resigning, Daoud Khan requested King Zahir Shah to approve new 'one-party constitution' proposed by him which would in turn increase Daoud Khan's already considerable power. Upon rejection, Daoud Khan angrily resigned.\nThe crisis was finally resolved with his forced resignation in March 1963 and the re-opening of the border in May. Pakistan continued to remain suspicious of Afghan intentions and Daoud's policy left a negative impression in the eyes of many Tajiks who felt they were being disenfranchised for the sake of Pashtun nationalism. He was succeeded by Mohammad Yusuf.\nIn 1964, King Zahir Shah introduced a new constitution, for the first time excluding all members of the royal family from the Council of Ministers. Khan had already stepped down. In addition to having been prime minister, he had also held the portfolios of Minister of Defense and Minister of Planning until 1963.\nPresidency and death.\nKhan was unsatisfied with King Zahir Shah's constitutional parliamentary system and lack of progress. He planned rebellion for more than a year before he seized power from the King on 17 July 1973. The coup was bloodless, and backed by a large number of army officers who were loyal to him, facing no resistance. Departing from tradition, and for the first time in Afghan history, he did not proclaim himself \"Shah\", establishing instead a republic with himself as president. The role of pro-communist Parchamite officers in the coup led to him receiving the nickname \"Red Prince\" by some.\nKing Zahir Shah's constitution establishing a parliament with elected members and the separation of powers was replaced by a now largely nominated loya jirga (meaning \"grand assembly\"). The parliament was disbanded.\nAlthough he was close to the Soviet Union during his prime ministership, Khan continued the Afghan policy of non-alignment with the Cold War superpowers. Nor did he bring drastic pro-Soviet change to the economic system.\nIn Khan's new cabinet, many ministers were fresh faced politicians, and only Dr Abdul Majid was a ministerial carryover from Khan's Prime Minister era (1953\u20131963); Majid was Minister of Education from 1953 to 1957, and from 1973 was appointed Minister of Justice until 1977. Initially about half of the new cabinet were either current members, former members or sympathizers of the PDPA, but over time their influence would be eradicated by Khan.\nA coup against Khan, which may have been planned before he took power, was repressed shortly after his seizure of power. In October 1973, Mohammad Hashim Maiwandwal, a former prime minister and a highly respected former diplomat, was arrested in a coup plot and died in prison before his trial set for December 1973. This was at a time when Parchamites controlled the Ministry of Interior under circumstances corroborating the widespread belief that he had been tortured to death by the leftists. According to one account, Daoud Khan planned to appoint Maiwandwal as prime minister, leading to the Parchamite Minister of Interior, Faiz Mohammad, along with fellow communists, framing Maiwandwal in a coup plot, then torturing him to death without Daoud Khan's knowledge. Louis Dupree wrote that Maiwandwal, one of few Afghan politicians with an international reputation, could have been a leader in a democratic process and therefore a target for communists. One of the army generals arrested under suspicion of this plot with Maiwandwal was Mohammed Asif Safi, who was later released. Khan personally apologized to him for the arrest.\nIn 1974, he signed one of two economic packages that aimed to greatly increase the capability of the Afghan military. At this time, there were increasing concerns that Afghanistan lacked a modern army comparable to the militaries of Iran and Pakistan.\nIn 1975, his government nationalized all banks in Afghanistan, including Da Afghanistan Bank, Afghanistan's central bank.\nKhan wanted to lessen the country's dependence on the Soviet Union and attempted to promote a new foreign policy. In 1975 he visited some countries in the Middle East, including Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, all of which were anti-Soviet states, to ask for aid, He also visited India. Regarding the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Havana, Khan said that Cuba \"only pretends to be non-aligned.\" Surprisingly, he did not renew the Pashtunistan agitation; relations with Pakistan improved thanks to interventions from the US and the Shah of Iran. These moves alerted the Soviets.\nConstitution of 1977.\nIn 1977, he established his own political party, the National Revolutionary Party, which became the focus of all political activity. In January 1977, a loya jirga approved a new constitution. It wrote in several new articles and amended others - one of these was the creation of a presidential one-party system of government.\nHe also began to moderate his socialist policies, although the 1977 constitution had a nationalist bend in addition to previous socialism and Islam. In 1978, there was a rift with the PDPA. Internally he attempted to distance himself from the communist elements within the coup. He was concerned about the tenor of many communists in his government and Afghanistan's growing dependency on the Soviet Union. These moves were highly criticized by Moscow, which feared that Afghanistan would soon become closer to the West, especially the United States; the Soviets had always feared that the United States could find a way to influence the government in Kabul.\nDuring his latter years in charge, his purge of communists in his government strained his relations with them, while his desire for one person rule created conflicts with the liberals who had been in charge during the monarchy. At the same time, his persecution of religious conservatives engendered enmity with them and their followers as well.\nRelations with Pakistan.\nAs during his time as prime minister, Daoud Khan again pressed on the question of Pashtunistan, again leading to sometimes tense relations with Pakistan.\nDaoud hosted General Secretary of the National Awami Party Khan Abdul Wali Khan, Ajmal Khattak, Juma Khan Sufi, Baluch guerrillas, and others. Khan's government and forces also commenced training of anti-Pakistani groups to conduct militant action and sabotage in Pakistan. The campaign was significant enough that even one of Bhutto's senior colleagues, minister of interior and head of the provincial branch of Bhutto's party of/in the then-North-West Frontier Province (renamed Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in 2010), Hayat Sherpao, was killed, ostensibly on the orders of the later-acquitted Awami Party. As a result, Afghanistan's already strained relationship with Pakistan further dipped and Pakistan likewise started similar kinds of cross-border interference. By 1975, Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, through its Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), had begun to engage in promoting a proxy war in Afghanistan.\nSince coming to power, under pressure from the PDPA and to increase domestic Pashtun support, Khan took a stronger line on the Pashtunistan issue and promoted a proxy war in Pakistan. Trade and transit agreements with Pakistan were subsequently severely affected.\nThe year 1975 was a watershed in Afghan-Pakistan relations. Pakistan blamed Afghanistan for unrest in Bajaur agency and the bombing of a PIA B707 at Islamabad airport in 1975. The 130 passengers of PIA B707 had deplaned before the explosion took place and thus no one was harmed in the explosion inside the aircraft.\nAt the same time, Afghanistan also faced several short lived uprisings in retaliation in eastern Afghanistan and in Panjshir valley, which Afghanistan blamed on Pakistan. There was also deployment of additional troops by both the countries along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border.\nThe same year Kabul was also quietly negotiating with Islamabad to defuse the tensions between the two countries. In early 1976, relations between the two countries improved and the leaders of the two countries, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto and Douad Khan, exchanged visits. Daoud Khan was also worried about the growing power of communists within his government so he started improving his relations with Pakistan and Iran. The same year Pakistan also provided aid to Afghanistan to help alleviate the suffering caused by earthquake and floods in northern Afghanistan. This gesture by Pakistan had helped mollify Afghan public opinion about Pakistan.\nBy October 1976, the head of Pakistan intelligence agency, Jilani was informing a US diplomat that Afghanistan was no longer creating troubles for Pakistan. By August 1976 relations with Pakistan had improved to a high degree. Later on, while promoting his new foreign policy doctrine, Daoud Khan came to a tentative agreement on a solution to the Pashtunistan problem with Ali Bhutto.\nDiplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.\nKhan met Leonid Brezhnev on a state visit to Moscow from 12 to 15 April 1977. He had asked for a private meeting with the Soviet leader to discuss with him the increased pattern of Soviet actions in Afghanistan. In particular, he discussed the intensified Soviet attempt to unite the two factions of the Afghan communist parties, Parcham and Khalq. Brezhnev described Afghanistan's non-alignment as important to the USSR and essential to the promotion of peace in Asia, and warned him about the presence of experts from NATO countries stationed in the northern parts of Afghanistan. Daoud bluntly replied:\"we will never allow you to dictate to us how to run our country and whom to employ in Afghanistan. How and where we employ the foreign experts will remain the exclusive prerogative of the Afghan state. Afghanistan shall remain poor, if necessary, but free in its acts and decisions\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"All of his life experience is evidence that Sardar Mohammad Daoud Khan would not bow to foreigners, regardless of their nationality. Particularly, in his last meeting with [Soviet leader] Leonid Brezhnev, he proved his bravery and patriotism. But KGB deceptions and the games that they played could have benefited from Daoud Khan's influence in the armed forces. So Daoud Khan, indirectly and with total unawareness, could have been manipulated by the KGB.\"\n Sayed Makhdoom Raheen in 2003\nAfter returning to Afghanistan, he made plans that his government would downscale its relationship with the Soviet Union, and instead forge closer contacts with the West as well as the oil-rich Saudi Arabia and Iran. Afghanistan signed a co-operative military treaty with Egypt and by 1977, the Afghan military and police force were being trained by Egyptian Armed Forces. This angered the Soviet Union because Egypt took the same route in 1974 in distancing itself from the Soviet Union.\nCommunist coup and assassination.\nAfter the murder of Mir Akbar Khyber, the prominent Parchamite ideologue, his funeral on 19 April 1978 served as a rallying point for the Afghan communists. An estimated 1,000 to 3,000 people gathered to hear speeches by PDPA leaders such as Nur Muhammad Taraki, Hafizullah Amin and Babrak Karmal.\nShocked by this demonstration of communist unity, Khan ordered the arrest of the PDPA leaders, but he acted too slowly. It took him a week to arrest Taraki, Karmal managed to escape to the USSR, and Amin was merely placed under house arrest. Khan had misjudged the situation and believed that Karmal's Parcham faction was the main communist threat. In fact, according to PDPA documents, Amin's Khalq faction had extensively infiltrated the military and they outnumbered Parcham cells by a factor of 2 to 3. Amin sent complete orders for the coup from his home while it was under armed guard, using his family members as messengers.\nThe army had been put on alert on 26 April because of a presumed coup. On 27 April 1978, a coup d'\u00e9tat, beginning with troop movements at the military base at Kabul International Airport, gained ground slowly over the next twenty-four hours as rebels battled units loyal to Daoud Khan in and around the capital.\nKhan and most of his family were assassinated during the coup by members of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA). The coup climaxed in the Arg, the former chief royal palace, during the early hours of 28 April 1978, involving heavy fighting and many deaths. Shortly afterwards, the new military leaders announced that Khan had been killed for refusing to pledge allegiance to the new regime by Lieutenant Imamuddin of the 444th Commando Battalion. Upon Daoud's assassination, Afghan singer Fazal Ghani wrote the song \u201cKhalqi Nizam\u201d which mocked the former president for his baldness and for being \u201cfinished with one strike\u201d, which was aired on Radio Television Afghanistan.\nBody and state funeral.\nOn 28 June 2008, his body and those of his family were found in two separate mass graves outside the walls of Pul-e-Charkhi prison, District 12 of Kabul city. Initial reports indicate that sixteen corpses were in one grave and twelve in the other. On 4 December 2008, the Afghan Health Ministry announced that Daoud's body had been identified on the basis of teeth molds and a small golden Quran, a present he had received from the King of Saudi Arabia, found near the body.\nOn 17 March 2009, General Daoud was given a state funeral. His only surviving child, Dorkhanai, attended the funeral.\nDaoud and following family members that were killed on the same day on 28 April 1978 are buried at an incomplete hilltop tomb located 2.5\u00a0km west of Darul Aman Palace, Kabul.\nPublic image.\nNews sources in the 1970s claimed that General Daoud Khan said he was happiest when he could \"light his American cigarettes with Soviet matches.\"\nMohammad Daoud Khan was retrospectively described as an \"old-fashioned statesman, compassionate yet reserved and authoritarian\" by \"The Guardian\"'s Nushin Arbabzadeh. Then-President Hamid Karzai hailed Khan's courage and patriotism in comments after his 2009 state funeral, saying he was \"always thinking of the advancement and prosperity of the country.\" Some Afghans fondly consider him to be the best leader their country has had in modern times.\nDuring his time as prime minister and president, Khan was highly unpopular among the non-Pashtun minorities in Afghanistan because of his alleged Pashtun favouritism. During his regime, all significant positions in the government, army and educational institutions were held by Pashtuns. His attempt at the Pashtunisation of Afghanistan reached such an extent that the word 'Afghan' started being used to refer only to Pashtuns and not to the other minority groups who collectively formed a majority in Afghanistan.\nThe Afghan Armed Forces were allied with Daoud Khan and supported his goal of promoting Pashtuns to higher posts in the Afghan Armed Forces. In 1963, Afghan Uzbeks were barred from becoming high-ranking officers in the Afghan armed forces. Similarly only a few Tajiks were allowed to hold the position of officer in the Afghan army, while other ethnicities were excluded from those positions, despite making up more than 50% of the Royal Afghan Army\u2019s personnel.\nDaoud Khan viewed the Afghan armed forces as a crucial vector in the Pashtunisation of Afghan state. The Panjshir uprising in 1975 is also believed to be result of anti-Pashtun frustration which had been building up in Panjshir valley as result of Daoud Khan's policies.\nPersonal life.\nIn September 1934, Daoud Khan married his cousin, Princess Zamina Begum (11 January 1917 \u2013 28 April 1978), sister of King Zahir (15 October 1914 \u2013 23 July 2007). The couple had four sons and four daughters:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51457", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51457", "title": "Austro-Hungarian empire", "text": ""}
{"id": "51458", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51458", "title": "AutoLISP", "text": "LISP computer programming language variant\nAutoLISP is a dialect of the programming language Lisp built specifically for use with the full version of AutoCAD and its derivatives, which include \"AutoCAD Civil 3D\", \"AutoCAD Map 3D\", \"AutoCAD Architecture\" and \"AutoCAD Mechanical\". Neither the application programming interface (API) nor the interpreter to execute AutoLISP code is included in the AutoCAD LT product line (up to Release 2023, AutoCAD LT 2024 includes AutoLISP). A subset of AutoLISP functions is included in the browser-based AutoCAD web app.\nFeatures.\nAutoLISP is a small, dynamically scoped, dynamically typed Lisp language dialect with garbage collection, immutable list structure, and settable symbols, lacking in such regular Lisp features as macro system, records definition facilities, arrays, functions with variable number of arguments and let bindings. Aside from the core language, most of the primitive functions are for geometry, accessing AutoCAD's internal DWG database, or manipulation of graphical entities in AutoCAD. The properties of these graphical entities are revealed to AutoLISP as association lists in which values are paired with AutoCAD \"group codes\" that indicate properties such as definitional points, radii, colors, layers, linetypes, etc. AutoCAD loads AutoLISP code from .LSP files.\nAutoLISP code can interact with the user through AutoCAD's graphical editor by use of primitive functions that allow the user to pick points, choose objects on screen, and input numbers and other data. AutoLisp also has a built-in graphical user interface (GUI) mini- or domain-specific language (DSL), the Dialog Control Language, for creating modal dialog boxes with automated layout, within AutoCAD.\nHistory.\nAutoLISP was derived from an early version of XLISP, which was created by David Betz. The language was introduced in AutoCAD Version 2.18 in January 1986, and continued to be enhanced in successive releases up to release 13 in February 1995. After that, its development was neglected by Autodesk in favor of more fashionable development environments like Visual Basic for Applications (VBA), .NET Framework, and ObjectARX. However, it has remained AutoCAD's main user customizing language.\n\"Vital-LISP\", a considerably enhanced version of AutoLISP including an integrated development environment (IDE), debugger, compiler, and ActiveX support, was developed and sold by third-party developer Basis Software. Vital LISP was a superset of the existing AutoLISP language that added VBA-like access to the AutoCAD object model, reactors (event handling for AutoCAD objects), general ActiveX support, and some other general Lisp functions. Autodesk purchased this, renamed it \"Visual LISP\", and briefly sold it as an add-on to AutoCAD release 14 released in May 1997. It was incorporated into AutoCAD 2000 released in March 1999, as a replacement for AutoLISP. Since then, Autodesk has ceased major enhancements to Visual LISP and focused more effort on VBA and .NET, and C++. As of January\u00a031, 2014[ [update]], Autodesk ended support for VBA versions before 7.1, as part of a long-term process of changing from VBA to .NET for user customizing.\nAutoLISP has such a strong following that other computer-aided design (CAD) application vendors add it to their products. Bricscad, IntelliCAD, DraftSight and others have AutoLISP functionality, so that AutoLISP users can consider using them as an alternative to AutoCAD. Most development involving AutoLISP since AutoCAD 2000 is performed within Visual LISP since the original AutoLISP engine was replaced with the Visual LISP engine. There are thousands of utilities and applications that have been developed using AutoLISP or Visual LISP (distributed as LSP, FAS and VLX files).\nExamples.\nA simple Hello world program in AutoLISP would be:\n (princ \"\\nHello World!\")\n (princ)\nNote the final line inside the function definition: when evaluated with no arguments, the codice_1 function returns a null symbol, which is not displayed by the AutoCAD command-line interface. As the AutoCAD command line functions as a read\u2013eval\u2013print loop (REPL), this would normally print \"Hello World!\" to the command line, followed immediately by the return value of the call to codice_1. Therefore, without the final call to the codice_1 function, the result of this would be:\ncodice_4\nThe codice_5 function may also be used to achieve the same result.\nA more complex example is:\n (if (setq pnt (getpoint \"\\nSpecify point: \"))\n (progn\n (entmake\n (list\n '(0 . \"POINT\")\n (cons 10 (trans pnt 1 0))\n )\n (entmake\n (list\n '(0 . \"TEXT\")\n (cons 10 (trans (cons (+ (car pnt) 0.6) (cdr pnt)) 1 0))\n (cons 40 (getvar 'textsize))\n (cons 1 (strcat \"X:\" (rtos (car pnt)) \" Y:\" (rtos (cadr pnt))))\n )\n )\n (princ)\nThe above code defines a new function which generates an AutoCAD point object at a given point, with a one-line text object displaying the X and Y coordinates beside it. The name of the function includes a special prefix 'c:', which causes AutoCAD to recognize the function as a regular command. The user, upon typing 'pointlabel' at the AutoCAD command line, would be prompted to pick a point, either by typing the X and Y coordinates, or clicking a location in the drawing. The function would then place a marker at that point, and create a one-line text object next to it, containing the X and Y coordinates of the point expressed relative to the active User Coordinate System (UCS). The function requires no parameters, and contains one local variable ('pnt').\nThe above example could also be written using built-in AutoCAD commands to achieve the same result, however this approach is susceptible to changes to the command prompts between AutoCAD releases.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
