{"id": "48596", "revid": "11290120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48596", "title": "Douglas MacArthur", "text": "American general (1880\u20131964)\nDouglas MacArthur (26 January 1880\u00a0\u2013 5 April 1964) was an American general who served as a top commander during World War II and the Korean War, achieving the rank of General of the Army. He served with distinction in World War I; as chief of staff of the United States Army from 1930 to 1935; as Supreme Commander, Southwest Pacific Area, from 1942 to 1945 during WWII; as Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers overseeing the occupation of Japan from 1945 to 1951; and as head of the United Nations Command in the Korean War from 1950 to 1951. MacArthur was nominated for the Medal of Honor three times, and awarded it for his WWII service in the Philippines. He is one of only five people to hold the rank of General of the Army, and the only person to hold the rank of Field Marshal in the Philippine Army.\nMacArthur, the son of Medal of Honor recipient Arthur MacArthur Jr., was raised on Army posts in the Old West. He was valedictorian of the West Texas Military Academy, and First Captain at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, where he graduated first in his class in 1903. During the 1914 U.S. occupation of Veracruz, he conducted a reconnaissance mission for which he was nominated for the Medal of Honor. In 1917, he was promoted from major to colonel and became chief of staff of the 42nd (Rainbow) Division. On the Western Front during World War I, he rose to the rank of brigadier general, was again nominated for a Medal of Honor, and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross twice and the Silver Star seven times. From 1919 to 1922, MacArthur served as Superintendent of the U.S. Military Academy, where he initiated a series of reforms. His next posting was in the Philippines, where in 1924 he was instrumental in quelling the Philippine Scout Mutiny. In 1925, MacArthur became the Army's youngest major general at the age of 45, and in 1930 was appointed Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army. He was involved in the controversial expulsion of the Bonus Army protesters in Washington, D.C., in 1932, and organized the Civilian Conservation Corps. In 1935, MacArthur was appointed Military Advisor to the Commonwealth of the Philippines. He retired from the Army in 1937, but continued as an advisor and as a Field Marshal in the Philippine Army from 1936.\nMacArthur was recalled to active duty in July 1941 as commander of U.S. Army Forces in the Far East. A large portion of his air forces were destroyed on 8 December 1941 in the Japanese attack on Clark Field, and an invasion of the Philippines followed. MacArthur's forces withdrew to Bataan, where they held out until April 1942. In March 1942, MacArthur left nearby Corregidor Island and escaped to Australia, where he was appointed Supreme Commander of the Southwest Pacific Area in April. He promised that he would return to the Philippines, and for his defense of the islands was awarded the Medal of Honor in 1942. From Australia, he commanded the New Guinea campaign, and in October 1944 returned to the Philippines and led the campaign which liberated the islands. In December 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army.\nAt the end of the war, MacArthur accepted the surrender of Japan on 2 September 1945. As the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers and effective ruler of Japan, he oversaw the war crimes tribunals and the demilitarization and democratization of the country under its new constitution, introducing women's rights, labor unions, land reform, and civil liberties. In 1948, MacArthur made a brief bid for the Republican Party's nomination in that year's presidential election. During the Korean War, he led the United Nations Command with initial success, but suffered a series of major defeats after China's entry into the war in October 1950. MacArthur was contentiously removed from his command in Korea by President Harry S. Truman in April 1951. He later became chairman of the board of Remington Rand, and died in Washington, D.C., in 1964.\nEarly life and education.\nA military brat, Douglas MacArthur was born 26 January 1880, at Little Rock Barracks in Arkansas, to Arthur MacArthur Jr., a U.S. Army captain, and his wife, Mary Pinkney Hardy MacArthur (nicknamed \"Pinky\"). Arthur Jr. was a son of Scottish-born jurist and politician Arthur MacArthur Sr. Arthur Jr. received the Medal of Honor for his actions with the Union Army in the Battle of Missionary Ridge during the American Civil War, and was promoted to lieutenant general. Pinky came from a prominent Norfolk, Virginia, family. Two of her brothers had fought for the South in the Civil War, and refused to attend her wedding. MacArthur is also distantly related to Matthew C. Perry, a Commodore of the U.S. Navy. Arthur and Pinky had three sons, of whom Douglas was the youngest, following Arthur III (born 1876), and Malcolm (1878). The family lived on a succession of Army posts in the American Old West. Conditions were primitive, and Malcolm died of measles in 1883. In his memoir, \"Reminiscences\", MacArthur wrote \"I learned to ride and shoot even before I could read or write\u2014indeed, almost before I could walk and talk.\" Douglas was extremely close with his mother and often considered a \"mama's boy\". Until around age eight, she dressed him in skirts and kept his hair long and in curls.\nEducation.\nMacArthur's time on the frontier ended in July 1889 when the family moved to Washington, D.C., where he attended the Force Public School. His father was posted to San Antonio, Texas, in September 1893. While there MacArthur attended the West Texas Military Academy, where he was awarded the gold medal for \"scholarship and deportment\". He played on the school tennis team, quarterback on the school football team, and shortstop on its baseball team. He was named valedictorian, with a final year average of 97.33 out of 100. MacArthur's father and grandfather unsuccessfully sought to secure Douglas a presidential appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point, first from Grover Cleveland and then from William McKinley; both were rejected. He later passed the examination for an appointment from Congressman Theobald Otjen, scoring 93.3. He later wrote: \"It was a lesson I never forgot. Preparedness is the key to success and victory.\"\nMacArthur entered West Point on 13 June 1899, and his mother moved to a suite at Craney's Hotel, which overlooked the grounds of the academy. Hazing was widespread at West Point at this time, and MacArthur and his classmate Ulysses S. Grant III were singled out for special attention by Southern cadets as sons of generals with mothers living at Craney's. When Cadet Oscar Booz left West Point after being hazed and subsequently died of tuberculosis, there was a congressional inquiry. MacArthur was called to appear before a special Congressional committee in 1901, where he testified against cadets implicated in hazing, but downplayed his own hazing even though the other cadets gave the full story to the committee. Congress subsequently outlawed acts \"of a harassing, tyrannical, abusive, shameful, insulting or humiliating nature\", although hazing continued. MacArthur was a corporal in Company B in his second year, a first sergeant in Company A in his third year and First Captain in his final year. He played left field for the baseball team and academically earned 2424.12 merits out of a possible 2470.00 or 98.14%, which was the third-highest score ever recorded. He graduated first in his 93-man class on 11 June 1903. At the time it was customary for the top-ranking cadets to be commissioned into the United States Army Corps of Engineers, therefore, MacArthur was commissioned as a second lieutenant in that corps.\nJunior officer.\nMacArthur spent his graduation furlough with his parents at Fort Mason, California, where his father, now a major general, was commanding the Department of the Pacific. Afterward, he joined the 3rd Engineer Battalion, which departed for the Philippines in October 1903. MacArthur was sent to Iloilo, where he supervised the construction of a wharf at Camp Jossman. He conducted surveys at Tacloban City, Calbayog and Cebu City. In November 1903, while working on Guimaras, he was ambushed by a pair of Filipino brigands or guerrillas; he shot and killed both. He was promoted to first lieutenant in Manila in April 1904. In October 1904, his tour of duty was cut short when he contracted malaria and dhobi itch during a survey on Bataan. He returned to San Francisco, where he was assigned to the California Debris Commission. In July 1905, he became chief engineer of the Division of the Pacific.\nIn October 1905, MacArthur received orders to proceed to Tokyo for appointment as aide-de-camp to his father. A man who knew the MacArthurs at this time wrote that \"Arthur MacArthur was the most flamboyantly egotistical man I had ever seen, until I met his son.\" They inspected Japanese military bases at Nagasaki, Kobe and Kyoto, then headed to India via Shanghai, Hong Kong, Java and Singapore, reaching Calcutta in January 1906. In India, they visited Madras, Tuticorin, Quetta, Karachi, the Northwest Frontier and the Khyber Pass. They then sailed to China via Bangkok and Saigon, and toured Canton, Qingdao, Beijing, Tianjin, Hankou and Shanghai before returning to Japan in June. The next month they returned to the United States, where Arthur MacArthur resumed his duties at Fort Mason, still with Douglas as his aide. In September, Douglas received orders to report to the 2nd Engineer Battalion at the Washington Barracks and enroll in the Engineer School. While there he served as \"an aide to assist at White House functions\" at the request of President Theodore Roosevelt.\nIn August 1907, MacArthur was sent to the engineer district office in Milwaukee, where his parents were living. In April 1908, he was posted to Fort Leavenworth, where he was given his first command, Company K, 3rd Engineer Battalion. He became battalion adjutant in 1909 and then engineer officer at Fort Leavenworth in 1910. MacArthur was promoted to captain in February 1911 and was appointed as head of the Military Engineering Department and the Field Engineer School. He participated in exercises at San Antonio, Texas, with the Maneuver Division in 1911 and served in Panama on detached duty in January and February 1912. The sudden death of their father on 5 September 1912 brought Douglas and his brother Arthur back to Milwaukee to care for their mother, whose health had deteriorated. MacArthur requested a transfer to Washington, D.C., so his mother could be near Johns Hopkins Hospital. Army Chief of Staff, Major General Leonard Wood, took up the matter with Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, who arranged for MacArthur to be posted to the Office of the Chief of Staff in 1912.\nVeracruz expedition.\nOn 21 April 1914, President Woodrow Wilson ordered the occupation of Veracruz. MacArthur joined the headquarters staff sent to the area, arriving on 1 May 1914. He realized that the logistic support of an advance from Veracruz would require the railroad. Finding plenty of railroad cars in Veracruz but no locomotives, MacArthur set out to verify a report that there were locomotives in Alvarado. For $150 in gold, he acquired a handcar and the services of three Mexicans, whom he disarmed. MacArthur and his party located five engines in Alvarado, two of which were only switchers, but the other three were exactly what was required. On the way back to Veracruz, his party was set upon by five armed men. The party made a run for it and outdistanced all but two of the armed men, whom MacArthur shot. Soon after, they were attacked by about fifteen horsemen. MacArthur took three bullets in his clothes but was unharmed. One of his companions was lightly wounded before the horsemen retired, after MacArthur shot four of them. Further on, the party was attacked a third time by three horsemen. MacArthur received another bullet hole in his shirt, but his men, using their handcar, managed to outrun all but one of their attackers. MacArthur shot both that man and his horse; the party had to remove the horse's carcass from the track before proceeding.\nA fellow officer wrote to Wood recommending that MacArthur be put forward for the Medal of Honor. Wood did so, and Chief of Staff Hugh L. Scott convened a board to consider the award. The board questioned \"the advisability of this enterprise having been undertaken without the knowledge of the commanding general on the ground\". This was Brigadier General Frederick Funston, a Medal of Honor recipient himself, who considered awarding the medal to MacArthur \"entirely appropriate and justifiable\". However, the board feared that \"to bestow the award recommended might encourage any other staff officer, under similar conditions, to ignore the local commander, possibly interfering with the latter's plans\"; consequently, MacArthur received no award.\nWorld War I.\nRainbow Division.\nMacArthur returned to the War Department, where he was promoted to major on 11 December 1915. In June 1916, he was assigned as head of the Bureau of Information at the office of the Secretary of War, Newton D. Baker. MacArthur has since been regarded as the Army's first press officer.\nFollowing the declaration of war on Germany on 6 April 1917 and the subsequent American entry into World War I, Baker and MacArthur secured an agreement from President Wilson for the use of the National Guard on the Western Front. MacArthur suggested sending first a division organized from units of different states, so as to avoid the appearance of favoritism toward any particular state. Baker approved the creation of this formation, which became the 42nd (\"Rainbow\") Division and appointed Major General William Abram Mann, the head of the National Guard Bureau, as its commander; MacArthur was its chief of staff, and with his new role came the rank of colonel, skipping the rank of lieutenant colonel. At MacArthur's request, this commission was in the infantry rather than the engineers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From its formation at Camp Mills, Long Island in August 1917, MacArthur was the division's key sparkplug, prime motivator, and individual most responsible for its creation. Competent, efficient, innovative, highly intelligent, and tirelessly energetic, as division chief of staff MacArthur appeared everywhere, at all hours \u2013 badgering, cajoling, inspiring, intervening, and attending to every detail, large and small.\nThe 42nd Division's initial training emphasized open-field combat rather than trench warfare. It sailed in a convoy from Hoboken, New Jersey, for the Western Front on 18 October 1917. On 19 December the 42nd's commander, the 63-year-old Mann, was replaced by 55-year-old Major General Charles T. Menoher, after Mann\u2013who was \"ill, old, and bedridden\"\u2013 failed a physical examination. The new division commander and his chief of staff \"became great friends\", in MacArthur's words, who further described Menoher as \"an able officer, an efficient administrator, of genial disposition and unimpeachable character\".\nLun\u00e9ville-Baccarat Defensive sector.\nThe 42nd Division entered the line in the quiet Lun\u00e9ville sector in February 1918. On 26 February, MacArthur and Captain Thomas T. Handy accompanied a French trench raid in which MacArthur assisted in the capture of a number of German prisoners. The commander of the French VII Corps, Major General Georges de Bazelaire, decorated MacArthur with the \"Croix de Guerre\". This was the first ever \"Croix de Guerre\" awarded to a member of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF). Menoher recommended MacArthur for a Silver Star, which he later received. The Silver Star Medal was not instituted until 8 August 1932, but small Silver Citation Stars were authorized to be worn on the campaign ribbons of those cited in orders for gallantry, similar to the British mention in despatches. When the Silver Star Medal was instituted, it was retroactively awarded to those who had been awarded Silver Citation Stars. On 9 March, the 42nd Division launched three raids of its own on German trenches in the Salient du Feys. MacArthur accompanied a company of the 168th Infantry. This time, his leadership was rewarded with the Distinguished Service Cross (DSC). A few days later, MacArthur, who was strict about his men carrying their gas masks but often neglected to bring his own, was gassed. He recovered in time to show Secretary Baker around the area on 19 March.\nChampagne-Marne offensive.\nUpon the recommendation of Menoher, MacArthur was awarded his first \"star\" when he was promoted to brigadier general on 26 June. At the age of just thirty-eight, this made him, at the time, the youngest general in the AEF. This would remain the case until October when two other men, Lesley J. McNair and Pelham D. Glassford, both being thirty-five, also received promotion to brigadier generals.\nAround the same time, the 42nd Division was shifted to Ch\u00e2lons-en-Champagne to oppose the impending German Champagne-Marne offensive. \"G\u00e9n\u00e9ral d'Arm\u00e9e\" Henri Gouraud of the French Fourth Army elected to meet the attack with a defense in depth, holding the front-line area as thinly as possible and meeting the German attack on his second line of defense. His plan succeeded, and MacArthur was awarded a second Silver Star. The 42nd Division participated in the subsequent Allied counter-offensive, and MacArthur was awarded a third Silver Star on 29 July.\nTwo days later, Menoher relieved the fifty-eight-year-old Brigadier General Robert A. Brown of the 84th Infantry Brigade (which consisted of the 167th and 168th Infantry Regiments and the 151st Machine Gun Battalion) of his command and replaced him with MacArthur. Hearing reports that the enemy had withdrawn, MacArthur went forward on 2 August to see for himself. He later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was 3:30 that morning when I started from our right at Sergy. Taking runners from each outpost liaison group to the next, moving by way of what had been No Man's Land, I will never forget that trip. The dead were so thick in spots we tumbled over them. There must have been at least 2,000 of those sprawled bodies. I identified the insignia of six of the best German divisions. The stench was suffocating. Not a tree was standing. The moans and cries of wounded men sounded everywhere. Sniper bullets sung like the buzzing of a hive of angry bees. An occasional shellburst always drew an angry oath from my guide. I counted almost a hundred disabled guns various size and several times that number of abandoned machine guns.\nMacArthur reported back to Menoher and Major General Hunter Liggett, the commander of I Corps (under whose command the 42nd Division fell), that the Germans had indeed withdrawn, and was awarded a fourth Silver Star. He was also awarded a second \"Croix de guerre\" and made a \"commandeur\" of the \"L\u00e9gion d'honneur\". MacArthur's leadership during the Champagne-Marne offensive and counter-offensive campaigns was noted by General Gouraud when he said MacArthur was \"one of the finest and bravest officers I have ever served with.\"\nBattle of Saint-Mihiel and Meuse-Argonne offensive.\nThe 42nd Division earned a few weeks rest, returning to the line for the Battle of Saint-Mihiel on 12 September 1918. The Allied advance proceeded rapidly, and MacArthur was awarded a fifth Silver Star for his leadership of the 84th Infantry Brigade. In his later life he recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Essey I saw a sight I shall never quite forget. Our advance been so rapid the Germans had evacuated in a panic. There was a German officer's horse saddled and equipped standing in a barn, a battery of guns complete in every detail, and the entire administration and music of a regimental band.\nHe received a sixth Silver Star for his participation in a raid on the night of 25\u201326 September. The 42nd Division was relieved on the night of 30 September and moved to the Argonne sector where it relieved the 1st Division on the night of 11 October. On a reconnaissance the next day, MacArthur was gassed again, earning a second Wound Chevron.\nThe 42nd Division's participation in the Meuse\u2013Argonne offensive began on 14 October when it attacked with both brigades. That evening, a conference was called to discuss the attack, during which Major General Charles P. Summerall, commander of V Corps, telephoned and demanded that Ch\u00e2tillon be taken by 18:00 the next evening. An aerial photograph had been obtained that showed a gap in the German barbed wire to the northeast of Ch\u00e2tillon. Lieutenant Colonel Walter E. Bare\u2014the commander of the 167th Infantry\u2014proposed an attack from that direction, covered by a machine-gun barrage. MacArthur adopted this plan. He was wounded, but not severely, while leading a reconnaissance patrol into no man's land at night to confirm the existence of the gap in the barbed wire. As he mentioned to William Addleman Ganoe a few years later, the Germans saw them and shot at MacArthur and the squad with artillery and machine guns. MacArthur was the sole survivor of the patrol, claiming it was a miracle that he survived. He confirmed that there was indeed an enormous, exposed gap in that area due to the lack of enemy gunfire coming from that area.\nSummerall nominated MacArthur for the Medal of Honor and promotion to major general, but he received neither. Instead, he was awarded a second Distinguished Service Cross. The 42nd Division returned to the line for the last time on the night of 4\u20135 November 1918. In the final advance on Sedan. MacArthur later wrote that this operation \"narrowly missed being one of the great tragedies of American history\". An order to disregard unit boundaries led to units crossing into each other's zones. In the resulting chaos, MacArthur was taken prisoner by men of the 1st Division, who mistook him for a German general. This would be soon resolved by the removal of his hat and long scarf that he wore. His performance in the attack on the Meuse heights led to his being awarded a seventh Silver Star. On 10 November, a day before the armistice with Germany that ended the fighting, MacArthur was appointed commander of the 42nd Division, upon the recommendation of its outgoing commander, Menoher, who had left to take over the newly activated VI Corps. For his service as the 42nd's chief of staff and commander of the 84th Infantry Brigade, he was later awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal.\nHis period in command of the 42nd Division was brief, for on 22 November he, like other brigadier generals, was replaced and returned to the 84th Infantry Brigade, with Major General Clement Flagler, his former battalion commander from Fort Leavenworth days before the war, instead taking command. It is possible that he may have retained command of the 42nd had he been promoted to major general (making him the youngest in the U.S. Army) but, with the sudden cessation of hostilities, that was unlikely. General Peyton C. March, the Army Chief of Staff (and close friend of Arthur MacArthur), \"had put a block on promotions. There would be no more stars awarded while the War Department got to grips with demobilization. MacArthur returned to commanding the 84th Brigade\".\nMacArthur was one of only three American generals who were wounded or killed in action in World War I. The other two were Army general Edward Sigerfoos, who died of wounds, and Marine general Albertus W. Catlin, who was wounded in action. In fact, MacArthur was the only American general in World War I who was wounded or killed while ranked as a general because Sigerfoos and Catlin had become casualties when they were colonels and in the process of being promoted to brigadier general.\nThe 42nd Division was chosen to participate in the occupation of the Rhineland, occupying the Ahrweiler district. In April 1919, the 42nd Division entrained for Brest and Saint-Nazaire, where they boarded ships to return to the United States. MacArthur traveled on the ocean liner , which reached New York on 25 April 1919.\nBetween the wars.\nSuperintendent of the United States Military Academy.\nShortly after the return home, MacArthur's 84th Brigade was demobilized at Camp Dodge, Iowa, on 12 May 1919. The following month, he became Superintendent of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, which General March, \"an acerbic, thin-lipped intellectual\", felt had become out of date in many respects and was much in need of reform. Accepting the post, \"one of the most prestigious in the army\", also allowed MacArthur to retain his rank of brigadier general (which was only temporary and for the duration of the war), instead of being reduced to his substantive rank of major like many of his contemporaries. When MacArthur moved into the superintendent's house with his mother, he became the youngest superintendent since Sylvanus Thayer in 1817. However, whereas Thayer had faced opposition from outside the army, MacArthur had to overcome resistance from graduates and the academic board.\nMacArthur's vision of what was required of an officer came not just from his recent experience of combat in France, but also from that of the occupation of the Rhineland in Germany. The military government of the Rhineland had required the Army to deal with political, economic and social problems but he had found that many West Point graduates had little or no knowledge of fields outside of the military sciences. During the war, West Point had been reduced to little more than an officer candidate school, with five classes being graduated in two years. Cadet and staff morale was low and hazing \"at an all-time peak of viciousness\". MacArthur's first change turned out to be the easiest. Congress had set the length of the course at three years. MacArthur was able to get the four-year course restored.\nDuring the debate over the length of the course, \"The New York Times\" brought up the issue of the cloistered and undemocratic nature of student life at West Point. Also, starting with Harvard University in 1869, civilian universities had begun grading students on academic performance alone, but West Point had retained the old \"whole man\" concept of education. MacArthur sought to modernize the system, expanding the concept of military character to include bearing, leadership, efficiency and athletic performance. He formalized the hitherto unwritten Cadet Honor Code in 1922 when he formed the Cadet Honor Committee to review alleged code violations. Elected by the cadets themselves, it had no authority to punish, but acted as a kind of grand jury, reporting offenses to the commandant. MacArthur attempted to end hazing by using officers rather than upperclassmen to train the plebes.\nInstead of the traditional summer camp at Fort Clinton, MacArthur had the cadets trained to use modern weapons by regular army sergeants at Fort Dix; they then marched back to West Point with full packs. He attempted to modernize the curriculum by adding liberal arts, government and economics courses, but encountered strong resistance from the academic board. In Military Art classes, the study of the campaigns of the American Civil War was replaced with the study of those of World War I. In History class, more emphasis was placed on the Far East. MacArthur expanded the sports program, increasing the number of intramural sports and requiring all cadets to participate. He allowed upper class cadets to leave the reservation, and sanctioned a cadet newspaper, \"The Brag\", forerunner of today's \"West Pointer\". He also permitted cadets to travel to watch their football team play, and gave them a monthly allowance of $5 (). Professors and alumni alike protested these radical moves. Most of MacArthur's West Point reforms were soon discarded but, in the ensuing years, his ideas became accepted and his innovations were gradually restored.\nArmy's youngest major general.\nMacArthur became romantically involved with socialite and multi-millionaire heiress Louise Cromwell Brooks. They were married at her family's villa in Palm Beach, Florida, on 14 February 1922. Rumors circulated that General Pershing, who had also courted Louise, had threatened to exile them to the Philippines if they were married. Pershing denied this as \"all damn poppycock\". More recently, Richard B. Frank has written that Pershing and Brooks had already \"severed\" their relationship by the time of MacArthur's transfer; Brooks was, however, \"informal[ly]\" engaged to a close aide of Pershing's (she broke off the relationship in order to accept MacArthur's proposal). Pershing's letter concerning MacArthur's transfer predated\u2014by a few days\u2014Brooks's and MacArthur's engagement announcement, though this did not dispel the newspaper gossip. In October 1922, MacArthur left West Point and sailed to the Philippines with Louise and her two children, Walter and Louise, to assume command of the Military District of Manila. MacArthur was fond of the children, and spent much of his free time with them.\nThe revolts in the Philippines had been suppressed, the islands were peaceful now, and in the wake of the Washington Naval Treaty, the garrison was being reduced. MacArthur's friendships with Filipinos like Manuel Quezon offended some people. \"The old idea of colonial exploitation\", he later conceded, \"still had its vigorous supporters.\" In February and March 1923 MacArthur returned to Washington to see his mother, who was ill from a heart ailment. She recovered, but it was the last time he saw his brother Arthur, who died suddenly from appendicitis in December 1923. In June 1923, MacArthur assumed command of the 23rd Infantry Brigade of the Philippine Division. On 7 July 1924, he was informed that a mutiny had broken out amongst the Philippine Scouts over grievances concerning pay and allowances. Over 200 were arrested and there were fears of an insurrection. MacArthur was able to calm the situation, but his subsequent efforts to improve the salaries of Filipino troops were frustrated by financial stringency and racial prejudice. On 17 January 1925, at the age of 44, he was promoted, becoming the Army's youngest major general.\nReturning to the U.S., MacArthur took command of the IV Corps Area, based at Fort McPherson in Atlanta, Georgia, on 2 May 1925. However, he encountered southern prejudice because he was the son of a Union Army officer, and he requested to be relieved. A few months later, he assumed command of the III Corps area, based at Fort McHenry in Baltimore, Maryland. The transfer allowed MacArthur and Louise to move to her Rainbow Hill estate, near Garrison, Maryland. However, this relocation also led to what he later described as \"one of the most distasteful orders I ever received\": a direction to serve on the court-martial of Brigadier General Billy Mitchell. MacArthur was the youngest of the thirteen judges, none of whom had aviation experience. Three of them, including Summerall, the president of the court, were removed when defense challenges revealed bias against Mitchell. Despite MacArthur's claim that he had voted to acquit, Mitchell was found guilty as charged and convicted. MacArthur felt \"that a senior officer should not be silenced for being at variance with his superiors in rank and with accepted doctrine\".\nIn 1927, MacArthur and Louise separated, and she moved to New York City, adopting as her residence the entire twenty-sixth floor of a Manhattan hotel. In August that year, William C. Prout\u2014the president of the American Olympic Committee\u2014died suddenly and the committee elected MacArthur as their new president. His main task was to prepare the U.S. team for the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam, where the Americans won the most medals. Upon returning to the U.S., MacArthur received orders to assume command of the Philippine Department. This time, the general travelled alone. On 17 June 1929, while he was in Manila, Louise obtained a divorce, ostensibly on the grounds of \"failure to provide\". In view of Louise's great wealth, William Manchester described this legal fiction as \"preposterous\". Both later acknowledged the real reason to be \"incompatibility\".\nChief of Staff.\nBy 1930, MacArthur was 50 and still the youngest and one of the best known of the U.S. Army's major generals. He left the Philippines on 19 September 1930 and for a brief time was in command of the IX Corps Area in San Francisco. On 21 November, he was sworn in as Chief of Staff of the United States Army, with the rank of general. While in Washington, he would ride home each day to have lunch with his mother. At his desk, he would wear a Japanese ceremonial kimono, cool himself with an oriental fan, and smoke cigarettes in a jeweled cigarette holder. In the evenings, he liked to read military history books. About this time, he began referring to himself as \"MacArthur\". He had already hired a public relations staff to promote his image with the American public, together with a set of ideas he was known to favor, namely: a belief that America needed a strongman leader to deal with the possibility that Communists might lead all of the great masses of unemployed into a revolution; that America's destiny was in the Asia-Pacific region; and a strong hostility to the British Empire. One contemporary described MacArthur as the greatest actor to ever serve as a U.S. Army general while another wrote that MacArthur had a court rather than a staff.\nThe onset of the Great Depression prompted Congress to make cuts in the Army's personnel and budget. Some 53 bases were closed, but MacArthur managed to prevent attempts to reduce the number of regular officers from 12,000 to 10,000. MacArthur's main programs included the development of new mobilization plans. He grouped the nine corps areas together under four armies, which were charged with responsibility for training and frontier defense. He also negotiated the MacArthur-Pratt agreement with the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral William V. Pratt. This was the first of a series of inter-service agreements over the following decades that defined the responsibilities of the different services with respect to aviation. This agreement placed coastal air defense under the Army. In March 1935, MacArthur activated a centralized air command, General Headquarters Air Force, under General Frank M. Andrews.\nBy rapidly promoting Andrews from lieutenant colonel to brigadier general MacArthur supported Andrews' endorsement of the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress heavy bomber and the concept of long-range four-engine bombers. This was controversial at the time because most high-ranking Army generals and officials in the War Department supported twin-engine bombers like the Douglas B-18 Bolo heavy bomber. After MacArthur left his position as Army Chief of Staff in October 1935 his successor Malin Craig and War Secretary Harry Hines Woodring ordered a halt to research and development of the B-17 and in 1939 zero four-engine bombers were ordered by the War Department and instead hundreds of inferior B-18s and other twin-engine bombers were ordered and delivered to the Army. Andrews, thanks to MacArthur putting him in a position of power in 1935, was able to use bureaucratic loopholes to covertly order research and development of the B-17 to the point that when the Army and President Roosevelt finally endorsed four-engine bombers in 1940 B-17s were able to be immediately produced with no delays related to research and testing.\nThe development of the M1 Garand rifle also happened during MacArthur's tenure as chief of staff. There was a debate over what caliber the M1 Garand should use. Many in the Army and Marine Corps wanted the new rifle to use the .276 Pedersen round. MacArthur personally intervened and ordered the M1 Garand to use the .30-06 Springfield round, which was what the M1903 Springfield used. This allowed the military to use the same ammunition for both the old standard service M1903 Springfield rifles and the future new standard service M1 Garand. The M1 Garand, chambered in .30-06 Springfield, was cleared for service in November 1935 and officially adopted in January 1936 as the new Army service rifle just a few months after MacArthur finished his tour of duty as chief of staff.\nBonus Army.\nOne of MacArthur's most controversial acts came in 1932, when the \"Bonus Army\" of veterans converged on Washington. He sent tents and camp equipment to the demonstrators, along with mobile kitchens, until an outburst in Congress caused the kitchens to be withdrawn. MacArthur was concerned that the demonstration had been taken over by communists and pacifists but the General Staff's intelligence division reported that only three of the march's 26 key leaders were communists. MacArthur went over contingency plans for civil disorder in the capital. Mechanized equipment was brought to Fort Myer, where anti-riot training was conducted.\nOn 28 July 1932, in a clash with the District police, two veterans were shot, and later died. President Herbert Hoover ordered MacArthur to \"surround the affected area and clear it without delay\". MacArthur brought up troops and tanks and, against the advice of Major Dwight D. Eisenhower, decided to accompany the troops, although he was not in charge of the operation. The troops advanced with bayonets and sabers drawn under a shower of bricks and rocks, but no shots were fired. In less than four hours, they cleared the Bonus Army's campground using tear gas. The gas canisters started a number of fires, causing the only death during the riots. While not as violent as other anti-riot operations, it was nevertheless a public relations disaster. However, the defeat of the \"Bonus Army\", while unpopular with the American people at large, did make MacArthur into the hero of the more right-wing elements in the Republican Party who believed that the general had saved America from a communist revolution in 1932.\nIn 1934, MacArthur sued journalists Drew Pearson and Robert S. Allen for defamation after they described his treatment of the Bonus marchers as \"unwarranted, unnecessary, insubordinate, harsh and brutal\". Also accused for proposing 19-gun salutes for friends, MacArthur asked for $750,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) to compensate for the damage to his reputation. The journalists threatened to call Isabel Rosario Cooper as a witness. MacArthur had met Isabel while in the Philippines, and she had become his mistress. MacArthur was forced to settle out of court, secretly paying Pearson $15,000 ().\nNew Deal.\nIn the 1932 presidential election, Herbert Hoover was defeated by Franklin D. Roosevelt. MacArthur and Roosevelt had worked together before World War I and had remained friends despite their political differences. MacArthur supported the New Deal through the Army's operation of the Civilian Conservation Corps. He ensured that detailed plans were drawn up for its employment and decentralized its administration to the corps areas, which became an important factor in the program's success. MacArthur's support for a strong military, and his public criticism of pacifism and isolationism, made him unpopular with the Roosevelt administration.\nPerhaps the most incendiary exchange between Roosevelt and MacArthur occurred over an administration proposal to cut 51% of the Army's budget. In response, MacArthur lectured Roosevelt that \"when we lost the next war, and an American boy, lying in the mud with an enemy bayonet through his belly and an enemy foot on his dying throat, spat out his last curse, I wanted the name not to be MacArthur, but Roosevelt\". In response, Roosevelt yelled, \"you must not talk that way to the President!\" MacArthur offered to resign, but Roosevelt refused his request, and MacArthur then staggered out of the White House and vomited on the front steps.\nIn spite of such exchanges, MacArthur was extended an extra year as chief of staff, and ended his tour in October 1935. For his service as chief of staff, he was awarded a second Distinguished Service Medal. He was retroactively awarded two Purple Hearts for his World War I service, a decoration that he authorized in 1932 based loosely on the defunct Military Badge of Merit. MacArthur insisted on being the first recipient of the Purple Heart, which he had engraved with \"#1\".\nField Marshal of the Philippine Army.\nWhen the Commonwealth of the Philippines achieved semi-independent status in 1935, President of the Philippines Manuel Quezon asked MacArthur to supervise the creation of a Philippine Army. Quezon and MacArthur had been personal friends since the latter's father had been Governor-General of the Philippines, 35 years earlier. With President Roosevelt's approval, MacArthur accepted the assignment. It was agreed that MacArthur would receive the rank of field marshal, with its salary and allowances, in addition to his major general's salary as Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines. This made him the best-paid soldier in the world. It would be his fifth tour in the Far East. MacArthur sailed from San Francisco on the in October 1935, accompanied by his mother and sister-in-law. He brought Eisenhower and Major James B. Ord along as his assistants. Another passenger on the \"President Hoover\" was Jean Marie Faircloth, an unmarried 37-year-old socialite. Over the next two years, MacArthur and Faircloth were frequently seen together. His mother became gravely ill during the voyage and died in Manila on 3 December 1935.\nPresident Quezon officially conferred the title of field marshal on MacArthur in a ceremony at Malaca\u00f1an Palace on 24 August 1936. Eisenhower recalled finding the ceremony \"rather fantastic\". He found it \"pompous and rather ridiculous to be the field marshal of a virtually nonexisting army.\" Eisenhower learned later on that the field-marshalship had not been (as he had assumed) Quezon's idea. \"I was surprised to learn from him that he had not initiated the idea at all; rather, Quezon said that MacArthur himself came up with the high-sounding title.\" (A persistent myth has pervaded the biographical literature, to the effect that MacArthur wore a \"specially designed sharkskin uniform\" at the 1936 ceremony to go with his new rank of Philippine Field Marshal. Richard Meixsel has debunked this story; in fact the special uniform was \"the creation of a poorly informed journalist in 1937 who mistook a recently introduced U.S. Army white dress uniform for a distinctive field marshal's attire.\")\nThe Philippine Army was formed from conscription. Training was conducted by a regular cadre, and the Philippine Military Academy was created along the lines of West Point to train officers. MacArthur and Eisenhower found that few of the training camps had been constructed and the first group of 20,000 trainees did not report until early 1937. Equipment and weapons were \"more or less obsolete\" American cast offs, and the budget was completely inadequate. MacArthur's requests for equipment fell on deaf ears, although MacArthur and his naval adviser, Lieutenant Colonel Sidney L. Huff, persuaded the Navy to initiate the development of the PT boat. Much hope was placed in the Philippine Army Air Corps, but the first squadron was not organized until 1939. Article XIX of the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty banned the construction of new fortifications or naval bases in all Pacific Ocean territories and colonies of the five signatories from 1923 to 1936. Also, military bases like at Clark and Corregidor were not allowed to be expanded or modernized during that 13-year period. For example, the Malinta Tunnel on Corregidor was constructed from 1932 to 1934 with condemned TNT and without a single dollar from the U.S. government because of the treaty. This added to the numerous challenges facing MacArthur and Quezon.\nIn Manila, MacArthur was a member of the Freemasons. On 28 March 1936, he became a 32nd degree Scottish Rite Freemason.\nMacArthur married Jean Faircloth in a civil ceremony on 30 April 1937. Their marriage produced a son, Arthur MacArthur IV, who was born in Manila on 21 February 1938. On 31 December 1937, MacArthur officially retired from the Army. He ceased to represent the U.S. as military adviser to the government, but remained as Quezon's adviser in a civilian capacity. Eisenhower returned to the U.S., and was replaced as MacArthur's chief of staff by Lieutenant Colonel Richard K. Sutherland, while Richard J. Marshall became deputy chief of staff.\nWorld War II.\nPhilippines campaign (1941\u20131942).\nDefense of the Philippines.\nOn 26 July 1941, Roosevelt federalized the Philippine Army, recalled MacArthur to active duty in the U.S. Army as a major general, and named him commander of U.S. Army Forces in the Far East (USAFFE). MacArthur was promoted to lieutenant general the following day, and then to general on 20 December. On 31 July 1941, the Philippine Department had 22,000 troops assigned, 12,000 of whom were Philippine Scouts. The main component was the Philippine Division, under the command of Major General Jonathan M. Wainwright. The initial American plan for the defense of the Philippines called for the main body of the troops to retreat to the Bataan peninsula in Manila Bay to hold out against the Japanese until a relief force could arrive. MacArthur changed this plan to one of attempting to hold all of Luzon and using B-17 Flying Fortresses to sink Japanese ships that approached the islands. MacArthur persuaded the decision-makers in Washington that his plans represented the best deterrent to prevent Japan from choosing war and of winning a war if worse came to worst.\nBetween July and December 1941, the garrison received 8,500 reinforcements. After years of parsimony, much equipment was shipped. By November, a backlog of 1,100,000 shipping tons of equipment intended for the Philippines had accumulated in U.S. ports and depots awaiting vessels. In addition, the Navy intercept station in the islands, known as Station CAST, had an ultra-secret Purple cipher machine, which decrypted Japanese diplomatic messages, and partial codebooks for the latest JN-25 naval code. Station CAST sent MacArthur its entire output, via Sutherland, the only officer on his staff authorized to see it.\nAt 03:30 local time on 8 December 1941 (about 09:00 on 7 December in Hawaii), Sutherland learned of the attack on Pearl Harbor and informed MacArthur. At 05:30, the Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army, General George Marshall, ordered MacArthur to execute the existing war plan, Rainbow Five. This plan had been leaked to the American public by the Chicago Tribune three days prior, and the following day Germany had publicly ridiculed the plan. MacArthur did not follow Marshall's order. On three occasions, the commander of the Far East Air Force, Major General Lewis H. Brereton, requested permission to attack Japanese bases in Formosa, in accordance with prewar intentions, but was denied by Sutherland; Brereton instead ordered his aircraft to fly defensive patrol patterns, looking for Japanese warships. Not until 11:00 did Brereton speak with MacArthur, and obtained permission to begin Rainbow Five. MacArthur later denied having the conversation. At 12:30, ten hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, aircraft of Japan's 11th Air Fleet achieved complete tactical surprise when they attacked Clark Field and the nearby fighter base at Iba Field, and destroyed or disabled 18 of Far East Air Force's 35 B-17s, caught on the ground refueling. Also destroyed were 53 of 107 P-40s, 3 P-35s, and more than 25 other aircraft. Substantial damage was done to the bases, and casualties totaled 80 killed and 150 wounded. What was left of the Far East Air Force was all but destroyed over the next few days.\nMacArthur attempted to slow the Japanese advance with an initial defense against the Japanese landings. MacArthur's plan for holding all of Luzon against the Japanese collapsed, for it distributed the American-Filipino forces too thinly. However, he reconsidered his overconfidence in the ability of his Filipino troops after the Japanese landing force made a rapid advance following its landing at Lingayen Gulf on 21 December, and ordered a retreat to Bataan. Within two days of the Japanese landing at Lingayen Gulf, MacArthur had reverted to the pre-July 1941 plan of attempting to hold only Bataan while waiting for a relief force to come. However, this switching of plans came at a grueling price; most of the American and some of the Filipino troops were able to retreat back to Bataan, but without most of their supplies, which were abandoned in the confusion. Manila was declared an open city at midnight on 24 December, without any consultation with Admiral Thomas C. Hart, commanding the Asiatic Fleet, forcing the Navy to destroy considerable amounts of valuable materiel. The Asiatic Fleet's performance during December 1941 was poor. Although the surface fleet was obsolete and was safely evacuated to try to defend the Dutch East Indies, more than two dozen modern submarines were assigned to Manila\u00a0\u2013 Hart's strongest fighting force. The submariners were confident, but they were armed with the malfunctioning Mark 14 torpedo and were unable to sink a single Japanese warship during the invasion. MacArthur thought the Navy betrayed him. The submariners were ordered to abandon the Philippines by the end of December after ineffective attacks on the Japanese fleet, only returning to Corregidor to evacuate high-ranking politicians or officers for the rest of the campaign.\nOn the evening of 24 December, MacArthur moved his headquarters to the island fortress of Corregidor in Manila Bay arriving at 21:30, with his headquarters reporting to Washington as being open on the 25th. A series of air raids by the Japanese destroyed all the exposed structures on the island and USAFFE headquarters was moved into the Malinta Tunnel. In the first-ever air raid on Corregidor on 29 December, Japanese airplanes bombed all the buildings on Topside including MacArthur's house and the barracks. MacArthur's family ran into the air raid shelter while MacArthur went outside to the garden of the house with some soldiers to observe and count the number of bombers involved in the raid when bombs destroyed the home. One bomb struck only ten feet from MacArthur and the soldiers shielded him with their bodies and helmets. Filipino sergeant Domingo Adversario was awarded the Silver Star and Purple Heart for getting his hand wounded by the bomb and covering MacArthur's head with his own helmet, which was also hit by shrapnel. MacArthur was not wounded. Later, most of the headquarters moved to Bataan, leaving only the nucleus with MacArthur. The troops on Bataan knew that they had been written off but continued to fight. Some blamed Roosevelt and MacArthur for their predicament. A ballad sung to the tune of \"The Battle Hymn of the Republic\" called him \"Dugout Doug\". However, most clung to the belief that somehow MacArthur \"would reach down and pull something out of his hat\".\nOn 1 January 1942, MacArthur accepted $500,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) from President Quezon of the Philippines as payment for his pre-war service. MacArthur's staff members also received payments: $75,000 for Sutherland, $45,000 for Richard Marshall, and $20,000 for Huff (equivalent to $, $, and $ in 2024, respectively). Eisenhower\u2014after being appointed Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force (AEF)\u2014was also offered money by Quezon, but declined. These payments were known only to a few in Manila and Washington, including President Roosevelt and Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, until they were made public by historian Carol Petillo in 1979. While the payments had been fully legal, the revelation tarnished MacArthur's reputation.\nEscape from the Philippines.\nIn February 1942, as Japanese forces tightened their grip on the Philippines, President Roosevelt ordered MacArthur to relocate to Australia. On the night of 12 March 1942, MacArthur and a select group that included his wife Jean, son Arthur, Arthur's Cantonese \"amah\", Loh Chui, and other members of his staff, including Sutherland, Richard Marshall and Huff, left Corregidor. They traveled in PT boats through stormy seas patrolled by Japanese warships, and reached Del Monte Airfield on Mindanao, where B-17s picked them up, and flew them to Australia. MacArthur ultimately arrived in Melbourne by train on 21 March. His famous declaration, \"I came through and I shall return\", was first made at Terowie railway station in South Australia, on 20 March. Washington asked MacArthur to amend his promise to \"We shall return\". He ignored the request.\nBataan surrendered on 9 April, and Corregidor on 6 May.\nMedal of Honor.\nGeorge Marshall decided that MacArthur would be awarded the Medal of Honor, a decoration for which he had twice previously been nominated, \"to offset any propaganda by the enemy directed at his leaving his command\". Eisenhower pointed out that MacArthur had not actually performed any acts of valor as required by law, but Marshall cited the 1927 award of the medal to Charles Lindbergh as a precedent. Special legislation had been passed to authorize Lindbergh's medal, but while similar legislation was introduced authorizing the medal for MacArthur by Congressmen J. Parnell Thomas and James E. Van Zandt, Marshall felt strongly that a serving general should receive the medal from the president and the War Department, expressing that the recognition \"would mean more\" if the gallantry criteria were not waived by a bill of relief.\nMarshall ordered Sutherland to recommend the award and authored the citation himself. Ironically, this also meant that it violated the governing statute, as it could only be considered lawful so long as material requirements were waived by Congress, such as the unmet requirement to perform conspicuous gallantry \"above and beyond the call of duty\". Marshall admitted the defect to the secretary of war, acknowledging that \"there is no specific act of General MacArthur's to justify the award of the Medal of Honor under a literal interpretation of the statutes\". Similarly, when the Army's adjutant general reviewed the case in 1945, he determined that \"authority for [MacArthur's] award is questionable under strict interpretation of regulations\".\nMacArthur had been nominated for the award twice before and understood that it was for leadership and not gallantry. He expressed the sentiment that \"this award was intended not so much for me personally as it is a recognition of the indomitable courage of the gallant army which it was my honor to command\". At the age of 62, MacArthur was the oldest living active-duty Medal of Honor recipient in history and as a four-star general, he was the highest-ranked military servicemember to ever receive the Medal of Honor. Arthur and Douglas MacArthur thus became the first father and son to be awarded the Medal of Honor. They remained the only pair until 2001, when Theodore Roosevelt was posthumously awarded for his service during the Spanish\u2013American War, Theodore Roosevelt Jr. having received one posthumously for his gallantry during the World War II Normandy invasion. MacArthur's citation, written by Marshall, read:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs the symbol of the forces resisting the Japanese, MacArthur received many other accolades. The Native American tribes of the Southwest chose him as a \"Chief of Chiefs\", which he acknowledged as from \"my oldest friends, the companions of my boyhood days on the Western frontier\". He was touched when he was named Father of the Year for 1942, and wrote to the National Father's Day Committee that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By profession I am a soldier and take pride in that fact, but I am prouder, infinitely prouder to be a father. A soldier destroys in order to build; the father only builds, never destroys. The one has the potentialities of death; the other embodies creation and life. And while the hordes of death are mighty, the battalions of life are mightier still. It is my hope that my son when I am gone will remember me, not from battle, but in the home, repeating with him our simple daily prayer, \"Our father, Who art in Heaven.\"\nNew Guinea Campaign.\nGeneral Headquarters.\nOn 18 April 1942, MacArthur was appointed Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in the Southwest Pacific Area (SWPA). Lieutenant General George Brett became Commander, Allied Air Forces, and Vice Admiral Herbert F. Leary became Commander, Allied Naval Forces. Since the bulk of land forces in the theater were Australian, George Marshall insisted an Australian be appointed as Commander, Allied Land Forces, and the job went to General Sir Thomas Blamey. Although predominantly Australian and American, MacArthur's command also included small numbers of personnel from the Netherlands East Indies, the United Kingdom, and other countries.\nMacArthur established a close relationship with the prime minister of Australia, John Curtin, and was probably the second most-powerful person in the country after the prime minister, although many Australians resented MacArthur as a foreign general who had been imposed upon them. MacArthur had little confidence in Brett's abilities as commander of Allied Air Forces, and in August 1942 selected Major General George C. Kenney to replace him. Kenney's application of air power in support of Blamey's troops would prove crucial.\nThe staff of MacArthur's General Headquarters (GHQ) was built around the nucleus that had escaped from the Philippines with him, who became known as the \"Bataan Gang\". Though Roosevelt and George Marshall pressed for Dutch and Australian officers to be assigned to GHQ, the heads of all the staff divisions were American and such officers of other nationalities as were assigned served under them. Initially located in Melbourne, GHQ moved to Brisbane\u2014the northernmost city in Australia with the necessary communications facilities\u2014in July 1942, occupying the Australian Mutual Provident Society building (renamed after the war as MacArthur Chambers).\nMacArthur formed his own signals intelligence organization, known as the Central Bureau, from Australian intelligence units and American cryptanalysts who had escaped from the Philippines. This unit forwarded Ultra information to MacArthur's Chief of Intelligence, Charles A. Willoughby, for analysis. After a press release revealed details of the Japanese naval dispositions during the Battle of the Coral Sea, at which a Japanese attempt to capture Port Moresby was turned back, Roosevelt ordered that censorship be imposed in Australia, and the Advisory War Council granted GHQ censorship authority over the Australian press. Australian newspapers were restricted to what was reported in the daily GHQ communiqu\u00e9. Veteran correspondents considered the communiqu\u00e9s, which MacArthur drafted personally, \"a total farce\" and \"Alice-in-Wonderland information handed out at high level\".\nPapuan Campaign.\nAnticipating that the Japanese would strike at Port Moresby again, the garrison was strengthened and MacArthur ordered the establishment of new bases at Merauke and Milne Bay to cover its flanks. The Battle of Midway in June 1942 led to consideration of a limited offensive in the Pacific. MacArthur's proposal for an attack on the Japanese base at Rabaul met with objections from the Navy, which favored a less ambitious approach, and objected to an Army general being in command of what would be an amphibious operation. The resulting compromise called for a three-stage advance. The first stage, the seizure of the Tulagi area, would be conducted by the Pacific Ocean Areas, under Admiral Chester W. Nimitz. The later stages would be under MacArthur's command.\nThe Japanese struck first, landing at Buna in July, and at Milne Bay in August. The Australians repulsed the Japanese at Milne Bay, but a series of defeats in the Kokoda Track campaign had a depressing effect back in Australia. On 30 August, MacArthur radioed Washington that unless action was taken, New Guinea Force would be overwhelmed. He sent Blamey to Port Moresby to take personal command. Having committed all available Australian troops, MacArthur decided to send American forces. The 32nd Infantry Division, a poorly trained National Guard division, was selected. A series of embarrassing reverses in the Battle of Buna\u2013Gona led to outspoken criticism of the American troops by the Australians. MacArthur then ordered Lieutenant General Robert L. Eichelberger to assume command of the Americans, and \"take Buna, or not come back alive\".\nMacArthur moved the advanced echelon of GHQ to Port Moresby on 6 November 1942. After Buna finally fell on 3 January 1943, MacArthur awarded the Distinguished Service Cross to twelve officers for \"precise execution of operations\". This use of the country's second highest award aroused resentment, because while some, like Eichelberger and George Alan Vasey, had fought in the field, others, like Sutherland and Willoughby, had not. For his part, MacArthur was awarded his third Distinguished Service Medal, and the Australian government had him appointed an honorary Knight Grand Cross of the British Order of the Bath.\nNew Guinea Campaign.\nAt the Pacific Military Conference in March 1943, the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved MacArthur's plan for Operation Cartwheel, the advance on Rabaul. MacArthur explained his strategy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My strategic conception for the Pacific Theater, which I outlined after the Papuan Campaign and have since consistently advocated, contemplates massive strokes against only main strategic objectives, utilizing surprise and air-ground striking power supported and assisted by the fleet. This is the very opposite of what is termed \"island hopping\" which is the gradual pushing back of the enemy by direct frontal pressure with the consequent heavy casualties which will certainly be involved. Key points must of course be taken but a wise choice of such will obviate the need for storming the mass of islands now in enemy possession. \"Island hopping\" with extravagant losses and slow progress\u00a0... is not my idea of how to end the war as soon and as cheaply as possible. New conditions require for solution and new weapons require for maximum application new and imaginative methods. Wars are never won in the past.\nLieutenant General Walter Krueger's Sixth Army headquarters arrived in SWPA in early 1943 but MacArthur had only three American divisions, and they were tired and depleted from the fighting at the Battle of Buna\u2013Gona and the Battle of Guadalcanal. As a result, \"it became obvious that any military offensive in the South-West Pacific in 1943 would have to be carried out mainly by the Australian Army\". The offensive began with the landing at Lae by the Australian 9th Division on 4 September 1943. The next day, MacArthur watched the landing at Nadzab by paratroops of the 503rd Parachute Infantry. His B-17 made the trip on three engines because one failed soon after leaving Port Moresby, but he insisted that it fly on to Nadzab. For this, he was awarded the Air Medal.\nThe Australian 7th and 9th Divisions converged on Lae, which fell on 16 September. MacArthur advanced his timetable, and ordered the 7th to capture Kaiapit and Dumpu, while the 9th mounted an amphibious assault on Finschhafen. Here, the offensive bogged down, partly because MacArthur had based his decision to assault Finschhafen on Willoughby's assessment that there were only 350 Japanese defenders at Finschhafen, when in fact there were nearly 5,000. A furious battle ensued.\nIn early November, MacArthur's plan for a westward advance along the coast of New Guinea to the Philippines was incorporated into plans for the war against Japan. Three months later, airmen reported no signs of enemy activity in the Admiralty Islands. Although Willoughby did not agree that the islands had been evacuated, MacArthur ordered an amphibious landing there, commencing the Admiralty Islands campaign. He accompanied the assault force aboard the light cruiser , the flagship of Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid, the new commander of the Seventh Fleet, and came ashore seven hours after the first wave of landing craft, for which he was awarded the Bronze Star. It took six weeks of fierce fighting before the 1st Cavalry Division captured the islands.\nMacArthur had one of the most powerful PR machines of any Allied general during the war, which made him into an extremely popular war hero with the American people. In late 1943\u2013early 1944, there was a serious effort by the conservative faction in the Republican Party centered in the Midwest to have MacArthur seek the Republican nomination to be the candidate for the presidency in the 1944 election, as they regarded the two men most likely to win the Republican nomination, namely Wendell Willkie and Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, as too liberal. For a time, MacArthur, who had long seen himself as a potential president, was in the words of the U.S. historian Gerhard Weinberg \"very interested\" in running as the Republican candidate in 1944. However, MacArthur's vow to \"return\" to the Philippines had not been fulfilled in early 1944 and he decided not to run for president until he had liberated the Philippines.\nFurthermore, Weinberg had argued that it is probable that Roosevelt, who knew of the \"enormous gratuity\" MacArthur had accepted from Quezon in 1942, had used his knowledge of this transaction to blackmail MacArthur into not running for president. Finally, despite the best efforts of the conservative Republicans to put MacArthur's name on the ballot, on 4 April 1944, Governor Dewey won such a convincing victory in the Wisconsin primary (regarded as a significant victory given that the Midwest was a stronghold of the conservative Republicans opposed to Dewey) as to ensure that he would win the Republican nomination to be the GOP's candidate for president in 1944.\nMacArthur bypassed the Japanese forces at Hansa Bay and Wewak, and assaulted Hollandia and Aitape, which Willoughby reported being lightly defended based on intelligence gathered in the Battle of Sio. MacArthur's bold thrust by going 600 miles up the coast had surprised and confused the Japanese high command, who had not anticipated that MacArthur would take such risks. Although they were out of range of the Fifth Air Force's fighters based in the Ramu Valley, the timing of the operation allowed the aircraft carriers of Nimitz's Pacific Fleet to provide air support.\nThough risky, the operation turned out to be another success. MacArthur caught the Japanese off balance and cut off Lieutenant General Hataz\u014d Adachi's Japanese XVIII Army in the Wewak area. Because the Japanese were not expecting an attack, the garrison was weak, and Allied casualties were correspondingly light. However, the terrain turned out to be less suitable for airbase development than first thought, forcing MacArthur to seek better locations further west. While bypassing Japanese forces had great tactical merit, it had the strategic drawback of tying up Allied troops to contain them. Moreover, Adachi was far from beaten, which he demonstrated in the Battle of Driniumor River.\nPhilippines Campaign (1944\u201345).\nLeyte.\nIn July 1944, President Roosevelt summoned MacArthur to meet with him in Hawaii \"to determine the phase of action against Japan\". Nimitz made the case for attacking Formosa. MacArthur stressed America's moral obligation to liberate the Philippines and won Roosevelt's support. In September, Admiral William Halsey Jr.'s carriers made a series of air strikes on the Philippines. Opposition was feeble; Halsey concluded, incorrectly, that Leyte was \"wide open\" and possibly undefended, and recommended that projected operations be skipped in favor of an assault on Leyte.\nOn 20 October 1944, troops of Krueger's Sixth Army landed on Leyte, while MacArthur watched from the light cruiser . That afternoon he arrived on the beach. The advance had not progressed far; snipers were still active and the area was under sporadic mortar fire. When his whaleboat grounded in knee-deep water, MacArthur requested a landing craft, but the beachmaster was too busy to grant his request. MacArthur was compelled to wade ashore. In his prepared speech, he said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;People of the Philippines: I have returned. By the grace of Almighty God our forces stand again on Philippine soil\u2014soil consecrated in the blood of our two peoples. We have come dedicated and committed to the task of destroying every vestige of enemy control over your daily lives, and of restoring upon a foundation of indestructible strength, the liberties of your people.\nSince Leyte was out of range of Kenney's land-based aircraft, MacArthur was dependent on carrier aircraft. Japanese air activity soon increased, with raids on Tacloban, where MacArthur decided to establish his headquarters, and on the fleet offshore. MacArthur enjoyed staying on \"Nashville\"'s bridge during air raids, although several bombs landed close by, and two nearby cruisers were hit. Over the next few days, the Japanese counterattacked in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, resulting in a near-disaster that MacArthur attributed to the command being divided between himself and Nimitz. Nor did the campaign ashore proceed smoothly. Heavy monsoonal rains disrupted the airbase construction program. Carrier aircraft proved to be no substitute for land-based aircraft, and the lack of air cover permitted the Japanese to pour troops into Leyte. Adverse weather and tough Japanese resistance slowed the American advance, resulting in a protracted campaign.\nBy the end of December, Krueger's headquarters estimated that 5,000 Japanese remained on Leyte, and on 26 December MacArthur issued a communiqu\u00e9 announcing that \"the campaign can now be regarded as closed except for minor mopping up\". Yet Eichelberger's Eighth Army killed another 27,000 Japanese on Leyte before the campaign ended in May 1945. On 18 December 1944, MacArthur was promoted to the new five-star rank of General of the Army, placing him in the company of Marshall and followed by Eisenhower and Henry \"Hap\" Arnold, the only four men to achieve the rank in World War II. Including Omar Bradley who was promoted during the Korean War so as not to be outranked by MacArthur, they were the only five men to achieve the rank of General of the Army since the 5 August 1888 death of Philip Sheridan. MacArthur was senior to all but Marshall. The rank was created by an Act of Congress when Public Law was passed on 14 December 1944, as a temporary rank, subject to reversion to permanent rank six months after the end of the war. The temporary rank was then declared permanent 23 March 1946 by Public Law 333 of the 79th Congress, which also awarded full pay and allowances in the grade to those on the retired list.\nLuzon.\nMacArthur's next move was the invasion of Mindoro, where there were good potential airfield sites. Willoughby estimated, correctly as it turned out, that the island had only about 1,000 Japanese defenders. The problem this time was getting there. Kinkaid balked at sending escort carriers into the restricted waters of the Sulu Sea, and Kenney could not guarantee land based air cover. The operation was clearly hazardous, and MacArthur's staff talked him out of accompanying the invasion on \"Nashville\". As the invasion force entered the Sulu Sea, a \"kamikaze\" struck \"Nashville\", killing 133 people and wounding 190 more. Australian and American engineers had three airstrips in operation within two weeks, but the resupply convoys were repeatedly attacked by \"kamikazes\". During this time, MacArthur quarreled with Sutherland, notorious for his abrasiveness, over the latter's mistress, Captain Elaine Clark. MacArthur had instructed Sutherland not to bring Clark to Leyte, due to a personal undertaking to Curtin that Australian women on the GHQ staff would not be taken to the Philippines, but Sutherland had brought her along anyway.\nThe way was now clear for the invasion of Luzon. This time, based on different interpretations of the same intelligence data, Willoughby estimated the strength of General Tomoyuki Yamashita's forces on Luzon at 137,000, while Sixth Army estimated it at 234,000. MacArthur's response was \"Bunk!\". He felt that even Willoughby's estimate was too high. \"Audacity, calculated risk, and a clear strategic aim were MacArthur's attributes\", and he disregarded the estimates. In fact, they were too low; Yamashita had more than 287,000 troops on Luzon. This time, MacArthur traveled aboard the light cruiser , watching as the ship was nearly hit by a bomb and torpedoes fired by midget submarines. His communiqu\u00e9 read: \"The decisive battle for the liberation of the Philippines and the control of the Southwest Pacific is at hand. General MacArthur is in personal command at the front and landed with his assault troops.\"\nMacArthur's primary concern was the capture of the port of Manila and the airbase at Clark Field, which were required to support future operations. He urged his commanders on. On 25 January 1945, he moved his advanced headquarters forward to Hacienda Luisita, closer to the front than Krueger's. He ordered the 1st Cavalry Division to conduct a rapid advance on Manila. It reached the northern outskirts of Manila on 3 February, but, unknown to the Americans, Rear Admiral Sanji Iwabuchi had decided to defend Manila to the death. The Battle of Manila raged for the next three weeks. To spare the civilian population, MacArthur prohibited the use of air strikes, but thousands of civilians died in the crossfire or Japanese massacres. He also refused to restrict the traffic of civilians who clogged the roads in and out of Manila, placing humanitarian concerns above military ones except in emergencies. For his part in the capture of Manila, MacArthur was awarded his third Distinguished Service Cross.\nAfter taking Manila, MacArthur installed one of his Filipino friends, Manuel Roxas\u2014who also happened to be one of the few people who knew about the huge sum of money Quezon had given MacArthur in 1942\u2014into a position of power that ensured Roxas was to become the next Filipino president. Roxas had been a leading Japanese collaborator serving in the puppet government of Jos\u00e9 Laurel, but MacArthur claimed that Roxas had secretly been an American agent all the long. About MacArthur's claim that Roxas was really part of the resistance, Weinberg wrote that \"evidence to this effect has yet to surface\", and that by favoring the Japanese collaborator Roxas, MacArthur ensured there was no serious effort to address the issue of Filipino collaboration with the Japanese after the war. There was evidence that Roxas used his position of working in the Japanese puppet government to secretly gather intelligence to pass onto guerillas, MacArthur, and his intelligence staff during the occupation period.\nOne of the major reasons for MacArthur to return to the Philippines was to liberate prisoner-of-war camps and civilian internee camps as well as to relieve the Filipino civilians suffering at the hands of the very brutal Japanese occupiers. MacArthur authorized daring rescue raids at numerous prison camps like Cabanatuan, Los Ba\u00f1os, and Santo Tomas. At Santo Tomas Japanese guards held 200 prisoners hostage, but the U.S. soldiers were able to negotiate safe passage for the Japanese to escape peacefully in exchange for the release of the prisoners.\nAfter the Battle of Manila, MacArthur turned his attention to Yamashita, who had retreated into the mountains of central and northern Luzon. Yamashita chose to fight a defensive campaign, being pushed back slowly by Krueger, and was still holding out at the time the war ended, much to MacArthur's intense annoyance as he had wished to liberate the entire Philippines before the war ended. On 2 September 1945, Yamashita (who had a hard time believing that the Emperor had ordered Japan to sign an armistice) came down from the mountains to surrender with some 50,500 of his men.\nSouthern Philippines.\nAlthough MacArthur had no specific directive to do so, and the fighting on Luzon was far from over, he committed his forces to liberate the remainder of the Philippines. In the GHQ communiqu\u00e9 on 5 July, he announced that the Philippines had been liberated and all operations ended, although Yamashita still held out in northern Luzon. Starting in May 1945, MacArthur used his Australian troops in the invasion of Borneo. He accompanied the assault on Labuan and visited the troops ashore. While returning to GHQ in Manila, he visited Davao, where he told Eichelberger that no more than 4,000 Japanese remained alive on Mindanao. A few months later, six times that number surrendered. In July 1945, he was awarded his fourth Distinguished Service Medal.\nAs part of preparations for Operation Downfall, the invasion of Japan, MacArthur became commander in chief U.S. Army Forces Pacific (AFPAC) in April 1945, assuming command of all Army and Army Air Force units in the Pacific except the Twentieth Air Force. At the same time, Nimitz became commander of all naval forces. Command in the Pacific therefore remained divided. During his planning of the invasion of Japan, MacArthur stressed to the decision-makers in Washington that it was essential to have the Soviet Union enter the war as he argued it was crucial to have the Red Army tie down the Kwantung army in Manchuria. Contrary to the claim that this meant that MacArthur urged Roosevelt to agree to every Soviet demand at the Yalta Conference, he was in fact not told about any of the territorial concessions to the Soviet Union in Asia as agreed upon in the secret deal that Roosevelt made with Joseph Stalin, and MacArthur said that he would not have supported the Soviet invasion of Manchuria had he known about the secret deal that involved Port Arthur, other parts of Manchuria, and northern Korea being given by the western Allies to the Soviet Union. Unlike Nimitz, who was told about the atomic bomb in February 1945, MacArthur was not told about its existence until a few days before Hiroshima was bombed. The invasion was pre-empted by the surrender of Japan in August 1945. On 2 September MacArthur accepted the formal Japanese surrender aboard the battleship , thus ending hostilities in World War II. In recognition of his role as a maritime strategist, the U.S. Navy awarded him the Navy Distinguished Service Medal.\nOccupation of Japan.\nProtecting the Emperor.\nOn 29 August 1945, MacArthur was ordered to exercise authority through the Japanese government machinery, including the Emperor Hirohito. MacArthur's headquarters was located in the Dai Ichi Life Insurance Building in Tokyo. Unlike in Germany, where the Allies had in May 1945 abolished the German state, the Americans chose to allow the Japanese state to continue to exist, albeit under their ultimate control. Unlike Germany, there was a certain partnership between the occupiers and occupied as MacArthur decided to rule Japan via the Emperor and most of the rest of the Japanese elite. The Emperor was a living god to the Japanese people, and MacArthur found that ruling via the Emperor made his job in running Japan much easier than it otherwise would have been.\nAfter the Japanese surrender in August 1945, there was a large amount of pressure that came from both Allied countries and Japanese leftists that demanded the emperor step down and be indicted as a war criminal. MacArthur disagreed, as he thought that an ostensibly cooperating emperor would help establish a peaceful allied occupation regime in Japan. Since retaining the emperor was crucial to ensuring control over the population, the allied forces shielded him from war responsibility and avoided undermining his authority. Evidence that would incriminate the emperor and his family was excluded from the International Military Tribunal for the Far East.\nCode-named Operation Blacklist, MacArthur created a plan that separated the emperor from the militarists, retained the emperor as a constitutional monarch but only as a figurehead, and used the emperor to retain control over Japan and help the U.S. achieve their objectives. The American historian Herbert P. Bix described the relationship between the general and the Emperor as: \"the Allied commander would use the Emperor, and the Emperor would cooperate in being used. Their relationship became one of expediency and mutual protection, of more political benefit to Hirohito than to MacArthur because Hirohito had more to lose\u2014the entire panoply of symbolic, legitimizing properties of the imperial throne\".\nAt the same time, MacArthur undermined the imperial mystique when his staff released a picture of his first meeting with the Emperor, the impact of which on the Japanese public was electric as the Japanese people for the first time saw the Emperor as a mere man overshadowed by the much taller MacArthur instead of the living god he had always been portrayed as. Up to 1945, the Emperor had been a remote, mysterious figure to his people, rarely seen in public and always silent, whose photographs were always taken from a certain angle to make him look taller and more impressive than he really was. No Japanese photographer would have taken such a photo of the Emperor being overshadowed by MacArthur. The Japanese government immediately banned the photo of the Emperor with MacArthur on the grounds that it damaged the imperial mystique, but MacArthur rescinded the ban and ordered all of the Japanese newspapers to print it. The photo was intended as a message to the Emperor about who was going to be the senior partner in their relationship.\nAs he needed the Emperor, MacArthur protected him from any effort to hold him accountable for his actions and allowed him to issue statements that incorrectly portrayed the emerging democratic post-war era as a continuation of the Meiji era reforms. MacArthur did not allow any investigations of the Emperor, and instead in October 1945 ordered his staff \"in the interests of peaceful occupation and rehabilitation of Japan, prevention of revolution and communism, all facts surrounding the execution of the declaration of war and subsequent position of the Emperor which tend to show fraud, menace or duress be marshalled\". In January 1946, MacArthur reported to Washington that the Emperor could not be indicted for war crimes on the grounds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His indictment will unquestionably cause a tremendous convulsion among the Japanese people, the repercussions of which cannot be overestimated. He is a symbol which unites all Japanese. Destroy him and the nation will disintegrate...It is quite possible that a million troops would be required which would have to be maintained for an indefinite number of years.\nTo protect the Emperor from being indicted, MacArthur had one of his staff, Brigadier General Bonner Fellers, tell the \"genr\u014d\" Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai on 6 March 1946:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To counter this situation, it would be most convenient if the Japanese side could prove to us that the Emperor is completely blameless. I think the forthcoming trials offer the best opportunity to do that. Tojo, in particular should be made to bear all responsibility at his trial. I want you to have Tojo say as follows: \"At the imperial conference prior to the start of the war, I already decided to push for war even if his majesty the emperor was against going to war with the United States.\"\nFrom the viewpoint of both sides, having one especially evil figure in the form of General Hideki Tojo, on whom everything that went wrong could be blamed, was most politically convenient. At a second meeting on 22 March 1946, Fellers told Yonai: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most influential advocate of un-American thought in the United States is [Benjamin V.] Cohen (a Jew and a Communist), the top adviser to Secretary of State Byrnes. As I told Yonai... it is extremely disadvantageous to MacArthur's standing in the United States to put on trial the very Emperor who is cooperating with him and facilitating the smooth administration of the occupation. This is the reason for my request... \"I wonder whether what I said to Admiral Yonai the other day has already been conveyed to Tojo?\"\nMacArthur's attempts to shield the Emperor from indictment and to have all the blame taken by Tojo were successful, which as Bix commented, \"had a lasting and profoundly distorting impact on the Japanese understanding of the lost war\".\nWar crimes trials.\nMacArthur was responsible for confirming and enforcing the sentences for war crimes handed down by the International Military Tribunal for the Far East. In late 1945, Allied military commissions in various cities in Asia tried 5,700 Japanese, Taiwanese and Koreans for war crimes. About 4,300 were convicted, almost 1,000 sentenced to death, and hundreds given life imprisonment. The charges arose from incidents that included the Rape of Nanking, the Bataan Death March and the Manila massacre. The trial in Manila of Yamashita was criticized because he was hanged for Iwabuchi's Manila massacre, which he had not ordered and of which he was probably unaware. Iwabuchi had killed himself as the battle for Manila was ending.\nMacArthur recommended that Shir\u014d Ishii and other members of Unit 731 be granted immunity from prosecution in exchange for germ warfare data based on human experimentation. He also exempted the Emperor and all members of the imperial family implicated in war crimes, including princes such as Chichibu, Asaka, Takeda, Higashikuni and Fushimi, from criminal prosecutions. MacArthur said that the emperor's abdication would not be necessary. In doing so, he ignored the advice of many members of the imperial family and Japanese intellectuals who publicly called for the abdication of the Emperor and the implementation of a regency. His reasoning was if the emperor were executed or sentenced to life imprisonment there would be a violent backlash and revolution from the Japanese from all social classes and this would interfere with his primary goal to change Japan from a militarist, feudal society to a pro-Western modern democracy. In a cable sent to General Dwight Eisenhower in February 1946, MacArthur said executing or imprisoning the emperor would require the use of one million occupation soldiers to keep the peace.\nSupreme Commander for the Allied Powers.\nAs Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers (SCAP) in Japan, MacArthur and his staff helped Japan rebuild itself, eradicate militarism and ultra-nationalism, promote political civil liberties, institute democratic government, and chart a new course that ultimately made Japan one of the world's leading industrial powers. The U.S. was firmly in control of Japan to oversee its reconstruction, and MacArthur was effectively the interim leader of Japan from 1945 until 1948. In 1946, MacArthur's staff drafted a new constitution that renounced war and stripped the Emperor of his military authority. The constitution\u2014which became effective on 3 May 1947\u2014instituted a parliamentary system of government, under which the Emperor acted only on the advice of his ministers. It included Article 9, which outlawed belligerency as an instrument of state policy and the maintenance of a standing army. The constitution also enfranchised women, guaranteed fundamental human rights, outlawed racial discrimination, strengthened the powers of Parliament and the Cabinet, and decentralized the police and local government.\nA major land reform was also conducted, led by Wolf Ladejinsky of MacArthur's SCAP staff. Between 1947 and 1949, approximately , or 38% of Japan's cultivated land, was purchased from the landlords under the government's reform program, and was resold to the farmers who worked them. By 1950, 89% of all agricultural land was owner-operated and only 11% was tenant-operated. MacArthur's efforts to encourage trade union membership met with phenomenal success, and by 1947, 48% of the non-agricultural workforce was unionized. Some of MacArthur's reforms were rescinded in 1948 when his unilateral control of Japan was ended by the increased involvement of the State Department. During the Occupation, SCAP successfully, if not entirely, abolished many of the financial coalitions known as the Zaibatsu, which had previously monopolized industry. Eventually, looser industrial groupings known as \"Keiretsu\" evolved. The reforms alarmed many in the U.S. Departments of Defense and State, who believed they conflicted with the prospect of Japan and its industrial capacity as a bulwark against the spread of communism in Asia.\nIn 1947, MacArthur invited the founder and first executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Roger Nash Baldwin, to teach the Japanese government and people about civil rights and civil liberties. MacArthur also asked him to do the same for southern Korea, which MacArthur was responsible for when it was under U.S. Army occupation. MacArthur ignored members of the House Un-American Activities Committee and the FBI who believed that Baldwin was a Soviet-loving communist. He wanted a civil liberties expert to quickly introduce western-style civil rights to the Japanese and thought conservatives would take too long. Baldwin helped found the Japan Civil Liberties Union. In a confidential letter to ACLU leaders the anti-militarist and very liberal Baldwin said about MacArthur, \"His observation on civil liberties and democracy rank with the best I ever heard from any civilian\u2014and they were incredible from a general.\"\nMacArthur ruled Japan with a soft-handed approach. He legalized the Japanese Communist Party despite reservations from the United States government out of a desire for Japan to be truly democratic and invited them to take part in the 1946 election, which was also the first ever election to allow women to vote. He ordered the release of all political prisoners of the Imperial Japanese era, including communist prisoners. The first May Day parade in 11 years in 1946 was greenlit by MacArthur also. On the day before the May Day celebrations, which would involve 300,000 Japanese communists demonstrating with red flags and pro-Marxism chants in front of the Tokyo Imperial Palace and the Dai-Ichi Building, a group of would-be assassins led by Hideo Tokayama who planned to assassinate MacArthur with hand grenades and pistols on May Day were stopped and some of its members were arrested. Despite this plot the May Day demonstrations went on. MacArthur stopped the Communist Party from gaining any popularity in Japan by releasing their members from prison, conducting landmark land reform that made MacArthur more popular than communism for the rural Japanese farmers and peasants, and allowing the communists to freely participate in elections. In the 1946 election they won only 6 seats.\nMacArthur was also in charge of southern Korea from 1945 to 1948 due to the lack of clear orders or initiative from Washington, D.C. There was no plan or guideline given to MacArthur from the Joint Chiefs of Staff or the State Department on how to rule Korea so what resulted was a very tumultuous 3 year military occupation that led to the creation of the U.S.-friendly Republic of Korea in 1948. He ordered Lieutenant General John R. Hodge, who accepted the surrender of Japanese forces in southern Korea in September 1945, to govern that area on SCAP's behalf and report to him in Tokyo. In an address to Congress on 19 April 1951, MacArthur declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Japanese people since the war have undergone the greatest reformation recorded in modern history. With a commendable will, eagerness to learn, and marked capacity to understand, they have from the ashes left in war's wake erected in Japan an edifice dedicated to the supremacy of individual liberty and personal dignity, and in the ensuing process there has been created a truly representative government committed to the advance of political morality, freedom of economic enterprise, and social justice.\nMacArthur handed over power to the Japanese government in 1949 but remained in Japan until relieved by President Harry S. Truman on 11 April 1951. The San Francisco Peace Treaty, signed on 8 September 1951, marked the end of the Allied occupation, and when it went into effect on 28 April 1952, Japan was once again an independent state.\n1948 presidential election.\nIn 1948, MacArthur made a bid to win the Republican nomination for president, which was the most serious of several efforts he made over the years. MacArthur's status as one of America's most popular war heroes together with his reputation as the statesman who had \"transformed\" Japan gave him a strong basis for running for president, but MacArthur's lack of connections within the GOP were a major handicap. MacArthur's strongest supporters came from the quasi-isolationist, Midwestern wing of the Republicans and embraced men such as Brigadier General Hanford MacNider, Philip La Follette, and Brigadier General Robert E. Wood, a diverse collection of \"Old Right\" and Progressive Republicans only united by a belief that the U.S. was too much involved in Europe for its own good. MacArthur declined to campaign for the presidency himself, but he privately encouraged his supporters to put his name on the ballot. MacArthur had always stated he would retire when a peace treaty was signed with Japan, and his push in the fall of 1947 to have the U.S. sign a peace treaty with Japan was intended to allow him to retire on a high note, and thus campaign for the presidency. For the same reasons, Truman subverted MacArthur's efforts to have a peace treaty signed in 1947, saying that more time was needed before the U.S. could formally make peace with Japan. Truman in fact was so worried about MacArthur becoming president that in 1947 he asked General Dwight Eisenhower (who, similar to Truman, did not like MacArthur either) to run for president and Truman would happily be his running mate. In 1951 he asked Eisenhower again to run to stop MacArthur. Eisenhower asked, \"What about MacArthur?\" Truman said, \"I'm going to take care of MacArthur. You'll see what happens to MacArthur.\"\nWithout a peace treaty, MacArthur decided not to resign while at the same time writing letters to Wood saying he would be more than happy to accept the Republican nomination if it were offered to him. In late 1947 and early 1948, MacArthur received several Republican grandees in Tokyo. On 9 March 1948 MacArthur issued a press statement declaring his interest in being the Republican nominee for president, saying he would be honored if the Republican Party were to nominate him, but would not resign from the Army to campaign for the presidency. The press statement had been forced by Wood, who told MacArthur that it was impossible to campaign for a man who was not officially running for president, and that MacArthur could either declare his candidacy or see Wood cease campaigning for him. MacArthur's supporters made a major effort to win the Wisconsin Republican primary held on 6 April 1948. MacArthur's refusal to campaign badly hurt his chances and it was won to everybody's surprise by Harold Stassen. The defeat in Wisconsin followed by defeat in Nebraska effectively ended MacArthur's chances of winning the Republican nomination, but MacArthur refused to withdraw his name until the 1948 Republican National Convention, at which Governor Thomas Dewey of New York was nominated.\nKorean War.\nSouth to the Naktong, North to the Yalu.\nOn 25 June 1950, North Korea invaded South Korea, starting the Korean War. The United Nations Security Council passed in quick succession Resolution 82, Resolution 83, Resolution 84 and Resolution 85 which authorized a United Nations Command (UNC) force to assist South Korea. The UN empowered the American government to select a commander, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously recommended MacArthur. He therefore became commander-in-chief of the UNC, while remaining SCAP in Japan and Commander-in-Chief, Far East. All South Korean forces were placed under his command. As they retreated before the North Korean onslaught, MacArthur received permission to commit U.S. ground forces. All the first units to arrive could do was trade men and ground for time, falling back to the Pusan Perimeter. By the end of August, the crisis subsided. North Korean attacks on the perimeter had tapered off. While the North Korean force numbered 88,000 troops, Lieutenant General Walton Walker's Eighth Army now numbered 180,000, and he had more tanks and artillery pieces.\nIn 1949, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General of the Army Omar Bradley, had predicted that \"large scale combined amphibious operations\u00a0... will never occur again\", but by July 1950, MacArthur was planning just such an operation. MacArthur compared his plan with that of General James Wolfe at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham, and brushed aside the problems of tides, hydrography and terrain. In September, despite lingering concerns from superiors, MacArthur's soldiers and Marines made a successful landing at Inchon, deep behind North Korean lines. Launched with naval and close air support, the landing outflanked the North Koreans, recaptured Seoul and forced them to retreat northward in disarray. Visiting the battlefield on 17 September, MacArthur surveyed six T-34 tanks that had been knocked out by Marines, ignoring sniper fire around him, except to note that the North Korean marksmen were poorly trained.\nMacArthur was informed about the massacres of thousands of alleged communists and communist sympathizers by South Korean forces in the summer of 1950, but, following long-established State Department policy, he described it as an \"internal matter.\" The Associated Press conducted extensive archival research and found documents classified \"secret\" and \"filed away\" by the Pentagon and State Department in Washington, that had indicated that MacArthur made no attempts to curb the summary mass killings.\nOn 11 September, Truman issued an order, NSC 81/1, to MacArthur and UN forces for an advance beyond the 38th parallel into North Korea. Truman, Secretary of State Dean Acheson, Secretary of Defense George Marshall, U.S. Ambassador to the UN Warren R. Austin, and the British and French governments all agreed on the decision to invade and occupy all of North Korea. MacArthur, busy with the Pusan Perimeter defense and the upcoming Inchon landings, had nothing to do with this decision. There was controversy over whether U.S. troops should cross the 38th parallel with only the approval from the U.S. government (NSC 81/1 was solely a U.S. order) because the original UN resolution only called for the restoration of South Korea below the 38th parallel. MacArthur was very hesitant about advancing north of the 38th parallel and waited for further instructions. Marshall ordered MacArthur on 30 September to feel \"unhampered tactically and strategically to proceed north of 38th parallel.\" This ambiguity was finally resolved by the UN General Assembly greenlighting MacArthur to advance northward on 4 October with Resolution 376(V), which authorized him and UN forces to cross the 38th parallel and to unify all of Korea under the Republic of Korea. The Joint Chiefs of Staff on 7 October further clarified to MacArthur that the official mandate for UN forces was the unification of a democratic Korea. MacArthur now planned another amphibious assault, on Wonsan on the east coast, but it fell to South Korean troops before the 1st Marine Division could reach it by sea. In October, MacArthur met with Truman at the Wake Island Conference, with Truman emulating Roosevelt's wartime meeting with MacArthur in Hawaii. MacArthur reassured Truman, commenting:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I can assure you one thing, Mr. President, if you ever have to run against a military man, his name won't be MacArthur.\".. \nThe president awarded MacArthur his fifth Distinguished Service Medal. Briefly questioned about the Chinese threat, MacArthur dismissed it, saying that he hoped to be able to withdraw the Eighth Army to Japan by Christmas, and to release a division for service in Europe in January. He regarded the possibility of Soviet intervention as a more serious threat.\nOn 20 October MacArthur flew to the Sukchon-Sunchon area of North Korea, north of Pyongyang, to supervise and observe an airborne operation by the 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team. This was the first of two airborne operations done by UN forces during the Korean War. MacArthur's unarmed airplane was subject to attack by enemy aircraft known to be based at Sinuiju. MacArthur received a Distinguished Flying Cross for supervising the operation in person.\nA month later, things had changed. The enemy were engaged by the UN forces at the Battle of Unsan in late October, which demonstrated the presence of Chinese soldiers in Korea and rendered significant losses to the American and other UN troops. Nevertheless, Willoughby downplayed the evidence about Chinese intervention in the war. He estimated that up to 71,000 Chinese soldiers were in the country, while the true number was closer to 300,000. He was not alone in this miscalculation. On 24 November, the Central Intelligence Agency reported to Truman that while there could be as many as 200,000 Chinese troops in Korea, \"there is no evidence that the Chinese Communists plan major offensive operations\".\nThat day, MacArthur flew to Walker's headquarters, and he later wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For five hours I toured the front lines. In talking to a group of officers I told them of General Bradley's desire and hope to have two divisions home by Christmas\u00a0... What I had seen at the front line worried me greatly. The R.O.K. troops were not yet in good shape, and the entire line was deplorably weak in numbers. If the Chinese were actually in heavy force, I decided I would withdraw our troops and abandon any attempt to move north. I decided to reconnoiter and try to see with my own eyes, and interpret with my own long experience what was going on\u00a0... MacArthur flew over the front line himself in his Douglas C-54 Skymaster but saw no signs of a Chinese build up and therefore decided to wait before ordering an advance or withdrawal. Evidence of the Chinese activity was hidden to MacArthur: the Chinese Army traveled at night and dug in during the day. For his reconnaissance efforts, MacArthur was nonetheless awarded the honorary combat pilot's wings.\nChina enters the war.\nChina considered the UN offensive to its border a serious threat to its security. China's fears of an invasion were reinforced by MacArthur's public statements that he wanted to conventionally bomb, but not invade, China and use Kuomintang forces stationed in Formosa to augment UN forces in the Korean peninsula in response to China first initiating hostile actions against UN troops in non-Chinese territory (North Korea) during October and November. MacArthur was banned by Truman from sending any airplanes, even reconnaissance planes, over Chinese territory and his Air Force and Navy pilots complained to him about Chinese (and also very likely Soviet) jets illegally attacking them across the Yalu River inside North Korean territory while UN planes were bombing North Korean infrastructure south of the Yalu. For the purpose of domestic mobilization, the Chinese government lied about how the war started by falsely claiming MacArthur initiated the hostilities when he landed his troops at Inchon. The theory that Chinese leader Mao Zedong only entered the war because of MacArthur's Yalu offensive and comments has been accepted without question for many decades after the Korean War. However, recent research from historian Arthur L. Herman and others in the 2010s, citing evidence from Chinese historical archives, showed that Mao actually planned on directly intervening in the Korean War ever since July 1950, when the first American soldiers landed in South Korea, long before the Inchon and Yalu battles and long before MacArthur's public statements regarding Taiwan and China in late August 1950. The Chinese were planning to get involved in Korea with or without MacArthur's Yalu offensive. In fact, China had already indirectly intervened in the beginning of the Korean War by transferring 69,200 People's Liberation Army soldiers who were Chinese citizens with Korean ethnicity to the North Korean Korean People's Army in 1949\u201350. These three Chinese army divisions that were transferred to North Korea were the 156th Division, 164th Division, and 166th Division. These former Chinese soldiers turned North Korean soldiers made up 47% of North Korea's 148,680-man army by June 1950.\nOn 25 November 1950, Walker's Eighth Army was attacked by the Chinese Army and soon the UN forces were in retreat. MacArthur provided US Army chief of staff General J. Lawton Collins with a series of nine successive withdrawal lines. On 23 December, Walker was killed when his jeep collided with a truck and was replaced by Lieutenant General Matthew Ridgway, whom MacArthur had selected in case of such an eventuality. Ridgway noted that MacArthur's \"prestige, which had gained an extraordinary luster after Inchon, was badly tarnished. His credibility suffered in the unforeseen outcome of the November offensive\u00a0...\"\nCollins discussed the possible use of nuclear weapons in Korea with MacArthur in December, and later asked him for a list of targets in the Soviet Union in case it entered the war. MacArthur testified before Congress in 1951 that he had never recommended the use of nuclear weapons, and considered but did not recommend a plan to cut off North Korea with radioactive poisons, although he broached the latter with Eisenhower, then president-elect, in 1952. In 1954, in an interview published after his death, he stated he had wanted to drop atomic bombs on enemy bases, explaining that \"I would have dropped between 30 and 50 atomic bombs on his air bases and other depots strung across the neck of Manchuria from just across the Yalu River from Antung (northwestern tip of Korea) to the neighborhood of Hunchun (just north of the northeastern tip of Korea near the border of the U.S.S.R.)\". In 1960, he challenged a statement by Truman that he had advocated using atomic bombs. Truman issued a retraction, stating that he had no evidence of the claim; it was merely his personal opinion. In January 1951, MacArthur refused to entertain proposals for the forward deployment of nuclear weapons to cover a UN retreat in Korea as proposed by Truman.\nIn April 1951, the Joint Chiefs of Staff drafted orders for MacArthur authorizing nuclear attacks on Manchuria and the Shandong Peninsula if the Chinese launched airstrikes originating from there against his forces. The next day Truman met with the chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, Gordon Dean, and arranged for the transfer of nine Mark 4 nuclear bombs to military control. Dean was apprehensive about delegating the decision on how they should be used to MacArthur, who lacked expert technical knowledge of the weapons and their effects. The Joint Chiefs were not entirely comfortable about giving them to MacArthur either, for fear that he might prematurely carry out his orders. Instead, they decided that the nuclear strike force would report to the Strategic Air Command.\nRemoval from command.\nWithin weeks of the Chinese attack, MacArthur was forced to retreat from North Korea. Seoul fell in January 1951, and both Truman and MacArthur were forced to contemplate the prospect of abandoning Korea entirely. European countries did not share MacArthur's world view, distrusted his judgment, and were afraid that he might use his stature and influence with the American public to re-focus American policy away from Europe and towards Asia. They were concerned that this might lead to a major war with China, possibly involving nuclear weapons. Since in February 1950 the Soviet Union and China had signed a defensive alliance committing each to go to war if the other party was attacked, the possibility that an American attack on China would cause World War III was considered to be very real at the time. In a visit to the United States in December 1950, the British prime minister, Clement Attlee, had raised the fears of the British and other European governments that \"General MacArthur was running the show\".\nUnder Ridgway's command, the Eighth Army pressed north again in January. He inflicted heavy casualties on the Chinese, recaptured Seoul in March 1951, and pushed on to the 38th Parallel. With the improved military situation, Truman now saw the opportunity to offer a negotiated peace but, on 24 March, MacArthur called upon China to admit that it had been defeated, simultaneously challenging both the Chinese and his own superiors. Truman's proposed announcement was shelved.\nOn 5 April, Representative Joseph William Martin Jr., the Republican leader in the House of Representatives, read aloud on the floor of the House a letter from MacArthur critical of Truman's Europe-first policy and limited-war strategy. The letter concluded with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It seems strangely difficult for some to realize that here in Asia is where the communist conspirators have elected to make their play for global conquest, and that we have joined the issue thus raised on the battlefield; that here we fight Europe's war with arms while the diplomats there still fight it with words; that if we lose the war to communism in Asia the fall of Europe is inevitable, win it and Europe most probably would avoid war and yet preserve freedom. As you pointed out, we must win. There is no substitute for victory.\nIn March 1951, secret United States intercepts of diplomatic dispatches disclosed clandestine conversations from Spanish and Portuguese diplomats in Tokyo embassies to their home countries in which they claimed that MacArthur expressed confidence to them that he would succeed in \"disposing of the Chinese Communist question\" once and for all. This conversation log did not record MacArthur saying this but Spanish and Portuguese diplomats claiming that MacArthur said that. When these alleged claims from the diplomats came to the attention of President Truman, he was enraged to learn that MacArthur was supposedly not only trying to increase public support for his position on conducting the war but had secretly informed foreign governments that he planned to initiate actions that were counter to United States policy. The President was unable to act immediately since he could not afford to reveal the existence of the intercepts and because of MacArthur's popularity with the public and political support in Congress. However, following the release on 5 April by Representative Martin of MacArthur's letter, Truman concluded he could relieve MacArthur of his commands without incurring unacceptable political damage.\nTruman summoned Secretary of Defense George Marshall, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Omar Bradley, Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Averell Harriman to discuss what to do about MacArthur. They concurred MacArthur should be relieved of his command but made no recommendation to do so. Although they felt that it was correct \"from a purely military point of view\", they were aware that there were important political considerations as well. Truman and Acheson agreed that MacArthur was insubordinate, but the Joint Chiefs avoided any suggestion of this. Insubordination was a military offense, and MacArthur could have requested a public court martial similar to that of Billy Mitchell. The outcome of such a trial was uncertain, and it might well have found him not guilty and ordered his reinstatement. The Joint Chiefs agreed that there was \"little evidence that General MacArthur had ever failed to carry out a direct order of the Joint Chiefs or acted in opposition to an order\". \"In point of fact\", Bradley insisted, \"MacArthur had stretched but not legally violated any JCS directives. He had violated the President's 6 December directive [not to make public statements on policy matters], relayed to him by the JCS, but this did not constitute violation of a JCS order.\" Truman ordered MacArthur's relief by Ridgway, and the order went out on 10 April with Bradley's signature.\nIn a 3 December 1973 article in \"Time\" magazine, Truman was quoted as saying in the early 1960s:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I fired him because he wouldn't respect the authority of the President. I didn't fire him because he was a dumb son of a bitch, although he was, but that's not against the law for generals. If it was, half to three-quarters of them would be in jail.\nThe relief of the famous general by the unpopular politician created a storm of public controversy. Polls showed that the majority of the public disapproved of the decision to relieve MacArthur. By February 1952, almost nine months later, Truman's approval rating had fallen to 22 percent. As of 2023[ [update]], that remains the lowest Gallup Poll approval rating recorded by any serving president. As the increasingly unpopular war in Korea dragged on, Truman's administration was beset with a series of corruption scandals, and he eventually decided not to run for re-election. Beginning on 3 May 1951, a Joint Senate Committee investigated MacArthur's removal. Its bipartisan conclusion was that \"the removal of General MacArthur was within the constitutional powers of the President but the circumstances were a shock to national pride.\"\nLater life.\nA day after his arrival in San Francisco from Korea on 18 April 1951, MacArthur flew with his family to Washington, D.C., where he was scheduled to address a joint session of Congress. It was his and Jean's first visit to the continental United States since 1937, when they had been married; Arthur IV, now aged 13, had never been to the U.S. On 19 April, MacArthur made his last official appearance in a presenting and defending his side of his disagreement with Truman over the conduct of the Korean War. During his speech, he was interrupted by fifty ovations. MacArthur ended the address saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am closing my 52 years of military service. When I joined the Army, even before the turn of the century, it was the fulfillment of all of my boyish hopes and dreams. The world has turned over many times since I took the oath on the plain at West Point, and the hopes and dreams have long since vanished, but I still remember the refrain of one of the most popular barrack ballads of that day which proclaimed most proudly that \"old soldiers never die; they just fade away\".\nAnd like the old soldier of that ballad, I now close my military career and just fade away, an old soldier who tried to do his duty as God gave him the light to see that duty.\nGood Bye.\nMacArthur received public adulation, which aroused expectations that he would run for president, but he was not a candidate. He carried out a speaking tour in 1951\u201352 attacking the Truman administration for \"appeasement in Asia\" and for mismanaging the economy. Initially attracting large crowds, by early 1952 MacArthur's speeches were attracting decreasing numbers as many complained that MacArthur seemed more interested in settling scores with Truman and praising himself than in offering up a constructive vision for the nation. MacArthur felt uncomfortable campaigning for the Republican nomination and hoped that at the 1952 Republican National Convention, a deadlock would ensue between Senator Robert A. Taft and General Dwight Eisenhower for the presidential nomination. MacArthur's plan was to then step in and offer himself as a compromise candidate; potentially picking Taft as a running mate. His unwillingness to campaign for the nomination seriously hurt his viability as a candidate. In the end, MacArthur endorsed Taft and was keynote speaker at the convention. Taft ultimately lost the nomination to Eisenhower, who went on to win the general election in a landslide. Once elected, Eisenhower consulted with MacArthur, his former commanding officer, about ending the war in Korea.\nDouglas and Jean MacArthur spent their last years together in the penthouse of the Waldorf Towers, a part of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. He was elected chairman of the board of Remington Rand in 1952. In that year, he earned a salary of $68,000, as well as $20,000 pay and allowances as a General of the Army (equivalent to $ and $ in 2024, respectively). The Waldorf became the setting for an annual birthday party on 26 January thrown by the general's former deputy chief engineer, Major General Leif J. Sverdrup. At the 1960 celebration for MacArthur's 80th birthday, many of his friends were startled by the general's visibly deteriorating health. The next day, he collapsed and was rushed into surgery at St. Luke's Hospital to control a severely swollen prostate. In June 1960, he was decorated by the Japanese government with the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia Flowers, the highest Japanese order which may be conferred on an individual who is not a head of state. In his statement upon receiving the honor, MacArthur said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No honor I have ever received moves me more deeply than this one. Perhaps this is because I can recall no parallel in the history of the world where a great nation recently at war has so distinguished its former enemy commander. What makes it even more poignant is my own firm disbelief in the usefulness of military occupations with their corresponding displacement of civil control.\nAfter his recovery, MacArthur methodically began to prepare for his death. He visited the White House for a final reunion with Eisenhower. In 1961, to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of Filipino independence, an eighty-one year old MacArthur made a \"sentimental journey\" to the Philippines, where he was decorated by President Carlos P. Garcia with the Philippine Legion of Honor and met with cheering crowds. MacArthur also accepted an advance of $900,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) from Henry Luce for the rights to his memoirs, and wrote the volume that would eventually be published as \"Reminiscences\". Sections began to appear in serialized form in \"Life\" magazine in the months before his death.\nPresident John F. Kennedy solicited MacArthur's counsel in 1961 and 1962. The first of three meetings was held shortly after the Bay of Pigs invasion. MacArthur was extremely critical of the military advice given to Kennedy and cautioned the young president to avoid a U.S. military build-up in Vietnam, pointing out that domestic problems should be given a much greater priority. MacArthur later gave similar advice to President Lyndon B. Johnson. In August 1962 Kennedy summoned MacArthur for counsel at the White House while MacArthur met members of Congress in Washington after Kennedy received intelligence that the Soviets were preparing to transport nuclear weapons to Cuba. \"The greatest weapon of war is the blockade,\" MacArthur advised Kennedy after a long conversation about how to deal with the Soviets and Chinese. \"If war comes, that is the weapon we should use.\" Kennedy used the naval blockade option during the Cuban Missile Crisis two months later. When Kennedy was urged to increase U.S. involvement in Laos and Vietnam by generals, politicians, and advisors he would tell them, \"Well now, you gentlemen, you go back and convince General MacArthur, then I'll be convinced.\"\nIn 1962, West Point honored the increasingly frail MacArthur with the Sylvanus Thayer Award for outstanding service to the nation, which had gone to Eisenhower the year before. MacArthur's speech to the cadets in accepting the award had as its theme \"Duty, Honor, Country\": &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn August 1962, MacArthur returned to Washington, D.C., to receive a special honor from a joint session of Congress called the Thanks of Congress. Congress unanimously passed a special resolution to give him this award. This was his first trip to Congress since April 1951 after he was relieved. He received an engrossed copy of the resolution that honored him for his military leadership during and following World War II and also \"for his many years of effort to strengthen the ties between the Philippines and the United States\". This honor is unique in that it dates back to the American Revolutionary War and has rarely been given to anybody after the Civil War. Two months later MacArthur was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal that honored his \"gallant service to his country\".\nIn 1963, President Kennedy asked MacArthur to help mediate a dispute between the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the Amateur Athletic Union over control of track sports in the country. The dispute threatened to derail the participation of the United States in the 1964 Summer Olympics. His presence helped to broker a deal, and participation in the games went on as planned.\nIllness and death.\nOn 2 March 1964, MacArthur was admitted to Walter Reed Army Medical Center for a checkup due to stomach pains and was diagnosed with moderate jaundice. His friend, former President Herbert Hoover, sent him a telegram the next day:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My dear Friend: From experience I can assure you the Waldorf Towers are much more desirable than any hospital, so I send warm good wishes that you'll soon be back in our neighborhood.\nMacArthur died in the hospital after surgery on 5 April 1964, of primary biliary cholangitis aged 84. Kennedy had authorized a state funeral before his own death in 1963, and Johnson confirmed the directive, ordering that MacArthur be buried \"with all the honor a grateful nation can bestow on a departed hero\". On 7 April his body was taken to New York City, where it lay in an open casket at the Park Avenue Armory for about 12 hours. That night it was taken by train to Washington Union Station and transported by a funeral procession to the Capitol, where it lay in state at the United States Capitol rotunda. An estimated 150,000 people filed by the bier.\nMacArthur had requested to be buried in Norfolk, Virginia, where his mother had been born and where his parents had married. On 11 April, his funeral service was held in St Paul's Episcopal Church in Norfolk and his body was laid to rest in the rotunda of the Norfolk City Hall.\nLegacy.\nIn 1960, the mayor of Norfolk had proposed using funds raised by public contribution to remodel the old Norfolk City Hall as a memorial to General MacArthur and as a repository for his papers, decorations, and mementos. Restored and remodeled, the MacArthur Memorial consists of a complex of three buildings on MacArthur Square containing nine museum galleries whose contents reflect the general's 50 years of military service. At the heart of the memorial is a rotunda. In its center lies a sunken circular crypt with two marble sarcophagi, one for MacArthur, the other for Jean, who continued to live in the Waldorf Towers until her death in 2000.\nThe MacArthur Chambers in Brisbane, Australia, hosts the MacArthur Museum on the 8th floor where MacArthur had his office.\nThe majority of South Koreans consider MacArthur to be a hero who saved the country twice: once in 1945 and once in 1950. The city of Incheon erected a statue of MacArthur in Jayu Park in 1957, which is considered a symbol of patriotism.\nThe Dai-Ichi Seimei Building in Tokyo has preserved MacArthur's 6th floor office as it was from 1945 to 1951 during his tenure as Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers.\nMacArthur has a contested legacy. In the Philippines in 1942, he suffered a defeat that Gavin Long described as \"the greatest in the history of American foreign wars\". Despite this:\n...in a fragile period of the American psyche when the general American public, still stunned by the shock of Pearl Harbor and uncertain what lay ahead in Europe, desperately needed a hero, they wholeheartedly embraced Douglas MacArthur\u2014good press copy that he was. There simply were no other choices that came close to matching his mystique, not to mention his evocative lone-wolf stand\u2014something that has always resonated with Americans.\nHe is highly respected and remembered to the present day in the Philippines and Japan. In 1961 MacArthur traveled to Manila one final time and was greeted by a cheering crowd of two million.\nMacArthur's concept of the role of the soldier as including civil affairs, quelling riots and low-level conflict, was dismissed by the majority of officers who had fought in Europe during World War II, and afterwards saw the Army's role as fighting the Soviet Union. Unlike them, in his victories in New Guinea in 1944, the Philippines in 1945 and Korea in 1950, he fought outnumbered, and relied on maneuver and surprise for success. The American sinologist John King Fairbank called MacArthur \"our greatest soldier\". British Field Marshal Viscount Alanbrooke, the chief of Britain's Imperial General Staff, had stated that MacArthur outshone all of his contemporary American and British generals, much to the concurring of B. H. Liddell Hart and espoused that the blend of his strong personality along with his grasp of tactics, operative mobility and vision had put him in such class, on par with or even greater than Genghis Khan and Napoleon Bonaparte. President of the Republic of China Chiang Kai-shek praised him a glory of the U.S. as well as all people who defend freedom and justice.\nOn the other hand, Truman once remarked that he did not understand how the U.S. Army could \"produce men such as Robert E. Lee, John J. Pershing, Eisenhower and Bradley and at the same time produce Custers, Pattons and MacArthur\". His relief of MacArthur cast a long shadow over American civil\u2013military relations for decades. When Lyndon Johnson met with William Westmoreland in Honolulu in 1966, he told him: \"General, I have a lot riding on you. I hope you don't pull a MacArthur on me.\" MacArthur's relief \"left a lasting current of popular sentiment that in matters of war and peace, the military really knows best\", a philosophy which became known as \"MacArthurism\".\nMacArthur's complicated legacy is symbolized by how his political and interservice opponents frequently would praise him for his military expertise and experience despite disliking the general's politics and personality. President Roosevelt's personal physician, Vice Admiral Ross T. McIntire, revealed after World War II that Roosevelt \"may have smiled now and then at some of the General's purple communiques, but always there was appreciation of him as a military genius who had worked miracles in the face of heart-breaking odds.\" One of Roosevelt's most trusted advisers, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief Fleet Admiral William D. Leahy, wrote of MacArthur: \"I had always entertained an extremely high opinion of his ability.\" Roosevelt himself told MacArthur, while the latter was serving as Chief of Staff of the Army, \"Douglas, I think you are our best general, but I believe you would be our worst politician.\"\nMacArthur remains a controversial and enigmatic figure. He has been portrayed as a reactionary, although he was in many respects ahead of his time. He championed a progressive approach to the reconstruction of Japan, arguing that all occupations ultimately ended badly. He was often out of step with his contemporaries, such as in 1941 when he contended that Nazi Germany could not defeat the Soviet Union, when he argued that North Korea and China were no mere Soviet puppets, and throughout his career in his insistence that the future lay in the Far East. As such, MacArthur implicitly rejected White American contemporary notions of racial superiority. He always treated Filipino and Japanese leaders with respect as equals. At the same time, his Victorian sensibilities recoiled at leveling Manila with aerial bombing, an attitude the World War II generation regarded as old-fashioned. When asked about MacArthur, Blamey said, \"The best and the worst things you hear about him are both true.\"\nHonors and awards.\nMacArthur earned over 100 military decorations from the U.S. and other countries including the Medal of Honor, the French Legion of Honour and \"Croix de guerre\", the Order of the Crown of Italy, the Order of Orange-Nassau from the Netherlands, the Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath from Australia, and the Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia Flowers, Grand Cordon from Japan.\nMacArthur was enormously popular with the American public. Streets, public works, children, and even a dance step were named after him. He was named Gallup's Most Admired Person in 1946 and 1947 and Gallup's Most Admired Man in 1951. A 1961 \"Time\" article said that \"to Filipinos, MacArthur [was] a hero without flaw\". In 1955, his promotion to General of the Armies was proposed in Congress, but the proposal was shelved.\nSince 1987, the General Douglas MacArthur Leadership Awards are presented annually by the United States Army on behalf of the General Douglas MacArthur Foundation to recognize officers who have demonstrated \"duty, honor, country\" in their professional lives and in service to their communities.\nSince 1989, the U.S. Army Cadet Command on behalf of the General Douglas MacArthur Foundation annually presents the MacArthur Award to the eight best U.S. Army ROTC programs in the country. The award is based on a combination of the performance by the school and its ROTC's commanding officers to support the program, its cadets' performance and standing on the command's National Order of Merit List, and its cadet retention rate.\nThe MacArthur Leadership Award at the Royal Military College of Canada is awarded to the graduating officer cadet who demonstrates outstanding leadership performance based on the credo of Duty-Honor-Country and potential for future military service.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48597", "revid": "219723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48597", "title": "Furniture", "text": "Objects used to support human activities\nFurniture refers to objects intended to support various human activities such as seating (e.g., stools, chairs, and sofas), eating (tables), storing items, working, and sleeping (e.g., beds and hammocks). Furniture is also used to hold objects at a convenient height for work (as horizontal surfaces above the ground, such as tables and desks), or to store things (e.g., cupboards, shelves, and drawers). Furniture can be a product of design and can be considered a form of decorative art. In addition to furniture's functional role, it can serve a symbolic or religious purpose. It can be made from a vast multitude of materials, including metal, plastic, and wood. Furniture can be made using a variety of woodworking joints which often reflects the local culture.\nPeople have been using natural objects, such as tree stumps, rocks and moss, as furniture since the beginning of human civilization and continues today in some households/campsites. Archaeological research shows that from around 30,000 years ago, people started to construct and carve their own furniture, using wood, stone, and animal bones. Early furniture from this period is known from artwork such as a Venus figurine found in Russia, depicting the goddess on a throne. The first surviving extant furniture is in the homes of Skara Brae in Scotland, and includes cupboards, dressers and beds all constructed from stone. Complex construction techniques such as joinery began in the early dynastic period of ancient Egypt. This era saw constructed wooden pieces, including stools and tables, sometimes decorated with valuable metals or ivory. The evolution of furniture design continued in ancient Greece and ancient Rome, with thrones being commonplace as well as the klinai, multipurpose couches used for relaxing, eating, and sleeping. The furniture of the Middle Ages was usually heavy, oak, and ornamented. Furniture design expanded during the Italian Renaissance of the fourteenth and fifteenth century. The seventeenth century, in both Southern and Northern Europe, was characterized by opulent, often gilded Baroque designs. The nineteenth century is usually defined by revival styles. The first three-quarters of the twentieth century are often seen as the march towards Modernism. One unique outgrowth of post-modern furniture design is a return to natural shapes and textures.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"furniture\" is derived from the French word , the noun form of , which means to supply or provide. Thus \"fourniture\" in French means supplies or provisions. The English usage, referring specifically to household objects, is specific to that language; French and other Romance languages as well as German use variants of the word \"meubles\", which derives from Latin \"mobilia\", meaning \"moveable goods\".\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe practice of using natural objects as rudimentary pieces of furniture likely dates to the beginning of human civilization. Early humans are likely to have used tree stumps as seats, rocks as rudimentary tables, and mossy areas for sleeping. During the late Paleolithic or early Neolithic period, from around 30,000 years ago, people began constructing and carving their own furniture, using wood, stone and animal bones. The earliest evidence for the existence of constructed furniture is a Venus figurine found at the Gagarino site in Russia, which depicts the goddess in a sitting position, on a throne. A similar statue of a seated woman was found in \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck in Turkey, dating to between 6000 and 5500 BCE. The inclusion of such a seat in the figurines implies that these were already common artefacts of that age.\nA range of unique stone furniture has been excavated in Skara Brae, a Neolithic village in Orkney, Scotland The site dates from 3100 to 2500 BCE and due to a shortage of wood in Orkney, the people of Skara Brae were forced to build with stone, a readily available material that could be worked easily and turned into items for use within the household. Each house shows a high degree of sophistication and was equipped with an extensive assortment of stone furniture, ranging from cupboards, dressers, and beds to shelves, stone seats, and limpet tanks. The stone dresser was regarded as the most important as it symbolically faces the entrance in each house and is therefore the first item seen when entering, perhaps displaying symbolic objects, including decorative artwork such as several Neolithic carved stone balls also found at the site.\nAntiquity.\nAncient furniture has been excavated from the 8th-century BCE Phrygian tumulus, the Midas Mound, in Gordion, Turkey. Pieces found here include tables and inlaid serving stands. There are also surviving works from the 9th\u20138th-century BCE Assyrian palace of Nimrud. The earliest surviving carpet, the Pazyryk Carpet was discovered in a frozen tomb in Siberia and has been dated between the 6th and 3rd century BCE.\nAncient Egypt.\nCivilization in ancient Egypt began with the clearance and irrigation of land along the banks of the River Nile, which began in about 6000 BCE. By that time, society in the Nile Valley was already engaged in organized agriculture and the construction of large buildings. At this period, Egyptians in the southwestern corner of Egypt were herding cattle and also constructing large buildings. Mortar was in use by around 4000 BCE The inhabitants of the Nile Valley and delta were self-sufficient and were raising barley and emmer (an early variety of wheat) and stored it in pits lined with reed mats. They raised cattle, goats and pigs and they wove linens and baskets. Evidence of furniture from the predynastic period is scarce, but samples from First Dynasty tombs indicate an already advanced use of furnishings in the houses of the age.\nDuring the Dynastic Period, which began in around 3200 BCE, Egyptian art developed significantly, and this included furniture design. Egyptian furniture was primarily constructed using wood, but other materials were sometimes used, such as leather, and pieces were often adorned with gold, silver, ivory and ebony, for decoration. Wood found in Egypt was not suitable for furniture construction, so it had to be imported into the country from other places, particularly Phoenicia. The scarcity of wood necessitated innovation in construction techniques. The use of scarf joints to join two shorter pieces together and form a longer beam was one example of this, as well as construction of veneers in which low quality cheap wood was used as the main building material, with a thin layer of expensive wood on the surface.\nThe earliest used seating furniture in the dynastic period was the stool, which was used throughout Egyptian society, from the royal family down to ordinary citizens. Various different designs were used, including stools with four vertical legs, and others with crossed splayed legs; almost all had rectangular seats, however. Examples include the workman's stool, a simple three legged structure with a concave seat, designed for comfort during labour, and the much more ornate folding stool, with crossed folding legs, which were decorated with carved duck heads and ivory, and had hinges made of bronze. Full chairs were much rarer in early Egypt, being limited to only wealthy and high ranking people, and seen as a status symbol; they did not reach ordinary households until the 18th dynasty. Early examples were formed by adding a straight back to a stool, while later chairs had an inclined back. Other furniture types in ancient Egypt include tables, which are heavily represented in art, but almost nonexistent as preserved items \u2013 perhaps because they were placed outside tombs rather than within, as well as beds and storage chests.\nAncient Greece.\nHistorical knowledge of Greek furniture is derived from various sources, including literature, terracotta, sculptures, statuettes, and painted vases. Some pieces survive to this day, primarily those constructed from metals, including bronze, or marble. Wood was an important and common material in Greek furniture, both domestic and imported. A common technique was to construct the main sections of the furniture with cheap solid wood, then apply a veneer using an expensive wood, such as maple or ebony. Greek furniture construction also made use of dowels and tenons for joining the wooden parts of a piece together. Wood was shaped by carving, steam treatment, and the lathe, and furniture is known to have been decorated with ivory, tortoise shell, glass, gold or other precious materials.\nThe modern word \"throne\" is derived from the ancient Greek \"thronos\" (Greek singular: \u03b8\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2), which was a seat designated for deities or individuals of high status/hierarchy or honor. The colossal chryselephantine statue of Zeus at Olympia, constructed by Phidias and lost in antiquity, featured the god Zeus seated on an elaborate throne, which was decorated with gold, precious stones, ebony and ivory, according to Pausanias. Other Greek seats included the \"klismos\", an elegant Greek chair with a curved backrest and legs whose form was copied by the Romans and is now part of the vocabulary of furniture design, the backless stool (diphros), which existed in most Greek homes, and folding stool. The kline, used from the late seventh century BCE, was a multipurpose piece used as a bed, but also as a sofa and for reclining during meals. It was rectangular and supported on four legs, two of which could be longer than the other, providing support for an armrest or headboard. Mattresses, rugs, and blankets may have been used, but there is no evidence for sheets.\nIn general, Greek tables were low and often appear in depictions alongside \"klinai\". The most common type of Greek table had a rectangular top supported on three legs, although numerous configurations exist, including trapezoid and circular. Tables in ancient Greece were used mostly for dining purposes \u2013 in depictions of banquets, it appears as though each participant would have used a single table, rather than a collective use of a larger piece. Tables also figured prominently in religious contexts, as indicated in vase paintings, for example, the wine vessel associated with Dionysus, dating to around 450 BCE and now housed at the Art Institute of Chicago. Chests were used for storage of clothes and personal items and were usually rectangular with hinged lids. Chests depicted in terracotta show elaborate patterns and design, including the Greek fret.\nAncient Rome.\nRoman furniture was based heavily on Greek furniture, in style and construction. Rome gradually superseded Greece as the foremost culture of Europe, leading eventually to Greece becoming a province of Rome in 146 BC. Rome thus took over production and distribution of Greek furniture, and the boundary between the two is blurred. The Romans did have some limited innovation outside of Greek influence, and styles distinctly their own.\nRoman furniture was constructed principally using wood, metal and stone, with marble and limestone used for outside furniture. Very little wooden furniture survives intact, but there is evidence that a variety of woods were used, including maple, citron, beech, oak, and holly. Some imported wood such as satinwood was used for decoration. The most commonly used metal was bronze, of which numerous examples have survived, for example, headrests for couches and metal stools. Similar to the Greeks, Romans used tenons, dowels, nails, and glue to join wooden pieces together, and also practised veneering.\nThe 1738 and 1748 excavations of Herculaneum and Pompeii revealed Roman furniture, preserved in the ashes of the AD 79 eruption of Vesuvius.\nMiddle Ages.\nUnlike the ancient western civilizations of Egypt, Greece, and Rome, there is comparatively little evidence of furniture from the 5th to the 15th century. Very few extant pieces survive, and evidence in literature is also scarce. It is likely that the style of furniture prevalent in late antiquity persisted throughout the Middle Ages. For example, a throne similar to that of Zeus is depicted in a sixth-century diptych, while the Bayeux tapestry shows Edward the Confessor and Harold seated on seats similar to the Roman sella curulis. The furniture of the Middle Ages was usually heavy, oak, and ornamented with carved designs.\nThe Hellenistic influence upon Byzantine furniture can be seen through the use of acanthus leaves, palmettes, bay and olive leaves as ornaments. Oriental influences manifest through rosettes, arabesques and the geometric stylisation of certain vegetal motifs. Christianity brings symbols in Byzantine ornamentation: the pigeon, fishes, the lamb and vines. The furniture from Byzantine houses and palaces was usually luxurious, highly decorated and finely ornamented. Stone, marble, metal, wood and ivory are used. Surfaces and ornaments are gilded, painted plychrome, plated with sheets of gold, emailed in bright colors, and covered in precious stones. The variety of Byzantine furniture is pretty big: tables with square, rectangle or round top, sumptuous decorated, made of wood sometimes inlaid, with bronze, ivory or silver ornaments; chairs with high backs and with wool blankets or animal furs, with coloured pillows, and then banks and stools; wardrobes were used only for storing books; cloths and valuable objects were kept in chests, with iron locks; the form of beds imitated the Roman ones, but have different designs of legs.\nThe main ornament of Gothic furniture and all applied arts is the \"ogive\". The geometric rosette accompanies the ogive many times, having a big variety of forms. Architectural elements are used at furniture, at the beginning with purely decorative reasons, but later as structure elements. Besides the ogive, the main ornaments are: acanthus leaves, ivy, oak leaves, haulms, clovers, fleurs-de-lis, knights with shields, heads with crowns and characters from the Bible. Chests are the main type of Gothic furniture used by the majority of the population. Usually, the locks and escutcheon of chests have also an ornamental scope, being finely made.\nRenaissance.\nAlong with the other arts, the Italian Renaissance of the fourteenth and fifteenth century marked a rebirth in design, often inspired by the Greco-Roman tradition. A similar explosion of design, and renaissance of culture in general occurred in Northern Europe, starting in the fifteenth century.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nThe 17th century, in both Southern and Northern Europe, was characterized by opulent, often gilded Baroque designs that frequently incorporated a profusion of vegetal and scrolling ornament. Starting in the eighteenth century, furniture designs began to develop more rapidly. Although there were some styles that belonged primarily to one nation, such as Palladianism in Great Britain or Louis Quinze in French furniture, others, such as the Rococo and Neoclassicism were perpetuated throughout Western Europe.\nDuring the 18th century, the fashion was set in England by the French art. In the beginning of the century Boulle cabinets were at the peak of their popularity and Louis XIV was reigning in France. In this era, most of the furniture had metal and enamelled decorations in it and some of the furniture was covered in inlays of marbles lapis lazuli, and porphyry and other stones. By mid-century this Baroque style was displaced by the graceful curves, shining ormolu, and intricate marquetry of the Rococo style, which in turn gave way around 1770 to the more severe lines of Neoclassicism, modeled after the architecture of ancient Greece and Rome. Creating a mass market for furniture, the distinguished London cabinet maker Thomas Chippendale's \"The Gentleman and Cabinet Maker's Director\" (1754) is regarded as the \"first comprehensive trade catalogue of its kind\".\nThere is something so distinct in the development of taste in French furniture, marked out by the three styles to which the three monarchs have given the name of \"Louis Quatorze\", \"Louis Quinze\", and \"Louis Seize\". This will be evident to anyone who will visit, first the Palace of Versailles, then the Grand Trianon, and afterwards the Petit Trianon.\n19th century.\nThe nineteenth century is usually defined by concurrent revival styles, including Gothic, Neoclassicism, and Rococo. The design reforms of the late century introduced the Aesthetic movement and the Arts and Crafts movement. Art Nouveau was influenced by both of these movements. Shaker-style furniture became popular during this time in North America as well.\nEarly North American.\nThis design was in many ways rooted in necessity and emphasizes both form and materials. Early British Colonial American chairs and tables are often constructed with turned spindles and chair backs often constructed with steaming to bend the wood. Wood choices tend to be deciduous hardwoods with a particular emphasis on the wood of edible or fruit bearing trees such as cherry or walnut.\nMid-Century Modern.\nThe first three-quarters of the 20th century is seen as the march towards Modernism. The furniture designers of Art Deco, De Stijl, Bauhaus, Jugendstil, Wiener Werkst\u00e4tte, and Vienna Secession all worked to some degree within the Modernist motto. \nBorn from the Bauhaus and Streamline Moderne came the post-World War II style \"Mid-Century Modern\". Mid-Century Modern materials developed during the war including laminated plywood, plastics, and fiberglass. Prime examples include furniture designed by George Nelson Associates, Charles and Ray Eames, Paul McCobb, Florence Knoll, Harry Bertoia, Eero Saarinen, Harvey Probber, Vladimir Kagan and Danish modern designers including Finn Juhl and Arne Jacobsen.\nContemporary.\nIndustrialisation, Post-Modernism, and the Internet have allowed furniture design to become more accessible to a wider range of people than ever before. There are many modern styles of furniture design, each with roots in Classical, Modernist, and Post-Modern design and art movements. The growth of Maker Culture across the Western sphere of influence has encouraged higher participation and development of new, more accessible furniture design techniques. One unique outgrowth of this post-modern furniture design trajectory is live edge, which incorporates the natural surface of a tree as part of a furniture object, heralding a resurgence of these natural shapes and textures within the home. Additionally, the use of epoxy resin has become more prevalent in DIY furniture styles.\nEcodesign.\nGreat efforts from individuals, governments, and companies has led to the manufacturing of products with higher sustainability known as Ecodesign. This new line of furniture is based on environmentally friendly design. Its use and popularity are increasing each year.\nPostmodernism.\nPostmodern design, intersecting the Pop art movement, gained steam in the 1960s and 70s, promoted in the 80s by groups such as the Italy-based Memphis movement. Transitional furniture is intended to fill a place between Traditional and Modern tastes.\nAsian history.\nAsian furniture has a quite distinct history. The traditions out of India, China, Korea, Pakistan, Indonesia (Bali and Java) and Japan are some of the best known, but places such as Mongolia, and the countries of South East Asia have unique facets of their own.\nFar Eastern.\nThe use of uncarved wood and bamboo and the use of heavy lacquers are well known Chinese styles. It is worth noting that Chinese furniture varies dramatically from one dynasty to the next. Chinese ornamentation is highly inspired by paintings, with floral and plant life motifs including bamboo trees, chrysanthemums, waterlilies, irises, magnolias, flowers and branches of cherry, apple, apricot and plum, or elongated bamboo leaves; animal ornaments include lions, bulls, ducks, peacocks, parrots, pheasants, roosters, ibises and butterflies. The dragon is the symbol of earth fertility, and of the power and wisdom of the emperor. Lacquers are mostly populated with princesses, various Chinese people, soldiers, children, ritually and daily scenes. Architectural features tend toward geometric ornaments, like meanders and labyrinths. The interior of a Chinese house was simple and sober. All Chinese furniture is made of wood, usually ebony, teak, or rosewood for heavier furniture (chairs, tables and benches) and bamboo, pine and larch for lighter furniture (stools and small chairs).\nTraditional Japanese furniture is well known for its minimalist style, extensive use of wood, high-quality craftsmanship and reliance on wood grain instead of painting or thick lacquer. Japanese chests are known as Tansu, known for elaborate decorative iron work, and are some of the most sought-after of Japanese antiques. The antiques available generally date back to the Tokugawa and Meiji periods. Both the technique of lacquering and the specific lacquer (resin of Rhus vernicifera) originated in China, but the lacquer tree also grows well in Japan. The recipes of preparation are original to Japan: resin is mixed with wheat flour, clay or pottery powder, turpentine, iron powder or wood coal. In ornamentation, the chrysanthemum, known as kiku, the national flower, is a very popular ornament, including the 16-petal chrysanthemum symbolizing the Emperor. Cherry and apple flowers are used for decorating screens, vases and sh\u014dji. Common animal ornaments include dragons, carps, cranes, gooses, tigers, horses and monkeys; representations of architecture such as houses, pavilions, towers, torii gates, bridges and temples are also common. The furniture of a Japanese house consists of tables, shelves, wardrobes, small holders for flowers, bonsais or for bonkei, boxes, lanterns with wooden frames and translucent paper, neck and elbow holders, and jardinieres.\nTypes.\nFor sitting.\nSeating is amongst the oldest known furniture types, and authors including Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica regard it as the most important. In addition to the functional design, seating has had an important decorative element from ancient times to the present day. This includes carved and sculpted pieces intended as works of art, as well as the styling of seats to indicate social importance, with senior figures or leaders granted the use of specially designed seats.\nThe simplest form of seat is the chair, which is a piece of furniture designed to allow a single person to sit down, which has a back and legs, as well as a platform for sitting. Chairs often feature cushions made from various fabrics.\nTypes of wood used.\nAll different types of woods have unique signature marks that can help in easy identification of the type. Hardwood and softwood are the two main categories for wood. \nBoth hardwoods and softwoods are used in furniture manufacturing, and each has its own specific uses. Deciduous trees, which have broad leaves that change color periodically throughout the year, are the source of hardwood. Coniferous trees, also known as cone-bearing trees, have small leaves or needles that stay on the tree throughout the year. \nCommon softwoods used include pine, redwood and yew. Higher quality furniture tends to be made out of hardwood, including oak, maple, mahogany, teak, walnut, cherry and birch. Highest quality wood will have been air dried to rid it of its moisture.\nCherry.\nA popular furniture hardwood is American black cherry. Cherry is a light reddish brown to brown color that intensifies into a rich color as it ages, and grows mostly in the eastern United States. Cherry has a tighter grain than birch and is softer. Much cherry lumber is narrow, and it has been utilized to make many lovely classic furniture pieces.\nBirch.\nBirch is a sturdy, durable, even-textured hardwood that is common in the United States and Canada. The wood appears white or creamy yellow to light brown with a crimson tinge in its natural state. Birch is frequently stained to complement other types of wood in furniture. Birch is used to make a lot of transparent, cabinet-grade plywood because it absorbs stain well and finishes beautifully. Birch is frequently used to construct interior doors and cupboards in addition to furniture.\nRubberwood.\nRubberwood is a widely used material in modern Asian furniture manufacturing. Affordable and fast-growing, it is often employed as a sustainable substitute for traditional Western hardwoods, allowing manufacturers to replicate the look and feel of classic lumber in contemporary furniture.\nKnown for its durability and sustainability, wood is widely used in furniture manufacturing. Dining tables are among the most common furniture made from wood, and there are many types of wooden tables\u2014such as acacia, birch, mango, and oak.\nRestoration of furniture.\nRestoring a piece of furniture may imply attempting to repair and revive the original finish in some way. More often than not, this entails removing the existing treatment and preparing the raw wood for a new finish. Methods for repair depend on what kind of wood it is: solid or veneered, hardwood or softwood, open grained or closed grained. These variables can sometimes decide if a piece of furniture is worth repairing, as well as the type of repairs and finish it will require if it is restored. The 3 methods of restoring furniture are rejuvenate, repair, and refinish.\nRejuvenate The piece can easily be restored by just cleaning and waxing the surface while preserving the current finish. It works on wooden furniture that is still in good shape and is the simplest way to clean it.\nRepair This process can fix dents and cracks by touching up some worn-out areas without removing the surface with this technique, the finish can be maintained while repairing the object with specialized products.\nRefinish Remove anything that is left for example any paint with a finish-stripper product or lightly sanding the area down and then applying wood finish like oil wax in order to protect the secure the wood.\nCleaning Remove dirt, dust, and grime from the furniture using a mild soap or specialized cleaner.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48599", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48599", "title": "Rock strata", "text": "Layers of sediment, rock or soil with internally consistent characteristics"}
{"id": "48600", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48600", "title": "Sendmail", "text": "Open-source mail transfer agent\n \nSendmail is a general purpose internetwork email routing facility that supports many kinds of mail-transfer and delivery methods, including the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) used for email transport over the Internet.\nA descendant of the \"delivermail\" program written by Eric Allman, Sendmail is a well-known project of the free and open source software and Unix communities. It has spread both as free software and proprietary software.\nOverview.\nAllman wrote the original ARPANET delivermail which shipped in 1979 with 4.0 and 4.1 BSD. He wrote Sendmail as a derivative of delivermail in the early 1980s at UC Berkeley. It shipped with BSD 4.1c in 1983, the first BSD version that included TCP/IP protocols.\nIn 1996, approximately 80% of the publicly reachable mail-servers on the Internet ran Sendmail. More recent surveys have suggested a decline, with 3.64% of mail servers in March 2021 detected as running Sendmail in a study performed by E-Soft, Inc. A previous survey (December 2007 or earlier) reported 24% of mail servers running Sendmail according to a study performed by Mail Radar.\nAllman designed Sendmail to incorporate great flexibility, but it can be daunting to configure for novices. Standard configuration packages delivered with the source code distribution require the use of the M4 macro language which hides much of the configuration complexity. The configuration defines the site-local mail delivery options and their access parameters, the mechanism of forwarding mail to remote sites, as well as many application tuning parameters.\nSendmail supports a variety of mail transfer protocols, including SMTP, DECnet's Mail-11, HylaFAX, QuickPage and UUCP. Additionally, Sendmail v8.12 as of September 2001[ [update]] introduced support for milters - external mail filtering programs that can participate in each step of the SMTP conversation.\nAcquisition by Proofpoint, Inc..\nSendmail, Inc was acquired by Proofpoint, Inc. This announcement was released on 1 October 2013.\nSecurity.\nSendmail originated in the early days of the Internet, an era when considerations of security did not play a primary role in the development of network software. Early versions of Sendmail suffered from a number of security vulnerabilities that have been corrected over the years.\nSendmail itself incorporated a certain amount of privilege separation in order to avoid exposure to security issues. As of 2009[ [update]], current versions of Sendmail, like other modern MTAs, incorporate a number of security improvements and optional features that can be configured to improve security and help prevent abuse.\nHistory of vulnerabilities.\nSendmail vulnerabilities in CERT advisories and alerts:\nThe \"UNIX-HATERS Handbook\" dedicated an entire chapter to perceived problems and weaknesses of sendmail.\nImplementation.\nAs of sendmail release 8.12.0 the default implementation of sendmail runs as the Unix user smmsp \u2014 the sendmail message submission program.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48601", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48601", "title": "Gay rights movement", "text": ""}
{"id": "48605", "revid": "50551885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48605", "title": "History of Korea", "text": "The Lower Paleolithic era on the Korean Peninsula and in Manchuria began roughly half a million years ago. The earliest known Korean pottery dates to around 8000 BC and the Neolithic period began thereafter, followed by the Bronze Age by 2000 BC, and the Iron Age around 700 BC. The Paleolithic people are likely not the direct ancestors of the present Korean people, but their direct ancestors are thought to be the Neolithic People of about 2000 BC.\nAccording to the mythic account recounted in the \"Samguk yusa\" (1281), the Gojoseon kingdom was founded in northern Korea and southern Manchuria in 2333 BC. The first written historical record on Gojoseon can be found from the text \"Guanzi\". The Jin state was formed in southern Korea by the 3rd century BC. In the late 2nd century BC, Gojoseon eventually fell to the Han dynasty of China, which led to succeeding warring states, the Proto\u2013Three Kingdoms period.\nFrom the 1st century BC, Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla grew to control the peninsula and Manchuria as the Three Kingdoms of Korea (57 BC\u2013668 AD), until unification by Silla in 676. In 698, Dae Jo-young established Balhae in the old territories of Goguryeo, which led to the Northern and Southern States period (698\u2013926) with Balhae and Silla coexisting.\nIn the late 9th century, Silla was divided into the Later Three Kingdoms (892\u2013936), which ended with the unification by Wang K\u014fn's Goryeo dynasty. Meanwhile, Balhae fell after invasions by the Khitan-led Liao dynasty; fleeing refugees including the last crown prince emigrated to Goryeo, where he was absorbed into the ruling family, thus unifying the two successor states of Goguryeo. During the Goryeo period, laws were codified, a civil service system was introduced, and culture influenced by Buddhism flourished. However, Mongol invasions in the 13th century brought Goryeo under the influence of the Mongol Empire and the Yuan dynasty of China until the mid-14th century.\nIn 1392, General Yi Seong-gye established the Joseon dynasty (1392\u20131897) after a coup d'\u00e9tat in 1388 that overthrew the Goryeo dynasty. King Sejong the Great (1418\u20131450) implemented numerous administrative, social, scientific, and economic reforms, established royal authority in the early years of the dynasty, and personally created Hangul, the Korean alphabet.\nAfter enjoying a period of peace for nearly two centuries, the Joseon dynasty faced foreign invasions from 1592 to 1637. Most notable of these were the Japanese invasions of Korea. The combined force of the Ming dynasty of China and the Joseon dynasty (whose naval fleet was successfully led by Admiral Yi Sun-sin) repelled these Japanese invasions, but at a cost to both countries. Henceforth, Joseon gradually became more and more isolationist and stagnant with frequent internal strifes.\nBy the mid 19th century, with the country unwilling to modernize, and under encroachment by European powers, Joseon Korea was forced to sign unequal treaties with foreign powers. After the assassination of Empress Myeongseong by Japanese mercenaries in 1895, the Donghak Peasant Revolution, and the Gabo Reforms of 1894 to 1896, the Korean Empire (1897\u20131910) came into existence, heralding a brief but rapid period of social reform and modernization. However, in 1905, the Korean Empire was forced to sign a protectorate treaty and in 1910, Japan effectively annexed the Korean Empire; the treaties involved were later confirmed to be null and void. Korea then became a de facto Japanese colony from 1910 to 1945. Korean resistance manifested in the widespread March First Movement of 1919. Thereafter the resistance movements, coordinated by the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea in exile, became largely active in neighboring Manchuria, China proper, and Siberia.\nAfter the end of World War II in 1945, the Allies divided the country into a northern area (protected by the Soviets) and a southern area (protected primarily by the United States). In 1948, when the great powers failed to agree on the formation of a single government, this partition became the modern states of North and South Korea. The peninsula was divided at the 38th Parallel: the \"Republic of Korea\" was created in the south, with the backing of the US and Western Europe, and the \"Democratic People's Republic of Korea\" in the north, with the backing of the Soviets and the communist People's Republic of China. The new premier of North Korea, Kim Il Sung, launched the Korean War in 1950 in an attempt to reunify the country under Communist rule. After immense material and human destruction, the conflict ended with a ceasefire in 1953. In 1991, both states were accepted into the United Nations. In 2018, the two nations agreed to work toward a final settlement to formally end the Korean conflict and promote the common prosperity and reunification of Korea.\nWhile both countries were essentially under authoritarian rule after the war, South Korea eventually liberalized. Since 1987 it has had a competitive electoral system. The South Korean economy has prospered, and the country is now considered to be fully developed. North Korea has maintained a totalitarian militarized rule, with a personality cult constructed around the Kim family. Economically, North Korea has remained heavily dependent on foreign aid.\nPrehistory.\nPaleolithic.\nNo fossil proven to be Homo erectus has been found in the Korean Peninsula, though a candidate has been reported. Tool-making artifacts from the Paleolithic period have been found in present-day North Hamgyong, South Pyongan, Gyeonggi, and north and south Chungcheong provinces, which dates the Paleolithic Age to half a million years ago, though it may have begun as late as 400,000 years ago or as early as 600,000\u2013700,000 years ago.\nNeolithic.\nThe earliest known Korean pottery dates back to around 8000 BC, and evidence of Mesolithic Pit\u2013Comb Ware culture (or Yunggimun pottery) is found throughout the peninsula, such as in Jeju Island. Jeulmun pottery, or \"comb-pattern pottery\", is found after 7000 BC, and is concentrated at sites in west-central regions of the Korean Peninsula, where a number of prehistoric settlements, such as Amsa-dong, existed. Jeulmun pottery bears basic design and form similarities to that of Mongolia, the Amur and Songhua river basins of Manchuria, the J\u014dmon culture in Japan, and the Baiyue in Southern China and Southeast Asia.\nArchaeological evidence demonstrates that agricultural societies and the earliest forms of social-political complexity emerged in the Mumun pottery period (c. 1500\u2013300 BC).\nPeople in southern Korea adopted intensive dry-field and paddy-field agriculture with a multitude of crops in the Early Mumun Period (1500\u2013850 BC). The first societies led by big-men or chiefs emerged in the Middle Mumun (850\u2013550 BC), and the first ostentatious elite burials can be traced to the Late Mumun (c. 550\u2013300 BC). Bronze production began in the Middle Mumun and became increasingly important in ceremonial and political society after 700 BC. Archeological evidence from Songguk-ri, Daepyeong, Igeum-dong, and elsewhere indicate that the Mumun era was the first in which chiefdoms rose, expanded, and collapsed. The increasing presence of long-distance trade, an increase in local conflicts, and the introduction of bronze and iron metallurgy are trends denoting the end of the Mumun around 300 BC.\nIn addition, 73 tombs similar to the ones found in Japan, estimated to date back to Gojoseon (100 BC), have been found in the southern tip of the Korean peninsula, and the discovery of jar burials, suggest a close relationship with Japan, and Gojoseon, proving that Gojoseon and Yayoi period Japan maintained close relations with one another even during the ancient times.\nBronze Age.\nThe Bronze Age in Korea is often held to have begun around 900\u2013800 BC, though the transition to the Bronze Age may have begun as far back as 2300 BC. Bronze daggers, mirrors, jewelry, and weaponry have been found, as well as evidence of walled-town polities. Rice, red beans, soybeans and millet were cultivated, and rectangular pit-houses and increasingly larger dolmen burial sites are found throughout the peninsula. Contemporaneous records suggest that Gojoseon transitioned from a feudal federation of walled cities into a centralised kingdom at least before the 4th-century BC. It is believed that by the 4th century BC, iron culture was developing in Korea by northern influence via today's Russia's Maritime Province.\nAncient Korea.\nGojoseon.\nGojoseon was the first Korean kingdom, located in the north of the peninsula and Manchuria, later alongside the state of Jin in the south of the peninsula.\nThe founding legend of Gojoseon, which is recorded in the \"Samguk yusa\" (1281) and other medieval Korean books, states that the country was established in 2333 BC by Dangun, said to be descended from heaven. While no evidence has been found that supports whatever facts may lie beneath this, the account has played an important role in developing Korean national identity.\nIn the 12th century BC, Gija, a prince from the Shang dynasty of China, purportedly founded Gija Joseon. In pre-modern Korea, Gija represented the authenticating presence of Chinese civilization, and until the 20th century, Koreans commonly believed that Dangun bestowed upon Korea its people and basic culture, while Gija gave Korea its high culture\u2014and presumably, standing as a legitimate civilization. However, due to contradicting historical and archaeological evidence, its existence was challenged in the 20th century, and today no longer forms the mainstream understanding of this period.\nThe historical Gojoseon kingdom was first mentioned in the Chinese record in a text called \"Guanzi\". By about the 4th century BC, Gojoseon had developed to the point where its existence was well known in China, and around this time, its capital moved to Pyongyang.\nIn 194 BC, the King of Gojoseon was overthrown by Wi Man (also known as Wei Man), a Korean-Chinese refugee from the Han vassal state of Yan. Wi Man then established Wiman Joseon.\nIn 128 BC, Nan L\u00fc (\u5357\u95ad), a leader of Ye who was receiving pressure from Wiman Joseon, surrendered to the Han dynasty and became the Canghai Commandery.\nChinese commanderies.\nIn 108 BC, the Chinese Han dynasty defeated Wiman Joseon and installed four commanderies in the northern Korean peninsula. Three of the commanderies fell or retreated westward within a few decades, but the Lelang Commandery remained as a center of cultural and economic exchange with successive Chinese dynasties for four centuries, until it was conquered by Goguryeo in 313 AD.\nJin State.\nAround 300 BC, a state called Jin arose in the southern part of the Korean peninsula. Very little is known about Jin, but it established relations with Han China and exported artifacts to the Yayoi of Japan. Around 100 BC, Jin evolved into the Samhan confederacies.\nMany smaller states sprang from the former territory of Gojoseon such as Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye, Goguryeo, and Baekje. The Three Kingdoms refer to Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla, although Buyeo and the Gaya confederacy existed into the 5th and 6th centuries respectively.\nProto\u2013Three Kingdoms.\nThe Proto-Three Kingdoms period, sometimes called the Several States Period (\uc5f4\uad6d\uc2dc\ub300,\u5217\u570b\u6642\u4ee3), is the time before the rise of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, which included Goguryeo, Silla, and Baekje, and occurred after the fall of Gojoseon. This time period consisted of numerous states that sprang up from the former territories of Gojoseon. Among these states, the largest and most influential were Eastern Buyeo and Northern Buyeo.\nNorthern states.\nAfter the fall of Gojoseon, Buyeo arose in today's North Korea and southern Manchuria, from about the 2nd century BC to 494 AD. Its remnants were absorbed by Goguryeo in 494, and both Goguryeo and Baekje, two of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, considered themselves its successor.\nAlthough records are sparse and contradictory, it is thought that in 86 BC, Dongbuyeo (Eastern Buyeo) branched out, after which the original Buyeo is sometimes referred to as Bukbuyeo (Northern Buyeo). Jolbon Buyeo was the predecessor to Goguryeo, and in 538, Baekje renamed itself \"Nambuyeo\" (Southern Buyeo).\nOkjeo was a tribal-state that was located in the northern Korean Peninsula, and was established after the fall of Gojoseon. Okjeo had been a part of Gojoseon before its fall. It never became a fully developed kingdom due to the intervention of its neighboring kingdoms. Okjeo became a tributary of Goguryeo, and was eventually annexed into Goguryeo by Gwanggaeto the Great in the 5th century.\nDongye (Eastern Ye) was another small kingdom that was situated in the northern Korean Peninsula. Dongye bordered Okjeo, and the two kingdoms faced the same fate of becoming tributaries of the growing empire of Goguryeo. Dongye was also a former part of Gojoseon before its fall.\nSouthern states.\nSam-han (; ) refers to the three confederacies of Mahan, Jinhan, and Byeonhan. The Samhan were located in the southern region of the Korean Peninsula. The Samhan countries were strictly governed by law, with religion playing an important role. Mahan was the largest, consisting of 54 states, and assumed political, economic, and cultural dominance. Byeonhan and Jinhan both consisted of 12 states, bringing a total of 78 states within the Samhan. The Samhan were eventually conquered by Baekje, Silla, and Gaya in the 4th century.\nThree Kingdoms of Korea.\nGoguryeo.\nGoguryeo was founded in 37 BC by Jumong (posthumously given the royal title Dongmyeongseong). Later, King Taejo centralized the government. Goguryeo was the first Korean kingdom to adopt Buddhism as the state religion in 372, in King Sosurim's reign.\nGoguryeo (also spelled as \"Kogury\u014f\") was also known as Goryeo (also spelled as \"Kory\u014f\"), and it eventually became the source of the modern name of Korea.\nThe 3rd and 4th centuries were characterized by territorial competition with the Chinese and Xianbei, resulting in both losses and gains. Goguryeo initiated the Goguryeo\u2013Wei War by attacking a Chinese fortress in 242 in an attempt to cut off Chinese access to its territories in Korea. Cao Wei of the Three Kingdoms of China retaliated by invading and destroying Hwando in 244. This forced the king to flee with Cao Wei in pursuit and broke Goguryeo's rule over the Okjeo and Ye, damaging its economy. The king eventually settled in a new capital, and Goguryeo focused on rebuilding and regaining control. In the early 4th century Goguryeo once again attacked the Chinese (now Sima Jin) to cut off their access to Korea and this time succeeded, and soon afterward conquered Lelang and Daifang ending the Chinese presence in Korea. However Goguryeo's expansion led to confrontation with the rising Xianbeis. The Xianbeis devastated Goguryeo's capital in the mid 4th century and the king retreated. Goguryeo eventually regrouped and began striking back in the late 4th century by King Gogukyang, culminating with the conquests of Gwanggaeto the Great.\nGoguryeo reached its zenith in the 5th century, becoming a powerful empire and one of the great powers in East Asia, when Gwanggaeto the Great and his son, Jangsu, expanded the country into almost all of Manchuria, parts of Inner Mongolia, parts of Russia, and took the present-day city of Seoul from Baekje. Goguryeo experienced a golden age under Gwanggaeto and Jangsu, who both subdued Baekje and Silla during their times, achieving a brief unification of the Three Kingdoms of Korea and becoming the most dominant power of the Korean peninsula. Jangsu's long reign of 79 years saw the perfecting of Goguryeo's political, economic and other institutional arrangements.\nGoguryeo was a highly militaristic state; in addition to contesting for control of the Korean Peninsula, Goguryeo had many military conflicts with various Chinese dynasties, most notably the Goguryeo\u2013Sui War, in which Goguryeo defeated a huge force traditionally said to number over a million men, and contributed to the Sui dynasty's fall.\nIn 642, the powerful general Y\u014fn Kaesomun led a coup and gained complete control over Goguryeo. In response, Emperor Taizong of Tang China led a campaign against Goguryeo, but was defeated and retreated. After the death of Taizong, his son Gaozong allied with the Korean kingdom of Silla and invaded Goguryeo again, but was unable to overcome Goguryeo's stalwart defenses and was defeated in 662. However, Y\u014fn Kaesomun died of natural causes in 666 and Goguryeo was thrown into chaos and weakened by a succession struggle among his sons and younger brother, with his eldest son defecting to Tang and his younger brother defecting to Silla. The Tang\u2013Silla alliance mounted a fresh invasion in 667, aided by the defector Yeon Namsaeng, and was finally able to conquer Goguryeo in 668.\nAfter the collapse of Goguryeo, Tang and Silla ended their alliance and fought over control of the Korean Peninsula. Silla succeeded in gaining control over most of the Korean Peninsula, while Tang gained control over Goguryeo's northern territories. However, 30 years after the fall of Goguryeo, a Goguryeo general by the name of Dae Jo-yeong founded the Korean-Mohe state of Balhae and successfully expelled the Tang presence from much of the former Goguryeo territories.\nBaekje.\nBaekje was founded by Onjo, a Goguryeo prince and the third son of Jumong, the founder of Goguryeo, in 18 BC. Baekje and Goguryeo shared founding myths and originated from Buyeo. The Records of the Three Kingdoms mentions Baekje as a member of the Mahan confederacy in the Han River basin (near now Seoul). It expanded into the southwest (Chungcheong and Jeolla provinces) of the peninsula and became a significant political and military power. In the process, Baekje came into fierce confrontation with Goguryeo and the Chinese commanderies in the vicinity of its territorial ambitions.\nAt its peak in the 4th century during the reign of King Geunchogo, Baekje absorbed all of the Mahan states and subjugated most of the western Korean peninsula (including the modern provinces of Gyeonggi, Chungcheong, and Jeolla, as well as part of Hwanghae and Gangwon) to a centralized government. Baekje acquired Chinese culture and technology through maritime contacts with the Southern dynasties during the expansion of its territory.\nBaekje was a great maritime power; its nautical skill, which made it the Phoenicia of East Asia, was instrumental in the dissemination of Buddhism throughout East Asia and continental culture to Japan. Baekje played a fundamental role in transmitting cultural developments, such as Chinese characters, Buddhism, iron-making, advanced pottery, and ceremonial burial to ancient Japan. Other aspects of culture were also transmitted when the Baekje court retreated to Japan after Baekje was conquered by the Silla\u2013Tang alliance.\nBaekje was once a great military power on the Korean Peninsula, especially during the time of Geunchogo, but was critically defeated by Gwanggaeto the Great and declined. Ultimately, Baekje was defeated by a coalition of Silla and Tang forces in 660.\nSilla.\nAccording to legend, the kingdom of Silla began with the unification of six chiefdoms of the Jinhan confederacy by Park Hyeokgeose in 57 BC, in the southeastern area of Korea. Its territory included the present-day port city of Busan, and Silla later emerged as a sea power responsible for destroying Japanese pirates, especially during the Unified Silla period.\nSilla artifacts, including unique gold metalwork, show influence from the northern nomadic steppes and Iranian peoples and especially Persians, with less Chinese influence than are shown by Goguryeo and Baekje. Silla expanded rapidly by occupying the Nakdong River basin and uniting the city-states.\nBy the 2nd century, Silla was a large state, occupying and influencing nearby city-states. Silla gained further power when it annexed the Gaya confederacy in 562. Silla often faced pressure from Goguryeo, Baekje and Japan, and at various times allied and warred with Baekje and Goguryeo.\nSilla was the smallest and weakest of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, but it used cunning diplomatic means to make opportunistic pacts and alliances with the more powerful Korean kingdoms, and eventually Tang China, to its great advantage.\nIn 660, King Muyeol of Silla ordered his armies to attack Baekje. General Kim Yu-shin, aided by Tang forces, conquered Baekje. In 661, Silla and Tang moved on Goguryeo but were repelled. King Munmu, son of Muyeol and nephew of Kim, launched another campaign in 667 and Goguryeo fell in the following year.\nGaya.\nGaya was a confederacy of small kingdoms in the Nakdong River valley of southern Korea since AD 42, growing out of the Byeonhan confederacy of the Samhan period. Gaya's plains were rich in iron, so export of iron tools was possible and agriculture flourished. In the early centuries, the Confederacy was led by Geumgwan Gaya in the Gimhae region. However, its leading power changed to Daegaya in the Goryeong region after the 5th century.\nConstantly engaged in war with the three kingdoms surrounding it, Gaya was not developed to form a unified state, and was ultimately absorbed into Silla in 562.\nNorth and South States.\nThe term North-South States refers to Unified Silla and Balhae, during the time when Silla controlled the majority of the Korean peninsula while Balhae expanded into Manchuria. During this time, culture and technology significantly advanced, especially in Unified Silla.\nUnified Silla.\nAfter the unification wars, the Tang dynasty established outposts in the former Goguryeo, and began to establish and administer communities in Baekje. Silla attacked Tang forces in Baekje and northern Korea in 671. Tang then invaded Silla in 674 but Silla drove the Tang forces out of the peninsula by 676 to achieve unification of most of the Korean peninsula.\nUnified Silla was a golden age of art and culture. During this period, long-distance trade between Unified Silla and the Abbasid Caliphate was documented by Persian geographer Ibn Khordadbeh in the \"Book of Roads and Kingdoms\". Buddhist monasteries such as the World Heritage Sites Bulguksa Temple and Seokguram Grotto are examples of advanced Korean architecture and Buddhist influence. Other state-sponsored art and architecture from this period include Hwangnyongsa Temple and Bunhwangsa Temple. Unified Silla carried on the maritime prowess of Baekje, which acted like the Phoenicia of medieval East Asia, and during the 8th and 9th centuries dominated the seas of East Asia and the trade between China, Korea and Japan, most notably during the time of Chang Pogo; in addition, Silla people made overseas communities in China on the Shandong Peninsula and the mouth of the Yangtze River. Unified Silla was a prosperous and wealthy country, and its metropolitan capital of Gyeongju was the fourth largest city in the world.\nBuddhism flourished during this time, and many Korean Buddhists gained great fame among Chinese Buddhists and contributed to Chinese Buddhism, including: Woncheuk, Wonhyo, Uisang, Musang, and Kim Gyo-gak, a Silla prince whose influence made Mount Jiuhua one of the Four Sacred Mountains of Chinese Buddhism.\nSilla began to experience political troubles in late 8th century. This severely weakened Silla and soon thereafter, descendants of the former Baekje established Later Baekje. In the north, rebels revived Goguryeo, beginning the Later Three Kingdoms period.\nUnified Silla lasted for 267 years until King Gyeongsun surrendered the country to Goryeo in 935, after 992 years and 56 monarchs.\nBalhae.\nBalhae was founded only thirty years after Goguryeo had fallen, in 698. It was founded in the northern part of former lands of Goguryeo by Dae Jo-yeong, a former Goguryeo general or chief of Sumo Mohe. Balhae controlled the northern areas of the Korean Peninsula, much of Manchuria (though it didn't occupy Liaodong Peninsula for much of history), and expanded into present-day Russian Primorsky Krai. It also adopted the culture of Tang dynasty, such as the government structure and geopolitical system.\nIn a time of relative peace and stability in the region, Balhae flourished, especially during the reigns of King Mun and King Seon. Balhae was called the \"Prosperous Country in the East\". However, Balhae was severely weakened and eventually conquered by the Khitan-led Liao dynasty in 926. Large numbers of refugees, including Dae Gwang-hyeon, the last crown prince of Balhae, were welcomed by Goryeo. Dae Gwang-hyeon was included in the imperial family of Wang K\u014fn, bringing a national unification between the two successor nations of Goguryeo.\nNo historical records from Balhae have survived, and the Liao left no histories of Balhae. Goryeo absorbed some Balhae territory, welcomed between 100,000 and 200,000 Balhae refugees including its Crown Prince Dae Gwang-hyeon, and maintained hostile relations with the Liao for destroying Balhae. However, Goryeo's official historical record, the Samguk sagi (\"History of the Three Kingdoms\"), includes passages on Balhae, but did not include a dynastic history of Balhae. Balhae was first included in Korean history by Goryeo scholar Yi Seung-hyu's Jewang ungi in 1287. The 18th century Joseon dynasty historian Yu Deuk-gong advocated the proper study of Balhae as part of Korean history, and coined the term \"North and South States Period\" to refer to this era.\nLater Three Kingdoms.\nThe Later Three Kingdoms period (892\u2013936) consisted of Unified Silla and the revival of Baekje and Goguryeo, known historiographically as \"Later Baekje\" and \"Later Goguryeo\". During the late 9th century, as Silla declined in power and exorbitant taxes were imposed on the people, rebellions erupted nationwide and powerful regional lords rose up against the waning kingdom.\nLater Baekje was founded by the general Ky\u014fn Hw\u014fn in 892, and its capital was established in Wansanju (modern Jeonju). The kingdom was based in the southwestern regions in the former territories of Baekje. In 927, Later Baekje attacked Gyeongju, the capital of Unified Silla, and placed a puppet on the throne. Eventually, Ky\u014fn Hw\u014fn was ousted by his sons due to a succession dispute and escaped to Goryeo, where he served as a general in the conquest of the kingdom he personally founded.\nLater Goguryeo was founded by the Buddhist monk Kung Ye in 901, and its original capital was established in Songak (modern Kaesong). The kingdom was based in the northern regions, which were the strongholds of Goguryeo refugees. Later Goguryeo's name was changed to Majin in 904, and Taebong in 911. In 918, Wang K\u014fn, a prominent general of Goguryeo descent, deposed the increasingly despotic and paranoid Kung Ye, and established Goryeo. By 936, Goryeo conquered its rivals and achieved the unification of the Later Three Kingdoms.\nGoryeo dynasty.\nGoryeo was founded by Wang K\u014fn in 918 and became the ruling dynasty of Korea by 936. It was named \"Goryeo\" because Wang K\u014fn, who was of Goguryeo descent, deemed the nation as the successor of Goguryeo. Wang K\u014fn made his hometown Kaesong (in present-day North Korea) the capital. The dynasty lasted until 1392, although the government was controlled by military regime leaders between 1170 and 1270. Goryeo (also spelled as Kory\u014f) is the source of the English name \"Korea\".\nDuring this period, laws were codified and a civil service system was introduced. Buddhism flourished and spread throughout the peninsula. The development of celadon pottery flourished in the 12th and 13th centuries. The production of the Tripitaka Koreana onto 81,258 wooden printing blocks, and use of metal movable type attest to Goryeo's cultural achievements.\nIn 1018, the Liao dynasty, which was the most powerful empire of its time, invaded Goryeo but was defeated by General Kang Kam-ch'an at the Battle of Kuju to end the Goryeo\u2013Khitan War. After defeating the Khitan Empire, Goryeo experienced a golden age that lasted a century, during which the Tripitaka Koreana was completed, and there were great developments in printing and publishing, promoting learning and dispersing knowledge on philosophy, literature, religion, and science; by 1100, there were 12 universities that produced famous scholars and scientists.\nIn 1231, the Mongols began their invasions of Korea during seven major campaigns and 39 years of struggle, but were unable to conquer Korea. Exhausted after decades of fighting, Goryeo sent its crown prince to the Dadu to swear allegiance to the Yuan dynasty; Kublai Khan accepted, and married one of his daughters to the Korean crown prince, and for the following 80 years Goryeo existed under the overlordship of the Mongol-ruled Yuan dynasty in China. The two nations became intertwined for 80 years as all subsequent Korean kings married Mongol princesses, and the last empress of the Yuan dynasty was a Korean woman.\nIn the 1350s, the Yuan dynasty declined rapidly due to internal struggles, enabling King Gongmin to reform the Goryeo government. Gongmin had various problems that needed to be dealt with, including the removal of pro-Yuan aristocrats and military officials, the question of land holding, and quelling the growing animosity between the Buddhists and Confucian scholars. During this tumultuous period, Goryeo momentarily conquered Liaoyang in 1356, repulsed two large invasions by the Red Turbans in 1359 and 1360, and defeated the final attempt by the Yuan to dominate Goryeo when General Ch'oe Y\u014fng defeated an invading Yuan tumen in 1364. During the 1380s, Goryeo turned its attention to the Wokou menace and used naval artillery created by Ch'oe Mu-s\u014fn to annihilate hundreds of pirate ships.\nThe Goryeo dynasty would last until 1392. Yi Seong-gye, the founder of the Joseon dynasty, took power in a coup in 1388 and after serving as the power behind the throne for two monarchs, established the Joseon dynasty in 1392.\nJoseon dynasty.\nPolitical history.\nIn 1392, the general Yi Seong-gye, later known as Taejo, established the Joseon dynasty (1392\u20131897), named in honor of the ancient kingdom Gojoseon, and founded on idealistic Confucianism-based ideology. The prevailing philosophy throughout the Joseon dynasty was Neo-Confucianism, which was epitomized by the seonbi class, scholars who passed up positions of wealth and power to lead lives of study and integrity.\nTaejo moved the capital to Hanyang (modern-day Seoul) and built the palace Gyeongbokgung. In 1394 he adopted Neo-Confucianism as the country's official religion, and pursued the creation of a strong bureaucratic state. His son and grandson, King Taejong and Sejong the Great, implemented numerous administrative, social, and economic reforms and established royal authority in the early years of the dynasty.\nDuring the 15th and 16th centuries, Joseon enjoyed many benevolent rulers who promoted education and science. Most notable among them was Sejong the Great (r. 1418\u201350), who personally created and promulgated Hangul, the Korean alphabet. This golden age saw great cultural and scientific advancements, including in printing, meteorological observation, astronomy, calendar science, ceramics, military technology, geography, cartography, medicine, and agricultural technology, some of which were unrivaled elsewhere.\nInternal conflicts within the royal court, civil unrest and other political struggles plagued the nation in the years that followed, worsened by the Japanese invasion of Korea between 1592 and 1598. Toyotomi Hideyoshi marshalled his forces and tried to invade the Asian continent through Korea, but was eventually repelled by the Korean military, with the assistance of the righteous armies and Chinese Ming dynasty. This war also saw the rise of the career of Admiral Lee Sun-sin with the turtle ship. As Korea was rebuilding, it had to repel invasions by the Manchu in 1627 and 1636. Internal politics were bitterly divided and settled by violence. Historian JaHyun Kim Haboush, in the summary by her editor William Haboush in 2016, interpreted the decisive impact of the victories against the Japanese and Manchu invaders:\nOut of this great war at the end of the 16th century and the Manchu invasions of 1627 and 1636\u20131637, Koreans emerged with a discernible sense of themselves as a distinct ethnic united by birth, language, and belief forged by this immense clash of the three great powers of East Asia\u00a0... Korea arrived at the brink of the seventeenth century as a nation.\nAfter the second Manchu invasion and stabilized relations with the new Qing dynasty, Joseon experienced a nearly 200-year period of external peace. However internally, the bitter and violent factional battles raged on. In the 18th century, King Yeongjo (r. 1724\u201376) and his grandson King Jeongjo (r. 1776\u20131800) led a new renaissance. Yeongjo and Jeongjo reformed the tax system which grew the revenue stream into the treasury, strengthened the military and sponsored a revival of learning. The printing press was rejuvenated by using movable metal type; the number and quality of publications sharply increased. Jeongjo sponsored scholars from various factions to work in the Kyujanggak, or Inner Royal Library, established in 1776.\n19th century.\nCorruption in government and social unrest prevailed after 1776. The government attempted sweeping reforms in the late 19th century, but adhered to a strict isolationist policy, earning Korea the nickname \"Hermit Kingdom\". The policy had been established primarily for protection against Western imperialism, but soon the Joseon dynasty was forced to open trade, beginning an era leading into Japanese rule.\nThe destabilization of the Korean nation may be said to have begun in the period of \"Sedo Jeongchi\" (Korean:\u00a0; Hanja:\u00a0; lit.\u00a0in-law politics) whereby, on the death of King Jeongjo of Joseon (r. 1776\u20131800), the 10-year-old Sunjo of Joseon (r. 1800\u201334) ascended the Korean throne, with the true power of the administration residing with his regent, Kim Jo-sun, as a representative of the Andong Kim clan. As a result, the disarray and blatant corruption in the Korean government, particularly in the three main areas of revenues\u00a0\u2013 land tax, military service, and the state granary system\u00a0\u2013 heaped additional hardship on the peasantry. Of special note is the corruption of the local functionaries (\"Hyangni\"), who could purchase an appointment as an administrator and so cloak their predations on the farmers with an aura of officialdom. Yangban families, formerly well-respected for their status as a noble class and being powerful both \"socially and politically\", were increasingly seen as little more than commoners unwilling to meet their responsibilities to their communities. Faced with increasing corruption in the government, brigandage of the disenfranchised (such as the mounted fire brigands, or \"Hwajok\", and the boat-borne water brigands or \"Sujok\") and exploited by the elite, many poor village folk sought to pool their resources, such as land, tools, and production, to survive. Despite the government effort in bringing an end to the practice of owning slaves in 1801, slavery in Korea remained legal until 1894.\nAt this time, Catholic and Protestant missions were well tolerated among the nobles, most notably in and around the area of Seoul. Animus and persecution by more conservative elements, the Pungyang Jo clan, took the lives of priests and followers, known as the Korean Martyrs, dissuading membership by the upper class. The peasants continued to be drawn to Christian egalitarianism, though mainly in urban and suburban areas. Arguably of greater influence were the religious teachings of Choe Je-u, (\ucd5c\uc81c\uc6b0, \u5d14\u6fdf\u611a, 1824\u201364) called \"Donghak\", which literally means \"Eastern Learning\", and the religion became especially popular in rural areas. Themes of exclusionism (from foreign influences), nationalism, salvation and social consciousness were set to music, allowing illiterate farmers to understand and accept them more readily. Along with many other Koreans, Choe was alarmed by the intrusion of Christianity and the Anglo-French occupation of Beijing during the Second Opium War. He believed the best way to counter foreign influence in Korea was to introduce democratic and human rights reforms internally. Nationalism and social reform struck a chord among peasant guerrillas, and Donghak spread all across Korea. Progressive revolutionaries organized the peasants into a cohesive structure. Arrested in 1863 following the Jinju uprising led by Yu Kye-chun, Choe was charged with \"misleading the people and sowing discord in society\". Choe was executed in 1864, sending many of his followers into hiding in the mountains.\nGojong of Korea (r. 1864\u20131907), enthroned at the age of 12, succeeded Cheoljong of Joseon (r. 1849\u201363). King Gojong's father, Heungseon Daewongun (Yi Ha-ung; 1820\u201398), ruled as the de facto regent and inaugurated far-ranging reforms to strengthen the central administration. Of special note was the decision to rebuild palace buildings and finance the project through additional levies on the population. Further inherited rule by a few elite ruling families was challenged by the adoption of a merit system for official appointments. In addition, \"Sowon\"\u00a0\u2013 private academies\u00a0\u2013 which threatened to develop a parallel system to the corrupt government and enjoyed special privileges and large landholdings, were taxed and repressed despite bitter opposition from Confucian scholars. Lastly, a policy of steadfast isolationism was enforced to staunch the increasing intrusion of Western thought and technology. He was impeached in 1873 and forced into retirement by the supporters of Empress Myeongseong, also called \"Queen Min\".\nCulture and society.\nKorea's culture was based on the philosophy of Neo-Confucianism, which emphasizes morality, righteousness, and practical ethics. Wide interest in scholarly study resulted in the establishment of private academies and educational institutions. Many documents were written about history, geography, medicine, and Confucian principles. The arts flourished in painting, calligraphy, music, dance, and ceramics.\nThe most notable cultural event of this era is the creation and promulgation of the Korean alphabet \"Hunmin jeongeom\" (later called \"Hangul\") by Sejong the Great in 1446. This period also saw various other cultural, scientific and technological advances.\nDuring Joseon dynasty, a social hierarchy system existed that greatly affected Korea's social development. The king and the royal family were atop the hereditary system, with the next tier being a class of civil or military officials and landowners known as \"yangban\", who worked for the government and lived off the efforts of tenant farmers and slaves.\nA middle class, \"jungin\", were technical specialists such as scribes, medical officers, technicians in science-related fields, artists and musicians. Commoners, \"sangmin\", constituted the largest class in Korea. They had obligations to pay taxes, provide labor, and serve in the military. By paying land taxes to the state, they were allowed to cultivate land and farm. The lowest class, \"cheonmin\", included tenant farmers, slaves, entertainers, craftsmen, prostitutes, laborers, shamans, vagabonds, outcasts, and criminals. Although slave status was hereditary, they could be sold or freed at officially set prices, and the mistreatment of slaves was forbidden.\nThis \"yangban\" focused system started to change in the late 17th century as political, economic and social changes came into place. By the 19th century, new commercial groups emerged, and the active social mobility caused the \"yangban\" class to expand, resulting in the weakening of the old class system. The Korea government ordered the freedom of government slaves in 1801. The class system of Korea was completely banned in 1894.\nForeign relationships.\nKorea dealt with a pair of Japanese invasions from 1592 to 1598 (\"Imjin War\" or the \"Seven Years' War\"). Prior to the war, Korea sent two ambassadors to scout for signs of Japan's intentions of invading Korea. However, they came back with two different reports, and while the politicians split into sides, few proactive measures were taken.\nThis conflict brought prominence to Admiral Yi Sun-sin as he contributed to eventually repelling the Japanese forces with the innovative use of his turtle ship, a massive, yet swift, ramming/cannon ship fitted with iron spikes. The use of the hwacha (a rocket-launched arrow battery) was also highly effective in repelling the Japanese invaders from the land.\nSubsequently, Korea was invaded in 1627 and again in 1636 by the Manchus, who went on to conquer China and establish the Qing dynasty, after which the Joseon dynasty recognized Qing suzerainty. Though Joseon respected its traditional tributary position to China, there was persistent loyalty for the perished Ming China and disdain for the Manchus, who were regarded as barbarians.\nDuring the 19th century, Joseon tried to control foreign influence by closing its borders to all nations. In 1853 the American whaleship \"South America\" visited Busan for 10 days and had amiable contact with local officials. Several Americans shipwrecked on Korea in 1855 and 1865 were also treated well and sent to China for repatriation. The Joseon court was aware of the foreign invasions and treaties involving Qing China, as well as the First and Second Opium Wars, and followed a cautious policy of slow exchange with the West.\nIn 1866, reacting to greater numbers of Korean converts to Catholicism despite several waves of persecutions, the Joseon court clamped down on them, massacring French Catholic missionaries and Korean converts alike. In response France invaded and occupied portions of Ganghwa Island. The French army occupied Ganghwa Island, an island near Seoul, and tried to advance to Seoul, but failed due to strong resistance from the Korean army, and then withdrew from the island.\nThe \"SS General Sherman\", a privately American-owned armed merchant marine sidewheel schooner, illegally attempted to open Korea to trade in 1866. Due to a miscalculation of water depth, the ship ran aground Pyongyang. After being ordered to leave on pain of execution by the Korean officials, the American crewmen sent out a dinghy to forage. They took hostages from the junk that intercepted them. Sporadic fighting ensued, resulting in the deaths of eight Koreans, the destruction of the \"Sherman\" by fire ship, and the killing of the crew. This incident is celebrated by the DPRK as a precursor to the capture of the USS Pueblo in 1968. The Korean government did not inform the United States about the incident. In 1871, the United States expedition to Korea () set out to determine the fate of the \"Sherman\". This incident is called the Shinmiyangyo in Korea. American warships, also with an agenda to open Korea to trade, sailed up the Han River against the will of the Korean government, attracting fire from a fort defending the capital. As punishment, the Americans attacked local military installations, provoking the Battle of Ganghwa. They killed around 243 to 350 Koreans on Ganghwa Island before withdrawing. This angered the Korean government and had the unintended effect of temporarily increasing isolationism and military strength.\nIn 1876, Korea was forced by warships to sign a trade treaty with Japan, the first formal treaty between the two nations in 433 years, since the 1443 Treaty of Gyehae. This unequal treaty compelled the Joseon to open up Korean ports, as well as granting extraterritoriality within Korea to the Meiji government and her people.\nIn 1882 signed a treaty with the United States, in a few years ending centuries of isolation.\nConflict between the conservative court and a reforming faction led to the Gapsin Coup in 1884. The reformers sought to reform Korea's institutionalized social inequality, by proclaiming social equality and the elimination of the privileges of the yangban class. The reformers were backed by Japan, and were thwarted by the arrival of Qing troops, invited by the conservative Queen Min. The Chinese troops departed but the leading general Yuan Shikai remained in Korea from 1885 to 1894 as Resident, directing Korean affairs.\nIn 1885, British Royal Navy occupied Geomun Island, and withdrew in 1887.\nKorea became linked by telegraph to China in 1888 with Chinese controlled telegraphs. China permitted Korea to establish embassies with Russia (1884), Italy (1885), France (1886), the United States, and Japan. China attempted to block the exchange of embassies in Western countries, but not with Tokyo. The Qing government provided loans. China promoted its trade in an attempt to block Japanese merchants, which led to Chinese favour in Korean trade. Anti-Chinese riots broke out in 1888 and 1889 and Chinese shops were torched. Japan remained the largest foreign community and largest trading partner.\nA rapidly modernizing Meiji Japan successfully challenged China in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894\u20131895) triggered by the Donghak Peasant Movement, forcing it to abandon its long-standing claims to deference by Korea. Modernization began in Korea when Japan forced it to open its ports in 1876. However, at first, the forces of modernization met strong opposition not only from the traditionalism of the ruling Korean elite but from the population at large, which supported the traditional Confucian system of government by gentlemen, therefore no major modernization processes occurred until the establishment of the Korean Empire in 1897. Japan used modernization movements to gain more and more control over Korea.\nIn 1895, Japanese agents carried out the assassination of Empress Myeongseong, who had sought Russian help, and the Russians were forced to retreat from Korea for the time.\nPro-Japanese government grew, while anti-Japanese politicians were either killed or fled for their survival. On 11 February 1896, King Gojong and his crown prince fled from the Gyeongbokgung to the Russian legation in Seoul, from where they governed for about one year, an event known as Gojong's internal exile to the Russian legation.\nModern history.\nKorean Empire (1897\u20131910).\nAs a result of the First Sino-Japanese War (1894\u20131895), the 1895 Treaty of Shimonoseki was concluded between China and Japan. It stipulated the abolition of subordinate relationships Korea had with China, in which Korea was a client state of China since the Imo Incident in 1882.\nIn 1897, Joseon was renamed the Korean Empire, and King Gojong became Emperor Gojong. The imperial government aimed to become a strong and independent nation by implementing domestic reforms, strengthening military forces, developing commerce and industry, and surveying land ownership. Organizations like the Independence Club also rallied to assert the rights of the Joseon people, but clashed with the government which proclaimed absolute monarchy and power.\nRussian influence was strong in the Empire until being defeated by Japan in the Russo-Japanese War (1904\u20131905). Korean Empire effectively became a protectorate of Japan on 17 November 1905, the 1905 Protectorate Treaty having been promulgated without Emperor Gojong's required seal or commission.\nFollowing the signing of the treaty, many intellectuals and scholars set up various organizations and associations, embarking on movements for independence. In 1907, Gojong was forced to abdicate after Japan learned that he sent secret envoys to the Second Hague Conventions to protest against the protectorate treaty, leading to the accession of Gojong's son, Emperor Sunjong. Immediately after Sunjong ascended the throne, Empire of Japan forcibly concluded the Japan\u2013Korea Treaty of 1907 in order to further strengthen the authority of the Resident-General, appointing Japanese vice-ministers in each department of the Korean Empire's government and openly interfering in the empire's internal affairs (vice-ministerial politics), and forcibly disbanded the army through a secret agreement.\nSoldiers who opposed this joined the Righteous army, and the movement expanded into a nationwide Righteous army war. However, on July 12, 1909, Empire of Japan took away the Korean Empire's judicial and police powers through the Japan\u2013Korea Memorandum of 1909, and suppressed the resistance of the Righteous army nationwide with force through the 60-day South Korea big suppression operation. At this operation, about 17,000 Righteous army and civilians were massacred.\nIn 1909, independence activist An Jung-geun assassinated It\u014d Hirobumi, former Resident-General of Korea, for Ito's intrusions on the Korean politics. This prompted the Japanese to ban all political organizations and proceed with plans for annexation.\nJapanese rule (1910\u20131945).\nIn 1910, the Empire of Japan effectively annexed Korea through the Japan\u2013Korea Annexation Treaty. Along with all other previously signed treaties between Korea and Japan, the annexation treaty was confirmed to be null and void in 1965. While Japan asserted that the treaty was concluded legally, Korea disputed the legality of the treaty, because the treaty was not signed by the Emperor of Korea as required and it violated the international convention on external pressures regarding treaties. Many Koreans formed the Righteous army to fight against Japanese rule.\nKorea was controlled by Japan under a Governor-General of Ch\u014dsen from 1910 until Japan's unconditional surrender to the Allied Forces on 15 August 1945. \"De jure\" sovereignty was deemed to have passed from the Joseon dynasty to the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea.\nAfter the annexation, Japan set out to suppress many traditional Korean customs, including eventually even the Korean language itself. Economic policies were implemented primarily for Japanese benefit. European-style transport and communication networks were constructed across the nation in order to extract resources and exploit labor. The banking system was consolidated and the Korean currency abolished.\nThe Japanese removed the Joseon hierarchy and gave the census register to the \"baekjeong\" and \"nobi\" who were not allowed to have the census register during Joseon period, The palace Gyeongbokgung was mostly destroyed, and replaced with the Government-General of Ch\u014dsen Building.\nAfter Emperor Gojong died in January 1919, with rumors of poisoning, independence rallies against the Japanese colonizers took place nationwide on 1 March 1919 (the March First Movement). This movement was suppressed by force and about 7,000 persons were killed by Japanese soldiers and police. An estimated two million people took part in peaceful, pro-liberation rallies, although Japanese records claim participation of less than half a million. This movement was partly inspired by United States President Woodrow Wilson's speech of 1919, declaring support for right of self-determination and an end to colonial rule after World War I.\nThe Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea was established in Shanghai, China, in the aftermath of the March 1 Movement, which coordinated the liberation effort and resistance against Japanese rule. Some of the achievements of the Provisional Government included the Battle of Chingshanli of 1920 and the ambush of Japanese military leadership in China in 1932. In 1920, Imperial Japanese Army massacred somewhere from 5,000 to tens of thousands of Korean civilians at Gando in retaliation to loss at Battle of Chingshanli. This incident is called Gando Massacre. The Provisional Government is considered to be the \"de jure\" government of the Korean people between 1919 and 1948. The legitimacy of the provisional government is enshrined into the preamble of the constitution of the Republic of Korea.\nPrimary and secondary education in Korea were classified as being for \"those habitually using the Korean language\", and for \"those habitually using the Japanese language\". Ethnic Koreans could thus attend the schools primarily for Japanese, and vice versa.\nAs of 1926, the Korean language was taught for four hours a week for the first and second year of a six-year course, and three hours a week for the rest of the course. Both Japanese and Koreans paid school fees, without exception. The average fee in a common school was about 25 cents a month. In 1923, Koreans paid on average 20 cents per capita and Japanese in Korea about 3.30 dollars per capita.\nThe literacy rate of Korea reached 22% in 1945. The school curriculum was radically modified to eliminate teaching of the Korean language and history. The Korean language was banned, and Koreans were forced to adopt Japanese names, and newspapers were prohibited from publishing in Korean. Numerous Korean cultural artifacts were destroyed or taken to Japan. According to an investigation by the South Korean government, 75,311 cultural assets were taken from Korea.\nSome Koreans left the Korean Peninsula for exile in China, the United States, and elsewhere. Koreans in Manchuria formed resistance groups known as Dongnipgun (Liberation Army); they would travel in and out of the Sino-Korean border, fighting guerrilla warfare with Japanese forces. Some of them would group together in the 1940s as the Korean Liberation Army, which took part in allied action in China and parts of South East Asia. Tens of thousands of Koreans also joined the People's Liberation Army and the National Revolutionary Army.\nThe expulsion of the Japanese in 1945 removed practically all administrative and technical expertise. While the Japanese only comprised 2.6% of the population in 1944, they were an urban elite. The largest 50 cities contained 71% of the Japanese but only 12% of the Koreans. They largely dominated the ranks of the well-educated occupations. Meanwhile, 71% of the Koreans worked on farms.\nDivision and Korean War (1945\u20131953).\nAt the Cairo Conference on November 22, 1943, the US, UK, and China agreed that \"in due course Korea shall become free and independent\"; at a later meeting in Yalta in February 1945, the Allies agreed to establish a four-power trusteeship over Korea. On August 14, 1945, Soviet forces entered Korea by amphibious landings, enabling them to secure control in the north. Japan surrendered to the Allied Forces on August 15, 1945.\nThe unconditional surrender of Japan brought about the liberation of Korea. However, the fundamental shifts in global politics and ideology in the post-war world led to the division of Korea into two occupation zones, effectively starting on September 8, 1945. The United States administered the southern half of the peninsula and the Soviet Union took over the area north of the 38th parallel. The Provisional Government was ignored, mainly due to American belief that it was too aligned with the communists. This division was meant to be temporary and was intended to return a unified Korea back to its people after the United States, United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and Republic of China could arrange a single government.\nPost-Liberation Korea and the Division.\nFollowing the unconditional surrender of the Japanese Empire in August 15, 1945, Korea experienced a temporary liberation. However, the post-war global situation rapidly devolved into the Cold War system centered around the two superpowers: the United States (US) and the Soviet Union (USSR). This Cold War dynamic became visibly apparent on the Korean Peninsula.\nThe United States was wary of the potential influence of the Soviet Union's powerful ground forces on the Korean Peninsula and the larger East Asian region. Consequently, the US proposed a division of the peninsula along the 38th parallel into two zones\u2014North and South\u2014to be governed under a Trusteeship administration, to which the Soviet Union agreed.\nThe Moscow Conference and the Trusteeship Controversy.\nOn December 16, 1945, after the Three Foreign Ministers' Conference involving the US, USSR, and the United Kingdom, US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes submitted a document titled \u2018the united administration for Korea\u2019 the following day. The core of this document was a detailed Trusteeship plan.\nThis plan stipulated that, instead of being governed by a Korean government, the peninsula would be administered by the four governing powers\u2014acting on behalf of the UN and the Korean people\u2014who would assume administrative, legislative, judicial, and executive functions for five years, until Korea could independently carry out these functions. However, the Soviet Union initially objected to this proposal, advocating instead that a Provisional Government should first be established within Korea, \"after which\" the Trusteeship should be implemented.\nThe compromise between the US and Soviet positions led to the joint communiqu\u00e9 of the Moscow Foreign Ministers' Conference (December 27) and the subsequent establishment of the US-Soviet Joint Commission.\nAnti-Trusteeship (Ban-Tak) and Pro-Trusteeship (Chan-Tak) Movements.\nIn Korea, the proposal for Trusteeship was widely viewed as a continuation of Japanese colonial rule. This sentiment fueled the Anti-Trusteeship (Opposition to Trusteeship, \"Ban-Tak\") campaign.This movement was primarily led by right-wing political forces, including the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea (PGROK) in Shanghai and figures like Syngman Rhee, who sought to establish a unified and sovereign national government immediately.\nConversely, left-wing forces, generally aligned with the Soviet Union, advocated for Pro-Trusteeship (Support for Trusteeship, \"Chan-Tak\") The two camps failed to reconcile their views and remained in fierce opposition, a fundamental conflict that paved the way for the permanent division of the Korean Peninsula.\nFailure of Unification Efforts and the Establishment of Two Koreas.\nThe Provisional Government in Shanghai was ultimately not recognized as the legitimate government by the United States Army Military Government in Korea (USAMGIK). Furthermore, the US-Soviet Joint Commission collapsed due to insurmountable differences in opinion between the two countries. In September 1947, the US submitted the Korean issue to the United Nations (UN).\nLeaders of the Provisional Government, such as Kim Gu and Kim Kyu-sik, continued to oppose a separate general election in the South and the establishment of two separate governments. They attempted to hold talks with the North in a final effort to establish a unified nation, but these efforts were unsuccessful.\nUltimately, under the supervision of the UN Temporary Commission on Korea (UNTCOK), a separate election (the May 10 General Election) was held in South Korea. The Government of the Republic of Korea (South Korea) was established on August 15, 1948.Subsequently, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) was established in the North on September 9, 1948, formalizing the existence of two states on the peninsula. On December 12, 1948, the UN General Assembly recognized the Republic of Korea as the only lawful government in Korea.\nOn June 25, 1950, the Korean War broke out when North Korea breached the 38th parallel line to invade the South, ending any hope of a peaceful reunification for the time being. After the war, the 1954 Geneva conference failed to adopt a solution for a unified Korea. Approximately 3 million people died in the Korean War, with a higher proportional civilian death toll than World War II or the Vietnam War, making it perhaps the deadliest conflict of the Cold War era. In addition, virtually all of Korea's major cities were destroyed by the war.\nModern Korea (1951\u2013present).\nOn April 27, 2018, both North and South Korea signed the Panmunjom Declaration on ending the conflict between the two countries to reunify Korea in the future. The declaration was suspended by North Korea in 2023 and by South Korea in 2024.\nSouth Korea.\nIn 1951, under pressure of the United States, the government of South Korea began diplomatic discussions with Japan. This was the first international interaction between Korea and Japan since the end of World War II. President Harry S. Truman, under the doctrine of the Bamboo curtain, deemed it urgent for Japan and South Korea to ally with each other to create a stronger western hegemon in the East.\nThis proved to be much more of an onerous process than expected by American diplomats. The trauma from the Korea under Japanese rule period was manifold and resented. The cultural distrust between Korea and Japan in political life can be traced as far back as the Imjin War in the 1590s. Diplomats of the ROK drew out discussions till June 1965, where they agreed to sign the treaty on basic relations.\nBeginning with Syngman Rhee in 1948, a series of autocratic governments took power in South Korea with American support and influence.\nWith the coup of Park Chung Hee in 1961, a new economic policy began. In order to promote economic development, a policy of export-oriented industrialization was applied. President Park developed the South Korean economy through a series of highly successful Five-Year Plans. South Korea's economic development was spearheaded by the chaebol, family conglomerates such as Samsung, Hyundai, SK Group and LG Corporation. The chaebols received state backing via tax breaks and cheap loans, and took advantage of South Korea's inexpensive labor to produce exportable products. The government made education a very high priority to create a well-educated populace capable of productively contributing to the economy. Despite occasional political instability, the Korean economy subsequently saw enormous growth for nearly forty years, in a period known as the Miracle on the Han River. The unparalleled economic miracle brought South Korea from one of the poorest states in the world after the Korean War into a fully developed country within a generation.\nSouth Korea eventually transitioned into a market-oriented democracy in 1987 largely due to popular demand for political reform, and then hosted the 1988 Summer Olympics, the second Summer Olympic Games to be held on the Asian continent, in the following year.\nMoving on from cheap, lower-value light industry exports, the South Korean economy eventually moved onto more capital-intensive, higher-value industries, such as information technology, shipbuilding, auto manufacturing, and petroleum refining. Today, South Korea is a leading economy and a technological powerhouse, rivaling even countries such as the United States in information and communications technology. South Korean pop culture has also boomed abroad in recent years, in a phenomenon known as the Korean Wave.\nNorth Korea.\nNorth Korea began their first ever diplomatic missions to Japan in 1955 to establish a \"General Association of Korean Residents\", an international organization led by Koreans in Japan who identified as belonging to the North Korean government, or ethnically North Korean; effectively to establish an embassy in Japan without initiating formal amity. The office was created in Tokyo.\nKim Il Sung denounced the 1965 Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and South Korea. Throughout the 1970s, North Korea eagerly supported and harbored members of the Japanese Red Army, which was recognized as a terrorist group by the Japan and United States government in 1971. The DPRK also gave diplomatic support to the Japan Socialist Party.\nDue to Soviet influence, North Korea established a communist government with a hereditary succession of leadership, with ties to China and the Soviet Union. Kim Il Sung became the supreme leader until his death in 1994, after which his son, Kim Jong Il took power. Kim Jong Il's son, Kim Jong Un, is the current leader, taking power after his father's death in 2011. After the Soviet Union's dissolution in 1991, the North Korean economy went on a path of steep decline, and it is currently heavily reliant on international food aid and trade with China.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nSurveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther books used in this page.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nC/J/K books.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48606", "revid": "1613900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48606", "title": "Wimbledon", "text": "Wimbledon most often refers to:\nWimbledon may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48607", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48607", "title": "Memphis, Tennessee", "text": "Memphis is a city in Shelby County, Tennessee, United States, and its county seat. Situated along the Mississippi River, it had a population of 633,104 at the 2020 census, making it the second-most populous city in Tennessee, the fifth-most populous in the Southeast, and the 28th-most populous in the US. Memphis is the largest city proper on the Mississippi River and anchors the Memphis metropolitan area that includes parts of Arkansas and Mississippi, the 45th-most populous metropolitan area in the U.S. with 1.34 million residents.\nEuropean exploration of the area began with Spanish conquistador Hernando de Soto in 1541. Located on the high Chickasaw Bluffs, the site offered natural protection from Mississippi River flooding and became a contested location in the colonial era. Modern Memphis was founded in 1819 by John Overton, James Winchester, and Andrew Jackson. The city thrived due to its river traffic and cotton-based economy, becoming one of the largest cities in the Antebellum South. After the American Civil War, it remained a key hub for the cotton and hardwood industries. Memphis is also notable for its role in the American Civil Rights Movement; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated there in 1968, and the city is now home to the National Civil Rights Museum, a Smithsonian affiliate.\nMemphis is one of the nation's leading commercial centers in transportation and logistics. The largest employer is FedEx, which maintains its global air hub at Memphis International Airport, one of the world's busiest cargo airports. The Port of Memphis also hosts the fifth-busiest inland water port in the U.S. Memphis is also known for its music scene, with Beale Street central to the development of Memphis blues and a broader legacy that includes soul, rock and roll, and hip-hop. Cultural landmarks include Graceland, Sun Studio, the Memphis Pyramid, and Stax Museum of American Soul Music. The city is also famed for its Memphis-style barbecue and hosts the annual World Championship Barbecue Cooking Contest. It is home to the Memphis Grizzlies of the NBA and several colleges and universities, including the University of Memphis, LeMoyne\u2013Owen College, and Rhodes College.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nOccupying a substantial bluff rising from the Mississippi River, the site of Memphis has been a natural location for human settlement by varying indigenous cultures over thousands of years. In the first millennium A.D. people of the Mississippian culture were prominent; the culture influenced a network of communities throughout the Mississippi River Valley and its tributaries. The hierarchical societies built complexes with large earthwork ceremonial and burial mounds as expressions of their sophisticated culture. The Chickasaw people, believed to be their descendants, later inhabited this site and a large territory in the Southeast.\nSpanish explorer Hernando de Soto encountered the historic Chickasaw in this area in the 16th century, followed in the 17th century by French explorers led by Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle.\nJ. D. L. Holmes, writing in Hudson's \"Four Centuries of Southern Indians\" (2007), notes that this site was a third strategic point in the late 18th century through which European powers could control United States encroachment beyond the Appalachians and their interference with Indian matters\u2014after Fort Nogales (present-day Vicksburg) and Fort Confederaci\u00f3n (present-day Epes, Alabama): \"Chickasaw Bluffs, located on the Mississippi River at the present-day location of Memphis. Spain and the United States vied for control of this site, which was a favorite of the Chickasaws.\"\nIn 1795 the Spanish Governor-General of Louisiana, Francisco Luis H\u00e9ctor de Carondelet, sent his lieutenant governor, Manuel Gayoso de Lemos, to negotiate and secure consent from the local Chickasaw so that a Spanish fort could be erected on the bluff; Fort San Fernando De Las Barrancas was the result. Holmes notes that consent was reached despite opposition from \"disappointed Americans and a pro-American faction of the Chickasaws\" when the \"pro-Spanish faction signed the Chickasaw Bluffs Cession and Spain provided the Chickasaws with a trading post\".\nFort San Fernando de las Barrancas remained a focal point of Spanish activity until, as Holmes summarizes:\n[T]he Treaty of San Lorenzo or Pinckney's Treaty of 1795 [implemented in March 1797], [had as its result that] all of the careful, diplomatic work by Spanish officials in Louisiana and West Florida, which has succeeded for a decade in controlling the Indians [e.g., the Choctaws], was undone. The United States gained the right to navigate the Mississippi River and won control over the Yazoo Strip north of the thirty-first parallel.\nThe Spanish dismantled the fort, shipping its lumber and iron to their locations in Arkansas.\nIn 1796, the site became the westernmost point of the newly admitted state of Tennessee, in what was then called the Southwest United States. The area was still largely occupied and controlled by the Chickasaw nation. Captain Isaac Guion led an American force down the Ohio River to claim the land, arriving on July 20, 1797. By this time, the Spanish had departed. The fort's ruins went unnoticed 20 years later when Memphis was laid out as a city after the United States government paid the Chickasaw for land.\n19th century.\nAt the beginning of the century, as recognized by the United States in 1786 Treaty of Hopewell, the land still belonged to the Chickasaw Nation. In the Treaty of Tuscaloosa, signed in October 1818 and ratified by Congress on January 7, 1819, the Chickasaw ceded their territory in Western Tennessee to the United States. The city of Memphis was founded less than five months after the U.S. takeover of the territory, on May 22, 1819 (incorporated December 19, 1826), by John Overton, James Winchester and Andrew Jackson. They named it after the ancient capital of Egypt on the Nile River.\nFrom the city's foundation onwards, African Americans formed large proportion of Memphis' population. Prior to the abolition of slavery in the United States, most Black people in Memphis were enslaved, being used as forced labor by white enslavers along the river or on outlying cotton plantations in the Mississippi Delta. The city's demographics changed dramatically in the 1850s and 1860s, due to waves of immigration and domestic migration. Due to increased immigration since the 1840s and the Great Famine, Irish Americans made up 9.9% of the population in 1850, but 23.2% by 1860, when the total population was 22,623.\nTennessee seceded from the Union in June 1861, and Memphis briefly became a Confederate stronghold. Union ironclad gunboats captured it in the naval Battle of Memphis on June 6, 1862, and the city and state were occupied by the Union Army for the duration of the war. Union commanders allowed the city to maintain its civil government during most of this period but excluded Confederate States Army veterans from office. This shifted political dynamics in the city as the war went on.\nThe war years contributed to additional dramatic changes in the city population. The Union Army's presence attracted many fugitive slaves who had escaped from surrounding rural plantations. So many sought protection behind Union lines that the Army set up contraband camps to accommodate them. Memphis's black population increased from 3,000 in 1860, when the total population was 22,623, to nearly 20,000 in 1865, with most settling south of the city limits.\nPostwar years, Reconstruction and Democratic control.\nThe rapid demographic changes added to the stress of war and occupation and uncertainty about who was in charge, increasing tensions between the city's ethnic Irish policemen and black Union soldiers after the war. In three days of rioting in early May 1866, the Memphis Riots erupted, in which white mobs made up of policemen, firemen, and other mostly ethnic Irish Americans attacked and killed 46 blacks, wounding 75 and injuring 100; raped several women; and destroyed nearly 100 houses while severely damaging churches and schools in South Memphis. Much of the black settlement was left in ruins. Two whites were killed in the riot. Many blacks permanently fled Memphis afterward, especially as the Freedmen's Bureau continued to have difficulty in protecting them. Their population fell to about 15,000 by 1870, 37.4% of the total population of 40,226.\nHistorian Barrington Walker suggests that the Irish rioted against blacks because of their relatively recent arrival as immigrants and the uncertain nature of their own claim to \"whiteness\"; they were trying to distinguish themselves from blacks in the underclass. The main fighting participants were ethnic Irish, decommissioned black Union soldiers, and newly emancipated African-American freedmen. Walker suggests that most of the mob was not in direct economic conflict with the blacks, as by then the Irish had attained better jobs, but were establishing social and political dominance over the freedmen.\nUnlike the disturbances in some other cities, ex-Confederate veterans were generally not part of the attacks against blacks in Memphis. As a result of the riots in Memphis, and a similar one in New Orleans, Louisiana in September, Congress passed the Reconstruction Act and the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.\nYellow fever epidemics.\nIn the 1870s, a series of yellow fever epidemics devastated Memphis, with the disease carried by river passengers traveling by ships along the waterways. During the Yellow Fever Epidemic of 1878, more than 5,000 people were listed in the official register of deaths between July 26 and November 27. The vast majority of these deaths were from yellow fever, making the epidemic in the city of 40,000 one of the most traumatic and severe in urban U.S. history. Within four days of the Memphis Board of Health's declaration of a yellow fever outbreak, 20,000 residents fled the city. The ensuing panic left the poverty-stricken, the working classes, and the African-American community at the most risk from the epidemic. Those who remained relied on volunteers from religious and physician organizations to tend to the sick. By the end of the year, more than 5,000 were confirmed dead in Memphis. The New Orleans health board listed \"not less than 4,600\" dead. The Mississippi Valley recorded 120,000 cases of yellow fever, with 20,000 deaths. The $15 million in losses caused by the epidemic bankrupted Memphis, and as a result, its charter was revoked by the state legislature.\nBy 1870, Memphis's population of 40,000 was almost double that of Nashville and Atlanta, and it was the second-largest city in the South after New Orleans. Its population continued to grow after 1870, even when the Panic of 1873 hit the US hard, particularly in the South. The Panic of 1873 resulted in expanding Memphis's underclasses amid the poverty and hardship it wrought, giving further credence to Memphis as a rough, shiftless city. Leading up to the outbreak in 1878, it had suffered two yellow fever epidemics, cholera, and malaria, giving it a reputation as sickly and filthy. It was unheard of for a city with a population as large as Memphis's not to have any waterworks; the city still relied for supplies entirely on collecting water from the river and rain cisterns, and had no way to remove sewage. The combination of a swelling population, especially of lower and working classes, and abysmal health and sanitary conditions made Memphis ripe for a serious epidemic.\nKate Bionda, an owner of an Italian \"snack house\", died of a fever on August 13, 1878. Hers was officially reported by the Board of Health, on August 14, as the first case of yellow fever in the city. A massive panic ensued. The same trains and steamboats that had brought thousands into Memphis, in five days carried away more than 25,000 refugees, more than half of the city's population. On August 23, the Board of Health finally declared a yellow fever epidemic in Memphis, and the city collapsed, hemorrhaging its population. In July of that year, the city had a population of 47,000; by September, 19,000 remained, and 17,000 of them had yellow fever. The only people left in the city were the lower classes, such as German and Irish immigrant workers and African Americans. None had the means to flee the city, as did the middle and upper-class whites of Memphis, and thus they were subjected to a city of death.\nImmediately following the Board of Health's declaration, a Citizen's Relief Committee was formed by Charles G. Fisher. It organized the city into refugee camps. The committee's main priority was to separate the poor from the city and isolate them in refugee camps. The Howard Association, formed specifically for yellow fever epidemics in New Orleans and Memphis, organized nurses and doctors in Memphis and throughout the country. They stayed at the Peabody Hotel, the only hotel to keep its doors open during the epidemic. From there they were assigned to their respective districts. Physicians of the epidemic reported seeing as many as 100 to 150 patients daily.\nThe Episcopal Community of St. Mary at St. Mary's Episcopal Cathedral played an important role during the epidemic in caring for the lower classes. Already supporting a girls' school and church orphanage, the Sisters of St. Mary also sought to provide care for the Canfield Asylum, a home for black children. Each day, they alternated caring for the orphans at St. Mary's, delivering children to the Canfield Asylum, and taking soup and medicine on house calls to patients. Between September 9 and October 4, Sister Constance and three other nuns fell victim to the epidemic and died. They later became known as the Martyrs of Memphis.\nAt long last, on October 28, a killing frost struck. The city sent out word to Memphians scattered all over the country to come home. Though yellow fever cases were recorded in the pages of Elmwood Cemetery's burial record as late as February 29, 1874, the epidemic seemed quieted. The Board of Health declared the epidemic at an end after it had caused over 20,000 deaths and financial losses of nearly $200 million. On November 27, a general citizen's meeting was called at the Greenlaw Opera House to offer thanks to those who had stayed behind to serve, of whom many had died. Over the next year property tax revenues collapsed, and the city could not make payments on its municipal debts. As a result, Memphis temporarily lost its city charter and was reclassified by the state legislature as a Taxing District from 1879 to 1893. But a new era of sanitation was developed in the city, a new municipal government in 1879 helped form the first regional health organization, and during the 1880s Memphis led the nation in sanitary reform and improvements.\nPerhaps the most significant effect of yellow fever on Memphis was in demographic changes. Nearly all of Memphis's upper and middle classes vanished, depriving the city of its general leadership and class structure that dictated everyday life, similar to that in other large Southern cities, such as New Orleans, Charleston, and Atlanta. In Memphis, the poorer whites and blacks fundamentally made up the city and played the greatest role in rebuilding it. The epidemic had resulted in Memphis being a less cosmopolitan place, with an economy that served the cotton trade and a population drawn increasingly from poor white and black Southerners.\nLate 19th century.\nThe 1890 election was strongly contested, resulting in white opponents of the D. P. Hadden faction working to deprive them of votes by disenfranchising blacks. The state had enacted several laws, including the requirement of poll taxes, that made it more difficult for them to register to vote and served to disenfranchise many blacks. Although political party factions in the future sometimes paid poll taxes to enable blacks to vote, African Americans lost their last positions on the city council in this election and were forced out of the police force. (They did not recover the ability to exercise the franchise until after the passage of civil rights legislation in the mid-1960s.) Historian L. B. Wrenn suggests the heightened political hostility of the Democratic contest and related social tensions contributed to a white mob lynching three black grocers in Memphis in 1892.\nJournalist Ida B. Wells of Memphis investigated the lynchings, as one of the men killed was a friend of hers. She demonstrated that these and other lynchings were more often due to economic and social competition than any criminal offenses by black men. Her findings were considered so controversial and aroused so much anger that she was forced to move away from the city. But she continued to investigate and publish the abuses of lynching.\nBusinessmen were eager to increase the city population after the losses of 1878\u201379, and supported the annexation of new areas; this measure was passed in 1890 before the census. The annexation measure was finally approved by the state legislature through a compromise achieved with real estate magnates, and the area annexed was slightly smaller than first proposed.\nIn 1893 the city was rechartered with home rule, which restored its ability to enact taxes. The state legislature established a cap rate. Although the commission government was retained and enlarged to five commissioners, Democratic politicians regained control from the business elite. The commission form of government was believed effective in getting things done, but because all positions were elected at-large, requiring them to gain majority votes, this practice reduced representation by candidates representing significant minority political interests.\n20th century.\nBusiness.\nIn terms of its economy, Memphis developed as the world's largest spot cotton market and the world's largest hardwood lumber market, both commodity products of the Mississippi Delta. Into the 1950s, it was also the world's largest mule market. These animals were still used extensively for agriculture. Attracting workers from Southern rural areas as well as new European immigrants, from 1900 to 1950 the city increased nearly fourfold in population, from 102,350 to 396,000 residents.\nRacist violence continued into the 20th century, with four lynchings between 1900 and the lynching of Thomas Williams in 1928.\nA Tennessee Powder Company built an explosives powder plant to make TNT and gunpowder on a 6,000-acre site in Millington in 1940. The plant was built to make smokeless gunpowder for the British Armed Forces during World War II. In May 1941, DuPont (1802\u20132017) took over the plant, changed the name to the Chickasaw Ordnance Works, and produced powder for the United States Armed Forces. There were 8,000 employees. The plant was dismantled after the war in 1946.\nPolitics: The Crump Machine.\nFrom the 1910s to about 1950, Memphis politics was controlled by E. H. \"Boss\" Crump. Crump worked with the city's middle class progressive leadership. He built up the police and fire departments\u2014and for decades routinely called on off-duty policemen and firemen, to help him out on election day. He built up public schools, and reorganized city government for more efficiency. Most progressives in the South were hostile to African American interests but not Crump. He worked with the leading Black politician Robert Church Jr. until 1940, as well as key Black ministers. Crump raised funds from white businessmen that paid the poll taxes for Blacks, which enabled them all to vote. Crump had his limits. He avoided the demand for prohibition by Baptist activists, and tolerated the city's thriving saloons and houses of prostitution. Crump served briefly in Congress which gave him a good view of the national picture. He was an early supporter of New York Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt for the presidency in 1932. Crump strongly supported President Roosevelt in Memphis and statewide and through his influence on the Congressional delegation. FDR responded by being very generous to the state, as seen in the massive TVA project. He gave Crump control of Memphis patronage and most statewide patronage.\nCity government.\nCrump secured a state law in 1911 to establish a small commission to manage the city. The city retained a form of commission government until 1967 and patronage flourished under Crump. The city installed a revolutionary sewer system and upgraded sanitation and drainage to prevent another epidemic. Pure water from an artesian well was discovered in the 1880s, securing the city's water supply. The commissioners developed an extensive network of parks and public works as part of the national City Beautiful movement. Lynette Wrenn concludes the new system handled business efficiently. However, it tended toward policies that benefited the city's wealthier residents while sometimes overlooking the needs of its less affluent neighborhoods.\nSince 1950.\nMemphis did not become a home rule city until 1963, although the state legislature had amended the constitution in 1953 to provide home rule for cities and counties. Before that, the city had to get state bills approved in order to change its charter and other policies and programs. Since 1963, it can change the charter by popular approval of the electorate.\nDuring the 1960s, the city was at the center of the Civil Rights Movement, as its large African-American population had been affected by state segregation practices and disenfranchisement in the early 20th century. African-American residents drew from the civil rights movement to improve their lives. In 1968, the Memphis sanitation strike began for living wages and better working conditions; the workers were overwhelmingly African American. They marched to gain public awareness and support for their plight: the danger of their work, and the struggles to support families with their low pay. Their drive for better pay had been met with resistance by the city government.\nMartin Luther King Jr. of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, known for his leadership in the non-violent movement, came to lend his support to the workers' cause. King stayed at the Lorraine Motel in the city, and was assassinated by James Earl Ray on April 4, 1968, the day after giving his \"I've Been to the Mountaintop\" speech at the Mason Temple.\nAfter learning of King's murder, many African Americans in the city rioted, looting and destroying businesses and other facilities, some by arson. The governor ordered Tennessee National Guardsmen into the city within hours, where small, roving bands of rioters continued to be active. Fearing the violence, more of the middle-class began to leave the city for the suburbs.\nIn 1970, the Census Bureau reported Memphis's population as 60.8% white and 38.9% black. Suburbanization was attracting wealthier residents to newer housing outside the city. After the riots and court-ordered busing in 1973 to achieve desegregation of public schools, \"about 40,000 of the system's 71,000 white students abandon[ed] the system in four years.\" Today, the city has a majority African-American population.\nMemphis is well known for its cultural contributions to the identity of the American South. Many renowned musicians grew up in and around Memphis and moved to Chicago and other areas from the Mississippi Delta, carrying their music with them to influence other cities and listeners over radio airwaves.\nFormer and current Memphis residents include musicians Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, Muddy Waters, Carl Perkins, Johnny Cash, Robert Johnson, W. C. Handy, Bobby Whitlock, B.B. King, Howlin' Wolf, Isaac Hayes, Booker T. Jones, Eric Gales, Al Green, Alex Chilton, Three 6 Mafia, the Sylvers, Jay Reatard, Zach Myers, and Aretha Franklin.\nOn December 23, 1988, a tanker truck hauling liquefied propane crashed at the I-40/I-240 interchange in Midtown and exploded, starting multiple vehicle and structural fires. Nine people were killed and ten were injured. It was one of Tennessee's deadliest motor vehicle accidents and eventually led to the reconstruction of the interchange where it occurred.\n21st century.\nOn June 2, 2021, the remains of Confederate General and Ku Klux Klan leader Nathan Bedford Forrest were removed from a Memphis park.\nOn January 7, 2023, after a routine traffic stop, five African American police officers brutally beat a 29-year-old African American man, Tyre Nichols. Nichols died from his injuries in the hospital three days later. Officer body cam footage and local surveillance cameras captured the altercations, which were described as \"heinous\" and showed \"a total lack of regard for human life\", according to Memphis police chief Cerelyn \"CJ\" Davis. The officers were fired and charged with second-degree murder, aggravated kidnapping, and other crimes. The relatively rapid dismissal and prosecution of the offending officers were favorably perceived by Nichols's family, and Davis called it a \"blueprint\" for future incidents of police brutality nationwide. The incident also resulted in the disbanding of the city's \"SCORPION\" unit, which had been mandated with directly combating the most violent crimes in the city. All the officers charged with involvement in Nichols's death were members of the unit.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 2.76%, is water.\nCityscape.\nDowntown Memphis rises from a bluff along the Mississippi River. The city and metro area spread out through suburbanization, and encompass southwest Tennessee, northern Mississippi, and eastern Arkansas. Several large parks were founded in the city in the early 20th century, notably Overton Park in Midtown and the Shelby Farms. The city is a national transportation hub and Mississippi River crossing for Interstate 40, (east-west), Interstate 55 (north-south), barge traffic, Memphis International Airport (FedEx's \"SuperHub\" facility) and numerous freight railroads that serve the city.\nRiverfront.\nThe Memphis Riverfront stretches along the Mississippi River from the Meeman-Shelby Forest State Park in the north, to the T. O. Fuller State Park in the south. The River Walk is a park system that connects downtown Memphis from Mississippi River Greenbelt Park in the north, to Tom Lee Park in the south.\nDeannexation.\nIn recent years, the city has decided to deannex some of its territory. It has gone through a three-phase process to deannex five areas within the city limits, returning them to unincorporated Shelby County. The first phase of deannexation occurred on January 1, 2020, when the Eads and River Bottoms areas returned to county jurisdiction. As a result, the Shelby County Sheriff is responsible for patrolling these former parts of Memphis. The first phase of the deannexation process reduced the city's size by 5% and its population by 0.03%.\nAquifer.\nShelby County is located over four natural aquifers, one of which is recognized as the \"Memphis Sand Aquifer\" or simply as the \"Memphis Aquifer\". Located underground, this artesian water source is considered soft and estimated by Memphis Light, Gas and Water to contain more than of water.\nCancelled Byhalia Pipeline project.\nThe Byhalia Pipeline proposed by Plains All American Pipeline and Valero Energy, and set to begin construction in 2020, was the subject of massive public and legal opposition to the project over concerns regarding possible contamination of the Memphis aquifer. Notable figures voicing public opposition to the project included Memphis Congressman Steve Cohen, Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Al Gore, Danny Glover, Giancarlo Esposito, and Jane Fonda.\nThe pipeline's route, which was set to run through the historic Black Boxtown neighborhood, raised concerns among the projects opponents about the racially disproportionate impacts that contamination from the pipeline would cause if completed.\nConstruction of the pipeline was cancelled in July 2021 after months of activism and resistance from organizations including Memphis Community Against the Pipeline (MCAP), Protect Our Aquifer, the Memphis and Mid-South Chapter of The Climate Reality Project, and other partnered organizations.\nClimate.\nMemphis has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\", Trewartha \"Cf\"), with four distinct seasons, and is located in USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 8a in downtown, cooling to 7b for much of the surrounding region. Winter weather comes alternately from the upper Great Plains and the Gulf of Mexico, which can lead to drastic swings in temperature. Summer weather may come from Texas (very hot and humid) or the Gulf (hot and very humid). July has a daily average temperature of , with high levels of humidity due to moisture encroaching from the Gulf of Mexico. Afternoon and evening thunderstorms are frequent during summer, but usually brief, lasting no longer than an hour. Early autumn is pleasantly drier and mild, but can be hot until late October. Late autumn is rainy and cooler; precipitation peaks again in November and December. Winters are mild to chilly, with a January daily average temperature of . Snow occurs sporadically in winter, with an average seasonal snowfall of . Ice storms and freezing rain pose a greater danger, as they can often pull tree limbs down on power lines and make driving hazardous. Severe thunderstorms can occur at any time of the year though mainly during the spring months. Large hail, strong winds, flooding, and frequent lightning can accompany these storms. Some storms spawn tornadoes.\nThe lowest temperature ever recorded in Memphis was on December 24, 1963, and the highest temperature ever was on July 13, 1980. Over the course of a year, there is an average of 4.4 days of highs below freezing, 6.9 nights of lows below , 43 nights of lows below freezing, 64 days of highs above , and 2.1 days of highs above .\nMemphis temperatures dropped to -4 F during the 1985 North American cold wave and during the December 1989 United States cold wave.\nAnnual precipitation is high () and relatively evenly distributed throughout the year. Average monthly rainfall is especially high in March through May, and December, while August and September are relatively drier.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor historical population data, see: History of Memphis, Tennessee. According to the 2020 United States Census, the racial composition of the city of Memphis was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010.\nAs of the 2010 United States census[ [update]], there were 652,078 people and 245,836 households in the city. The population density was 2,327.4 people per sq\u00a0mi (898.6/km2). There were 271,552 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 63.33% African American, 29.39% White, 1.46% Asian American, 1.57% Native American, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 1.45% from other races, and 1.04% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 6.49% of the population.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $32,285, and the median income for a family was $37,767. Males had a median income of $31,236 versus $25,183 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,838. About 17.2% of families and 20.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.1% of those under age 18, and 15.4% of those age 65 or over. In 2011, the U.S. Census Bureau ranked the Memphis area as the poorest large metro area in the country. Jeff Wallace of the University of Memphis noted that the problem was related to decades of segregation in government and schools. He said that it was a low-cost job market, but other places in the world could offer cheaper labor, and the workforce was undereducated for today's challenges.\nThe Memphis Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), the 42nd largest in the United States, has a 2010 population of 1,316,100 and includes the Tennessee counties of Shelby, Tipton and Fayette; as well as the northern Mississippi counties of DeSoto, Marshall, Tate, and Tunica; and Crittenden County, Arkansas, all part of the Mississippi Delta.\nThe total metropolitan area has a higher proportion of whites and a higher per capita income than the population in the city. The 2010 census shows that the Memphis metro area is close to a majority-minority population:\nthe white population is 47.9 percent of the eight-county area's 1,316,100 residents. The non-Hispanic white population, a designation frequently used in census reports, was 46.2 percent of the total. The African American percentage was 45.7. For several decades, the Memphis metro area has had the highest percentage of black population among the nation's large metropolitan areas. The area has seemed on a path to become the nation's first metro area of one million or more with a majority black population.\nIn a reverse trend of the Great Migration, numerous African Americans and other minorities have moved into DeSoto County, and blacks have followed suburban trends, moving into the suburbs of Shelby County.\nThe top countries of origin for Memphis' immigrants in 2015 were Mexico, India, China, Honduras and Vietnam.\nReligion.\nAn 1870 map of Memphis shows religious buildings of the Baptist, Catholic, Episcopal, Methodist, Presbyterian, Congregational, and other Christian denominations, and a Jewish congregation. In 2009, places of worship exist for Christians, Jews, Hindus, Buddhists, and Muslims.\nThe international headquarters of the Church of God in Christ, the largest Pentecostal denomination in the United States, is located in Memphis. Its Mason Temple was named after the denomination's founder, Charles Harrison Mason. This auditorium is where Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. gave his noted \"I've Been to the Mountaintop\" speech in April 1968, the night before he was assassinated at his motel. The National Civil Rights Museum, located in Memphis at the Lorraine Motel and other buildings, has an annual ceremony at Mason's Temple of Deliverance where it honors people with Freedom Awards.\nBellevue Baptist Church is a Southern Baptist megachurch in Memphis that was founded in 1903. Its current membership is around 30,000. For many years, it was led by Adrian Rogers, a three-term president of the Southern Baptist Convention.\nOther notable and/or large churches in Memphis include Second Presbyterian Church (EPC), Highpoint Church (SBC), Hope Presbyterian Church (EPC), Evergreen Presbyterian Church (PCUSA), Colonial Park United Methodist Church, Christ United Methodist Church, Idlewild Presbyterian Church (PCUSA), GraceLife Pentecostal Church (UPCI), First Baptist Broad, Temple of Deliverance, Calvary Episcopal Church, the Church of the River (First Unitarian Church of Memphis), First Congregational Church (UCC) and Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church.\nMemphis is home to two cathedrals. The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Memphis, and St. Mary's Episcopal Cathedral is the seat of the Episcopal Diocese of West Tennessee.\nMemphis is home to Temple Israel, a Reform synagogue that has approximately 7,000 members, making it one of the largest Reform synagogues in the country. Baron Hirsch Synagogue is the largest Orthodox shul in the United States. Jewish residents were part of the city before the Civil War, but more Jewish immigrants came from Eastern Europe in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nMemphis is home to an estimated 10,000 to 15,000 Muslims of various cultures and ethnicities.\nA number of seminaries are located in Memphis and the metropolitan area. Memphis is home to Memphis Theological Seminary and Harding School of Theology. Suburban Cordova is home to Mid-America Baptist Theological Seminary.\nCrime and police.\nIn the 21st century, Memphis' crime rate has remained significantly higher than the national average. Memphis' gangs are a major reason for the crime crises in the city. Since the 2000s, it has consistently been recognized as one of the most dangerous cities in the U.S.\nIn 2023, Memphis set a homicide record with 397 homicides. New York City, the nation's largest city with a population of 8.5 million, had a lower homicide count of 386 in 2023. Identity theft, carjackings and robberies were also happening at a highly concerning rate in the city after 2020. Crime was the primary reason 30,000 former Memphis residents decided to relocate outside the city between 2017 and 2022. Memphis' businesses are also leaving the city or closing down at a high rate due to rampant crime. Memphis' leaders are continually discussing and implementing strategies such as recruiting more police officers to hopefully lower crime in the city. However, on September 9, 2025, it was revealed that crime in Memphis had in fact dropped to a 25-year low across major categories. On September 15, 2025, president Trump signed a order to mobilize federal law enforcement agents, including FBI, and to deploy the Tennessee National Guard to Memphis. Some members of the Memphis city council, including Memphis mayor Paul Young, opposed the plan. The federal government deployed the Memphis Safe Task Force to Memphis in October 2025.\nEconomy.\nThe city's central geographic location has aided its business development. On the Mississippi River and intersected by five major freight railroads and two Interstate Highways, I-40 and I-55, Memphis is well positioned for commerce in the transportation and shipping industry. Its access by water was key to its initial development, with steamboats plying the Mississippi river. Railroad construction strengthened its connection to other markets to the east and west.\nSince the second half of the 20th century, highways and interstates have played major roles as transportation corridors. A third interstate, I-69, is under construction, and a fourth, I-22, has recently been designated from the former High Priority Corridor X. River barges are unloaded onto trucks and trains. The city is home to Memphis International Airport, the world's busiest cargo airport, surpassing Hong Kong International Airport in 2021. Memphis serves as a primary hub for FedEx Express shipping.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], Memphis was the home of three Fortune 500 companies: FedEx (no. 63), International Paper (no. 107), and AutoZone (no. 306).\nOther major corporations based in Memphis include Allenberg Cotton, American Residential Services (also known as ARS/Rescue Rooter); Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell &amp; Berkowitz; Cargill Cotton, City Gear, First Horizon National Corporation, Fred's, GTx, Lenny's Sub Shop, Mid-America Apartments, Perkins Restaurant and Bakery, ServiceMaster, True Temper Sports, Varsity Brands, and Verso Paper. Corporations with major operations based in Memphis include Gibson guitars (based in Nashville), and Smith &amp; Nephew.\nThe Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis also has a branch in Memphis.\nThe entertainment and film industries have discovered Memphis in recent years. Several major motion pictures, most of which were recruited and assisted by the Memphis &amp; Shelby County Film and Television Commission, have been filmed in Memphis, including \"Making the Grade\" (1984), \"Elvis and Me\" (1988), \"Great Balls of Fire!\" (1988), \"Heart of Dixie\" (1989), \"Mystery Train\" (1989), \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (1991), \"Trespass\" (1992), \"The Gun in Betty Lou's Handbag\" (1992), \"The Firm\" (1993), \"The Delta\" (1996), \"The People Vs. Larry Flynt\" (1996), \"The Rainmaker\" (1997), \"Cast Away\" (2000), \"21 Grams\" (2002), \"A Painted House\" (2002), \"Hustle &amp; Flow\" (2005), \"Forty Shades of Blue\" (2005), \"Walk the Line\" (2005), \"Black Snake Moan\" (2007), \"Nothing But the Truth\" (2008), \"Soul Men\" (2008), and \"The Grace Card\" (2011). \"The Blind Side\" (2009) was set in Memphis but filmed in Atlanta. The 1992 television movie \"Memphis\", starring Memphis native Cybill Shepherd, who also served as executive producer and writer, was also filmed in Memphis.\nArts and culture.\nCultural events.\nOne of the largest celebrations of the city is Memphis in May. The month-long series of events promotes Memphis's heritage and outreach of its people far beyond the city's borders. The four main events are the Beale Street Music Festival, International Week, The World Championship Barbecue Cooking Contest, and the Great River Run. The World Championship Barbecue Cooking Contest is the largest pork barbecue-cooking contest in the world.\nIn April, downtown Memphis celebrates \"Africa in April Cultural Awareness Festival\", or simply Africa in April. The festival was designed to celebrate the arts, history, culture, and diversity of the African diaspora. Africa in April is a three-day festival with vendors' markets, fashion showcases, blues showcases, and an international diversity parade.\nDuring late May-early June, Memphis is home to the Memphis Italian Festival at Marquette Park. The 2019 festival will be its 30th and has hosted musical acts, local artisans, and Italian cooking competitions. It also presents chef demonstrations, the Coors Light Competitive Bocce Tournament, the Galtelli Cup Recreational Bocce Tournament, a volleyball tournament, and pizza tossing demonstrations. This festival was started by Holy Rosary School and Parish and began inside the School parking lot in 1989. The Memphis Italian Festival is run almost completely by former and current Holy Rosary School and Church members and begins with a 5K run each year.\nCarnival Memphis, formerly known as the Memphis Cotton Carnival, is an annual series of parties and festivities in June that salutes various aspects of Memphis and its industries. An annual King and Queen of Carnival are secretly selected to reign over Carnival activities. From 1935 to 1982, the African-American community staged the Cotton Makers Jubilee; it has merged with Carnival Memphis.\nA market and arts festival, the Cooper-Young Festival, is held annually in September in the Cooper-Young district of Midtown Memphis. The event draws artists from all over North America and includes local music, art sales, contests, and displays.\nMemphis sponsors several film festivals: the Indie Memphis Film Festival, Outflix, and the Memphis International Film and Music Festival. The Indie Memphis Film Festival is in its 14th year and was held April 27\u201328, 2013. Recognized by \"MovieMaker Magazine\" as one of 25 \"Coolest Film Festivals\" (2009) and one of 25 \"Festivals Worth the Entry Fee\" (2011), Indie Memphis offers Memphis year-round independent film programming, including the Global Lens international film series, IM Student Shorts student films, and an outdoor concert film series at the historic Levitt Shell. The Outflix Film Festival, also in its 15th year, was held September 7\u201313, 2013. Outflix features a full week of LGBT cinema, including short films, features, and documentaries. The Memphis International Film and Music Festival is held in April; it is in its 11th year and takes place at Malco's Ridgeway Four.\nMid-South Pride is Tennessee's second-largest LGBT pride event.\nOn the weekend before Thanksgiving, the Memphis International Jazz Festival is held in the South Main Historic Arts District in Downtown Memphis. This festival promotes the important role Memphis has played in shaping Jazz nationally and internationally. Acts such as George Coleman, Herman Green, Kirk Whalum and Marvin Stamm all come out of the rich musical heritage in Memphis.\nFormerly titled the W. C. Handy Awards, the International Blues Awards are presented by the Blues Foundation (headquartered in Memphis) for blues music achievement. Weeklong playing competitions are held, as well as an awards banquet including a night of performance and celebration.\nMusic.\nMemphis is the home of founders and pioneers of various American music genres, including Memphis soul, Memphis blues, gospel, rock n' roll, rockabilly, Memphis rap, Buck, crunk, and \"sharecropper\" country music (in contrast to the \"rhinestone\" country sound historically associated with Nashville).\nMany musicians, including Aretha Franklin, Jerry Lee Lewis, Johnny Cash, Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins, Roy Orbison, Booker T. &amp; the M.G.'s, Otis Redding, Isaac Hayes, Shawn Lane, Al Green, Bobby Whitlock, Rance Allen, Percy Sledge, Solomon Burke, William Bell, Sam &amp; Dave and B.B. King, got their start in Memphis in the 1950s and 1960s.\nBeale Street is a national historical landmark, and shows the impact Memphis has had on American blues, particularly after World War II as electric guitars took precedence over the original acoustic sound from the Mississippi Delta. Sam Phillips' Sun Studio still stands, and is open for tours. Elvis, Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis, Carl Perkins and Roy Orbison all made their first recordings there, and were \"discovered\" by Phillips. Many great blues artists recorded there, such as W. C. Handy, the \"Father of the Blues\".\nStax Records created a classic 1960s soul music sound, much grittier and horn-based than the better-known Motown from Detroit. Booker T. and the M.G.s were the label's backing band for most of the classic hits that came from Stax, by Sam &amp; Dave, Otis Redding, Wilson Pickett and many more. The sound was revisited in the 1980s in the \"Blues Brothers\" movie, in which many of the musicians starred as themselves.\nMemphis is also noted for its influence on the power pop musical genre in the 1970s. Notable bands and musicians include Big Star, Chris Bell, Alex Chilton, Tommy Hoehn, The Scruffs and Prix.\nMemphis rap culture significantly influenced hip-hop culture worldwide. Memphis hip-hop became more mainstream during the 2000s. Memphis-based artists such as Three 6 Mafia, Juicy J, Lil Wyte, 8Ball &amp; MJG, Gangsta Boo, Project Pat, La Chat, Young Dolph, Yo Gotti, NLE Choppa, Moneybagg Yo, GloRilla, Pooh Shiesty, and Key Glock are among the most popular emcees in the nation.\nSeveral notable singers are from the Memphis area, including Justin Timberlake, K. Michelle, Kirk Whalum, Ruth Welting, Kid Memphis, Kallen Esperian, Julien Baker, and Andrew VanWyngarden. The Metropolitan Opera of New York had its first tour in Memphis in 1906; in the 1990s it decided to tour only larger cities. Metropolitan Opera performances are now broadcast in HD at local movie theaters across the country.\nCuisine.\nMemphis is the home of Memphis-style barbecue, which is one of four predominant regional styles of barbecue in the United States. Memphis-style barbecue has become well known due to the World Championship Barbecue Cooking Contest held each May, which has been listed in \"Guinness World Records\" as the largest pork barbecue contest in the world. Notable Memphis restaurants include:\nVisual art.\nIn addition to the Brooks Museum and Dixon Gallery and Gardens, Memphis plays host to two burgeoning visual art areas, one city-sanctioned, and the other organically formed.\nThe South Main Arts District is an arts neighborhood in south downtown. Over the past 20 years, the area has morphed from a derelict brothel and juke joint neighborhood to a gentrified, well-lit area sponsoring \"Trolley Night\", when arts patrons stroll down the street to see fire spinners, DJs playing in front of clubs, specialty shops and galleries. Not far from South Main Arts district is Medicine Factory, an artist-run organization.\nAnother developing arts district in Memphis is Broad Avenue. This east\u2013west avenue is undergoing neighborhood revitalization from the influx of craft and visual artists taking up residence and studios in the area. An art professor from Rhodes College holds small openings on the first floor of his home for local students and professional artists. Odessa, another art space on Broad Avenue, hosts student art shows and local electronic music. Other gallery spaces spring up for semi-annual artwalks.\nMemphis also has non-commercial visual arts organizations and spaces, including local painter Pinkney Herbert's Marshall Arts gallery, on Marshall Avenue near Sun Studios, another arts neighborhood characterized by affordable rent.\nLiterature.\nWell-known writers from Memphis include Shelby Foote, the noted Civil War historian. Novelist John Grisham grew up in nearby DeSoto County, Mississippi, and sets many of his books in Memphis.\nMany works of fiction and literature are set in Memphis. These include \"The Reivers\" by William Faulkner (1962), \"September, September\" by Shelby Foote (1977); Peter Taylor's \"The Old Forest and Other Stories\" (1985), and his Pulitzer Prize-winning \"A Summons to Memphis\" (1986); \"The Firm\" (1991) and \"The Client\" (1993), both by John Grisham; \"Memphis Afternoons: a Memoir\" by James Conaway (1993), \"Plague of Dreamers\" by Steve Stern (1997); \"Cassina Gambrel Was Missing\" by William Watkins (1999); \"The Guardian\" by Beecher Smith (1999), \"We are Billion-Year-Old Carbon\" by Corey Mesler (2005), \"The Silence of the Lambs\" by Thomas Harris, and \"The Architect\" by James Williamson (2007).\nTourism.\nPoints of interest.\nOther Memphis attractions include the Simmons Bank Liberty Stadium, FedExForum, and Mississippi riverboat day cruises.\nCemeteries.\nThe Memphis National Cemetery is a United States National Cemetery located in northeastern Memphis.\nHistoric Elmwood Cemetery is one of the oldest rural garden cemeteries in the South, and contains the Carlisle S. Page Arboretum. Memorial Park Cemetery is noted for its sculptures by Mexican artist Dionicio Rodriguez.\nElvis Presley was originally buried in Forest Hill Cemetery, the resting place of his backing band's bassist, Bill Black. After an attempted grave robbing, Presley's body was moved and reinterred at the grounds of Graceland.\nSports.\nThe Memphis Grizzlies of the National Basketball Association is the only team from one of the \"big four\" major sports leagues in Memphis. The Memphis Redbirds of the International League are a Minor League Baseball affiliate of the St. Louis Cardinals.\nThe University of Memphis college basketball team, the Memphis Tigers, has a strong following in the city due to a history of competitive success. The Tigers have competed in three NCAA Final Fours (1973, 1985, 2008), with the latter two appearances being vacated. The current coach of the Memphis Tigers is Penny Hardaway. Memphis is home to Simmons Bank Liberty Stadium, the site of University of Memphis football, the Liberty Bowl and the Southern Heritage Classic.\nThe annual St. Jude Classic, a regular part of the PGA Tour, is also held in the city. Each February the city hosts the Regions Morgan Keegan Championships and the Cellular South Cup, which are men's ATP World Tour 500 series and WTA events, respectively.\nMemphis has a significant history in pro wrestling. Jerry \"The King\" Lawler and Jimmy \"The Mouth of the South\" Hart are among the sport's most well-known figures who came out of the city. Sputnik Monroe, a wrestler of the 1950s, like Lawler, promoted racial integration in the city. Ric Flair also noted Memphis as his birthplace.\nIn the 1970s and early 1980s, the former WFL franchise Memphis Southmen / Memphis Grizzlies sued the NFL in an attempt to be accepted as an expansion franchise. In 1993, the Memphis Hound Dogs was a proposed NFL expansion that was passed over in favor of the Jacksonville Jaguars and Carolina Panthers. The Simmons Bank Liberty Stadium also served as the temporary home of the former Tennessee Oilers (now the Titans) while the city of Nashville worked out stadium issues.\nThe city is also the site of Memphis International Raceway, which held NASCAR events from 1998 to 2009, when Dover Motorsports closed it. In 2011 it reopened under different ownership. It no longer holds NASCAR races, but the Arca Menards Series returned to the track in 2020.\nParks and recreation.\nMajor Memphis parks include W.C. Handy Park, Tom Lee Park, Audubon Park, Overton Park including the Old Forest Arboretum, the Lichterman Nature Center (a nature learning center), the Memphis Botanic Garden, and Jesse H Turner Park.\nShelby Farms park, located at the eastern edge of the city, is one of the largest urban parks in the United States.\nGovernment.\nBeginning in 1963, Memphis adopted a mayor-council form of government, with 13 City Council members, six elected at-large from throughout the city and seven elected from geographic districts. Following passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, civil rights activists challenged the at-large electoral system in court because it made it more difficult for the minority to elect candidates of their choice; at-large voting favored candidates who could command a majority across the city. In 1995, the city adopted a new plan. The 13 Council positions are elected from nine geographic districts: seven are single-member districts and two elect three members each.\nPaul Young, a Democrat, is the city's mayor. He took office on January 1, 2024.\nSince the late 20th century, regional discussions have recurred on the concept of consolidating unincorporated Shelby County and Memphis into a metropolitan government, as Nashville-Davidson County did in 1963. Consolidation was a referendum item on the 2010 ballots in both the city of Memphis and Shelby County, under the state law for dual-voting on such measures. The referendum was controversial in both jurisdictions. Black leaders, including then-Shelby County Commissioner Joe Ford and national civil rights leader Al Sharpton, opposed the consolidation. According to the plaintiffs' expert, Marcus Pohlmann, these leaders \"tried to turn that referendum into a civil rights issue, suggesting that for blacks to vote for consolidation was to give up hard-won civil rights victories of the past\".\nIn October 2010 before the vote, eight Shelby County citizens had filed a lawsuit in federal court against the state and the Shelby County Elections Commission against the dual-voting requirement. Plaintiffs argued that total votes for the referendum should have been counted together, rather than as separate elections. City voters narrowly supported the measure for consolidation with 50.8% in favor; county voters overwhelmingly voted against the measure with 85% against. The state argued that with the election decided, the lawsuit should be dismissed, but the federal court disagreed.\nBy late 2013, in pre-trial actions, both sides were trying to disqualify the other's experts, in discussions of whether regional voting revealed racial polarization, and whether voting on the referendum demonstrated racial bloc voting. \"The experts for both sides have clashed on whether racial bloc voting is inevitable in local elections and whether that would require some kind of court remedy.\"\nThe defendants' expert, Todd Donovan, did not think that polarized voting as revealed for political candidates meant that \"African-American voters and white voters have polarized interests when it comes to referendum choices on government administration, taxation, service provision and other policy questions.\" He noted, \"In the absence of distinct political interests that create polarized blocs of referendum voters defined by race, there is no cohesive racial minority voting interest that can be diluted by a referendum.\"\nIn 2014, the federal district court dismissed the lawsuit, on the grounds that the referendum would have failed when both jurisdictions' votes were counted together. (In total voting, 64% of voters opposed the consolidation.) In the last week of December 2014, the U.S. Sixth District Court of Appeals upheld that decision, ruling that, \"\"In this election, the referendum for consolidation did not pass and would not have passed even if there had been no dual-majority vote requirement (with the vote counts combined).\"\nBefore the referendum, the decision was made by the city and county to exclude public school management and operations from the proposed consolidation. As noted below, in 2011 the Memphis city council voted to dissolve its city school board and consolidate with the Shelby County School System, without the collaboration or agreement of Shelby County. The city had authority for this action under Tennessee state laws that differentiate between city and county powers.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary.\nThe city is served by Memphis-Shelby County Schools (formerly Shelby County Schools). On March 8, 2011, residents voted to dissolve the charter for Memphis City Schools, effectively merging it with the Shelby County School District. After issues with state law and court challenges, the merger took effect the start of the 2013\u201314 school year. In Shelby County, six incorporated cities voted to establish separate school systems in 2013.\nThe Memphis-Shelby County School System operates 222 elementary, middle, and high schools.\nThe Memphis area is also home to many private, college-prep schools, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPostsecondary.\nColleges and universities in the city include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMemphis also has campuses of several for-profit post-secondary institutions, including Concorde Career College, ITT Technical Institute, Vatterott College, and University of Phoenix. Remington College is a local nonprofit post-secondary institution.\nThe University of Tennessee College of Dentistry was founded in 1878, making it the oldest dental college in the South, and the third oldest public college of dentistry in the United States.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nNielsen Media Research currently defines Memphis and its surrounding metropolitan area as the 51st largest American media market. Despite Memphis proper's large size, Memphis has always been a medium-sized market; the nearby suburban and rural areas are not much larger than the city itself.\nMajor broadcast television affiliate stations in the Memphis area include, but are not limited to:\nRadio.\nTerrestrial broadcast radio stations in the Memphis area include, but are not limited to:\nCultural references.\nMusic.\nMemphis is the subject of numerous pop and country songs, including \"The Memphis Blues\" by W. C. Handy, \"Memphis, Tennessee\" by Chuck Berry, \"Night Train to Memphis\" by Roy Acuff, \"Goin' to Memphis\" by Paul Revere and the Raiders, \"Queen of Memphis\" by Confederate Railroad, \"Memphis Soul Stew\" by King Curtis, \"Maybe It Was Memphis\" by Pam Tillis, \"Graceland\" by Paul Simon, \"Memphis Train\" by Rufus Thomas, \"All the Way from Memphis\" by Mott the Hoople, \"Wrong Side of Memphis\" by Trisha Yearwood, \"Stuck Inside of Mobile with the Memphis Blues Again\" by Bob Dylan, \"Memphis Skyline\" by Rufus Wainwright, \"Sequestered in Memphis\" by the Hold Steady and \"Walking in Memphis\" by Marc Cohn.\nIn addition, Memphis is mentioned in scores of other songs, including \"Proud Mary\" by Creedence Clearwater Revival, \"Honky Tonk Women\" by the Rolling Stones, \"Dixie Chicken\" by Little Feat, \"Who's Gonna Fill Their Shoes\" by George Jones, \"Daisy Jane\" by America, \"Life Is a Highway\" by Tom Cochrane, \"Black Velvet\" by Alannah Myles, \"Cities\" by Talking Heads, \"Crazed Country Rebel\" by Hank Williams III, \"Pride (In the Name of Love)\" by U2, \"M.E.M.P.H.I.S.\" by the Disco Biscuits, \"New New Minglewood Blues\" and \"Candyman\" by the Grateful Dead, \"You Should Be Glad\" by Widespread Panic, \"Roll With Me\" by 8Ball &amp; MJG, \"Someday\" by Steve Earle and popularly recorded by Shawn Colvin, and many others.\nMore than 1,000 commercial recordings of over 800 distinct songs contain \"Memphis\" in them. The Memphis Rock N' Soul Museum maintains an ever-updated list of these on its website.\nFilm and television.\nMany films are set in the American city including, \"Black Snake Moan\", \"The Blind Side\", \"Cast Away\", \"\", \"The Client\", \"Elvis\", \"The Firm\", \"Forty Shades of Blue\", \"Great Balls of Fire!\", \"Hustle &amp; Flow\", \"Kill Switch\", \"Making the Grade\", \"Memphis Belle\", \"Mississippi Grind\", \"Mystery Train\", \"N-Secure\", \"The Rainmaker\", \"The Silence of the Lambs\", \"Soul Men\", and \"Walk the Line\".\nMany of those and other films have also been filmed in Memphis including, \"Black Snake Moan\", \"Walk the Line\", \"Hustle &amp; Flow\", \"Forty Shades of Blue\", \"21 Grams\", \"A Painted House\", \"American Saint\", \"The Poor and Hungry\", \"Cast Away\", \"Woman's Story\", \"The Big Muddy\", \"The Rainmaker\", \"Finding Graceland\", \"The People vs. Larry Flynt\", \"The Delta\", \"Teenage Tupelo\", \"A Family Thing\", \"Without Air\", \"The Firm\", \"The Client\", \"The Gun in Betty Lou's Handbag\", \"Trespass\", \"The Silence of the Lambs\", \"Great Balls of Fire!\", \"Elvis and Me\", \"Mystery Train\", \"Leningrad Cowboys Go America\", \"Heart of Dixie\", \"The Contemporary Gladiator\", \"\", \"Making the Grade\", \"The River Rat\", \"The River\", \"Hallelujah!\", \"Elizabethtown\", \"3000 Miles to Graceland\", \"A Face in the Crowd\", \"Undefeated\", \"Man on the Moon\", \"Nothing But the Truth\", \"Sore Losers\", \"Soul Men\", \"I Was a Zombie for the F.B.I.\", \"I'm From Hollywood\", \"The Grace Card\", \"This is Elvis\", \"Cookie's Fortune\", \"Open Five\", \"The Open Road\", \"In the Valley of Elah\", \"Walk Hard\", \"My Blueberry Nights\", \"Savage Country\", and \"Two-Lane Blacktop\".\nThe television series \"Greenleaf\", \"Memphis Beat\", \"Quarry\" and \"Bluff City Law\" are set in the city.\nLiterature.\nMany works of fiction and literature are set in Memphis. These include \"The Reivers\" by William Faulkner (1962), \"September, September\" by Shelby Foote (1977); Peter Taylor's \"The Old Forest and Other Stories\" (1985), and his Pulitzer Prize-winning \"A Summons to Memphis\" (1986); \"The Firm\" (1991), \"The Client\" (1993) and The Rainmaker, all by John Grisham; \"Memphis Afternoons: a Memoir\" by James Conaway (1993), \"Plague of Dreamers\" by Steve Stern (1997); \"Cassina Gambrel Was Missing\" by William Watkins (1999); \"The Guardian\" by Beecher Smith (1999), \"We are Billion-Year-Old Carbon\" by Corey Mesler (2005), \"The Silence of the Lambs\" by Thomas Harris, and \"The Architect\" by James Williamson (2007).\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nInterstate 40, Interstate 55, Interstate 22, Interstate 240, Interstate 269, and State Route 385 are the main expressways in the Memphis area. Interstates 40 and 55 cross the Mississippi River at Memphis from the state of Arkansas. Interstate 69 is a proposed interstate that, upon completion, would connect Memphis to Canada and Mexico.\nI-40 is a coast-to-coast freeway that connects Memphis to Nashville and on to North Carolina to the east, and Little Rock, Arkansas, Oklahoma City, and the Greater Los Angeles Area to the west. I-55 connects Memphis to St. Louis and Chicago to the north, and Jackson, Mississippi and New Orleans to the south. I-240 is the inner beltway which serves areas including Downtown, Midtown, South Memphis, Memphis International Airport, East Memphis, and North Memphis. I-269 is the larger, outer interstate loop immediately serving the suburbs of Millington, Eads, Arlington, Collierville, and Hernando, Mississippi. It was completed in 2018.\nInterstate 22 connects Memphis with Birmingham, Alabama, via northern Mississippi (including Tupelo) and northwestern Alabama. While technically not entering the city of Memphis proper, I-22 ends at I-269 in Byhalia, Mississippi, connecting it to the rest of the Memphis interstate system.\nInterstate 69 is proposed to follow I-55 and I-240 through the city of Memphis. Once completed, I-69 will link Memphis with Port Huron, Michigan via Indianapolis, Indiana, and Brownsville, Texas via Shreveport, Louisiana and Houston, Texas.\nA new spur, Interstate 555, also serves the Memphis metro area connecting it to Jonesboro, Arkansas.\nOther important federal highways though Memphis include the east\u2013west U.S. Route 70, U.S. Route 64, and U.S. Route 72; and the north\u2013south U.S. Route 51 and U.S. Route 61. The former is the historic highway north to Chicago via Cairo, Illinois, while the latter roughly parallels the Mississippi River for most of its course and crosses the Mississippi Delta region to the south, with the Delta also legendary for Blues music.\nRoadways\nMemphis maintains 6,800 lane-miles of city roadways. The city collaborated with Google Cloud Platform and SpringML in February 2019 to test machine learning (ML) to improve public services. A key focus is pothole identification using TensorFlow technology. Public Works personnel completed 63,000 repairs, with around 7,500 of those reported by citizens to 311.\nTransit.\nThe Memphis Area Transit Authority provides local transit services around Memphis, including the MATA Trolley heritage streetcar system. Intercity bus service to the city is provided by Flixbus, Greyhound Lines, and Jefferson Lines.\nRailroads.\nA large volume of railroad freight moves through Memphis, because of its two heavy-duty Mississippi River railroad crossings, which carry several major east\u2013west railroad freight lines, and also because of the major north\u2013south railroad lines through Memphis which connect with such major cities as Chicago, St. Louis, Indianapolis, Louisville, New Orleans, Dallas, Houston, Mobile, and Birmingham.\nBy the early 20th century, Memphis had two major passenger railroad stations, which made the city a regional hub for trains coming from the north, east, south and west. After passenger railroad service declined heavily through the middle of the 20th century, the Memphis Union Station was demolished in 1969. The Memphis Central Station was eventually renovated, and it still serves the city. The only inter-city passenger railroad service to Memphis is the daily \"City of New Orleans\" train, operated by Amtrak, which has one train northbound and one train southbound each day between Chicago and New Orleans.\nRailroads, passenger carriers.\nAmtrak (AMTK)\nAirports.\nMemphis International Airport is the global \"SuperHub\" of FedEx Express, and has the largest cargo operations by volume of any airport worldwide, surpassing Hong Kong International Airport in 2021.\nMemphis International ranks as the 41st busiest passenger airport in the US and served as a hub for Northwest Airlines (later Delta Air Lines) until September 3, 2013. It had 4.39 million boarding passengers (enplanements) in 2011, an 11.9% decrease over the previous year. Delta has reduced its flights at Memphis by approximately 65% since its 2008 merger with Northwest Airlines and operates an average of 30 daily flights as of December 2013, with two international destinations (Canc\u00fan \u2013 seasonally; Toronto year-round). Delta Air Lines announced the closing of its Memphis pilot and crew base in 2012. Other airlines providing passenger service are: Southwest Airlines; American Airlines; United Airlines; Allegiant; Frontier; Air Canada; and Southern Vacations Express.\nThere are also general aviation airports in the Memphis Metropolitan Area, including the Millington Regional Jetport, located at the former Naval Air Station in Millington, Tennessee.\nRiver port.\nMemphis has the second-busiest cargo port on the Mississippi River, which is also the fourth-busiest inland port in the United States. The International Port of Memphis covers both the Tennessee and Arkansas sides of the Mississippi River from river mile\u00a0725 (km\u00a01167) to mile\u00a0740 (km\u00a01191). A focal point of the river port is the industrial park on President's Island, just south of Downtown Memphis.\nBridges.\nFour railroad and highway bridges cross the Mississippi River at Memphis. In order of their opening years, these are the Frisco Bridge (1892, single-track rail), the Harahan Bridge (1916, a road-rail bridge until 1949, currently carries double-track rail), the Memphis-Arkansas Memorial Bridge (Highway, 1949; later incorporated into Interstate 55), and the Hernando de Soto Bridge (Interstate 40, 1973). A bicycle/pedestrian walkway opened along the Harahan Bridge in late 2016, utilizing the former westbound roadway.\nUtilities.\nMemphis's primary utility provider is the Memphis Light, Gas and Water Division (MLGW). This is the largest three-service municipal utility in the United States, providing electricity, natural gas, and pure water service to all residents of Shelby County. Prior to that, Memphis was served by two primary electric companies, which were merged into the Memphis Power Company.\nThe City of Memphis bought the private company in 1939 to form MLGW, which was an early customer of electricity from the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). In 1954 the Dixon-Yates contract was proposed to make more power available to the city from the TVA, but the contract was cancelled; it had been an issue for the Democrats in the 1954 Congressional elections.\nMLGW still buys most of its power from TVA, and the company pumps its own fresh water from the Memphis Aquifer, using more than 180 water wells.\nHealth care.\nThe Memphis and Shelby County region supports numerous hospitals, including the Methodist and Baptist Memorial health systems, two of the nation's largest private hospitals. Until the 1960s and the end of segregation, most hospitals only served white patients. One of the few hospitals for African Americans in Memphis in those times was Collins Chapel Connectional Hospital, whose historic building now houses a homeless shelter.\nMethodist Le Bonheur Healthcare, the largest healthcare provider in the Memphis region and the fourth largest employer as of 2018, operates seven hospitals and several rural clinics. Methodist Healthcare operates, among others, the Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, which offers primary level 1 pediatric trauma care, as well as a nationally recognized pediatric brain tumor program. Methodist Healthcare also operates Methodist University Hospital, a 617-bed facility 1 mile southeast of Le Bonheur.\nBaptist Memorial Healthcare operates fifteen hospitals (three in Memphis), including Baptist Memorial Hospital, and with a merger in 2018 became the largest healthcare system in the mid-South. According to Health Care Market Guide's annual studies, Mid-Southerners have named Baptist Memorial their \"preferred hospital choice for quality\".\nThe St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, leading pediatric treatment and research facility focused on children's catastrophic diseases, resides in Memphis. The institution was conceived and built by entertainer Danny Thomas in 1962 as a tribute to St. Jude Thaddeus, patron saint of impossible, hopeless, and difficult causes.\nRegional One Health is located in Memphis.\nMemphis is home to Delta Medical Center of Memphis, which is the only employee-owned medical facility in North America.\nIndividual health insurance marketplace insurers are limited, with Bright Health and Cigna offering coverage in the area.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMemphis has sister city relationships with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48608", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48608", "title": "Census Bureau", "text": ""}
{"id": "48612", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48612", "title": "Mind Sports Organisation", "text": "Association for promoting mind sports\nThe Mind Sports Organisation (MSO) is an association for promoting mind sports including Contract Bridge, Chess, Go, Mastermind, and Scrabble. Since 1997 it has annually organised in England a multi-sport competition, the Mind Sports Olympiad.\nThe MSO was founded in conjunction with the first Mind Sports Olympiad. Beside the main event, always in England and usually in London, it has supported similar events elsewhere, including Milan; South Korea, and Prague.\nMind Sports Olympiad.\nThe first Mind Sports Olympiad was held in London's Royal Festival Hall in 1997. It brought together an unprecedented number of strategy games and events. William Hartston in \"The Independent\" said, \"The biggest gamesfest ever to hit these (or perhaps any other) shores\".\nThe inaugural MSO along with a very large number of games, introduced two new events of their own creation the Pentamind and the Decamentathlon. These were two events to parallel the multi-event games in athletics of the modern pentathlon and the decathlon. This was part of the ambition to create an Olympics of the mind.\nThe Mind Sports Olympiad returned to London with sponsorship in both 1998 and 1999. Despite a falling out between the organisers (see controversy below) a successful event was held in Alexandra Palace the next year in 2000.\nThe Mind Sports Olympiad main event continued to happen but without sponsorship the tournaments were held at a number of different universities. The event was still going strong for the years 2001 - 2006. The main 2004 event featured a separate event for schools, featuring competitions and activities in chess, go, quizzes and intelligence puzzles. But in 2007 the Mind Sports Olympiad was reduced to a much smaller venue in Potters Bar due to no sponsorship and no advertising. In 2008 the MSO saw a revival returning to a central London venue, the Royal Horticultural Halls, Westminster and again on 21\u201331 August 2009. The 2010 event was held at the Soho Theatre in London. In 2011, the Mind Sports Olympiad moved to a bigger venue, the University of London Union. The 16th MSO will take place once again at the University of London Union in 18\u201327 August 2012.\nBy 2012 MSO had been flourishing both at its satellite events and at the main event in London, which attracted almost 800 entries in 2011. MSO London is a truly global event, and the 2010 Pentamind World Champion Paco Garcia De La Banda hails from Spain, while the 2011 Pentamind World Champion Andres Kuusk is from Estonia. The most widely read chess magazine in the world, Chess Life, featured an article in February 2012 about in the inauguration of Diving Chess into the 2011 Mind Sports Olympiad.\nVenues.\nThe Mind Sports Olympiad main event has been annual since 1997 at the following locations in England:\nGames at the MSO.\nThe MSO consists mainly of single event competitions most of which are for the nominal title of Olympiad champion, though some trademarked games are authorised by the game designer and publishers as the official world championships. All games, whether an Olympiad or the official World championship, can count towards the Pentamind. Medals, and more recently trophies, are awarded for gold, silver and bronze positions in each competition as well as ranks, with similar awards for the top juniors in each event. In early Olympiads sponsorship allowed for generous financial prizes to go with many of the events. In recent years such prizes have been limited to a small number of events, usually as a result of specific outside sponsorship for that discipline.\nNotable games include (most other refs mention some of these):\nThe well-known: chess, bridge, draughts, shogi, backgammon, Chinesechess (xiang-qi), Othello, poker, cribbage, Mastermind\nAnd many newer games like:\nAbalone, Boku, Continuo, Entropy, Kamisado, Lines of Action (LOA), Pacru, Twixt\nAt MSO tournaments, the Decamentathlon is a composite event in which players compete in ten separate mind sports. The following mental skills have always been part of the Decamentathlon: memory skills, mental calculation, IQ, chess, Go, othello, 8 by 8 draughts, and creative thinking. MSO also organises Mental Calculation World Championship separately. The remaining two mental skills have changed over the years and come from this list: contract bridge, Backgammon, Mastermind, and most recently Sudoku.\nThe MSO introduced the Abstract Games World Championship in 2008.\nPentamind.\nThis was one of the Mind Sports Olympiad's original events. It was an attempt along with the decamentathlon to produce an event for all-rounders to parallel the Olympic Games with its events the decamentathlon and pentathlon. Unlike the decamentathlon's fixed format (see separate article) the pentamind has very little fixed format. It disallows using games that are considered too similar and normally requires a long event, but otherwise any five\nevents from the schedule could be used.\nThe Pentamind champion is the player with the highest numerical score in \"pentamind points\" from 5 valid events.\nThis is calculated using the formula 100 x (n - p) / (n - 1), where n is the number of players and p is the player's position in an event. The position is the position before tie-breaks and any split positions are shared amongst all of the tied players. When there are fewer than 10 players in a tournament, the score is multiplied by a secondary factor [p / (p + 1)].\nPentamind World Champions.\nThis event has been won five times by Demis Hassabis.\nStructure of the organisation.\nWhen the MSO was initially formed in 1997, the board running it included David Levy, Tony Buzan, and Raymond Keene, David Levy being the original founder of the MSO concept. The current (2012) board consists of David Levy, Tony Corfe and Etan Ilfeld. The Mind Sports Olympiad is run by MSO Limited, which is registered in the UK with company number 04712990, and was incorporated in 2003.\nSatellite Mind Sports Olympiads.\nSeveral satellite events were held around the world bearing the Mind Sports Olympiad name. These have occurred in Cambridge, England; Singapore; Seoul, South Korea; Milan, Italy; Oulu, Finland; and Prague, The Czech Republic.\nOther mind sports events.\nSeveral other mind sports events and festivals have been held that have their roots in the original organisation.\nWorld Mind Sports Games.\nThe World Mind Sports Games (WMSG) was created by the International Mind Sports Association (IMSA) as a \"stepping stone on the path of introducing a third kind of Olympic Games (after the Summer and the Winter Olympics)\". with the aim to be held alongside the Summer Olympic Games every 4 years. The first WMSG was held in Beijing 2008 to coincide with Olympic host city; the 2012 WMSG was held in Lille, France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48614", "revid": "49582294", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48614", "title": "Respiratory therapist", "text": "Practitioner in cardio-pulmonary medicine\nA respiratory therapist is a specialized healthcare practitioner trained in critical care and cardio-pulmonary medicine in order to work therapeutically with people who have acute critical conditions, cardiac and pulmonary disease. Respiratory therapists graduate from a college or university with a degree in respiratory therapy and have passed a national board certifying examination. The NBRC (National Board for Respiratory Care) is responsible for credentialing as a CRT (certified respiratory therapist), or RRT (registered respiratory therapist) in the United States. The Canadian Society of Respiratory Therapists and provincial regulatory colleges administer the RRT credential in Canada.\nThe American specialty certifications of respiratory therapy include: CPFT and RPFT (Certified or Registered Pulmonary Function Technologist), ACCS (Adult Critical Care Specialist), NPS (Neonatal/Pediatric Specialist), and SDS (Sleep Disorder Specialist).\nRespiratory therapists work in hospitals in the intensive care units (Adult, Pediatric, and Neonatal), on hospital floors, in emergency departments, in pulmonary functioning laboratories (PFTs), are able to intubate patients, work in sleep labs (polysomnography) (PSG) labs, and in home care specifically DME (durable medical equipment) and home oxygen.\nRespiratory therapists are specialists and educators in many areas including cardiology, pulmonology, and sleep therapy. Respiratory therapists are clinicians trained in advanced airway management; establishing and maintaining the airway during management of trauma, and intensive care.\nRespiratory therapists initiate and manage life support for people in intensive care units and emergency departments, stabilizing, treating and managing pre-hospital and hospital-to-hospital patient transport by air or ground ambulance.\nIn the outpatient setting respiratory therapists work as educators in asthma clinics, ancillary clinical staff in pediatric clinics, and sleep-disorder diagnosticians in sleep-clinics, they also serve as clinical providers in cardiology clinics and cath-labs, as well as working in pulmonary rehabilitation.\nClinical practice.\nRespiratory therapy, done by respiratory therapists, is a large variety of treatments to help with breathing and support the heart's work. Giving oxygen and drugs to ease breathing are two examples. Respiratory therapists also do patient assessments.\nIntensive care and operating room.\nRespiratory therapists educate, assist in diagnosis, and treat people who have heart and lung problems. Specialized in both cardiac and pulmonary care, respiratory therapists often collaborate with specialists in pulmonology and anaesthesia in various aspects of clinical care of patients. Respiratory therapists provide a vital role in both medicine and nursing such as the initiation and maintenance of mechanical ventilation.\nOutpatient clinical practice.\nRespiratory therapists are also primary clinicians in conducting tests to measure lung function and teaching people to manage asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder among other cardiac and lung functions.\nInternationally, respiratory therapists that provide lung function testing are termed respiratory scientists, but in North America, they may be a respiratory therapist.\nHome-health care.\nOutside of clinics and hospitals, respiratory therapists often manage home oxygen needs of patients and their families, providing around the clock support for home ventilators and other equipment for conditions like sleep apnea.\nIn the clinic or outpatient setting respiratory therapists assist with diagnosis and serve as an educator for patients with cardiac and respiratory illness. In the United States, respiratory therapists with certification as registered respiratory therapists evaluate and treat patients with a great deal of autonomy under the direction of a pulmonologist. In facilities that maintain critical care transport teams respiratory therapists are a preferred addition to all types of surface or air transport.\nPublic education.\nIn other settings respiratory therapists are found in schools as asthma educators, working with teachers and coaches about childhood symptoms of asthma and how to spot an emergency. In the United States, legislation has been unsuccessfully introduced several times to allow respiration therapists certified as asthma specialists with registered respiratory therapist certification to prescribe and manage previously diagnosed respiratory patients in physician clinics. In sleep clinics, respiratory therapists work with physicians in the diagnosis of sleep-related illnesses. Respiratory therapists in the United States are migrating toward a role with autonomy similar to the extension of the physician like the physician assistant. Respiratory therapists are frequently utilized as complete cardiovascular specialists to place and manage arterial accesses along with peripherally-inserted central catheters.\nCredentialing and licensure.\nUnited States and Canada.\nIn the United States and Canada, respiratory therapists are healthcare practitioners who, after receiving their education, complete a credentialing process and become a certified respiratory therapists (CRT) or registered respiratory therapists (RRTs).\nAfter satisfactorily completing the required examinations and being added to a registry, the practitioner is then eligible to apply for a license to practice in the region governed by their respective licensing body.\nIn the United States, specialist respiratory therapists are clinicians who hold National Board for Respiratory Care specialty credentials, which may include neonatal/pediatric specialist (CRT-NPS or RRT-NPS), adult critical care specialist (RRT-ACCS), sleep disorder specialist (CRT-SDS or RRT-SDS), and pulmonary function technologist (CPFT or RPFT). The NBRC's RRT-ACCS examination is the newest NBRC examination: it was introduced in 2012.\nIn the United States, one must obtain a degree in respiratory care and must then sit for the board exams to become a RRT. RRT is issued by the National Board for Respiratory Care after passing the Therapist Multiple-Choice Examination NBRC-TMC and Clinical Simulation Examination NBRC-CSE examinations. Eligibility for the NBRC-CSE examination is based on scoring high enough on the NBRC-TMC, and holding at least an Associate of Science in Respiratory Care. Professional credentials denoted as a Certified Asthma Educator (AE-C) may also be earned by passing the National Asthma Educator Certification Board (NAECB) exam.\nIn some parts of Canada, one may practice as a provisional respiratory therapist after graduating, until writing and passing the CBRC exam. The RRT certification is granted by examination from the Canadian Society of Respiratory Therapists.\nScope of practice.\nThe registered respiratory therapist is typically governed by their medical director for clinical services and their licensing body for laboratory, rehabilitation and home-health services. Trained in cardiology and pulmonology medicine. The registered respiratory therapist is prepared didactically and clinically to perform advanced procedures and emergency management. Actual scope of practice varies by region and institution.\nInternational respiratory care.\nExcept for the United States and Canada, very few countries have a dedicated professional role for respiratory health. In these countries, respiratory care is provided by physiotherapists, nurses and physicians that have chosen to specialize in this field. In many countries this recognition is in a transition stage; as an example, in 2011, a journal from China claimed that hospitals in Beijing, China began a recruitment drive to acquire respiratory therapists for their intensive care units where previously nurses were the only clinician.\nCanada.\nUpon graduation from an accredited school of respiratory therapy, the graduate is then eligible to write the national exam administered by the Canadian Board for Respiratory Care.\nSuccess on this examination will then allow the respiratory therapist to register with any licensing body in Canada. Alberta, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Quebec and Saskatchewan are the Canadian provinces with provincial licensing bodies; in these provinces, it is illegal to practice the profession of Respiratory Care without first being licensed as a full or provisional member with the provincial licensing body.\nThese provinces are so-called regulated provinces. In some provinces, one may work provisionally upon graduating, until writing and passing the exam. In all other jurisdictions, the licensing body for the profession of Respiratory Care is the Canadian Society for Respiratory Therapy.\nRegistration as a full member is optional for respiratory therapists living in regulated provinces, however, for respiratory therapists living in non-regulated provinces, registration as a full member with the CSRT is compulsory. Registration with the provincial regulatory body or the CSRT (in non-regulated provinces) confers upon the respiratory therapist the title of registered respiratory therapist (RRT). Canada and the United States recognize each of their cardio-pulmonary education structure as equal, however, a qualifying exam must be written in order to practice in either nation.\nThere is pressure for the program to become a degree, like other therapies (physical therapy, occupational therapy) now require a master's degree or greater. However, in some places such as Alberta, Canada the cardio-pulmonary course work is only offered at technical schools that are unable to grant a formal degree.\nFrance.\nRespiratory therapy is a sub-specialty of physical therapy in France. Respiratory care as a specialty is regulated by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Fran\u00e7aise des Masseurs Kin\u00e9sith\u00e9rapeutes R\u00e9\u00e9ducateurs.\nGermany.\nThe German Respiratory Society first issued a resolution to develop the dedicated respiratory therapist (RT) role in 2004 as a means to increase the quality of patient care, delegate physician duties and respond to the observed increase in respiratory conditions and diseases. In 2006, a year-long pilot training program was offered to established nurses and physiotherapists. Researchers report that significant\nadditional work is necessary to define and position the role of the respiratory therapist within the current healthcare system.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, the title of the respiratory therapist can be acquired applying to the master's degree in respiratory therapy. It consists of frontal lessons and various internships throughout Italian hospitals.\nPhilippines.\nIn Philippines respiratory therapists are clinicians who have been awarded at minimum a Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Care degree. Licenses to practice respiratory care are regulated by the Professional Regulatory Board of Respiratory therapy and Professional Regulation Commission which is established and legally maintained by the Philippine Respiratory Therapy Act (Republic Act No. 10024).\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nIn United Arab Emirates respiratory therapists must have been awarded a Bachelor of Science in Respiratory Care. An additional two-years of experience is required for foreign applicants. Licenses are maintained and awarded by the Dubai Health Authority. The Dubai Health Authority restricts respiratory therapists to working only in physical medicine and rehabilitation Centers, in hospitals, in surgical clinics with cardio-thoracic surgeons and with physicians in family/general practice or pulmonology.\nSaudi Arabia.\nSaudi Arabia utilizes respiratory therapists in a similar fashion to Canada and the U.S. Some respiratory therapists from North America travel to Saudi Arabia for temporary need.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, a respiratory therapist is an allied health professional who plays an integral role in the care of critically ill patients in the Intensive Care Units, managing patients on invasive and non-invasive mechanical ventilation, and other respiratory supportive devices. Respiratory therapists are recognized domain experts pertaining to respiratory care and are responsible to facilitate learning and training for respiratory care topics (mechanical ventilation management, artificial airway management, lung protective strategies, diagnostic procedures, etc) for medical students, nursing students, and health care colleagues (nurses, physicians, allied health professions) in the hospitals.\nAs part of their duties, some of the respiratory therapists are also routinely assigned to staff the emergency department, outpatient ambulatory clinics, diagnostic polysomnography laboratories, as well as the pulmonary function test laboratories to assist with the diagnostic procedures for patients.\nAll respiratory therapists in Singapore have a baccalaureate degree in respiratory therapy awarded by accredited institutions across the region and the United States and hold board certifications in their country of training.\nIn 2010, the Association of Respiratory Therapists Singapore (ARTS) was established as the national professional organization for respiratory therapists working in Singapore and is a recognized international affiliate of the American Association for Respiratory Therapists (AARC). In 2022, ARTS was also inducted as a council member into the International Council for Respiratory Therapists, with two established leaders serving as co-governors to represent the interests of respiratory therapists in Singapore.\nAs of 2024, services and care provided by respiratory therapists can be found in all public hospitals in the country and is continuing to grow at with demand.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, a respiratory therapist is a clinician who has at a minimum completed an Associate of Science in Respiratory Care degree along with a certification process. After satisfactorily completing required examinations either administered by the National Board for Respiratory Care or directly by the individual state licensing board (either the medical examiner's board or a special state respiratory care board), the practitioner is then eligible to apply for a license to practice in the region governed by their respective licensing body.\nThere are two recognized governing bodies in the United States: the State Board of Respiratory Care in the state in which a respiratory therapist is licensed to practice and the National Board for Respiratory Care (NBRC), a non-profit organization which regulates two levels of certification along with some additional specialist certifications.\nThe Certified Respiratory Therapist (CRT) is the certification given after successfully passing the Therapist Multiple Choice NBRC-TMC exam; the Registered Respiratory Therapist (RRT) certification is given after first making the RRT cut-off score on the TMC exam, and passing the Clinical Simulation Exam NBRC-CSE.\nMost state boards of respiratory care require proof of the appropriate NBRC credential and award various license titles, including (but not limited to) respiratory care practitioner, licensed registered respiratory therapist, and licensed certified respiratory therapist.\nThere has been a substantial push to standardize the state licensure by the American Association for Respiratory Care. The NBRC credential is renewed every 5 years for a fee in addition to fees assessed by the state boards of respiratory care.\nUnited Kingdom.\nRespiratory therapy in the UK is not a recognized specific profession, but a specialization route available to physicians, nurses, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists.\nCommon titles include cardio-respiratory physiotherapist, clinical respiratory physiologist (as well as other healthcare scientists), respiratory nurse and cardio-respiratory occupational therapist.\nAll UK trained physiotherapists receive advanced training in respiratory therapy theory and practice as a core component of their pre-registration physiotherapy degree program. Following qualification and a period of rotations throughout the core areas of physiotherapy practice, they may then follow a career pathway specializing in respiratory physiotherapy. Areas of practice include critical care, respiratory medicine, cystic fibrosis, asthma, hyperventilation syndrome, general and specialized surgery, non-invasive ventilation, ventilation weaning, cardiac and pulmonary rehab, respiratory therapy outpatient clinics and community respiratory therapy. The Association of Chartered Physiotherapists interested in respiratory care is the specialist interest group for UK physiotherapists working within the field of respiratory therapy. All physiotherapists working within the United Kingdom must be registered with the Health and Care Professions Council, regardless of their area of clinical practice, in order to be allowed to work in both the public and private sectors. Respiratory physiotherapy postgraduate master's degree and PhD programs exist within the United Kingdom for suitably qualified and experienced therapists.\nThe main grouping of healthcare scientists working in areas similar to respiratory therapists are respiratory and sleep physiologists. They perform the majority of comprehensive pulmonary physiological assessments (including cardiopulmonary exercise tests) as well as sleep studies. They might also manage non-invasive ventilation services and undertake allergy testing. Similarly, critical care scientists are involved in many aspects of patient critical care that respiratory therapists might, including the management and application of invasive ventilation technologies and other respiratory adjuncts as ell as point-of-care blood testing (including interpreting the results for other clinicians), but are also involved in other areas of critical care, such renal replacement therapy and non-respiratory related patient monitoring; Critical care scientists might also be involved in the provision of non-invasive ventilation services and pre-operative cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Other healthcare science groupings might also occasionally be involved in some of the physiological investigations mentioned above e.g. neurophysiologists might perform sleep studies to investigate neurological reasons for sleep disturbance, while cardiac scientist might perform cardiopulmonary exercise testing focused on the diagnosis of cardiac issues. Since the advent of modernising scientific careers, there have been a largely unitary model of accreditation pathway for Healthcare Scientists in the UK. The framework can be roughly divided into four stages: an associate/assistant stage (usually not holding any professional registration), a BSc-level practitioner stage eligible for voluntary registration (e.g.with the Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists or the Academy for Healthcare Science Healthcare Science Practitioner Register), an MSc-level Scientist stage where individuals are eligible for state registration as Clinical Scientists with the Health and Care Professions Council, and a doctoral-level stage that in addition to registration with the Health and Care Professions Council involves registration on the Academy for Healthcare Science Higher Specialist Scientist Register. Those on the Higher Specialist Scientist Register are largely equivalent in seniority to medical consultants, though they cannot prescribe; in Respiratory Science this might e.g. involve the advising on the provision of non-invasive ventilation to complex patients. Healthcare Scientists are usually trained to work with all patient age groups.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, the respiratory therapist is one of the allied health professionals who need minimum four-years Bachelor of Science in respiratory therapy (Care) for the license. According to the Health Professionals Act and Respiratory Therapist Act lawed in 2002, respiratory therapists require \"Senior Professional and Technical Examinations\" by the Ministry of Examination to get the license.\nMost respiratory therapists in Taiwan participate in adult, neonatal and pediatric ICU care for artificial airway maintenance, invasive or non-invasive ventilation management, aerosol therapy, oxygen therapy, inhaled Nitric oxide therapy, CPR, chest physiotherapy, artery blood gas analysis, pulmonary rehabilitation, and lung expansion therapy, etc.\nSome respiratory therapists also will be available in PFT (Pulmonary Function Testing) room or RCC (Respiratory Care Center) and RCW (Respiratory Care Ward) built for focusing on difficult-weaning patients' ventilator weaning. Moreover, after 5 years of experience in hospital, respiratory therapists can set up a home respiratory care office by themselves.\nNowadays, there are five colleges with the Department of Respiratory Therapy including Chang Gung University, Taipei Medical University, Kao Hsiung Medical University, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology (ChiaYi Campus), and Fu Jen Catholic University.\nYemen.\nRespiratory care in Yemen has started in 2005 and the profession has accredited by Yemeni Medical Council in 2020 as one of allied medical professions.\nRespiratory care professionals need to complete either minimum three years Associate of Science in Respiratory Care or four-years Bachelor of Science in respiratory care (BsRC) for the license called YRCLE. there are currently 3 accredited programs in bachelor degree and one postgraduate program as master of science in respiratory care in Yemen.\nYemen has joined https:// in 2020 as the third Arabic country after Saudi Arabia &amp; UAE. It has currently full member of https:// and Saleem N. Hamilah, BS, RCP, FNIV, MsRC is the official governor for Yemen.\nRespiratory Care Services Administration.\nThe Respiratory Care Services Administration (RCSA) is a governmental administration at Yemen's Ministry of Public Health &amp; Population established in July 2019.\nYemeni Association For Respiratory Care.\nThe Yemeni Association for Respiratory Care (YARC) is a non profit organization and is the only professional organization supporting Respiratory Care in the Yemen. In addition to attempting to help respiratory therapists nationally and locally, the YARC is trying to promote the profession as a whole to increase interest and membership. The YARC established in 2017.\nSpecialist respiratory therapists.\nAnesthesia assistants.\nThe traditional role of the operating room respiratory therapist has included providing technical support to the anesthesiologist for the proper use and maintenance of the anesthetic gas machine, in addition to also providing airway management. In Ontario, Canada, this role in the operating room has evolved to include a more advanced and specialized role with increasing responsibilities to the respiratory therapist. This \"anesthesia assistant\" is a distinct occupation from the American \"anesthesiologist assistant\". These Canadian respiratory therapists are academically prepared to perform activities such as sedation by the administration of anesthetic gases and medications, insertion and management of vascular (arterial and venous) access and assessment of the depth of anesthesia under the guidance of an anesthesiologist. This role is similar to the nurse anesthetist, except that an anesthesia assistant must have an anesthesiologist supervising them and a nurse anesthetist, does not.\nAsthma specialists.\nAsthma specialists work with clinics, hospitals and schools as an educator for teachers, parents, patients and practitioners on asthma and allergies. Respiratory therapists in the role as an asthma educator additionally help diagnose and treat asthma and other respiratory illness. Additionally, an asthma educator is the resource clinician in inpatient and outpatient environments for evaluating and advising physicians on treatment plans and helping facilitate patient understanding and compliance with the plan. In the United States, certified asthma educators (AE-C) are credentialed by the National Asthma Education Certification Board (NAECB).\nIn Canada, the Canadian Network for Respiratory Care administers two certifications for the specialization as respiratory therapist asthma educator, the certified asthma educator (CAE) (preferred by practitioners with a pediatric focus) and the certified respiratory educator (CRE), which comprises the CAE program with additional training in COPD.\nCystic fibrosis.\nRespiratory therapists work with people who cystic fibrosis in clinics and hospitals by educating them about their disease and working with them on a treatment plan. While admitted to a hospital, patients with cystic fibrosis have their treatment schedule modified and maintained by respiratory therapists. Maintaining a healthy schedule for pharmacokinetic and physical therapeutic airway clearance typically more frequent than home treatment plans because admissions are usually due to an increased need for therapy during the stay.\nCardiovascular perfusionist.\nRespiratory therapists are able to fulfill the role of perfusionist with appropriate training. The perfusionist is a highly trained member of the cardiothoracic surgical team (often time an RT with extra training) which consists of cardiac surgeons, anesthesiologists, physician assistants, surgical technicians, other respiratory therapists, and nurses. The perfusionist's main responsibility is to support the physiological and metabolic needs of the cardiac surgical patient so that the cardiac surgeon may operate on a still, unbeating heart. Perfusionist certifications are maintained and awarded by The American Board of Cardiovascular Perfusion.\nExtra-corporeal membrane oxygenation.\nExtracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a modified cardiopulmonary bypass technique used for the treatment of life-threatening cardiac or respiratory failure. An ECMO Clinical Specialist is a technical specialist trained to manage the ECMO system including blood pump, tubing, artificial oxygenator, and related equipment.\nThe ECMO Specialist is also responsible for the clinical needs of the patient on ECMO which may include bedside management of oxygenation and carbon dioxide removal, maintenance of normal acid-base balance, administration of medications, blood and blood products, and maintenance of appropriate anticoagulation therapies for the blood. This ECMO Clinical Specialist may be the bedside critical care nurse specifically trained in ECMO patient and circuit management, or the ECMO system may be primarily managed by a registered respiratory therapist, or physicians with training as ECMO clinical specialists.\nNeonatal &amp; pediatric intensive care.\nMuch like adult intensivist respiratory therapists, neonatal and pediatric specialists deal primarily with managing life support for the pediatric or neonatal patient. Pediatric respiratory therapists are trained extensively in antenatal and intrapartum patients and family. In the United States a specialist certification exists and is awarded by the National Board for Respiratory Care. Available to respiratory therapists holding certification as a certified respiratory therapist or registered respiratory therapist however the registered respiratory therapist is preferred by most institutions.\nSleep disorder specialist.\n Respiratory therapists monitor, interpret and diagnose findings from a sleep study, as well as the medical history and physical exam to make the diagnosis and decide on treatment related to sleep-disorders. A sleep study can also help diagnose narcolepsy.\nIn the United States a sleep disorder specialist can be a registered respiratory therapist with the sleep disorder specialist certification (RRT-SDS) who performs sleep disorders testing and therapeutic intervention along with a diagnosis of sleep-related disease such as Obstructive Sleep Apnea or Central Apnea. In Canada, it is often an RT with additional training to become a Registered Polysomnography Technician (RPSGT)\nCase management.\nCase management is a collaborative process that assesses, plans, implements, coordinates, monitors, and evaluates the options and services required to meet the client's health and human services needs. It is characterized by advocacy, communication, and resource management and promotes quality and cost-effective interventions and outcomes. Eligibility and certification is maintained by the Commission for Case Management Certification, a body certifying healthcare professionals in the United States.\nSurface &amp; air transport specialist.\nRespiratory therapists work with nurses, physicians, and paramedics in emergency flight and ground transport. They are a vital practitioner delivering care inside helicopters, air ambulance or ground ambulance working to pick up a patient and move them to a facility that has what they need. In the United States certification for transport (C-NPT) is currently awarded by The National Certification Corporation.\nPulmonary research and science.\nRespiratory therapists are sometimes referred to as respiratory scientists who are specialists in pulmonary function. Respiratory therapists work with Pulmonologists in both clinical and general research of the respiratory system, ranging from the anatomy of the respiratory epithelium to the most effective treatment of pulmonary hypertension in pediatrics. Scientific research also takes place to look for causes and possible treatment in diseases such as asthma and lung cancer.\nHistory of respiratory care.\nThe profession of respiratory care was officially established in the United States c.\u20091930; and respiratory research has officially existed since the early 1900s. During the early years, respiratory therapists were referred to as \"oxygen technicians\", and most of their activities involved moving cylinders of compressed gas and administering oxygen via nasal catheter or oxygen tent. Most oxygen technicians were trained on the job, although brief training programs began to appear in the late 1940s and 1950s.\nToday the profession hardly resembles what it was in the 1940s. Respiratory therapists provide direct care, patient education, and care coordination. They are academically trained in respiratory nursing and respiratory medicine. They practice in acute care facilities, long-term acute care facilities, skilled nursing facilities, assisted-living centers, subacute care units, rehabilitation centers, diagnostics units, and in the home. Respiratory therapist training has also dramatically changed. Current accreditation standards require Respiratory therapists to have, at minimum, an Associate of Science in Respiratory Care degree from an accredited program. Legal requirements to practice respiratory therapy have also dramatically changed. 49 states now legally recognize respiratory therapists. Limited permits or state licenses are now required in all states except Alaska, which has no statutory authority over the practice of respiratory care. All states that have licensure requirements also require continuing education.\nIn 2007 the American Association for Respiratory Care (AARC) began developing recommendations for the promotion of the field of respiratory care in the United States in response to increased concern regarding licensure and credentialing issues as well as international recognition of those practicing in the United States. The task force decided to recommend that by 2015 the minimum education requirement for licensure and certification as a respiratory therapist be a bachelor of science in respiratory therapy (BSRT). The AARC task force also recommended the American Respiratory Care Foundation change its scholarship policies and only award assistance and grants to those working toward a bachelor's degree. The Committee on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (CoARC) was asked by the AARC task force to change its accreditation standards and no longer accredit associates level respiratory care programs. The CoARC replied by a press release rejecting the recommendation. In 2011 legislation introduced by the AARC will help improve the use of respiratory therapists in clinical applications by allowing them to manage patients with asthma and COPD seeing a clinic for routine checkups. Similar bills have been introduced before and have died in committee.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48618", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48618", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for Poetry", "text": "American award for distinguished poetry\nThe Pulitzer Prize for Poetry is one of the seven American Pulitzer Prizes awarded annually for Letters, Drama, and Music. The award came five years after the first Pulitzers were awarded in other categories; Joseph Pulitzer's will had not mentioned poetry. It was first presented in 1922, and is given for a distinguished volume of original verse by an American author, published during the preceding calendar year.\nBefore the establishment of the award, the 1918 and 1919 Pulitzer cycles included three Pulitzer Prize Special Citations and Awards (called at the time the Columbia University Poetry Prize) for poetry books funded by \"a special grant from The Poetry Society.\" See Special Pulitzers for Letters.\nHarriet Monroe, founding publisher and long-time editor of \"Poetry\" magazine, wrote in an editorial (Apr.\u2013Sept., 1922), \"The award of a Pulitzer Prize of one thousand dollars to the \"Collected Poems of Edwin Arlington Robinson\" is a most agreeable surprise, as this is the first Pulitzer Prize ever granted to a poet. Four years ago, when the Poetry Society of America gave its first annual five hundred dollars to Sara Teasdale's \"Love Songs\", the award, being made in conjunction with the Pulitzer prizes, was falsely attributed to the same origin.\"\nFinalists have been announced since 1980, ordinarily two others beside the winner.\nWinners.\nIn its first 92 years to 2013, the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry was awarded 92 times. Two were given in 2008, none in 1946. Robert Frost won the prize four times and several others won it more than once (below).\nMultiple wins and nominations.\nThe following individuals received two or more Pulitzer Prizes for Poetry (The 1918 and 1919 Special Prizes are included):\nThe following individuals received two or more nominations:\nBolded years are years that the poet won\nRobert Frost won the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry four times from 1924 to 1943. Edwin Arlington Robinson won three prizes during the 1920s and several people, all male, have won two.\nCarl Sandburg won one of the special prizes for his poetry in 1919 and won the Poetry Pulitzer in 1951. \nOnly four women have had multiple nominations: Adrienne Rich with 4, and Louise Gl\u00fcck, Jorie Graham and Diane Seuss with 2 each.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48621", "revid": "10521907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48621", "title": "Grassroots democracy", "text": "Type that favors individual activism\nGrassroots democracy is a tendency towards designing political processes that shift as much decision-making authority as practical to the organization's lowest geographic or social level of organization. \nGrassroots organizations can have a variety of structures; depending on the type of organization and what the members want. These can be non-structured and non-hierarchical organizations that are run by all members, or by whichever member wishes to do something. \nTo cite a specific hypothetical example, a national grassroots organization would place as much decision-making power as possible in the hands of local chapters or common members instead of the head office. The principle is that for democratic power to be best exercised it must be vested in a local community and common members instead of isolated, atomized individuals, at the top of the organization. Grassroots organizations can inhabit participatory systems. Grassroots systems differ from representative systems that allow local communities or national memberships to elect representatives who then go on to make decisions.\nThe difference among the three systems comes down to where they rest on two different axes: the rootedness in a community (grassroots versus national or international); and the ability of all individuals to participate in the shared decision-making process (participatory versus representative).\nAs an economic system.\nGrassroots democracy is a key component of libertarian socialist political philosophies, which, for various reasons, advocate putting firms under the control of local communities or councils. For example, eco-socialists argue that firms should be controlled by the group of people whose ecosystem is directly affected by that firm's activity. Meanwhile, Anarchists view contemporary forms of employment as examples of unjust and unnecessary forms of hierarchy and centralization. Finally, Libertarian Marxists view history as a struggle between various social groups where the inclusive nature of a grassroots economy will enable new socioeconomic groups to emerge such that these struggles will abate, thereby, improving the human condition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48624", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48624", "title": "English civil war", "text": ""}
{"id": "48625", "revid": "156441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48625", "title": "Worldwide Green Parties", "text": ""}
{"id": "48626", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48626", "title": "War crime", "text": "Act violating the laws of war\nA war crime is a violation of the laws of war that gives rise to individual criminal responsibility for actions by combatants in action, such as intentionally killing civilians or intentionally killing prisoners of war, torture, taking hostages, unnecessarily destroying civilian property, deception by perfidy, wartime sexual violence, pillaging, and for any individual that is part of the command structure who orders any attempt to committing mass killings (including genocide or ethnic cleansing), the granting of no quarter despite surrender, the conscription of children in the military, and flouting the legal distinctions of proportionality and military necessity.\nThe formal concept of war crimes emerged from countries fighting and the codification of the customary international law that applied to warfare between sovereign states, such as the Lieber Code (1863) of the Union Army in the American Civil War and the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 for international war. In the aftermath of World War II, the war-crime trials of the leaders of the Axis powers established the Nuremberg principles, such as that international criminal law defines what is a war crime. In 1899, the Geneva Conventions legally defined new war crimes and established that states could exercise universal jurisdiction over war criminals. In the late 20th century and early 21st century, international courts extrapolated and defined additional categories of war crimes applicable to a civil war.\nHistory.\nEarly examples.\nIn 1474, the first trial for a war crime was that of Peter von Hagenbach, realised by an ad hoc tribunal of the Holy Roman Empire, for his command responsibility for the actions of his soldiers, because \"he, as a knight, was deemed to have a duty to prevent\" criminal behaviour by a military force. Despite having argued that he had obeyed superior orders, von Hagenbach was convicted, condemned to death, and beheaded.\nHague Conventions.\nThe Hague Conventions were international treaties negotiated at the First and Second Peace Conferences at The Hague, Netherlands, in 1899 and 1907, respectively, and were, along with the Geneva Conventions, among the first formal statements of the laws of war and war crimes in the nascent body of secular international law.\nLieber Code.\nThe Lieber Code was written early in the American Civil War and President Abraham Lincoln issued as General Order 100 on 24 April 1863, just months after the military executions at Mankato, Minnesota. General Order 100, \"\u201cInstructions for the Government of the Armies of the United States in the Field,\"\" (Lieber Code) was written by Franz Lieber, a German lawyer, political philosopher, and veteran of the Napoleonic Wars. Lincoln made the Code military law for all wartime conduct of the Union Army. It defined command responsibility for war crimes and crimes against humanity as well as stated the military responsibilities of the Union soldier fighting the Confederate States of America.\nGeneva Conventions.\nThe Geneva Conventions are four related treaties adopted and continuously expanded from 1864 to 1949 that represent a legal basis and framework for the conduct of war under international law. Every single member state of the United Nations has currently ratified the conventions, which are universally accepted as customary international law, applicable to every situation of armed conflict in the world. The Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions adopted in 1977 containing the most pertinent, detailed and comprehensive protections of international humanitarian law for persons and objects in modern warfare are still not ratified by several states continuously engaged in armed conflicts, namely the United States, Israel, India, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, and others. Accordingly, states retain different codes and values about wartime conduct. Some signatories have routinely violated the Geneva Conventions in a way that either uses the ambiguities of law or political maneuvering to sidestep the laws' formalities and principles.\nThe first three conventions have been revised and expanded, with the fourth one added in 1949:\nTwo Additional Protocols were adopted in 1977 with the third one added in 2005, completing and updating the Geneva Conventions:\nLeipzig trials.\nJust after the First World War, world governments started to try and systematically create a code for how war crimes would be defined. Their first outline of a law was \"\"Instructions for the Government of Armies of the United States in the Field\",\u201d also known as the \"Lieber Code.\" A small number of German military personnel of the World War I were tried in 1921 by the German Supreme Court for alleged war crimes.\nNuremberg trials 1945.\nThe modern concept of war crime was further developed under the auspices of the Nuremberg trials based on the definition in the London Charter that was published on 8 August 1945 (see Nuremberg principles). Along with war crimes the charter also defined crimes against peace and crimes against humanity, which are often committed during wars and in concert with war crimes.\nInternational Military Tribunal for the Far East 1946.\nAlso known as the Tokyo Trial, the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal was convened on 3 May 1946, to try the leaders of the Empire of Japan for three types of crimes: \"Class A\" (crimes against peace), \"Class B\" (war crimes), and \"Class C\" (crimes against humanity), committed during the Second World War.\nInternational Criminal Court.\nOn 1 July 2002, the International Criminal Court (ICC), a treaty-based international court located in The Hague, came into being for the prosecution of war crimes committed on or after that date. Several nations, most notably the United States, China, Russia, and Israel, have criticized the court. The United States still participates as an observer. Article 12 of the Rome Statute provides jurisdiction over the citizens of non-contracting states if they are accused of committing crimes in the territory of one of the state parties.\nThe ICC only has jurisdiction over these crimes when they are \"part of a plan or policy or as part of a large-scale commission of such crimes.\"\nProminent indictees.\nHeads of state and government.\nTo date, the present and former heads of state and heads of government that have been charged with war crimes include:\nDefinition.\nWar crimes are serious violations of the rules of customary and treaty law concerning international humanitarian law, criminal offenses for which there is individual responsibility.\nColloquial definitions of \"war crime\" include violations of established protections of the \"laws of war\", but also include failures to adhere to norms of procedure and rules of battle, such as attacking those displaying a peaceful flag of truce, or using that same flag as a ruse to mount an attack on enemy troops. The use of chemical and biological weapons in warfare are also prohibited by numerous chemical arms control agreements and the Biological Weapons Convention. Wearing enemy uniforms or civilian clothes to infiltrate enemy lines for espionage or sabotage missions is a legitimate ruse of war, though fighting in combat or assassinating individuals behind enemy lines while so disguised is not, as it constitutes unlawful perfidy. Attacking enemy troops while they are being deployed by way of a parachute is not a war crime. Protocol I, Article 42 of the Geneva Conventions explicitly forbids attacking parachutists who eject from disabled aircraft and surrendering parachutists once landed. Article 30 of the 1907 \"Hague Convention IV \u2013 The Laws and Customs of War on Land\" explicitly forbids belligerents to punish enemy spies without previous trial.\nThe rule of war, also known as the law of armed conflict, permits belligerents to engage in combat. A war crime occurs when superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering is inflicted upon an enemy. War crimes are significant in international humanitarian law because it is an area where international tribunals such as the Nuremberg Trials and Tokyo Trials have been convened. Recent examples are the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which were established by the Security Council acting under Chapter VIII of the UN Charter.\nUnder the Nuremberg Principles, \"war crimes\" are different from crimes against peace. Crimes against peace include planning, preparing, initiating, or waging a war of aggression, or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements, or assurances. Because the definition of a state of \"war\" may be debated, the term \"war crime\" itself has seen different usage under different systems of international and military law. It has some degree of application outside of what some may consider being a state of \"war\", but in areas where conflicts persist enough to constitute social instability.\nWar crimes also include such acts as mistreatment of prisoners of war or civilians. War crimes are sometimes part of instances of mass murder and genocide though these crimes are more broadly covered under international humanitarian law described as crimes against humanity. In 2008, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1820, which noted that \"rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide\"; see also wartime sexual violence. In 2016, the International Criminal Court convicted someone of sexual violence for the first time; specifically, they added rape to a war crimes conviction of Congo Vice President Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo.\nWar crimes also included deliberate attacks on citizens and property of neutral states, such as the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. As the attack on Pearl Harbor happened while the U.S. and Japan were at peace and without a just cause for self-defense, the attack was declared by the Tokyo Trials to go beyond justification of military necessity and therefore constituted a war crime.\nThe legalities of war have sometimes been accused of containing favoritism toward the winners (\"victor's justice\"), as some controversies have not been ruled as war crimes. Some examples include the Allies' destruction of Axis cities during World War II, such as the firebombing of Dresden, the \"Operation Meetinghouse\" raid on Tokyo (the most destructive single bombing raid in history), and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In regard to the strategic bombing during World War II, there was no international treaty or instrument protecting a civilian population specifically from attack by aircraft, therefore the aerial attacks on civilians were not officially war crimes. The Allies at the trials in Nuremberg and Tokyo never prosecuted the Germans, including Luftwaffe commander-in-chief Hermann G\u00f6ring, for the bombing raids on Warsaw, Rotterdam, and British cities during the Blitz as well as the indiscriminate attacks on Allied cities with V-1 flying bombs and V-2 rockets, nor the Japanese for the aerial attacks on crowded Chinese cities.\nControversy arose when the Allies re-designated German prisoners of war (under the protection of the 1929 Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War) as Disarmed Enemy Forces (allegedly unprotected by the 1929 Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War), many of which were then used for forced labor such as clearing minefields. By December 1945, six months after the war had ended, it was estimated by French authorities that 2,000 German prisoners were still being killed or maimed each month in mine-clearing accidents. The wording of the 1949 Third Geneva Convention was intentionally altered from that of the 1929 convention so that soldiers who \"fall into the power\" following surrender or mass capitulation of an enemy are now protected as well as those taken prisoner in the course of fighting.\nUnited Nations.\nThe United Nations defines war crimes as described in Article 8 of the Rome Statute, the treaty that established the International Criminal Court.\nRome Statute.\nArticle 8 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court defines war crimes as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLegality of civilian casualties.\nUnder the law of armed conflict (LOAC), the death of non-combatants is not necessarily a violation; there are many things to take into account. Civilians \"cannot\" be made the object of an attack, but the death/injury of civilians while conducting an attack on a military objective are governed under principles such as of proportionality and military necessity and can be permissible. Military necessity \"permits the destruction of life of\u00a0\u2026 persons whose destruction is incidentally unavoidable by the armed conflicts of the war;\u00a0\u2026 it does not permit the killing of innocent inhabitants for purposes of revenge or the satisfaction of a lust to kill. The destruction of property to be lawful must be imperatively demanded by the necessities of war.\"\nFor example, conducting an operation on an ammunition depot or a terrorist training camp would not be prohibited because a farmer is plowing a field in the area; the farmer is not the object of attack and the operations would adhere to proportionality and military necessity. On the other hand, an extraordinary military advantage would be necessary to justify an operation posing risks of collateral death or injury to thousands of civilians. In \"grayer\" cases the legal question of whether the expected incidental harm is excessive may be very subjective. For this reason, States have chosen to apply a \"clearly excessive\" standard for determining whether a criminal violation has occurred.\nWhen there is no justification for military action, such as civilians being made the object of attack, a proportionality analysis is unnecessary to conclude that the attack is unlawful.\nInternational Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.\nFor aerial strikes, pilots generally have to rely on information supplied by external sources (headquarters, ground troops) that a specific position is in fact a military target. In the case of former Yugoslavia, NATO pilots hit a civilian object (the Chinese embassy in Belgrade) that was of no military significance, but the pilots had no idea of determining it aside from their orders. The committee ruled that \"the aircrew involved in the attack should not be assigned any responsibility for the fact they were given the wrong target and that it is inappropriate to attempt to assign criminal responsibility for the incident to senior leaders because they were provided with wrong information by officials of another agency\". The report also notes that \"Much of the material submitted to the OTP consisted of reports that civilians had been killed, often inviting the conclusion to be drawn that crimes had therefore been committed. Collateral casualties to civilians and collateral damage to civilian objects can occur for a variety of reasons.\"\nRendulic Rule.\nThe Rendulic Rule is a standard by which commanders are judged.\nGerman General Lothar Rendulic was charged for ordering extensive destruction of civilian buildings and lands while retreating from a suspected enemy attack in what is called scorched earth policy for the military purpose of denying the use of ground for the enemy. The German troops retreating from Finnish Lapland believed Finland would be occupied by Soviet troops and destroyed many settlements while retreating to Norway under the command of Rendulic. He overestimated the perceived risk but argued that Hague IV authorized the destruction because it was necessary to war. He was acquitted of that charge.\nUnder the \"Rendulic Rule\" persons must assess the military necessity of an action based on the information available to them at that time; they cannot be judged based on information that subsequently comes to light.\nSee also.\nCountry listings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLegal issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMiscellaneous.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48628", "revid": "18426370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48628", "title": "Gaussian integer", "text": "Complex number whose real and imaginary parts are both integers\nIn number theory, a Gaussian integer is a complex number whose real and imaginary parts are both integers. The Gaussian integers, with ordinary addition and multiplication of complex numbers, form an integral domain, usually written as formula_1 or formula_2 \nGaussian integers share many properties with integers: they form a Euclidean domain, and thus have a Euclidean division and a Euclidean algorithm; this implies unique factorization and many related properties. However, Gaussian integers do not have a total order that respects arithmetic. \nGaussian integers are algebraic integers and form the simplest ring of quadratic integers.\nGaussian integers are named after the German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss.\nBasic definitions.\nThe Gaussian integers are the set\nformula_3\nIn other words, a Gaussian integer is a complex number such that its real and imaginary parts are both integers.\nSince the Gaussian integers are closed under addition and multiplication, they form a commutative ring, which is a subring of the field of complex numbers. It is thus an integral domain.\nWhen considered within the complex plane, the Gaussian integers constitute the 2-dimensional square lattice.\nThe \"conjugate\" of a Gaussian integer \"a\" + \"bi\" is the Gaussian integer \"a\" \u2212 \"bi\".\nThe \"norm\" of a Gaussian integer is its product with its conjugate.\nformula_4\nThe norm of a Gaussian integer is thus the square of its absolute value as a complex number. The norm of a Gaussian integer is a nonnegative integer, which is a sum of two squares. By the sum of two squares theorem, a norm cannot have a factor formula_5 in its prime decomposition where formula_6 and formula_7 is odd (in particular, a norm is not itself congruent to 3 modulo 4).\nThe norm is multiplicative, that is, one has\nformula_8\nfor every pair of Gaussian integers \"z\", \"w\". This can be shown directly, or by using the multiplicative property of the modulus of complex numbers.\nThe units of the ring of Gaussian integers (that is the Gaussian integers whose multiplicative inverse is also a Gaussian integer) are precisely the Gaussian integers with norm 1, that is, 1, \u22121, \"i\" and \u2212\"i\".\nEuclidean division.\nGaussian integers have a Euclidean division (division with remainder) similar to that of integers and polynomials. This makes the Gaussian integers a Euclidean domain, and implies that Gaussian integers share with integers and polynomials many important properties such as the existence of a Euclidean algorithm for computing greatest common divisors, B\u00e9zout's identity, the principal ideal property, Euclid's lemma, the unique factorization theorem, and the Chinese remainder theorem, all of which can be proved using only Euclidean division.\nA Euclidean division algorithm takes, in the ring of Gaussian integers, a dividend \"a\" and divisor \"b\" \u2260 0, and produces a quotient \"q\" and remainder \"r\" such that\nformula_9\nIn fact, one may make the remainder smaller:\nformula_10\nEven with this better inequality, the quotient and the remainder are not necessarily unique, but one may refine the choice to ensure uniqueness.\nTo prove this, one may consider the complex number quotient \"x\" + \"iy\" \n . There are unique integers \"m\" and \"n\" such that \u2212 &lt; \"x\" \u2212 \"m\" \u2264 and \u2212 &lt; \"y\" \u2212 \"n\" \u2264, and thus \"N\"(\"x\" \u2212 \"m\" + \"i\"(\"y\" \u2212 \"n\")) \u2264. Taking \"q\" = \"m\" + \"in\", one has\nformula_11\nwith\nformula_12\nand\nformula_13\nThe choice of \"x\" \u2212 \"m\" and \"y\" \u2212 \"n\" in a semi-open interval is required for uniqueness.\nThis definition of Euclidean division may be interpreted geometrically in the complex plane (see the figure), by remarking that the distance from a complex number \u03be to the closest Gaussian integer is at most .\nPrincipal ideals.\nSince the ring \"G\" of Gaussian integers is a Euclidean domain, \"G\" is a principal ideal domain, which means that every ideal of G is principal. Explicitly, an ideal I is a subset of a ring R such that every sum of elements of I and every product of an element of I by an element of R belong to I. An ideal is principal if it consists of all multiples of a single element \"g\", that is, it has the form\nformula_14\nIn this case, one says that the ideal is \"generated\" by \"g\" or that \"g\" is a \"generator\" of the ideal.\nEvery ideal \"I\" in the ring of the Gaussian integers is principal, because, if one chooses in \"I\" a nonzero element \"g\" of minimal norm, for every element \"x\" of \"I\", the remainder of Euclidean division of \"x\" by \"g\" belongs also to \"I\" and has a norm that is smaller than that of \"g\"; because of the choice of \"g\", this norm is zero, and thus the remainder is also zero. That is, one has \"x\" = \"qg\", where \"q\" is the quotient.\nFor any \"g\", the ideal generated by \"g\" is also generated by any \"associate\" of \"g\", that is, \"g\", \"gi\", \u2212\"g\", \u2212\"gi\"; no other element generates the same ideal. As all the generators of an ideal have the same norm, the \"norm of an ideal\" is the norm of any of its generators.\nIn some circumstances, it is useful to choose, once for all, a generator for each ideal. There are two classical ways for doing that, both considering first the ideals of odd norm. If the \"g\" = \"a\" + \"bi\" has an odd norm \"a\"2 + \"b\"2, then one of \"a\" and \"b\" is odd, and the other is even. Thus \"g\" has exactly one associate with a real part \"a\" that is odd and positive. In his original paper, Gauss made another choice, by choosing the unique associate such that the remainder of its division by 2 + 2\"i\" is one. In fact, as \"N\"(2 + 2\"i\") = 8, the norm of the remainder is not greater than 4. As this norm is odd, and 3 is not the norm of a Gaussian integer, the norm of the remainder is one, that is, the remainder is a unit. Multiplying \"g\" by the inverse of this unit, one finds an associate that has one as a remainder, when divided by 2 + 2\"i\".\nIf the norm of \"g\" is even, then either \"g\" = 2\"k\"\"h\" or \"g\" = 2\"k\"\"h\"(1 + \"i\"), where \"k\" is a positive integer, and \"N\"(\"h\") is odd. Thus, one chooses the associate of \"g\" for getting a \"h\" which fits the choice of the associates for elements of odd norm.\nGaussian primes.\nAs the Gaussian integers form a principal ideal domain, they also form a unique factorization domain. This implies that a Gaussian integer is irreducible (that is, it is not the product of two non-units) if and only if it is prime (that is, it generates a prime ideal).\nThe prime elements of Z[\"i\"] are also known as Gaussian primes. An associate of a Gaussian prime is also a Gaussian prime. The conjugate of a Gaussian prime is also a Gaussian prime (this implies that Gaussian primes are symmetric about the real and imaginary axes).\nA positive integer is a Gaussian prime if and only if it is a prime number that is congruent to 3 modulo 4 (that is, it may be written 4\"n\" + 3, with \"n\" a nonnegative integer) (sequence in the OEIS). The other prime numbers are not Gaussian primes, but each is the product of two conjugate Gaussian primes.\nA Gaussian integer \"a\" + \"bi\" is a Gaussian prime if and only if either:\nIn other words, a Gaussian integer \"m\" is a Gaussian prime if and only if either its norm is a prime number, or \"m\" is the product of a unit (\u00b11, \u00b1\"i\") and a prime number of the form 4\"n\" + 3.\nIt follows that there are three cases for the factorization of a prime natural number \"p\" in the Gaussian integers:\n (1 + \"i\")(1 \u2212 \"i\") \n \"i\"(1 \u2212 \"i\")2; that is, 2 is the product of the square of a Gaussian prime by a unit; it is the unique ramified prime in the Gaussian integers.\nUnique factorization.\nAs for every unique factorization domain, every Gaussian integer may be factored as a product of a unit and Gaussian primes, and this factorization is unique up to the order of the factors, and the replacement of any prime by any of its associates (together with a corresponding change of the unit factor).\nIf one chooses, once for all, a fixed Gaussian prime for each equivalence class of associated primes, and if one takes only these selected primes in the factorization, then one obtains a prime factorization which is unique up to the order of the factors. With the choices described above, the resulting unique factorization has the form\nformula_15\nwhere \"u\" is a unit (that is, \"u\" \u2208 {1, \u22121, \"i\", \u2212\"i\"}), \"e\"0 and \"k\" are nonnegative integers, \"e\"1, \u2026, \"ek\" are positive integers, and \"p\"1, \u2026, \"pk\" are distinct Gaussian primes such that, depending on the choice of selected associates,\n \"ak\" + \"ibk\" with \"a\" odd and positive, and \"b\" even,\nAn advantage of the second choice is that the selected associates behave well under products for Gaussian integers of odd norm. On the other hand, the selected associate for the real Gaussian primes are negative integers. For example, the factorization of 231 in the integers, and with the first choice of associates is 3 \u00d7 7 \u00d7 11, while it is (\u22121) \u00d7 (\u22123) \u00d7 (\u22127) \u00d7 (\u221211) with the second choice.\nGaussian rationals.\nThe field of Gaussian rationals is the field of fractions of the ring of Gaussian integers. It consists of the complex numbers whose real and imaginary part are both rational.\nThe ring of Gaussian integers is the integral closure of the integers in the Gaussian rationals.\nThis implies that Gaussian integers are quadratic integers and that a Gaussian rational is a Gaussian integer, if and only if it is a solution of an equation\nformula_16\nwith \"c\" and \"d\" integers. In fact \"a\" + \"bi\" is solution of the equation\nformula_17\nand this equation has integer coefficients if and only if \"a\" and \"b\" are both integers.\nGreatest common divisor.\nAs for any unique factorization domain, a \"greatest common divisor (gcd)\" of two Gaussian integers \"a\", \"b\" is a Gaussian integer \"d\" that is a common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\", which has all common divisors of \"a\" and \"b\" as divisor. That is (where | denotes the divisibility relation),\nThus, \"greatest\" is meant relatively to the divisibility relation, and not for an ordering of the ring (for integers, both meanings of \"greatest\" coincide).\nMore technically, a greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\" is a generator of the ideal generated by \"a\" and \"b\" (this characterization is valid for principal ideal domains, but not, in general, for unique factorization domains).\nThe greatest common divisor of two Gaussian integers is not unique, but is defined up to the multiplication by a unit. That is, given a greatest common divisor \"d\" of \"a\" and \"b\", the greatest common divisors of \"a\" and \"b\" are \"d\", \u2212\"d\", \"id\", and \u2212\"id\".\nThere are several ways for computing a greatest common divisor of two Gaussian integers \"a\" and \"b\". When one knows the prime factorizations of \"a\" and \"b\",\nformula_18\nwhere the primes \"pm\" are pairwise non associated, and the exponents \"\u03bcm\" non-associated, a greatest common divisor is\nformula_19\nwith\nformula_20\nUnfortunately, except in simple cases, the prime factorization is difficult to compute, and Euclidean algorithm leads to a much easier (and faster) computation. This algorithm consists of replacing of the input (\"a\", \"b\") by (\"b\", \"r\"), where \"r\" is the remainder of the Euclidean division of \"a\" by \"b\", and repeating this operation until getting a zero remainder, that is a pair (\"d\", 0). This process terminates, because, at each step, the norm of the second Gaussian integer decreases. The resulting \"d\" is a greatest common divisor, because (at each step) \"b\" and \"r\" = \"a\" \u2212 \"bq\" have the same divisors as \"a\" and \"b\", and thus the same greatest common divisor.\nThis method of computation works always, but is not as simple as for integers because Euclidean division is more complicated. Therefore, a third method is often preferred for hand-written computations. It consists in remarking that the norm \"N\"(\"d\") of the greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\" is a common divisor of \"N\"(\"a\"), \"N\"(\"b\"), and \"N\"(\"a\" + \"b\"). When the greatest common divisor \"D\" of these three integers has few factors, then it is easy to test, for common divisor, all Gaussian integers with a norm dividing \"D\".\nFor example, if \"a\" = 5 + 3\"i\", and \"b\" = 2 \u2212 8\"i\", one has \"N\"(\"a\") = 34, \"N\"(\"b\") = 68, and \"N\"(\"a\" + \"b\") = 74. As the greatest common divisor of the three norms is 2, the greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\" has 1 or 2 as a norm. As a gaussian integer of norm 2 is necessarily associated to 1 + \"i\", and as 1 + \"i\" divides \"a\" and \"b\", then the greatest common divisor is 1 + \"i\".\nIf \"b\" is replaced by its conjugate \"b\" = 2 + 8\"i\", then the greatest common divisor of the three norms is 34, the norm of \"a\", thus one may guess that the greatest common divisor is \"a\", that is, that \"a\" | \"b\". In fact, one has 2 + 8\"i\" = (5 + 3\"i\")(1 + \"i\").\nCongruences and residue classes.\nGiven a Gaussian integer \"z\"0, called a \"modulus\", two Gaussian integers \"z\"1,\"z\"2 are \"congruent modulo\" \"z\"0, if their difference is a multiple of \"z\"0, that is if there exists a Gaussian integer \"q\" such that \"z\"1 \u2212 \"z\"2 \n \"qz\"0. In other words, two Gaussian integers are congruent modulo \"z\"0, if their difference belongs to the ideal generated by \"z\"0. This is denoted as \"z\"1 \u2261 \"z\"2 (mod \"z\"0).\nThe congruence modulo \"z\"0 is an equivalence relation (also called a congruence relation), which defines a partition of the Gaussian integers into equivalence classes, called here congruence classes or \"residue classes\". The set of the residue classes is usually denoted Z[\"i\"]/\"z\"0Z[\"i\"], or Z[\"i\"]/\u27e8\"z\"0\u27e9, or simply Z[\"i\"]/\"z\"0.\nThe residue class of a Gaussian integer \"a\" is the set\nformula_21\nof all Gaussian integers that are congruent to \"a\". It follows that if and only if \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"z\"0).\nAddition and multiplication are compatible with congruences. This means that \"a\"1 \u2261 \"b\"1 (mod \"z\"0) and \"a\"2 \u2261 \"b\"2 (mod \"z\"0) imply \"a\"1 + \"a\"2 \u2261 \"b\"1 + \"b\"2 (mod \"z\"0) and \"a\"1\"a\"2 \u2261 \"b\"1\"b\"2 (mod \"z\"0).\nThis defines well-defined operations (that is independent of the choice of representatives) on the residue classes:\nformula_22\nWith these operations, the residue classes form a commutative ring, the quotient ring of the Gaussian integers by the ideal generated by \"z\"0, which is also traditionally called the \"residue class ring modulo\"\u00a0\"z\"0 (for more details, see Quotient ring).\nExamples.\n (\"i\" \u2212 1)3 there are eight residue classes, namely , whereof four contain only even Gaussian integers and four contain only odd Gaussian integers.\nDescribing residue classes.\nGiven a modulus \"z\"0, all elements of a residue class have the same remainder for the Euclidean division by \"z\"0, provided one uses the division with unique quotient and remainder, which is described above. Thus enumerating the residue classes is equivalent with enumerating the possible remainders. This can be done geometrically in the following way.\nIn the complex plane, one may consider a square grid, whose squares are delimited by the two lines\nformula_23\nwith \"s\" and \"t\" integers (blue lines in the figure). These divide the plane in semi-open squares (where \"m\" and \"n\" are integers)\nformula_24\nThe semi-open intervals that occur in the definition of \"Qmn\" have been chosen in order that every complex number belong to exactly one square; that is, the squares \"Qmn\" form a partition of the complex plane. One has\nformula_25\nThis implies that every Gaussian integer is congruent modulo \"z\"0 to a unique Gaussian integer in \"Q\"00 (the green square in the figure), which its remainder for the division by \"z\"0. In other words, every residue class contains exactly one element in \"Q\"00.\nThe Gaussian integers in \"Q\"00 (or in its boundary) are sometimes called \"minimal residues\" because their norm are not greater than the norm of any other Gaussian integer in the same residue class (Gauss called them \"absolutely smallest residues\").\nFrom this one can deduce by geometrical considerations, that the number of residue classes modulo a Gaussian integer \"z\"0 \n \"a\" + \"bi\" equals its norm \"N\"(\"z\"0) \n \"a\"2 + \"b\"2 (see below for a proof; similarly, for integers, the number of residue classes modulo \"n\" is its absolute value ).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nThe relation \"Qmn\" \n (\"m\" + \"in\")\"z\"0 + \"Q\"00 means that all \"Qmn\" are obtained from \"Q\"00 by translating it by a Gaussian integer. This implies that all \"Qmn\" have the same area \"N\" \n \"N\"(\"z\"0), and contain the same number \"ng\" of Gaussian integers.\nGenerally, the number of grid points (here the Gaussian integers) in an arbitrary square with the area \"A\" is \"A\" + \"\u0398\"(\u221a\"A\") (see Big theta for the notation). If one considers a big square consisting of \"k\" \u00d7 \"k\" squares \"Qmn\", then it contains \"k\"2\"N\" + \"O\"(\"k\"\u221a\"N\") grid points. It follows \"k\"2\"ng\" \n \"k\"2\"N\" + \"\u0398\"(\"k\"\u221a\"N\"), and thus \"ng\" \n \"N\" + \"\u0398\"(), after a division by \"k\"2. Taking the limit when \"k\" tends to the infinity gives \"ng\" \n \"N\" \n \"N\"(\"z\"0).\nResidue class fields.\nThe residue class ring modulo a Gaussian integer \"z\"0 is a field if and only if formula_26 is a Gaussian prime.\nIf \"z\"0 is a decomposed prime or the ramified prime 1 + \"i\" (that is, if its norm \"N\"(\"z\"0) is a prime number, which is either 2 or a prime congruent to 1 modulo 4), then the residue class field has a prime number of elements (that is, \"N\"(\"z\"0)). It is thus isomorphic to the field of the integers modulo \"N\"(\"z\"0).\nIf, on the other hand, \"z\"0 is an inert prime (that is, \"N\"(\"z\"0) \n \"p\"2 is the square of a prime number, which is congruent to 3 modulo 4), then the residue class field has \"p\"2 elements, and it is an extension of degree 2 (unique, up to an isomorphism) of the prime field with \"p\" elements (the integers modulo \"p\").\nPrimitive residue class group and Euler's totient function.\nMany theorems (and their proofs) for moduli of integers can be directly transferred to moduli of Gaussian integers, if one replaces the absolute value of the modulus by the norm. This holds especially for the \"primitive residue class group\" (also called multiplicative group of integers modulo \"n\") and Euler's totient function. The primitive residue class group of a modulus \"z\" is defined as the subset of its residue classes, which contains all residue classes that are coprime to \"z\", i.e. (\"a\",\"z\") \n 1. Obviously, this system builds a multiplicative group. The number of its elements shall be denoted by \"\u03d5\"(\"z\") (analogously to Euler's totient function \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") for integers \"n\").\nFor Gaussian primes it immediately follows that \"\u03d5\"(\"p\") \n |\"p\"|2 \u2212 1 and for arbitrary composite Gaussian integers\nformula_27\nEuler's product formula can be derived as\nformula_28\nwhere the product is to build over all prime divisors \"pm\" of \"z\" (with \"\u03bdm\" &gt; 0). Also the important theorem of Euler can be directly transferred:\n For all \"a\" with (\"a\",\"z\") \n 1, it holds that \"a\"\"\u03d5\"(\"z\") \u2261 1 (mod \"z\").\nHistorical background.\nThe ring of Gaussian integers was introduced by Carl Friedrich Gauss in his second monograph on quartic reciprocity (1832). The theorem of quadratic reciprocity (which he had first succeeded in proving in 1796) relates the solvability of the congruence \"x\"2 \u2261 \"q\" (mod \"p\") to that of \"x\"2 \u2261 \"p\" (mod \"q\"). Similarly, cubic reciprocity relates the solvability of \"x\"3 \u2261 \"q\" (mod \"p\") to that of \"x\"3 \u2261 \"p\" (mod \"q\"), and biquadratic (or quartic) reciprocity is a relation between \"x\"4 \u2261 \"q\" (mod \"p\") and \"x\"4 \u2261 \"p\" (mod \"q\"). Gauss discovered that the law of biquadratic reciprocity and its supplements were more easily stated and proved as statements about \"whole complex numbers\" (i.e. the Gaussian integers) than they are as statements about ordinary whole numbers (i.e. the integers).\nIn a footnote he notes that the Eisenstein integers are the natural domain for stating and proving results on cubic reciprocity and indicates that similar extensions of the integers are the appropriate domains for studying higher reciprocity laws.\nThis paper not only introduced the Gaussian integers and proved they are a unique factorization domain, it also introduced the terms norm, unit, primary, and associate, which are now standard in algebraic number theory.\nUnsolved problems.\nMost of the unsolved problems are related to distribution of Gaussian primes in the plane.\nThere are also conjectures and unsolved problems about the Gaussian primes. Two of them are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48629", "revid": "45848010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48629", "title": "Normal space", "text": "Type of topological space\nIn topology and related branches of mathematics, a normal space is a topological space in which any two disjoint closed sets have disjoint open neighborhoods. Such spaces need not be Hausdorff in general. A normal Hausdorff space is called a T4 space. Strengthenings of these concepts are detailed in the article below and include completely normal spaces and perfectly normal spaces, and their Hausdorff variants: T5 spaces and T6 spaces.\nAll these conditions are examples of separation axioms.\nDefinitions.\nA topological space \"X\" is a normal space if, given any disjoint closed sets \"E\" and \"F\", there are neighbourhoods \"U\" of \"E\" and \"V\" of \"F\" that are also disjoint. More intuitively, this condition says that \"E\" and \"F\" can be separated by neighbourhoods.\nA T4 space is a T1 space \"X\" that is normal; this is equivalent to \"X\" being normal and Hausdorff.\nA completely normal space, or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;hereditarily normal space, is a topological space \"X\" such that every subspace of \"X\" is a normal space. It turns out that \"X\" is completely normal if and only if every two separated sets can be separated by neighbourhoods. Also, \"X\" is completely normal if and only if every open subset of \"X\" is normal with the subspace topology.\nA T5 space, or completely T4 space, is a completely normal T1 space \"X\", which implies that \"X\" is Hausdorff; equivalently, every subspace of \"X\" must be a T4 space.\nA perfectly normal space is a topological space formula_1 in which every two disjoint closed sets formula_2 and formula_3 can be precisely separated by a function, in the sense that there is a continuous function formula_4 from formula_1 to the interval formula_6 such that formula_7 and formula_8. This is a stronger separation property than normality, as by Urysohn's lemma disjoint closed sets in a normal space can be separated by a function, in the sense of formula_9 and formula_10, but not precisely separated in general. It turns out that \"X\" is perfectly normal if and only if \"X\" is normal and every closed set is a G\u03b4 set. Equivalently, \"X\" is perfectly normal if and only if every closed set is the zero set of a continuous function. The equivalence between these three characterizations is called Vedenissoff's theorem. Every perfectly normal space is completely normal, because perfect normality is a hereditary property.\nA T6 space, or perfectly T4 space, is a perfectly normal Hausdorff space.\nNote that the terms \"normal space\" and \"T4\" and derived concepts occasionally have a different meaning. (Nonetheless, \"T5\" always means the same as \"completely T4\", whatever the meaning of T4 may be.) The definitions given here are the ones usually used today. For more on this issue, see History of the separation axioms.\nTerms like \"normal regular space\" and \"normal Hausdorff space\" also turn up in the literature\u2014they simply mean that the space both is normal and satisfies the other condition mentioned. In particular, a normal Hausdorff space is the same thing as a T4 space. Given the historical confusion of the meaning of the terms, verbal descriptions when applicable are helpful, that is, \"normal Hausdorff\" instead of \"T4\", or \"completely normal Hausdorff\" instead of \"T5\".\nFully normal spaces and fully T4 spaces are discussed elsewhere; they are related to paracompactness.\nA locally normal space is a topological space where every point has an open neighbourhood that is normal. Every normal space is locally normal, but the converse is not true. A classical example of a completely regular locally normal space that is not normal is the Nemytskii plane.\nExamples of normal spaces.\nMost spaces encountered in mathematical analysis are normal Hausdorff spaces, or at least normal regular spaces:\nAlso, all fully normal spaces are normal (even if not regular). Sierpi\u0144ski space is an example of a normal space that is not regular.\nExamples of non-normal spaces.\nAn important example of a non-normal topology is given by the Zariski topology on an algebraic variety or on the spectrum of a ring, which is used in algebraic geometry.\nA non-normal space of some relevance to analysis is the topological vector space of all functions from the real line R to itself, with the topology of pointwise convergence.\nMore generally, a theorem of Arthur Harold Stone states that the product of uncountably many non-compact metric spaces is never normal.\nProperties.\nEvery closed subset of a normal space is normal. The continuous and closed image of a normal space is normal.\nThe main significance of normal spaces lies in the fact that they admit \"enough\" continuous real-valued functions, as expressed by the following theorems valid for any normal space \"X\".\nUrysohn's lemma:\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are two disjoint closed subsets of \"X\", then there exists a continuous function \"f\" from \"X\" to the real line R such that \"f\"(\"x\") = 0 for all \"x\" in \"A\" and \"f\"(\"x\") = 1 for all \"x\" in \"B\".\nIn fact, we can take the values of \"f\" to be entirely within the unit interval [0,1]. In fancier terms, disjoint closed sets are not only separated by neighbourhoods, but also separated by a function.\nMore generally, the Tietze extension theorem:\nIf \"A\" is a closed subset of \"X\" and \"f\" is a continuous function from \"A\" to R, then there exists a continuous function \"F\": \"X\" \u2192 R that extends \"f\" in the sense that \"F\"(\"x\") = \"f\"(\"x\") for all \"x\" in \"A\".\nThe map \"formula_11\" has the lifting property with respect to a map from a certain finite topological space with five points (two open and three closed) to the space with one open and two closed points.\nIf U is a locally finite open cover of a normal space \"X\", then there is a partition of unity precisely subordinate to U. This shows the relationship of normal spaces to paracompactness.\nIn fact, any space that satisfies any one of these three conditions must be normal.\nA product of normal spaces is not necessarily normal. This fact was first proved by Robert Sorgenfrey. An example of this phenomenon is the Sorgenfrey plane. In fact, since there exist spaces which are Dowker, a product of a normal space and [0, 1] need not to be normal. Also, a subset of a normal space need not be normal (i.e. not every normal Hausdorff space is a completely normal Hausdorff space), since every Tychonoff space is a subset of its Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification (which is normal Hausdorff). A more explicit example is the Tychonoff plank. The only large class of product spaces of normal spaces known to be normal are the products of compact Hausdorff spaces, since both compactness (Tychonoff's theorem) and the T2 axiom are preserved under arbitrary products.\nRelationships to other separation axioms.\nIf a normal space is R0, then it is in fact completely regular.\nThus, anything from \"normal R0\" to \"normal completely regular\" is the same as what we usually call \"normal regular\".\nTaking Kolmogorov quotients, we see that all normal T1 spaces are Tychonoff.\nThese are what we usually call \"normal Hausdorff\" spaces.\nA topological space is said to be pseudonormal if given two disjoint closed sets in it, one of which is countable, there are disjoint open sets containing them. Every normal space is pseudonormal, but not vice versa.\nCounterexamples to some variations on these statements can be found in the lists above.\nSpecifically, Sierpi\u0144ski space is normal but not regular, while the space of functions from R to itself is Tychonoff but not normal.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48630", "revid": "50547770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48630", "title": "2014", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2014 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nThe year 2014 was marked by the surge of the West African Ebola epidemic, which began in 2013, becoming the most widespread outbreak of the Ebola virus in human history, resulting in 28,646 confirmed infections and 11,323 confirmed deaths according to the World Health Organization, who declared it a Public Health Emergency in August. The virus caused major socioeconomic disruption in the region, primarily in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Other notable health concerns in 2014 included a significant increase in polio cases in Pakistan.\nThe rise of ISIS became a major geopolitical crisis in 2014 after the group declared a global caliphate and launched devastating offensives in Iraq and Syria. The Camp Speicher massacre in which the Islamic State murdered 1,566 Shia Iraqi Air Force cadets and the Fall of Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, prompted a U.S led military intervention, which would later become a global effort. The Islamic State committed numerous atrocities, including mass beheadings, mass executions of civilians, and the genocide and persecution of religious minorities like the Yazidis, Christians and Shia Muslims. ISIS would attract thousands of foreign fighters from across the world to join their military, drawn by their ideology and promises of establishing a global Islamic state. ISIS led to a massive displacement of people in Iraq and Syria, creating a major humanitarian crisis for millions of peoples. Another notable conflict was the 2014 Gaza War, which Israel began 26 days after three Israeli teenagers were murdered in the West Bank by Hamas-affiliated Palestinian militants, the large-scale military operation, codenamed \"Operation Protective Edge\" saw intense fighting, with Israeli airstrikes and ground incursions into Gaza, killing 2,310 and wounding 10,626 Palestinians. The conflict would end on August 26, 2014, after a ceasefire agreement brokered by Egypt went into effect.\nThe Euromaidan protests, a series of demonstrations in Ukraine, were triggered by President Viktor Yanukovych's sudden decision to pursue closer economic ties with Russia and his refusal to sign the European Union\u2013Ukraine Association Agreement, which culminated in the Revolution of Dignity in February. Following this, a disputed referendum led to Russia occupying and annexing Crimea from Ukraine, subsequent pro-Russian unrest led to Russian backed separatist forces in eastern Ukraine seizing control of key areas, leading to the War in Donbas in April. The war escalated after Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 was shot down by Russian-backed forces while flying in Eastern Ukraine.\nPolitical crises continued across the globe, with Thailand experiencing a military coup in May as the Royal Thai Army overthrew the caretaker government. Three main airplane disasters happened, the mysterious disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over eastern Ukraine, and the crash of Indonesia AirAsia Flight 8501, collectively claiming over 700 lives. Civil unrest emerged in Ferguson, Missouri in the United States due to the killing of Michael Brown and in Hong Kong, during the 2014 Hong Kong protests. Despite all these challenges, scientific achievement provided hope as India became the first Asian nation to reach Mars with its Mangalyaan mission, and the Rosetta spacecraft's Philae probe completed humanity's first landing on a comet.\n2014 was designated as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48631", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48631", "title": "Paracompact space", "text": "Topological space in which every open cover has an open refinement that is locally finite\nIn mathematics, a paracompact space is a topological space in which every open cover has an open refinement that is locally finite. These spaces were introduced by . Every compact space is paracompact. Every paracompact Hausdorff space is normal, and a Hausdorff space is paracompact if and only if it admits partitions of unity subordinate to any open cover. Sometimes paracompact spaces are defined so as to always be Hausdorff.\nEvery closed subspace of a paracompact space is paracompact. While compact subsets of Hausdorff spaces are always closed, this is not true for paracompact subsets. A space such that every subspace of it is a paracompact space is called hereditarily paracompact. This is equivalent to requiring that every open subspace be paracompact.\nThe notion of paracompact space is also studied in pointless topology, where it is more well-behaved. For example, the product of any number of paracompact locales is a paracompact locale, but the product of two paracompact spaces may not be paracompact. Compare this to Tychonoff's theorem, which states that the product of any collection of compact topological spaces is compact. However, the product of a paracompact space and a compact space is always paracompact.\nEvery metric space is paracompact. A topological space is metrizable if and only if it is a paracompact and locally metrizable Hausdorff space.\nDefinition.\nA \"cover\" of a set formula_1 is a collection of subsets of formula_1 whose union contains formula_1. In symbols, if formula_4 is an indexed family of subsets of formula_1, then formula_6 is a cover of formula_1 if\n formula_8\nA cover of a topological space formula_1 is \"open\" if all its members are open sets. A \"refinement\" of a cover of a space formula_1 is a new cover of the same space such that every set in the new cover is a subset of some set in the old cover. In symbols, the cover formula_11 is a refinement of the cover formula_4 if and only if, for every formula_13 in formula_14, there exists some formula_15 in formula_6 such that formula_17.\nAn open cover of a space formula_1 is \"locally finite\" if every point of the space has a neighborhood that intersects only finitely many sets in the cover. In symbols, formula_4 is locally finite if and only if, for any formula_20 in formula_1, there exists some neighbourhood formula_14 of formula_20 such that the set\n formula_24\nis finite. A topological space formula_1 is now said to be paracompact if every open cover has a locally finite open refinement.\nThis definition extends verbatim to locales, with the exception of locally finite: an open cover formula_6 of formula_1 is locally finite iff the set of opens formula_14 that intersect only finitely many opens in formula_6 also form a cover of formula_1. Note that an open cover on a topological space is locally finite iff its a locally finite cover of the underlying locale.\nExamples.\nSome examples of spaces that are not paracompact include:\nProperties.\nParacompactness is weakly hereditary, i.e. every closed subspace of a paracompact space is paracompact. This can be extended to F-sigma subspaces as well.\nAlthough a product of paracompact spaces need not be paracompact, the following are true:\nBoth these results can be proved by the tube lemma which is used in the proof that a product of \"finitely many\" compact spaces is compact.\nParacompact Hausdorff spaces.\nParacompact spaces are sometimes required to also be Hausdorff to extend their properties.\nPartitions of unity.\nThe most important feature of paracompact Hausdorff spaces is that they admit partitions of unity subordinate to any open cover. This means the following: if \"X\" is a paracompact Hausdorff space with a given open cover, then there exists a collection of continuous functions on \"X\" with values in the unit interval [0, 1] such that:\nIn fact, a T1 space is Hausdorff and paracompact if and only if it admits partitions of unity subordinate to any open cover (see below). This property is sometimes used to define paracompact spaces (at least in the Hausdorff case).\nPartitions of unity are useful because they often allow one to extend local constructions to the whole space. For instance, the integral of differential forms on paracompact manifolds is first defined locally (where the manifold looks like Euclidean space and the integral is well known), and this definition is then extended to the whole space via a partition of unity.\nProof that paracompact Hausdorff spaces admit partitions of unity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;(Click \"show\" at right to see the proof or \"hide\" to hide it.)\nA Hausdorff space formula_31 is paracompact if and only if it every open cover admits a subordinate partition of unity. The \"if\" direction is straightforward. Now for the \"only if\" direction, we do this in a few stages.\n Lemma 1: If formula_32 is a locally finite open cover, then there exists open sets formula_33 for each formula_34, such that each formula_35 and formula_36 is a locally finite refinement.\n Lemma 2: If formula_32 is a locally finite open cover, then there are continuous functions formula_38 such that formula_39 and such that formula_40 is a continuous function which is always non-zero and finite.\n Theorem: In a paracompact Hausdorff space formula_31, if formula_32 is an open cover, then there exists a partition of unity subordinate to it.\n Proof (Lemma 1): \nLet formula_43 be the collection of open sets meeting only finitely many sets in formula_32, and whose closure is contained in a set in formula_45. One can check as an exercise that this provides an open refinement, since paracompact Hausdorff spaces are regular, and since formula_32 is locally finite. Now replace formula_43 by a locally finite open refinement. One can easily check that each set in this refinement has the same property as that which characterised the original cover.\n Now we define formula_48. The property of formula_43 guarantees that every formula_50 is contained in some formula_51. Therefore formula_36 is an open refinement of formula_32. Since we have formula_54, this cover is immediately locally finite.\n Now we want to show that each formula_55. For every formula_56, we will prove that formula_57. Since we chose formula_58 to be locally finite, there is a neighbourhood formula_59 of formula_60 such that only finitely many sets in formula_58 have non-empty intersection with formula_59, and we note formula_63 those in the definition of formula_64. Therefore we can decompose formula_64 in two parts: formula_66 who intersect formula_59, and the rest formula_68 who don't, which means that they are contained in the closed set formula_69. We now have formula_70. Since formula_71 and formula_72, we have formula_73 for every formula_74. And since formula_75 is the complement of a neighbourhood of formula_60, formula_60 is also not in formula_75. Therefore we have formula_57.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Proof (Lemma 2): \nApplying Lemma 1, let formula_38 be continuous maps with formula_81 and formula_39 (by Urysohn's lemma for disjoint closed sets in normal spaces, which a paracompact Hausdorff space is). Note by the support of a function, we here mean the points not mapping to zero (and not the closure of this set). To show that formula_83 is always finite and non-zero, take formula_84, and let formula_85 a neighbourhood of formula_86 meeting only finitely many sets in formula_32; thus formula_86 belongs to only finitely many sets in formula_32; thus formula_90 for all but finitely many formula_91; moreover formula_92 for some formula_91, thus formula_94; so formula_95 is finite and formula_96. To establish continuity, take formula_97 as before, and let formula_98, which is finite; then formula_99, which is a continuous function; hence the preimage under formula_100 of a neighbourhood of formula_95 will be a neighbourhood of formula_86.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Proof (Theorem): \nTake formula_103 a locally finite subcover of the refinement cover: formula_104. Applying Lemma 2, we obtain continuous functions formula_105 with formula_106 (thus the usual closed version of the support is contained in some formula_34, for each formula_108; for which their sum constitutes a \"continuous\" function which is always finite non-zero (hence formula_109 is continuous positive, finite-valued). So replacing each formula_110 by formula_111, we have now \u2014 all things remaining the same \u2014 that their sum is everywhere formula_112. Finally for formula_84, letting formula_85 be a neighbourhood of formula_86 meeting only finitely many sets in formula_103, we have formula_117 for all but finitely many formula_108 since each formula_106. Thus we have a partition of unity subordinate to the original open cover.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRelationship with compactness.\nThere is a similarity between the definitions of compactness and paracompactness:\nFor paracompactness, \"subcover\" is replaced by \"open refinement\" and \"finite\" by is replaced by \"locally finite\". Both of these changes are significant: if we take the definition of paracompact and change \"open refinement\" back to \"subcover\", or \"locally finite\" back to \"finite\", we end up with the compact spaces in both cases.\nParacompactness has little to do with the notion of compactness, but rather more to do with breaking up topological space entities into manageable pieces.\nComparison of properties with compactness.\nParacompactness is similar to compactness in the following respects:\nIt is different in these respects:\nVariations.\nThere are several variations of the notion of paracompactness. To define them, we first need to extend the list of terms above:\nA topological space is:\nThe adverb \"countably\" can be added to any of the adjectives \"paracompact\", \"metacompact\", and \"fully normal\" to make the requirement apply only to countable open covers.\nEvery paracompact space is metacompact, and every metacompact space is orthocompact.\n formula_120\n The notation for the star is not standardised in the literature, and this is just one possibility.\nDefinition of relevant terms for the variations.\nAs the names imply, a fully normal space is normal and a fully T4 space is T4. Every fully T4 space is paracompact. In fact, for Hausdorff spaces, paracompactness and full normality are equivalent. Thus, a fully T4 space is the same thing as a paracompact Hausdorff space.\nWithout the Hausdorff property, paracompact spaces are not necessarily fully normal. Any compact space that is not regular provides an example.\nA historical note: fully normal spaces were defined before paracompact spaces, in 1940, by John W. Tukey. \nThe proof that all metrizable spaces are fully normal is easy. When it was proved by A.H. Stone that for Hausdorff spaces full normality and paracompactness are equivalent, he implicitly proved that all metrizable spaces are paracompact. Later Ernest Michael \ngave a direct proof of the latter fact and\nM.E. Rudin gave another, elementary, proof."}
{"id": "48632", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48632", "title": "Locally compact space", "text": "Type of topological space in mathematics\nIn topology and related branches of mathematics, a topological space is called locally compact if, roughly speaking, each small portion of the space looks like a small portion of a compact space. More precisely, it is a topological space in which every point has a compact neighborhood. \nWhen locally compact spaces are Hausdorff they are called locally compact Hausdorff, which are of particular interest in mathematical analysis.\nFormal definition.\nLet \"X\" be a topological space. Most commonly \"X\" is called locally compact if every point \"x\" of \"X\" has a compact neighbourhood, i.e., there exists an open set \"U\" and a compact set \"K\", such that formula_1.\nThere are other common definitions: They are all equivalent if \"X\" is a Hausdorff space (or preregular). But they are not equivalent in general:\n1. every point of \"X\" has a compact neighbourhood.\n2. every point of \"X\" has a closed compact neighbourhood.\n2\u2032. every point of \"X\" has a relatively compact neighbourhood.\n2\u2033. every point of \"X\" has a local base of relatively compact neighbourhoods.\n3. every point of \"X\" has a local base of compact neighbourhoods.\n4. every point of \"X\" has a local base of closed compact neighbourhoods.\n5. \"X\" is Hausdorff and satisfies any (or equivalently, all) of the previous conditions.\nLogical relations among the conditions:\nCondition (1) is probably the most commonly used definition, since it is the least restrictive and the others are equivalent to it when \"X\" is Hausdorff. This equivalence is a consequence of the facts that compact subsets of Hausdorff spaces are closed, and closed subsets of compact spaces are compact. Spaces satisfying (1) are also called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;weakly locally compact, as they satisfy the weakest of the conditions here.\nAs they are defined in terms of relatively compact sets, spaces satisfying (2), (2'), (2\") can more specifically be called locally relatively compact. Steen &amp; Seebach calls (2), (2'), (2\") strongly locally compact to contrast with property (1), which they call \"locally compact\".\nSpaces satisfying condition (4) are exactly the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;locally compact regular spaces. Indeed, such a space is regular, as every point has a local base of closed neighbourhoods. Conversely, in a regular locally compact space suppose a point formula_2 has a compact neighbourhood formula_3. By regularity, given an arbitrary neighbourhood formula_4 of formula_2, there is a closed neighbourhood formula_6 of formula_2 contained in formula_8 and formula_6 is compact as a closed set in a compact set.\nCondition (5) is used, for example, in Bourbaki. Any space that is locally compact (in the sense of condition (1)) and also Hausdorff automatically satisfies all the conditions above. Since in most applications locally compact spaces are also Hausdorff, these locally compact Hausdorff spaces will thus be the spaces that this article is primarily concerned with.\nExamples and counterexamples.\nCompact Hausdorff spaces.\nEvery compact Hausdorff space is also locally compact, and many examples of compact spaces may be found in the article compact space.\nHere we mention only:\nHausdorff spaces that are not locally compact.\nAs mentioned in the following section, if a Hausdorff space is locally compact, then it is also a Tychonoff space. For this reason, examples of Hausdorff spaces that fail to be locally compact because they are not Tychonoff spaces can be found in the article dedicated to Tychonoff spaces.\nBut there are also examples of Tychonoff spaces that fail to be locally compact, such as:\nThe first two examples show that a subset of a locally compact space need not be locally compact, which contrasts with the open and closed subsets in the previous section.\nThe last example contrasts with the Euclidean spaces in the previous section; to be more specific, a Hausdorff topological vector space is locally compact if and only if it is finite-dimensional (in which case it is a Euclidean space).\nThis example also contrasts with the Hilbert cube as an example of a compact space; there is no contradiction because the cube cannot be a neighbourhood of any point in Hilbert space.\nProperties.\nEvery locally compact preregular space is, in fact, completely regular. It follows that every locally compact Hausdorff space is a Tychonoff space. Since straight regularity is a more familiar condition than either preregularity (which is usually weaker) or complete regularity (which is usually stronger), locally compact preregular spaces are normally referred to in the mathematical literature as \"locally compact regular spaces\". Similarly locally compact Tychonoff spaces are usually just referred to as \"locally compact Hausdorff spaces\".\nEvery locally compact regular space, in particular every locally compact Hausdorff space, is a Baire space.\nThat is, the conclusion of the Baire category theorem holds: the interior of every countable union of nowhere dense subsets is empty.\nA subspace \"X\" of a locally compact Hausdorff space \"Y\" is locally compact if and only if \"X\" is locally closed in \"Y\" (that is, \"X\" can be written as the set-theoretic difference of two closed subsets of \"Y\"). In particular, every closed set and every open set in a locally compact Hausdorff space is locally compact. Also, as a corollary, a dense subspace \"X\" of a locally compact Hausdorff space \"Y\" is locally compact if and only if \"X\" is open in \"Y\". Furthermore, if a subspace \"X\" of \"any\" Hausdorff space \"Y\" is locally compact, then \"X\" still must be locally closed in \"Y\", although the converse does not hold in general.\nWithout the Hausdorff hypothesis, some of these results break down with weaker notions of locally compact. Every closed set in a weakly locally compact space (= condition (1) in the definitions above) is weakly locally compact. But not every open set in a weakly locally compact space is weakly locally compact. For example, the one-point compactification formula_12 of the rational numbers formula_13 is compact, and hence weakly locally compact. But it contains formula_13 as an open set which is not weakly locally compact.\nQuotient spaces of locally compact Hausdorff spaces are compactly generated.\nConversely, every compactly generated Hausdorff space is a quotient of some locally compact Hausdorff space.\nFor functions defined on a locally compact space, local uniform convergence is the same as compact convergence.\nThe point at infinity.\nThis section explores compactifications of locally compact spaces. Every compact space is its own compactification. So to avoid trivialities it is assumed below that the space \"X\" is not compact.\nSince every locally compact Hausdorff space \"X\" is Tychonoff, it can be embedded in a compact Hausdorff space formula_15 using the Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification.\nBut in fact, there is a simpler method available in the locally compact case; the one-point compactification will embed \"X\" in a compact Hausdorff space formula_16 with just one extra point.\nThe locally compact Hausdorff spaces can thus be characterised as the open subsets of compact Hausdorff spaces.\nIntuitively, the extra point in formula_16 can be thought of as a point at infinity.\nThe point at infinity should be thought of as lying outside every compact subset of \"X\".\nMany intuitive notions about tendency towards infinity can be formulated in locally compact Hausdorff spaces using this idea.\nFor example, a continuous real or complex valued function \"f\" with domain \"X\" is said to \"vanish at infinity\" if, given any positive number \"e\", there is a compact subset \"K\" of \"X\" such that formula_19 whenever the point \"x\" lies outside of \"K\". This definition makes sense for any topological space \"X\". If \"X\" is locally compact and Hausdorff, such functions are precisely those extendable to a continuous function \"g\" on its one-point compactification formula_20 where formula_21\nGelfand representation.\nFor a locally compact Hausdorff space \"X,\" the set formula_22 of all continuous complex-valued functions on \"X\" that vanish at infinity is a commutative C*-algebra. In fact, every commutative C*-algebra is isomorphic to formula_22 for some unique (up to homeomorphism) locally compact Hausdorff space \"X\". This is shown using the Gelfand representation. \nLocally compact groups.\nThe notion of local compactness is important in the study of topological groups mainly because every Hausdorff locally compact group \"G\" carries natural measures called the Haar measures which allow one to integrate measurable functions defined on \"G\".\nThe Lebesgue measure on the real line formula_24 is a special case of this.\nThe Pontryagin dual of a topological abelian group \"A\" is locally compact if and only if \"A\" is locally compact.\nMore precisely, Pontryagin duality defines a self-duality of the category of locally compact abelian groups.\nThe study of locally compact abelian groups is the foundation of harmonic analysis, a field that has since spread to non-abelian locally compact groups.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48633", "revid": "1306091634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48633", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Photography", "text": "American photojournalism award\nThe Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Photography is one of the American Pulitzer Prizes annually awarded for journalism. From 2000 it has used the \"breaking news\" name but it is considered a continuation of the Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography, which was awarded from 1968 to 1999. Prior to 1968, a single Prize was awarded for photojournalism, the Pulitzer Prize for Photography, which was replaced in that year by Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography and Pulitzer Prize for Feature Photography.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48634", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48634", "title": "Nowhere dense set", "text": "Mathematical set whose closure has empty interior\nIn mathematics, a subset of a topological space is called nowhere dense or rare if its closure has empty interior. In a very loose sense, it is a set whose elements are not tightly clustered (as defined by the topology on the space) anywhere. For example, the integers are nowhere dense among the reals, whereas the interval (0, 1) is not nowhere dense.\nA countable union of nowhere dense sets is called a meagre set. Meagre sets play an important role in the formulation of the Baire category theorem, which is used in the proof of several fundamental results of functional analysis.\nDefinition.\nDensity nowhere can be characterized in different (but equivalent) ways. The simplest definition is the one from density:\nA subset formula_1 of a topological space formula_2 is said to be dense in another set formula_3 if the intersection formula_4 is a dense subset of formula_5 formula_1 is nowhere dense or rare in formula_2 if formula_1 is not dense in any nonempty open subset formula_3 of formula_10 \nExpanding out the negation of density, it is equivalent that each nonempty open set formula_3 contains a nonempty open subset disjoint from formula_12 It suffices to check either condition on a base for the topology on formula_10 In particular, density nowhere in formula_14 is often described as being dense in no open interval.\nDefinition by closure.\nThe second definition above is equivalent to requiring that the closure, formula_15 cannot contain any nonempty open set. This is the same as saying that the interior of the closure of formula_1 is empty; that is,formula_17 Alternatively, the complement of the closure formula_18 must be a dense subset of formula_19 in other words, the exterior of formula_1 is dense in formula_10\nProperties.\nThe notion of \"nowhere dense set\" is always relative to a given surrounding space. Suppose formula_22 where formula_23 has the subspace topology induced from formula_10 The set formula_25 may be nowhere dense in formula_26 but not nowhere dense in formula_27 Notably, a set is always dense in its own subspace topology. So if formula_25 is nonempty, it will not be nowhere dense as a subset of itself. However the following results hold:\nA set is nowhere dense if and only if its closure is.\nEvery subset of a nowhere dense set is nowhere dense, and a finite union of nowhere dense sets is nowhere dense. Thus the nowhere dense sets form an ideal of sets, a suitable notion of negligible set. In general they do not form a \ud835\udf0e-ideal, as meager sets, which are the countable unions of nowhere dense sets, need not be nowhere dense. For example, the set formula_45 is not nowhere dense in formula_46\nThe boundary of every open set and of every closed set is closed and nowhere dense. A closed set is nowhere dense if and only if it is equal to its boundary, if and only if it is equal to the boundary of some open set (for example the open set can be taken as the complement of the set). An arbitrary set formula_47 is nowhere dense if and only if it is a subset of the boundary of some open set (for example the open set can be taken as the exterior of formula_25).\nNowhere dense sets with positive measure.\nA nowhere dense set is not necessarily negligible in every sense. For example, if formula_2 is the unit interval formula_63 not only is it possible to have a dense set of Lebesgue measure zero (such as the set of rationals), but it is also possible to have a nowhere dense set with positive measure. One such example is the Smith\u2013Volterra\u2013Cantor set.\nFor another example (a variant of the Cantor set), remove from formula_64 all dyadic fractions, i.e. fractions of the form formula_65 in lowest terms for positive integers formula_66 and the intervals around them: formula_67 \nSince for each formula_68 this removes intervals adding up to at most formula_69 the nowhere dense set remaining after all such intervals have been removed has measure of at least formula_70 (in fact just over formula_71 because of overlaps) and so in a sense represents the majority of the ambient space formula_72 \nThis set is nowhere dense, as it is closed and has an empty interior: any interval formula_73 is not contained in the set since the dyadic fractions in formula_73 have been removed.\nGeneralizing this method, one can construct in the unit interval nowhere dense sets of any measure less than formula_75 although the measure cannot be exactly 1 (because otherwise the complement of its closure would be a nonempty open set with measure zero, which is impossible).\nFor another simpler example, if formula_3 is any dense open subset of formula_14 having finite Lebesgue measure then formula_78 is necessarily a closed subset of formula_14 having infinite Lebesgue measure that is also nowhere dense in formula_14 (because its topological interior is empty). Such a dense open subset formula_3 of finite Lebesgue measure is commonly constructed when proving that the Lebesgue measure of the rational numbers formula_45 is formula_83 This may be done by choosing any bijection formula_84 (it actually suffices for formula_84 to merely be a surjection) and for every formula_86 letting \nformula_87\n(here, the Minkowski sum notation formula_88 was used to simplify the description of the intervals). \nThe open subset formula_89 is dense in formula_14 because this is true of its subset formula_45 and its Lebesgue measure is no greater than formula_92 \nTaking the union of closed, rather than open, intervals produces the F\ud835\udf0e-subset\nformula_93\nthat satisfies formula_94 Because formula_95 is a subset of the nowhere dense set formula_96 it is also nowhere dense in formula_46 \nBecause formula_14 is a Baire space, the set\nformula_99\nis a dense subset of formula_14 (which means that like its subset formula_101 formula_102 cannot possibly be nowhere dense in formula_14) with formula_104 Lebesgue measure that is also a nonmeager subset of formula_14 (that is, formula_102 is of the second category in formula_14), which makes formula_108 a comeager subset of formula_14 whose interior in formula_14 is also empty; however, formula_108 is nowhere dense in formula_14 if and only if its closure in formula_14 has empty interior. \nThe subset formula_45 in this example can be replaced by any countable dense subset of formula_14 and furthermore, even the set formula_14 can be replaced by formula_117 for any integer formula_118\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48635", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48635", "title": "Open cover", "text": ""}
{"id": "48636", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48636", "title": "Partition of unity", "text": "Set of functions from a topological space to [0,1] which sum to 1 for any input\nIn mathematics, a partition of unity on a topological space &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a set &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of continuous functions from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to the unit interval [0,1] such that for every point formula_1:\nPartitions of unity are useful because they often allow one to extend local constructions to the whole space. They are also important in the interpolation of data, in signal processing, and the theory of spline functions.\nExistence.\nThe existence of partitions of unity assumes two distinct forms:\nThus one chooses either to have the supports indexed by the open cover, or compact supports. If the space is compact, then there exist partitions satisfying both requirements.\nA finite open cover always has a continuous partition of unity subordinate to it, provided the space is locally compact and Hausdorff. \nParacompactness of the space is a necessary condition to guarantee the existence of a partition of unity subordinate to any open cover. Depending on the category to which the space belongs, this may also be a sufficient condition. In particular, a compact set in the Euclidean space admits a smooth partition of unity subordinate to any finite open cover. The construction uses mollifiers (bump functions), which exist in continuous and smooth manifolds, but not necessarily in analytic manifolds. Thus for an open cover of an analytic manifold, an analytic partition of unity subordinate to that open cover generally does not exist. \"See\" analytic continuation.\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are partitions of unity for spaces &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; respectively, then the set of all pairs formula_10 is a partition of unity for the cartesian product space &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The tensor product of functions act as formula_11\nExample.\nLet formula_12 and formula_13 be antipodal points on the circle formula_14. We can construct a partition of unity on formula_14 by looking at a chart on the complement of the point formula_16 that sends formula_17 to formula_18 with center formula_19. Now let formula_20 be a bump function on formula_18 defined by formula_22 then, both this function and formula_23 can be extended uniquely onto formula_14 by setting formula_25. Then, the pair of functions formula_26 forms a partition of unity over formula_14.\nVariant definitions.\nSometimes a less restrictive definition is used: the sum of all the function values at a particular point is only required to be positive, rather than 1, for each point in the space. However, given such a set of functions formula_28 one can obtain a partition of unity in the strict sense by dividing by the sum; the partition becomes formula_29 where formula_30, which is well defined since at each point only a finite number of terms are nonzero. Even further, some authors drop the requirement that the supports be locally finite, requiring only that formula_31 for all formula_32.\nIn the field of operator algebras, a partition of unity is composed of projections formula_33. In the case of formula_34-algebras, it can be shown that the entries are pairwise orthogonal:\nformula_35\nNote it is \"not\" the case that in a general *-algebra that the entries of a partition of unity are pairwise orthogonal.\nIf formula_36 is a normal element of a unital formula_34-algebra formula_38, and has finite spectrum formula_39, then the projections in the spectral decomposition:\nformula_40\nform a partition of unity.\nIn the field of compact quantum groups, the rows and columns of the fundamental representation formula_41 of a quantum permutation group formula_42 form partitions of unity.\nApplications.\nA partition of unity can be used to define the integral (with respect to a volume form) of a function defined over a manifold: one first defines the integral of a function whose support is contained in a single coordinate patch of the manifold; then one uses a partition of unity to define the integral of an arbitrary function; finally one shows that the definition is independent of the chosen partition of unity.\nA partition of unity can be used to show the existence of a Riemannian metric on an arbitrary manifold.\nMethod of steepest descent employs a partition of unity to construct asymptotics of integrals.\nLinkwitz\u2013Riley filter is an example of practical implementation of partition of unity to separate input signal into two output signals containing only high- or low-frequency components.\nThe Bernstein polynomials of a fixed degree \"m\" are a family of \"m\"+1 linearly independent single-variable polynomials that are a partition of unity for the unit interval formula_43.\nThe weak Hilbert Nullstellensatz asserts that if formula_44 are polynomials with no common vanishing points in formula_45, then there are polynomials formula_46 with formula_47. That is, formula_48 form a polynomial partition of unity subordinate to the Zariski-open cover formula_49. \nPartitions of unity are used to establish global smooth approximations for Sobolev functions in bounded domains.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48637", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48637", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Reporting", "text": "American journalism award\nThe Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Reporting is a Pulitzer Prize awarded for a distinguished example of breaking news, local reporting on news of the moment. It has been awarded since 1953 under several names:\nPrior to 1953, a Pulitzer Prize for Local Reporting combined both breaking and investigative reporting under one category. The Pulitzer Committee issues an official citation explaining the reasons for the award.\nHitherto confined to local coverage, the Breaking News Reporting category was expanded to encompass state and national reporting in 2017.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48639", "revid": "45", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48639", "title": "Octave (software)", "text": ""}
{"id": "48640", "revid": "38927932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48640", "title": "Universal jurisdiction", "text": "Legal principle\nUniversal jurisdiction is a legal principle that allows states or international organizations to claim criminal jurisdiction over an accused person, regardless of where the alleged crime was committed and irrespective of the accused's nationality, country of residence, or any other connection to the prosecuting entity. Crimes prosecuted under universal jurisdiction are considered crimes against all, too serious to tolerate jurisdictional arbitrage. The concept of universal jurisdiction is therefore closely linked to the idea that some international norms are \"erga omnes\", or owed to the entire world community, as well as to the concept of \"jus cogens\"\u2014that certain international law obligations are binding on all states.\nAccording to Amnesty International, a proponent of universal jurisdiction, certain crimes pose such a serious threat to the international community as a whole that states have a logical and moral duty to prosecute individuals responsible; therefore, no place should be a safe house for those who have committed genocide, crimes against humanity, extrajudicial executions, war crimes, torture, or forced disappearances. \nOpponents, such as former US diplomat Henry Kissinger argue that universal jurisdiction is a breach of each state's sovereignty. All states are equal in sovereignty, as affirmed by the United Nations Charter, and \"[w]idespread agreement that human rights violations and crimes against humanity must be prosecuted has hindered active consideration of the proper role of international courts. Universal jurisdiction risks creating universal tyranny\u2014that of judges.\" According to Kissinger, as a logistical matter, since any number of states could set up such \"universal jurisdiction\" tribunals, the process could quickly degenerate into politically driven show trials that attempt to place a quasi-judicial stamp on a state's enemies or opponents.\nUnited Nations Security Council Resolution 1674, adopted by the United Nations Security Council on 28 April 2006, \"[r]eaffirm[ed] the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document regarding the responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity\" and commits the Security Council to action to protect civilians in armed conflict.\nHistory.\nThe \"Institutes of Justinian\", echoing the \"Commentaries\" of Gaius, says that \"All nations ... are governed partly by their own particular laws, and partly by those laws which are common to all, [those that] natural Reason appoints for all mankind.\" Expanding on the classical understanding of universal law accessible by reason, in the seventeenth century, the Dutch jurist Grotius laid the foundations for universal jurisdiction in modern international law, promulgating in his \"De Jure Praedae\" (\"Of the Law of Captures\") and later \"D\u0113 j\u016bre bell\u012b ac p\u0101cis\" (\"Of the Law of War and Peace\") the Enlightenment view that there are universal principles of right and wrong.\nAccording to Henry Kissinger, at about the same time, international law came to recognize the analogous concept of \"host\u0113s h\u016bm\u0101n\u012b generis\" (\"enemies of the human race\") applying to pirates or hijackers whose crimes took place outside of nation-state territories, while universal jurisdiction subjecting senior officials or heads of states as criminal subjects was new.\nFrom these premises, representing the Enlightenment belief in trans-territorial, trans-cultural standards of right and wrong, derives universal jurisdiction.\nPerhaps the most notable and influential precedent for universal jurisdiction were the mid-20th century Nuremberg Trials. U.S. Justice Robert H. Jackson then chief prosecutor, famously stated that an International Military Tribunal enforcing universal principles of right and wrong could prosecute acts without a particular geographic location, Nazi \"crimes against the peace of the world\"\u2014even if the acts were perfectly legal at the time in Fascist Germany. Indeed, one charge was Nazi law itself became a crime, law distorted into a bludgeon of oppression. The Nuremberg trials supposed universal standards by which one nation's laws, and acts of its officials, can be judged; an international rule of law unbound by national borders.\nOn the other hand, even at the time, the Nuremberg trials were criticized as victor's justice, revenge papered over with legal simulacra. US Supreme Court Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone remarked that his colleague Justice Jackson acting as Nuremberg Chief prosecutor was \"conducting his high-grade lynching party in Nuremberg. I don't mind what he does to the Nazis, but I hate to see the pretense that he is running a court and proceeding according to common law. This is a little too sanctimonious a fraud to meet my old-fashioned ideas.\"\nKenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, argues that universal jurisdiction allowed Israel to try Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem in 1961. Roth also argues that clauses in treaties such as the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the United Nations Convention Against Torture of 1984, which requires signatory states to pass municipal laws that are based on the concept of universal jurisdiction, indicate widespread international acceptance of the concept.\nTheory of universal jurisdiction application.\nAmongst the vast spread of literature surrounding the theory, application, and history of Universal Jurisdiction, there are two approaches: the \"global enforcer\" and the \"no safe haven\". \"Global enforcer\" refers to the usage of universal jurisdiction as an active way of preventing and punishing international crimes committed anywhere while \"no safe haven\" takes on a more passive tone, referring to the usage of this principle to ensure that the specific country is not a territorial refuge for any suspects of international crimes.\nUniversal distinct from extraterritorial jurisdiction.\nUniversal jurisdiction differs from a state's prosecuting crimes under its own laws, whether on its own territory (territorial jurisdiction) or abroad (extraterritorial jurisdiction). As an example, the United States asserts jurisdiction over stateless vessels carrying illicit drugs on international waters\u2014but here the US reaches across national borders to enforce its own law, rather than invoking universal jurisdiction and trans-national standards of right and wrong.\nStates attempting to police acts committed by foreign nationals on foreign territory tends to be more controversial than a state prosecuting its own citizens wherever they may be found. Bases on which a state might exercise jurisdiction in this way include the following:\nInternational tribunals invoking universal jurisdiction.\nEstablished in The Hague in 2002, the International Criminal Court (ICC) is an international tribunal of general jurisdiction (defined by treaty) to prosecute state-members' citizens for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and the crime of aggression, as specified by several international agreements, most prominently the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court signed in 1998. A serious international crime is outlined in Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal court as a serious criminal act committed as part of a \"widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack\", including murder, rape, slavery, persecution, extermination, and torture. Universal jurisdiction over the crimes enumerated in the Rome Statute was rejected by the signing parties, however universal jurisdiction is what allows the United Nations Security Council to refer specific situations to the ICC. This has only happened with Darfur (2005) and Libya (2011).\nIn addition the United Nations has set up geographically specific courts to investigate and prosecute crimes against humanity under a theory of universal jurisdiction, such as the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (1994), and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (1993).\nThe International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia investigates war crimes that took place in the Balkans in the 1990s. It convicted former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karad\u017ei\u0107 on 10 charges relating to directing murders, purges and other abuses against civilians, including genocide in connection with the 1995 massacre of 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica; he was sentenced to 40 years in prison.\nParticular states invoking universal jurisdiction.\nUniversal jurisdiction may be asserted by a particular nation as well as by an international tribunal. The result is the same: individuals become answerable for crimes defined and prosecuted regardless of where they live, or where the conduct occurred; crimes said to be so grievous as to be universally condemned.\nAmnesty International argues that since the end of the Second World War over fifteen states have conducted investigations, commenced prosecutions and completed trials based on universal jurisdiction for the crimes or arrested people with a view to extraditing the persons to a state seeking to prosecute them. These states include: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Mexico, Netherlands, Senegal, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Amnesty writes:\n All states parties to the Convention against Torture and the Inter-American Convention are obliged whenever a person suspected of torture is found in their territory to submit the case to their prosecuting authorities for the purposes of prosecution, or to extradite that person. In addition, it is now widely recognized that states, even those that are not states parties to these treaties, may exercise universal jurisdiction over torture under customary international law.\nExamples of particular states invoking universal jurisdiction are Israel's prosecution of Eichmann in 1961 (see below) and Spain's prosecution of South American dictators and torturers (see below). More recently, the Center for Constitutional Rights tried first in Switzerland and then in Canada to prosecute former U.S. President George W. Bush on behalf of persons tortured in US detention camps, invoking the universal jurisdiction doctrine. Bush cancelled his trip to Switzerland after news of the planned prosecution came to light. Bush has traveled to Canada but the Canadian government shut down the prosecution in advance of his arrest. The center has filed a grievance with the United Nations for Canada's failure to invoke universal jurisdiction to enforce the Convention Against Torture, a petition on which action is pending.\nImmunity for state officials.\nOn 14 February 2002, the International Court of Justice in the \"ICJ Arrest Warrant Case\" concluded that state officials may have immunity under international law while serving in office. The court stated that immunity was not granted to state officials for their own benefit, but instead to ensure the effective performance of their functions on behalf of their respective states. The court also stated that when abroad, state officials may enjoy immunity from arrest in another state on criminal charges, including charges of war crimes or crimes against humanity. But the ICJ qualified its conclusions, saying that state officers \"may be subject to criminal proceedings before certain international criminal courts, where they have jurisdiction. Examples include the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda\u00a0..., and the future International Criminal Court.\"\nIn 2003, Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, was served with an arrest warrant by the Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL) that was set up under the auspices of a treaty that binds only the United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone. Taylor contested the Special Court's jurisdiction, claiming immunity, but the Special Court for Sierra Leone concluded in 2004 that \"the sovereign equality of states does not prevent a head of state from being prosecuted before an international criminal tribunal or court\". The Special Court convicted Taylor in 2012 and sentenced him to fifty years' imprisonment, making him the first head of state since the Nuremberg trials after World War II to be tried and convicted by an international court. In sum, the question whether a former head of state might have immunity depends on which international court or tribunal endeavors to try him, how the court is constituted, and how it interprets its own mandate.\nUniversal jurisdiction enforcement around the world.\nArgentina.\nOn 14 February 2025, a court in Argentina, acting on a petition from the Burmese Rohingya Organisation UK and citing universal jurisdiction, issued arrest warrants against several officials in Myanmar, including junta leader Min Aung Hlaing, former president Htin Kyaw, and former state counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi on charges of \"genocide and crimes against humanity\" against the Rohingyas.\nAustralia.\nThe High Court of Australia confirmed the authority of the Australian Parliament, under the Australian Constitution, to exercise universal jurisdiction over war crimes in the \"Polyukhovich v Commonwealth\" case of 1991.\nBelgium.\nIn 1993, Belgium's Parliament passed a \"law of universal jurisdiction\" (sometimes referred to as \"Belgium's genocide law\"), allowing the state to prosecute people accused of war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. In 2001, four Rwandan citizens were convicted and given sentences from 12 to 20 years' imprisonment for their involvement in 1994 Rwandan genocide. There was a rapid succession of cases:\nConfronted with this sharp increase in cases, Belgium established the condition that the accused person must be Belgian or present in Belgium. An arrest warrant issued in 2000 under this law, against the then Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Abdoulaye Yerodia Ndombasi, was challenged before the International Court of Justice in the case entitled \"ICJ Arrest Warrant Case\". The ICJ's decision issued on 14 February 2002 found that it did not have jurisdiction to consider the question of universal jurisdiction, instead deciding the question on the basis of immunity of high-ranking state officials. However, the matter was addressed in separate and dissenting opinions, such as that of President Guillaume who concluded that universal jurisdiction exists only in relation to piracy; and the dissenting opinion of Judge Oda who recognised piracy, hijacking, terrorism and genocide as crimes subject to universal jurisdiction.\nOn 1 August 2003, Belgium repealed the law on universal jurisdiction, and introduced a new law on extraterritorial jurisdiction similar to or more restrictive than that of most other European countries. However, some cases that had already started continued. These included those concerning the Rwandan genocide, and complaints filed against the Chadian ex-President Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9 (dubbed the \"African Pinochet\"). In September 2005, Habr\u00e9 was indicted for crimes against humanity, torture, war crimes and other human rights violations by a Belgian court. Arrested in Senegal following requests from Senegalese courts, he was tried and convicted for war crimes by the Special Tribunal in Senegal in 2016 and sentenced to life in prison.\nCanada.\nTo implement the Rome Statute, Canada passed the Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act. Michael Byers, a University of British Columbia law professor, has argued that these laws go further than the Rome Statute, providing Canadian courts with jurisdiction over acts pre-dating the ICC and occurring in territories outside of ICC member-states; \"as a result, anyone who is present in Canada and alleged to have committed genocide, torture ... anywhere, at any time, can be prosecuted [in Canada]\".\nFinland.\nFran\u00e7ois Bazaramba was sentenced to life imprisonment in Finland in 2010 for participation in the Rwandan genocide of 1994.\nIn 2021 a trial for Gibril Massaquoi, charged with murder, aggravated war crimes and aggravated crimes against humanity in Liberia, started in Finland, with part of the hearings of witnesses to take place in Liberia and Sierra Leone.\nIn 2023 Yan Petrovsky was arrested in Finland at the request of the Ukrainian government, who sought to extradite him for war crimes committed during the war in Donbas. The extradition request was rejected due to human rights concerns, but Petrovsky was arrested and charged for the same crimes by the Finnish authorities. In 2025 Petrovsky was sentenced to life imprisonment.\nFrance.\nThe article 689 of the \"code de proc\u00e9dure p\u00e9nale\" states the infractions that can be judged in France when they were committed outside French territory either by French citizens or foreigners. The following infractions may be prosecuted:\nIn February 2019, Abdulhamid Chaban, a former soldier of the Syrian Army, was arrested and indicted for complicity in crimes against humanity during the Syrian civil war, whereas Majdi Nema, a former spokesperson for Jaysh al-Islam, was arrested and indicted for war crimes and torture, respectively. In May 2023, the French Court of Cassation ruled that French universal jurisdiction allows for a trial of said individuals, and that it was not obligatory that \"the offences of crime against humanity or war crime be identically described by the laws of the foreign country\", in this case Syria.\nOn 15 November 2023, France issued international arrest warrants for Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad and three other Syrian officials for war crimes perpetrated during the 2013 Ghouta chemical attack and the 2018 Douma chemical attack.\nOn 21 May 2024, a Paris Criminal Court started a trial \"in absentia\" of Ali Mamlouk, former head of the National Security Bureau, Jamil Hassan, former director of the Air Force intelligence service, and Abdel Salam Mahmoud, former head of investigations for the service, for the deaths of two French-Syrian citizens during the Syrian civil war.\nGermany.\nUnder the German legal system, international crimes are offenses that require public prosecution () and are not dependent on the victims' individual criminal complaints to initiate the prosecution.\nNikola Jorgi\u0107 on 26 September 1997 was convicted of genocide in Germany and sentenced to four terms of life imprisonment for his involvement in the Bosnian genocide. His appeal following his conviction was rejected by the German Federal Court of Justice, Germany's highest court of appeal for criminal matters, on 30 April 1999. The court stated that genocide is a crime which all nations must prosecute.\nSince then Germany has implemented the principle of universal jurisdiction for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes into its criminal law through the or VStGB (\"international criminal code\", literally \"book of the criminal law of peoples\"), which implemented the treaty creating the International Criminal Court into domestic law. The law was passed in 2002 and up to 2014. It has been used once, in the trial of Rwandan rebel leader Ignace Murwanashyaka. In 2015 he was found guilty and sentenced to 13 years in prison. Furthermore, section 7(2) of German Criminal Code (stGB) establishes the principle of , stating that German criminal law applies to offenses committed abroad by foreign nationals who currently reside in Germany if there is no criminal law jurisdiction in the foreign country or when no extradition request was made.\nOn June 16 it was reported that the German court has sentenced Syrian doctor Alaa M. to life imprisonment for committing torture and war crimes during the early stages of the Syrian civil war between 2011 and 2012. The Frankfurt court found that Alaa M., a doctor at a military hospital in Homs, killed two people and tortured nine others using brutal methods like beatings and burning wounds. The court said his crime was serious and decided he wouldn't be eligible for early release. Alaa M. had lived in Germany for ten years as an orthopedic surgeon and was arrested in 2020 after victims recognized him in a TV documentary. He denied the charges, claiming it was a conspiracy. The trial, which lasted over three years, mainly relied on survivor testimonies. The verdict is not final, and he can still appeal. This case is important because it is one of the first convictions under Germany's universal jurisdiction laws. These laws let Germany prosecute people accused of serious crimes like torture and war crimes, no matter where the crimes took place.\nIsrael.\nThe moral philosopher Peter Singer, along with Kenneth Roth, has cited Israel's prosecution of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 as an assertion of universal jurisdiction. He claims that while Israel did invoke a statute specific to Nazi crimes against Jews, its Supreme Court claimed universal jurisdiction over crimes against humanity.\nEichmann's defense lawyer argued that Israel did not have jurisdiction on account of Israel not having come into existence until 1948. The Genocide Convention also did not come into effect until 1951, and the Genocide Convention does not automatically provide for universal jurisdiction. It is also argued that Israeli agents obtained Eichmann illegally, violating international law when they seized and kidnapped Eichmann, and brought him to Israel to stand trial. The Argentinian government settled the dispute diplomatically with Israel.\nIsrael argued universal jurisdiction based on the \"universal character of the crimes in question\" and that the crimes committed by Eichmann were not only in violation of Israel law, but were considered \"grave offenses against the law of nations itself\". It also asserted that the crime of genocide is covered under international customary law. As a supplemental form of jurisdiction, a further argument is made on the basis of protective jurisdiction. Protective jurisdiction is a principle that \"provides that states may exercise jurisdiction over aliens who have committed an act abroad which is deemed prejudicial to the security of the particular state concerned\".\nMalaysia.\nIn November 2011, the Kuala Lumpur War Crimes Commission (KLWCC), created in 2007 by former Malaysian prime minister Mahathir Mohamad as a private institution (without the support of any government), exercised what it viewed as universal jurisdiction to try and convict \"in absentia\" former US President George W. Bush and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair for the invasion of Iraq. In May 2012, the tribunal again under what it saw as universal jurisdiction took testimony from victims of torture at Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo, and convicted \"in absentia\" former President Bush, former Vice President Dick Cheney, former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, former Deputy Assistant Attorneys General John Yoo and Jay Bybee, former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, and former counselors David Addington and William Haynes II for conspiracy to commit war crimes. The tribunal referred its findings to the chief prosecutor at the International Criminal Court in The Hague.\nThe Malaysian human rights group SUARAM expressed concern about the KLWCC's procedures, and former United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, Param Cumaraswamy, described the KLWCC as having no legal basis, and was sceptical about fair trials taking place \"in absentia\".\nNetherlands.\nIn January 2024, Mustafa A., a member of Liwa al-Quds, was convicted in the Netherlands for war crimes and crimes against humanity carried out during the Syrian civil war while fighting on the side of Syrian government forces. He was sentenced to twelve years of imprisonment.\nSenegal.\nA case against the former dictator of Chad, Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9, started in 2015 in Senegal.\nSpain.\nSpanish law recognizes the principle of universal jurisdiction. Article 23.4 of the Judicial Power Organization Act (LOPJ), enacted on 1 July 1985, establishes that Spanish courts have jurisdiction over crimes committed by Spaniards or foreign citizens outside Spain when such crimes can be described according to Spanish criminal law as genocide, terrorism, or some other, as well as any other crime that, according to international treaties or conventions, must be prosecuted in Spain. On 25 July 2009, the Spanish Congress passed a law that limits the competence of the Audiencia Nacional under Article 23.4 to cases in which Spaniards are victims, there is a relevant link to Spain, or the alleged perpetrators are in Spain. The law still has to pass the Senate, the high chamber, but passage is expected because it is supported by both major parties.\nIn 1999, Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Mench\u00fa brought a case against the Guatemalan military leadership in a Spanish Court. Six officials, among them Efra\u00edn R\u00edos Montt and \u00d3scar Humberto Mej\u00eda, were formally charged on 7 July 2006 to appear in the Spanish National Court after Spain's Constitutional Court ruled in September 2005, the Spanish Constitutional Court declaration that the \"principle of universal jurisdiction prevails over the existence of national interests\", following the Menchu suit brought against the officials for atrocities committed in the Guatemalan Civil War.\nIn June 2003, Spanish judge Baltasar Garz\u00f3n jailed Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, a former Argentine naval officer, who was extradited from Mexico to Spain pending his trial on charges of genocide and terrorism relating to the years of Argentina's military dictatorship.\nOn 11 January 2006, the Spanish High Court agreed to investigate a case in which seven former Chinese officials, including the former Communist Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin and former Premier Li Peng were alleged to have participated in a genocide in Tibet. This investigation follows a Spanish Constitutional Court (26 September 2005) ruling that Spanish courts could try genocide cases even if they did not involve Spanish nationals. China denounced the investigation as an interference in its internal affairs and dismissed the allegations as \"sheer fabrication\". The case was shelved in 2010, because of a law passed in 2009 that restricted High Court investigations to those \"involving Spanish victims, suspects who are in Spain, or some other obvious link with Spain\".\nComplaints were lodged against former Israeli Defense Forces chief of General Staff Lt.-Gen. (res.) Dan Halutz and six other senior Israeli political and military officials by pro-Palestinian organizations, who sought to prosecute them in Spain under the principle of universal jurisdiction. On 29 January 2009, Fernando Andreu, a judge of the Audiencia Nacional, opened preliminary investigations into claims that a targeted killing attack in Gaza in 2002 warranted the prosecution of Halutz, the former Israeli defence minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, the former defence chief-of-staff Moshe Ya'alon, and four others, for crimes against humanity. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu strongly criticized the decision, and Israeli officials refused to provide information requested by the Spanish court. The attack killed the founder and leader of the military wing of the Islamic militant organisation Hamas, Salah Shehade, who Israel said was responsible for hundreds of civilian deaths. The attack also killed 14 others (including his wife and 9 children). It had targeted the building where Shahade hid in Gaza City. It also wounded some 150 Palestinians, according to the complaint (or 50, according to other reports). The Israeli chief of operations and prime minister apologized officially, saying they were unaware, due to faulty intelligence, that civilians were in the house. The investigation in the case was halted on 30 June 2009 by a decision of a panel of 18 judges of the Audiencia Nacional. The Spanish Court of Appeals rejected the lower court's decision, and on appeal in April 2010 the Supreme Court of Spain upheld the Court of Appeals decision against conducting an official inquiry into the IDF's targeted killing of Shehadeh.\nSweden.\nUniversal jurisdiction was used in Sweden for the trial of Hamid Nouri for involvement in the 1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners. In 2022, Nouri was sentenced to a life in prison.\nIn April 2024, a Swedish court started a trial of Syrian Brigadier general Mohammed Hamo for indiscriminate attacks against civilians in Homs during the Syrian civil war.\nSwitzerland.\nOn 18 June 2021, former ULIMO commander Alieu Kosiah was sentenced to 20 years in prison for committing war crimes in Liberia during the country's first civil war. This was the first time that a Liberian national was tried for war crimes in relation to the Liberian Civil Wars, and the first time that the Swiss Federal Criminal Court held a war crimes trial.\nOn 18 April 2023, the Swiss Attorney General declared that Ousman Sonko, a former Interior Minister of the Gambia, had been charged with crimes against humanity. He was accused of \"having supported, participated in and failed to prevent 'systematic and generalised attacks' as part of a repressive campaign by security forces against Jammeh's opponents\".\nTurkey.\nIn January 2022, when filing a criminal case in the Istanbul Prosecutor's Office against Chinese officials for torture, rape, crimes against humanity and genocide against Uyghurs, lawyer Gulden Sonmez stated that Turkish legislation recognises universal jurisdiction for these offences.\nIn November 2025, the Istanbul Bar Association file a case against 37 Israeli officials on allegations of genocide in relation to the Gaza genocide and the interception of the ships of the Global Sumud Flotilla and the detention and torturing of the flotilla participants. Arrest warrants against the 37 officials, including government members Benjamin Netanyahu, Itamar Ben-Gvir, and Yisrael Katz, and military leaders Eyal Zamir and David Saar Salama, were issued by the Istanbul Chief Public Prosecutor's Office.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAn offence is generally only triable in the jurisdiction where the offence took place, unless a specific statute enables the UK to exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction. This is the case, \"inter alia\", for:\nIn December 2009, Westminster Magistrates' Court issued an arrest warrant for Tzipi Livni in connection with accusations of war crimes in the Gaza Strip during Operation Cast Lead (2008\u20132009). The warrant was issued on 12 December and revoked on 14 December 2009 after it was revealed that Livni had not entered British territory. The warrant was later denounced as \"cynical\" by the Israeli foreign ministry, while Livni's office said she was \"proud of all her decisions in Operation Cast Lead\". Livni herself called the arrest warrant \"an abuse of the British legal system\". Similarly a January visit to Britain by a team of Israel Defense Forces (IDF) was cancelled over concerns that arrest warrants would be sought by pro-Palestinian advocates in connection with allegations of war crimes under laws of universal jurisdiction.\nIn January 2013, Nepalese Colonel Kumar Lama was charged in the UK with torture under universal jurisdiction. He was acquitted in September 2016, with the jury finding him not guilty on one count, and failing to reach a verdict on the other.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has no formal statute to authorize it. In some cases, however, the federal government has exercised self-help in the apprehension or killing persons who are suspected of conspiring to commit crimes within the United States from outside of the country or committing crimes against American officials outside of the United States. This has occurred even when the suspect is not a United States person, has never been to the United States, and even when the person has never conspired or assisted in the commission of a crime within the United States, there is a functioning government which could try the person for the crime committed there, and notwithstanding the existence of a proper treaty of extradition between that country and the United States, ignoring the provisions of the treaty and capturing or killing the person directly.\nIn 1985, the Mexican national Humberto Alvarez-Machain allegedly assisted in the torture and murder of a United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) agent in Mexico. Mexico declined to extradite a Mexican national for the alleged crime committed in Mexico, despite having a treaty of extradition. The United States then hired a private citizen and some Mexican nationals as mercenaries to kidnap Alvarez-Machain and take him to the United States for trial. The trial court ruled that his arrest was unlawful because it violated the extradition treaty. On appeal, in \"United States v. Alvarez-Machain\", 504 U.S. 655 (1992), the Supreme Court held that, notwithstanding the existence of an extradition treaty with Mexico, it was still legal for the federal government of the United States to exercise self-help by forcibly abducting him on a street in Mexico and bringing him to the United States to stand trial. In Alvarez-Machain's subsequent criminal trial, he was acquitted; he later lost a lawsuit against the American government on the grounds of wrongful apprehension and imprisonment.\nBy event.\n2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nUniversal jurisdiction investigations of war crimes in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine were started under universal jurisdiction legislation of several individual states. States that started investigations included Germany, Lithuania, Spain and Sweden.\nCritiques.\nAccessibility of witnesses.\nOne of the major logistical issues a court may run into during an application of universal jurisdiction is the accessibility of witnesses. States do not have the legal authority to summon witnesses who currently reside abroad to appear before their national courts, nor do they always have access to the necessary witnesses or evidence needed to implicate a foreign national of crimes against humanity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48644", "revid": "50395928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48644", "title": "1896 Summer Olympics", "text": "Multi-sport event in Athens, Greece\nThe 1896 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the I Olympiad, and commonly known as Athens 1896 (), were the first international Olympic Games held in modern history. Organised by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), which had been created by French aristocrat Pierre de Coubertin, the event was held in Athens, Greece, from 6 to 15 April 1896.\nFourteen nations (according to the IOC, though the number is subject to interpretation) and 241 athletes (all males; this number is also disputed) took part in the games. Participants were all European or living in Europe, with the exception of the United States team, and over 65% of the competing athletes were Greek. Winners were given a silver medal, while runners-up received a copper medal. Retroactively, the IOC has designated the top three finishers in each event as gold, silver, and bronze medalists. Ten of the 14 participating nations earned medals. On April 6, 1896, American James Connolly became the first Olympic medalist in more than 1,500 years, competing in the triple jump. The United States won the most gold medals, 11, while host nation Greece won the most medals overall, 47. The highlight for the Greeks was the marathon victory by their compatriot Spyridon Louis. The most successful competitor was German wrestler and gymnast Carl Schuhmann, who won four events.\nAthens had been unanimously chosen to stage the inaugural modern Games during a congress organised by Coubertin in Paris on 23 June 1894 (during which the IOC was also created) because Greece was the birthplace of the Ancient Olympic Games. The main venue was the Panathenaic Stadium, where athletics and wrestling took place; other venues included the Neo Phaliron Velodrome for cycling and the Zappeion for fencing. The opening ceremony was held in the Panathenaic Stadium on 6 April, during which most of the competing athletes were aligned on the infield, grouped by nation. After a speech by the president of the organising committee, Crown Prince Constantine, his father officially opened the Games. Afterwards, nine bands and 150 choir singers performed an Olympic Hymn, composed by Spyridon Samaras and written by Kostis Palamas.\nThe 1896 Olympics were regarded as a great success. The Games had the largest international participation of any sporting event to that date. The Panathenaic Stadium overflowed with the largest crowd ever to watch a sporting event. After the Games, Coubertin and the IOC were petitioned by several prominent figures, including Greece's King George and some of the American competitors in Athens, to hold all the following Games in Athens. However, the 1900 Summer Olympics were already planned for Paris, and, with the exception of the Intercalated Games of 1906, the Olympics did not return to Greece until the 2004 Summer Olympics, 108 years later.\nReviving the Games.\nDuring the 19th century, several small-scale sports festivals across Europe were named after the Ancient Olympic Games. The 1870 Olympics at the Panathenaic stadium, which had been refurbished for the occasion, had an audience of 30,000 people. Pierre de Coubertin, a French pedagogue and historian, adopted William Penny Brookes' idea to establish a multi-national and multi-sport event\u2014the ancient games only allowed male athletes of Greek origin to participate. In 1890, Coubertin wrote an article in \"La Revue Athl\u00e9tique\", which espoused the importance of Much Wenlock, a rural market town in the English county of Shropshire. It was here that, in October 1850, the local physician William Penny Brookes founded the Wenlock Olympian Games, a festival of sports and recreations that included athletics and team sports, such as cricket, football and quoits. Coubertin also took inspiration from the earlier Greek games organised under the name of Olympics by businessman and philanthropist Evangelis Zappas in 1859, 1870 and 1875. The 1896 Athens Games were funded by the legacies of Evangelis Zappas and his cousin Konstantinos Zappas117 and by George Averoff128 who had been specifically requested by the Greek government, through crown prince Constantine, to sponsor the second refurbishment of the Panathenaic Stadium. The Greek government did this despite the cost of refurbishing the stadium in marble already being funded in full by Evangelis Zappas forty years earlier.14\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With deep feeling towards Baron de Coubertin's courteous petition, I send him and the members of the Congress, with my sincere thanks, my best wishes for the revival of the Olympic Games.\u2014\u200a\nOn 18 June 1894, Coubertin organised a congress at the Sorbonne, Paris, to present his plans to representatives of sports societies from 11 countries. Following his proposal's acceptance by the congress, a date for the first modern Olympic Games needed to be chosen. Coubertin suggested that the Games be held concurrently with the 1900 Universal Exposition of Paris. Concerned that a six-year waiting period might lessen public interest, congress members opted instead to hold the inaugural Games in 1896. With a date established, members of the congress turned their attention to the selection of a host city. It remains a mystery how Athens was finally chosen to host the inaugural Games. In the following years, both Coubertin and Demetrius Vikelas would offer recollections of the selection process that contradicted the official minutes of the congress. Most accounts hold that several congressmen first proposed London as the location, but Coubertin dissented. After a brief discussion with Vikelas, who represented Greece, Coubertin suggested Athens. Vikelas made the Athens proposal official on 23 June, and since Greece had been the original home of the Olympics, the congress unanimously approved the decision. Vikelas was then elected the first president of the newly established International Olympic Committee (IOC).\nOrganization.\nNews that the Olympic Games would return to Greece was well received by the Greek public, media, and royal family. According to Coubertin, \"the Crown Prince Constantine learned with great pleasure that the Games will be inaugurated in Athens.\" Coubertin went on to confirm that, \"the King and the Crown Prince will confer their patronage on the holding of these games.\" Constantine later conferred more than that; he eagerly assumed the presidency of the 1896 organising committee.108\nHowever, the country had financial troubles and was in political turmoil. The job of prime minister alternated between Charilaos Trikoupis and Theodoros Deligiannis frequently during the last years of the 19th century. Because of this financial and political instability, both prime minister Trikoupis and Stephanos Dragoumis, the president of the Zappas Olympic Committee, which had attempted to organise a series of national Olympiads, believed that Greece could not host the event.111\u2013118 In late 1894, the organising committee under Stephanos Skouloudis presented a report that the cost of the Games would be three times higher than originally estimated by Coubertin. They concluded the Games could not be held and offered their resignation. The total cost of the Games was 3,740,000 gold drachmas.\nWith the prospect of reviving the Olympic games very much in doubt, Coubertin and Vikelas commenced a campaign to keep the Olympic movement alive. Their efforts culminated on 7 January 1895 when Vikelas announced that crown prince Constantine would assume the presidency of the organising committee. His first responsibility was to raise the funds necessary to host the Games. He relied on the patriotism of the Greek people to motivate them to provide the required finances.118 Constantine's enthusiasm sparked a wave of contributions from the Greek public. This grassroots effort raised 330,000 drachmas. A special set of postage stamps was commissioned; the sale of which raised 400,000 drachmas. Ticket sales added 200,000 drachmas. At the request of Constantine, businessman George Averoff agreed to pay for the restoration of the Panathenaic Stadium. Averoff would donate 920,000 drachmas128 to this project. As a tribute to his generosity, a statue of Averoff was constructed and unveiled on 5 April 1896 outside the stadium. It stands there to this day.\nSome of the athletes would take part in the Games because they happened to be in Athens at the time the Games were held, either on holiday or for work (e.g., some of the British competitors worked for the British embassy). A designated Olympic Village for the athletes did not appear until the 1932 Summer Olympics. Consequently, the athletes had to provide their own lodging.\nThe first regulation voted on by the new IOC in 1894 was to allow only amateur athletes to participate in the Olympic Games. The various contests were thus held under amateur regulations with the exception of fencing matches. The rules and regulations were not uniform, so the Organising Committee had to choose among the codes of the various national athletic associations. The jury, the referees and the game director bore the same names as in antiquity (\"Ephor\", \"Helanodic\" and \"Alitarc\"). Prince George acted as final referee; according to Coubertin, \"his presence gave weight and authority to the decisions of the ephors\".\nWomen were not entitled to compete at the 1896 Summer Olympics, because de Coubertin felt that their inclusion would be \"impractical, uninteresting, unaesthetic and incorrect\".\nVenues.\nSeven venues were used for the 1896 Summer Olympics. Panathenaic Stadium was the main venue, hosting four of the nine sports contested. The town of Marathon served as host to the marathon event and the individual road race events. Swimming was held in the Bay of Zea, fencing at the Zappeion, sport shooting at Kallithea, and tennis at the Athens Lawn Tennis Club. Tennis was a sport unfamiliar to Greeks at the time of the 1896 Games.\nThe Bay of Zea is a seaport and marina in the Athens area; it was used as the swimming venue because the organizers of the Games wanted to avoid spending money on constructing a special purpose swimming venue.\nFour of the 1896 venues were reused as competition venues for the 2004 Games. The velodrome would be renovated into a football stadium in 1964 and was known as Karaiskakis Stadium. This venue was renovated in 2003 for use as a football venue for the 2004 Games. During the 2004 Games, Panathinaiko Stadium served as host for archery competitions and was the finish line for the athletic marathon event. The city of Marathon itself served as the starting point for both marathon events during the 2004 Games.242 The Zappeion served as the first home of the organizing committee (ATHOC) for the 2004 Games from 1998 to 1999, and served as the main communications center during those Games.20\nCalendar.\n&lt;section begin=\"Calendar\"/&gt;\n\u2021 The iconic Olympic rings symbol was not designed by Baron Pierre de Coubertin until 1912.\nNote: Silver medals were awarded to the winners, with copper medals given to the runners-up, and no prizes were given to those who came in 3rd place in any events.\n&lt;section end=\"Calendar\"/&gt;\nOpening ceremony.\nOn Easter Monday 6 April (25 March according to the Julian calendar used in Greece until 1923), the games of the First Olympiad were officially opened. The Panathenaic Stadium was filled with an estimated 80,000 spectators, including King George I of Greece, his wife Olga, and their sons. Most of the competing athletes were aligned on the infield, grouped by nation. After a speech by the president of the organising committee, Crown Prince Constantine, his father officially opened the Games with the words (in Greek):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I declare the opening of the first international Olympic Games in Athens. Long live the Nation. Long live the Greek people.\"\nAfterwards, nine bands and 150 choir singers performed an Olympic Hymn, composed by Spyridon Samaras, with words by poet Kostis Palamas. Thereafter, a variety of musical offerings provided the backgrounds to the Opening Ceremonies until 1960, since which time the Samaras/Palamas composition has become the official Olympic Anthem (decision taken by the IOC Session in 1958). Other elements of current Olympic opening ceremonies were initiated later: the Olympic flame was first lit in 1928, the first athletes' oath was sworn at the 1920 Summer Olympics, and the first officials' oath was taken at the 1972 Olympic Games.\nEvents.\nAt the 1894 Sorbonne Congress, a large roster of sports was suggested for the program in Athens. \nThe first official announcements regarding the sporting events to be held featured sports such as football and cricket, but these plans were not finalised, and these sports did not make the final program for the Games. Rowing and sailing events were also scheduled but were cancelled on the planned days of competition: sailing due to a lack of special boats in Greece and no foreign entries, and rowing due to poor weather. \nAs a result, the 1896 Summer Olympics programme featured 9 sports encompassing 10 disciplines and 43 events. The number of events in each discipline is noted in parentheses.\nAthletics.\nThe athletics events had the most international field of any of the sports. The major highlight was the marathon, held for the first time in international competition. Spyridon Louis, a previously unrecognised water carrier, won the event to become the only Greek athletics champion and a national hero. Although Greece had been favoured to win the discus and the shot put, the best Greek athletes finished just behind the American Robert Garrett in both events.153\nNo world records were set, as few top international competitors had elected to compete. In addition, the curves of the track were very tight, making fast times in the running events virtually impossible. Despite this, Thomas Burke, of the United States, won the 100-meter race in 12.0 seconds and the 400-meter race in 54.2 seconds. Burke was the only one who used the \"crouch start\" (putting his knee on soil), confusing the jury. Eventually, he was allowed to start from this \"uncomfortable position\".\nChile claims one athlete, Luis Subercaseaux, who competed for the nation at the 1896 Summer Olympics. This makes Chile one of the 14 nations to appear at the inaugural Summer Olympic Games. Subercaseaux's results are not listed in the official report, though that report typically includes only winners and Subercaseaux won no medals. He was entered to compete in the 100m, 400m and 800m events but is usually listed as a no show. An appraisal of a famous photo of series 2 of the 100 meters sprint, performed by facial recognition experts of the Chilean forensic police, concluded that Subercaseaux was one of the participants.\nThe day after the official marathon, Stamata Revithi ran the 40-kilometer course in 5 hours 30 minutes, finishing outside Panathinaiko Stadium. However, some of the authors, who believe that \"Melpomene\" and Revithi are the same person, attribute to the latter the more favorable time of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442\u00a0hours. She was denied entry into the official race as the 1896 Olympics excluded women from competition.\nCycling.\nThe rules of the International Cycling Association were used for the cycling competitions. The track cycling events were held at the newly built Neo Phaliron Velodrome. Only one road event was held, a race from Athens to Marathon and back (87 kilometres).\nIn the track events, the best cyclist was Frenchman Paul Masson, who won the one lap time trial, the sprint event, and the 10,000 meters. In the 100 kilometres event, Masson entered as a pacemaker for his compatriot L\u00e9on Flameng. Flameng won the event, after a fall, and after stopping to wait for his Greek opponent Georgios Kolettis to fix a mechanical problem. The Austrian fencer Adolf Schmal won the 12-hour race, which was completed by only two cyclists, while the road race event was won by Aristidis Konstantinidis.\nFencing.\nThe fencing events were held in the Zappeion, which, built with money Evangelis Zappas had given to revive the ancient Olympic Games, had never seen any athletic contests before.148 Unlike other sports (in which only amateurs were allowed to take part at the Olympics), professionals were authorised to compete in fencing, though in a separate event. These professionals were considered gentlemen athletes, just like the amateurs.\nFour events were scheduled, but the \u00e9p\u00e9e event was cancelled for unknown reasons. The foil event was won by a Frenchman, Eug\u00e8ne-Henri Gravelotte, who beat his countryman, Henri Callot, in the final.148 The other two events, the sabre and the masters foil, were won by Greek fencers. Leonidas Pyrgos, who won the latter event, became the first Greek Olympic champion in the modern era.\nGymnastics.\nThe gymnastics competition was carried out on the infield of the Panathinaiko Stadium. Germany sent an 11-man team, which won five of the eight events, including both team events: in the team event on the horizontal bar, the German team was the only entry.\nThree Germans added individual titles: Hermann Weing\u00e4rtner won the horizontal bar event, Alfred Flatow won the parallel bars, and Carl Schuhmann, who also won the wrestling event, won the vault. Louis Zutter, a Swiss gymnast, won the pommel horse, while Greeks Ioannis Mitropoulos and Nikolaos Andriakopoulos were victorious in the rings and rope climbing events, respectively.151\nSailing and rowing.\nA regatta of sailing boats was on the program of the Games of the First Olympiad for 31 March 1896 (Julian calendar). However this event had to be given up.\nThe official English report states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Regatta could not take place because some special boats embarkation had not been provided for.\u2014\u200a\nThe German version states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The sailing competitions were cancelled because neither had we provided the special boats for it, nor had foreign applicants registered.\nRowing races were scheduled for the next day, 1 April 1896 (Julian); however, poor weather forced their cancellation.\nThe official English report states:109\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The regatta was therefore postponed to three o'clock in the afternoon. In the afternoon however the storm was still on the increase, some of the lighter embarkations were thrown on the shore by the violence of the waves, and the elements continued to rage with such fury that every idea of a boatrace had to be given up.\nThe German rower, Berthold K\u00fcttner, wrote several articles about the 1896 Games that were published in his Berlin rowing club's magazine in 1936 and reprinted in the Journal of Olympic History in 2012. He stated that he and Adolf J\u00e4ger had lined up for the start of the double sculls event. He further wrote that \"The double scull would be the first to start because the wind had become much stronger. On a fishing boat we took our double scull to the starting line. We already had problems getting into the double scull because of the swells. From our opponents no one had appeared \u2013 although both Greeks and Italians had applied. Because a longer wait for them seemed pointless, the starter told us to sail without competition.\n\"After the official salutation and presentation in the Court Loge, where many of the attendees could not hide a laugh about my clothing, Prince George, President of the Committee, praised me for our appearance at the racing track and presented me with the winners medal in bronze. At the same time he also gave me one for \"Bundesbruder\" J\u00e4ger. The commemorative medal, which each of the participants received, had already been presented to us earlier.\"\nHe went on to state that the single sculls and race for naval boats were postponed until the following day, then ultimately cancelled when the weather worsened. The International Olympic Committee does not recognize any of this.\nShooting.\nHeld at a range at Kallithea, the shooting competition consisted of five events\u2014two using a rifle and three with the pistol. The first event, the military rifle, was won by Pantelis Karasevdas, the only competitor to hit the target with all of his shots. The second event, for military pistols, was dominated by two American brothers: John and Sumner Paine. They became the first siblings to finish first and second in the same event. To avoid embarrassing their hosts, the brothers decided that only one of them would compete in the next pistol event, the free pistol. Sumner Paine won that event, thereby becoming the first relative of an Olympic champion to become Olympic champion himself.\nThe Paine brothers did not compete in the 25-meter pistol event, as the event judges determined that their weapons were not of the required calibre. In their absence, Ioannis Phrangoudis won. The final event, the free rifle, began on the same day. However, the event could not be completed due to darkness and was finalised the next morning, when Georgios Orphanidis was crowned the champion.\nSwimming.\nThe swimming competition was held in the open sea because the organizers had refused to spend the money necessary for a specially constructed stadium. Nearly 20,000 spectators lined the Bay of Zea off the Piraeus coast to watch the events. The water in the bay was cold, and the competitors suffered during their races. There were three open events (men's 100-metre freestyle, men's 500-metre freestyle, and men's 1200 metre freestyle), in addition to a special event open only to Greek sailors, all of which were held on the same day (11 April).\nFor Alfr\u00e9d Haj\u00f3s of Hungary, this meant he could only compete in two of the events, as they were held too close together, which made it impossible for him to adequately recuperate. Nevertheless, he won the two events in which he swam, the 100 and 1200 meter freestyle. Haj\u00f3s later became one of only two Olympians to win a medal in both the athletic and artistic competitions, when he won a silver medal for architecture in 1924. The 500-meter freestyle was won by Austrian swimmer Paul Neumann, who defeated his opponents by more than a minute and a half.\nTennis.\nAlthough tennis was already a major sport by the end of the 19th century, none of the top players turned up for the tournament in Athens. The competition was held at the courts of the Athens Lawn Tennis Club, and the infield of the velodrome used for the cycling events. John Pius Boland, who won the event, had been entered in the competition by a fellow-student of his at Oxford; the Greek, Konstantinos Manos. As a member of the Athens Lawn Tennis sub-committee, Manos had been trying, with the assistance of Boland, to recruit competitors for the Athens Games from among the sporting circles of Oxford University. In the first round, Boland defeated Friedrich Traun, a promising tennis player from Hamburg, who had been eliminated in the 100-meter sprint competition. Boland and Traun decided to team up for the doubles event, in which they reached the final and defeated their Greek opponents after losing the first set.\nWeightlifting.\nThe sport of weightlifting was still young in 1896, and the rules differed from those in use today. Competitions were held outdoors, in the infield of the main stadium, and there were no weight limits. The first event was held in a style now known as the \"clean and jerk\". Two competitors stood out: Briton Launceston Elliot and Viggo Jensen of Denmark. Both of them lifted the same weight, but the jury, with Prince George as the chairman, ruled that Jensen had done so in a better style. The British delegation, unfamiliar with this tie-breaking rule, lodged a protest. The lifters were eventually allowed to make further attempts, but neither lifter improved, and Jensen was declared the champion.\nElliot got his revenge in the one hand lift event, which was held immediately after the two-handed one. Jensen had been slightly injured during his last two-handed attempt and was no match for Elliot, who won the competition easily. The Greek audience was charmed by the British victor, whom they considered very attractive. A curious incident occurred during the weightlifting event: a servant was ordered to remove the weights, which appeared to be a difficult task for him. Prince George came to his assistance; he picked up the weight and threw it a considerable distance with ease, to the delight of the crowd.\nWrestling.\nNo weight classes existed for the wrestling competition, held in the Panathenaic Stadium, which meant that there would only be one winner among competitors of all sizes. The rules used were similar to modern Greco-Roman wrestling, although there was no time limit, and not all leg holds were forbidden (in contrast to current rules).\nApart from the two Greek contestants, all the competitors had previously been active in other sports. Weightlifting champion Launceston Elliot faced gymnastics champion Carl Schuhmann. The latter won and advanced into the final, where he met Georgios Tsitas, who had previously defeated Stephanos Christopoulos. Darkness forced the final match to be suspended after 40 minutes; it was continued the following day, when Schuhmann needed only fifteen minutes to finish the bout.\nClosing ceremony.\nOn the morning of Sunday 12 April (or 31 March, according to the Julian calendar then used in Greece), King George organised a banquet for officials and athletes (even though some competitions had not yet been held). During his speech, he made clear that, as far as he was concerned, the Olympics should be held in Athens permanently. The official closing ceremony was held the following Wednesday after being postponed from Tuesday due to rain. Again, the royal family attended the ceremony, which was opened by the national anthem of Greece and an ode composed in ancient Greek by George S. Robertson, a British athlete and scholar.50\nAfterwards, the king awarded prizes to the winners. Unlike today, the first-place winners received a silver medal, an olive branch and a diploma, while runners-up received a copper medal, a laurel branch and a diploma. Third place winners did not receive a prize.\nSome winners also received additional prizes, such as Spyridon Louis, who received a cup from Michel Br\u00e9al, a friend of Coubertin, who had conceived the marathon event. Louis then led the medalists on a lap of honour around the stadium, while the Olympic Hymn was played again. The King then formally announced that the first Olympiad was at an end and left the Stadium, while the band played the Greek national hymn and the crowd cheered.\nLike the Greek king, many others supported the idea of holding the next Games in Athens; most of the American competitors signed a letter to the Crown Prince expressing this wish. Coubertin, however, was heavily opposed to this idea, as he envisioned international rotation as one of the cornerstones of the modern Olympics. According to his wish, the next Games were held in Paris, although they would be somewhat overshadowed by the concurrent Universal Exposition.156\nParticipating nations.\nThe concept of national teams was not a major part of the Olympic movement until the Intercalated Games 10 years later, though many sources list the nationality of competitors in 1896 and give medal counts. There are significant conflicts with regard to which nations competed. The International Olympic Committee gives a figure of 14, but does not list them. The following 14 are most likely the ones recognised by the IOC. Olympedia lists 13, excluding Chile; other sources list 12, excluding Chile and Bulgaria; others list 13, including those two but excluding Italy. Egypt is also sometimes included because of the participation of Dimitrios Kasdaglis, a Greek national who resided in Alexandria after living in Great Britain for years. Belgium and Russia had entered the names of competitors but withdrew.\nNumber of athletes by National Olympic Committees.\nNational Olympic Committees did not yet exist. Over 65% of all athletes were Greek.\nMedal count.\nTen of the 14 participating nations earned medals, in addition to two medals won by mixed teams (teams made up of athletes from multiple nations). The IOC has retroactively assigned gold, silver and bronze medals to the three best placed athletes in each event to comport with more recent traditions. In this regard, five of the bronze medalists at the Games are unknown: two in swimming and three in gymnastics.\nThe United States won the most gold medals (11), while host nation Greece won the most medals overall (47), as well as the most silver (18) and bronze (19) medals, finishing with one fewer gold medal than the United States, though having 155 athletes more than the U.S.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48646", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48646", "title": "1896 Olympic Summer Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "48647", "revid": "434947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48647", "title": "Thai language", "text": "Tai language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThai, or Central Thai (historically Siamese; ), is a Tai language of the Kra\u2013Dai language family spoken by the Central Thai, Mon, Lao Wiang, and Phuan people in Central Thailand and the vast majority of Thai Chinese enclaves throughout the country. It is the sole official language of Thailand.\nThai is the most spoken of over 60 languages of Thailand by both number of native and overall speakers. Over half of its vocabulary is derived from or borrowed from Pali, Sanskrit, Mon and Old Khmer. It is a tonal and analytic language. Thai has a complex orthography and system of relational markers. Spoken Thai, depending on standard sociolinguistic factors such as age, gender, class, spatial proximity, and the urban/rural divide, is partly mutually intelligible with Lao, Isan, and some fellow Thai topolects. These languages are written with slightly different scripts, but are linguistically similar and effectively form a dialect continuum.\nThe Thai language is spoken by over 70 million people in Thailand as of 2024. Moreover, most Thais in the northern (Lanna), the Southern (Tai) and the northeastern (Isan) parts of the country today are bilingual speakers of Central Thai and their respective regional dialects because Central Thai is the language of television, education, news reporting, and all forms of media. A recent research found that the speakers of the Northern Thai language (also known as Phasa Mueang or Kham Mueang) have become so few, as most people in northern Thailand now invariably speak Standard Thai, so that they are now using mostly Central Thai words and only seasoning their speech with the \"Kham Mueang\" accent. Standard Thai is based on the register of the educated classes by Central Thai and ethnic minorities in the area along the ring surrounding the Metropolis.\nIn addition to Central Thai, Thailand is home to other related Tai languages. Although most linguists classify these dialects as related but distinct languages, native speakers often identify them as regional variants or dialects of the \"same\" Thai language, or as \"different kinds of Thai\". As a dominant language in all aspects of society in Thailand, Thai initially saw gradual and later widespread adoption as a second language among the country's minority ethnic groups from the mid-late Ayutthaya period onward. Ethnic minorities today are predominantly bilingual, speaking Thai alongside their native language or dialect.\nClassification.\nStandard Thai is classified as one of the Chiang Saen languages\u2014others being Northern Thai, Southern Thai and numerous smaller languages, which together with the Northwestern Tai and Lao-Phutai languages, form the Southwestern branch of Tai languages. The Tai languages are a branch of the Kra\u2013Dai language family, which encompasses a large number of indigenous languages spoken in an arc from Hainan and Guangxi south through Laos and Northern Vietnam to the Cambodian border.\nStandard Thai is the principal language of education and government and spoken throughout Thailand. The standard is based on the dialect of the central Thai people, and it is written in the Thai script.\nHistory.\nThai has undergone various historical sound changes. Some of the most significant changes occurred during the evolution from Old Thai to modern Thai. The Thai writing system has an eight-century history and many of these changes, especially in consonants and tones, are evidenced in the modern orthography.\nEarly spread.\nAccording to a Chinese source, during the Ming dynasty, Yingya Shenglan (1405\u20131433), Ma Huan reported on the language of the Xi\u0101nlu\u00f3 (\u66b9\u7f85) or Ayutthaya Kingdom, saying that it somewhat resembled the local patois as pronounced in Guangdong Ayutthaya, the old capital of Thailand from 1351 - 1767 A.D., was from the beginning a bilingual society, speaking Thai and Khmer. Bilingualism must have been strengthened and maintained for some time by the great number of Khmer-speaking captives the Thais took from Angkor Thom after their victories in 1369, 1388 and 1431. Gradually toward the end of the period, a language shift took place. Khmer fell out of use. Both Thai and Khmer descendants whose great-grand parents or earlier ancestors were bilingual came to use only Thai. In the process of language shift, an abundance of Khmer elements were transferred into Thai and permeated all aspects of the language. Consequently, the Thai of the late Ayutthaya Period which later became Ratanakosin or Bangkok Thai, was a thorough mixture of Thai and Khmer. There were more Khmer words in use than Tai cognates. Khmer grammatical rules were used actively to coin new disyllabic and polysyllabic words and phrases. Khmer expressions, sayings, and proverbs were expressed in Thai through transference.\nThais borrowed both the Royal vocabulary and rules to enlarge the vocabulary from Khmer. The Thais later developed the royal vocabulary according to their immediate environment. Thai and Pali, the latter from Theravada Buddhism, were added to the vocabulary. An investigation of the Ayutthaya Rajasap reveals that three languages, Thai, Khmer and Khmero-Indic were at work closely both in formulaic expressions and in normal discourse. In fact, Khmero-Indic may be classified in the same category as Khmer because Indic had been adapted to the Khmer system first before the Thai borrowed.\nOld Thai.\nOld Thai had a three-way tone distinction on \"live syllables\" (those not ending in a stop), with no possible distinction on \"dead syllables\" (those ending in a stop, i.e. either or the glottal stop that automatically closes syllables otherwise ending in a short vowel).\nThere was a two-way voiced vs. voiceless distinction among all fricative and sonorant consonants, and up to a four-way distinction among stops and affricates. The maximal four-way occurred in labials () and denti-alveolars (); the three-way distinction among velars () and palatals (), with the glottalized member of each set apparently missing.\nThe major change between old and modern Thai was due to voicing distinction losses and the concomitant tone split. This may have happened between about 1300 and 1600 CE, possibly occurring at different times in different parts of the Thai-speaking area. All voiced\u2013voiceless pairs of consonants lost the voicing distinction:\nHowever, in the process of these mergers, the former distinction of voice was transferred into a new set of tonal distinctions. In essence, every tone in Old Thai split into two new tones, with a lower-pitched tone corresponding to a syllable that formerly began with a voiced consonant, and a higher-pitched tone corresponding to a syllable that formerly began with a voiceless consonant (including glottalized stops). An additional complication is that formerly voiceless unaspirated stops/affricates (original ) also caused original tone 1 to lower, but had no such effect on original tones 2 or 3.\nThe above consonant mergers and tone splits account for the complex relationship between spelling and sound in modern Thai. Modern \"low\"-class consonants were voiced in Old Thai, and the terminology \"low\" reflects the lower tone variants that resulted. Modern \"mid\"-class consonants were voiceless unaspirated stops or affricates in Old Thai\u2014precisely the class that triggered lowering in original tone 1 but not tones 2 or 3. Modern \"high\"-class consonants were the remaining voiceless consonants in Old Thai (voiceless fricatives, voiceless sonorants, voiceless aspirated stops). The three most common tone \"marks\" (the lack of any tone mark, as well as the two marks termed \"mai ek\" and \"mai tho\") represent the three tones of Old Thai, and the complex relationship between tone mark and actual tone is due to the various tonal changes since then. Since the tone split, the tones have changed in actual representation to the point that the former relationship between lower and higher tonal variants has been completely obscured. Furthermore, the six tones that resulted after the three tones of Old Thai were split have since merged into five in standard Thai, with the lower variant of former tone 2 merging with the higher variant of former tone 3, becoming the modern \"falling\" tone.\nEarly Old Thai.\nEarly Old Thai also apparently had velar fricatives as distinct phonemes. These were represented by the now-obsolete letters \u0e03 \"kho khuat\" and \u0e05 \"kho khon\", respectively. During the Old Thai period, these sounds merged into the corresponding stops , and as a result the use of these letters became unstable.\nAt some point in the history of Thai, an alveolo-palatal nasal phoneme also existed, inherited from Proto-Tai. A letter \u0e0d \"yo ying\" also exists, which is used to represent an alveolo-palatal nasal in words borrowed from Sanskrit and Pali, and is currently pronounced at the beginning of a syllable but at the end of a syllable. Most native Thai words that are reconstructed as beginning with are also pronounced in modern Thai, but generally spelled with \u0e22 \"yo yak\", which consistently represents . This suggests that &gt; in native words occurred in the pre-literary period. It is unclear whether Sanskrit and Pali words beginning with were borrowed directly with a , or whether a was re-introduced, followed by a second change &gt; . The northeastern Thai dialect Isan and the Lao language still preserve the phoneme /\u0272/, which is represented in the Lao script by \u0e8d, such as in the word \u0e8d\u0eb8\u0e87 (, \"mosquito\"). This letter is distinct from the phoneme and its Lao letter \u0ea2, such as in the word \u0ea2\u0eb2 (, \"medicine\"). The distinction in writing has been lost in the informal writing of the Isan language with the Thai script and both sounds are represented by \u0e22 (See: Comparison of Lao and Isan).\nProto-Tai also had a glottalized palatal sound, reconstructed as in Li Fang-Kuei (1977). Corresponding Thai words are generally spelled \u0e2b\u0e22, which implies an Old Thai pronunciation of (or ), but a few such words are spelled \u0e2d\u0e22, which implies a pronunciation of and suggests that the glottalization may have persisted through to the early literary period.\nVowel developments.\nThe vowel system of modern Thai contains nine pure vowels and three centering diphthongs, each of which can occur short or long. According to Li (1977), however, many Thai dialects have only one such short\u2013long pair (), and in general it is difficult or impossible to find minimal short\u2013long pairs in Thai that involve vowels other than and where both members have frequent correspondences throughout the Tai languages. More specifically, he notes the following facts about Thai:\nFurthermore, the vowel that corresponds to short Thai has a different and often higher quality in many of the Tai languages compared with the vowel corresponding to Thai .\nThis leads Li to posit the following:\nNot all researchers agree with Li. Pittayaporn (2009), for example, reconstructs a similar system for Proto-Southwestern-Tai, but believes that there was also a mid back unrounded vowel (which he describes as ), occurring only before final velar . He also seems to believe that the Proto-Southwestern-Tai vowel length distinctions can be reconstructed back to similar distinctions in Proto-Tai.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nInitials.\nStandard Thai distinguishes three voice-onset times among plosive and affricate consonants:\nWhereas English makes a distinction between voiced and unvoiced aspirated , Thai distinguishes a third sound \u2013 the unvoiced, unaspirated that occurs in English only as an allophone of , for example after an as in the sound of the \"p\" in \"spin\". There is similarly a laminal denti-alveolar , , triplet in Thai. In the velar series there is a , pair and in the postalveolar series a , pair, without the corresponding voiced sounds and . (In loanwords from English, English and are borrowed as the tenuis stops and .) Among some younger speakers (such as younger female speakers from Bangkok metropolian area), postalveolar series are alveolar and . Among some older speakers (such as older speakers from Maeklong river basin), they can be stops and , however these pronunciation are not standard. Voiced stops tend to vary from fully pulmonic to implosives. However, implosive pronunciation is rare among younger speakers due to standardization and influence of the standard dialect. \nIn each cell below, the first line indicates (IPA), the second indicates the Thai characters in initial position. Note that several letters appearing in the same box have identical pronunciation. In such cases, one of the letters may serve as the \"default\", being more common and/or preferred for borrowings from English and such; for example, \u0e19 in the case of \"n\" and \u0e2a for \"s\". The letter \u0e2b, the default \"h\" letter, is also used to help write certain tones (described below).\nFinals.\nAlthough the overall 44 Thai consonant letters provide 21 sounds in case of initials, the case for finals is different. For finals, only eight sounds, as well as no sound, called \"m\u0101tr\u0101\" () are used. To demonstrate, at the end of a syllable, \u0e1a () and \u0e14 () are devoiced, becoming pronounced as and respectively. Additionally, all plosive sounds are unreleased. Hence, final , , and sounds are pronounced as , , and respectively.\nOf the consonant letters, excluding the disused \u0e03 and \u0e05, six (\u0e09 \u0e1c \u0e1d \u0e2b \u0e2d \u0e2e) cannot be used as a final and the other 36 are grouped as following.\nClusters.\nIn Thai, each syllable in a word is articulated independently, so consonants from adjacent syllables (i.e. heterosyllabic) show no sign of articulation as a cluster. Thai has specific phonotactical patterns that describe its syllable structure, including tautosyllabic consonant clusters, and vowel sequences. In core Thai words (i.e. excluding loanwords), only clusters of two consonants occur, of which there are 11 combinations:\nThe number of clusters increases in loanwords such as (\u0e17\u0e23) in (, from Sanskrit \"indr\u0101\") or (\u0e1f\u0e23) in (, from English \"free\"); however, these usually only occur in initial position, with either , , or as the second consonant sound and not more than two sounds at a time. In addition, \u0e01 may be Romanized as \"g\" and \u0e1b as \"b\" in those specific clusters to distinguish them from the corresponded aspirated stops.\nVowels.\nThe vowel nuclei of the Thai language are given in the following table. The top entry in every cell is the symbol from the , the second entry gives the spelling in the Thai script, where a dash (\u2013) indicates the position of the initial consonant after which the vowel is pronounced. A second dash indicates that a final consonant follows.\nEach vowel quality occurs in long-short pairs: these are distinct phonemes forming distinct words in Thai.\nThe long-short pairs are as follows:\nThere are also opening and closing diphthongs in Thai, which analyze as and . For purposes of determining tone, those marked with an asterisk are sometimes classified as long:\nAdditionally, there are three triphthongs. For purposes of determining tone, those marked with an asterisk are sometimes classified as long:\nTones.\nThere are five phonemic tones: mid, low, falling, high, and rising, sometimes referred to in older reference works as \"rectus, gravis, circumflexus, altus,\" and \"demissus,\" respectively. The table shows an example of both the phonemic tones and their phonetic realization, in the IPA. Moren &amp; Zsiga (2006) and Zsiga &amp; Nitisaroj (2007) provide phonetic and phonological analyses of Thai tone realization.\nNotes:\nChecked syllables.\nIn some English loanwords, closed syllables with a long vowel ending in an obstruent sound have a high tone, and closed syllables with a short vowel ending in an obstruent sound have a falling tone.\nGrammar.\nFrom the perspective of linguistic typology, Thai can be considered to be an analytic language. The word order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object, although the subject is often omitted. Additionally, Thai is an isolating language lacking any form of inflectional morphology whatsoever. Thai pronouns are selected according to the gender and relative status of speaker and audience.\nAdjectives and adverbs.\nThere is no morphological distinction between adverbs and adjectives. Many words can be used in either function. They follow the word they modify, which may be a noun, verb, or another adjective or adverb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComparatives take the form \"A X B\" (, ), 'A is more X than B'. The superlative is expressed as \"A X \" (, ), 'A is most X'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdjectives in Thai can be used as complete predicates. Because of this, many words used to indicate tense in verbs (see Verbs:Tense below) may be used to describe adjectives.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n* Remark mostly means 'I am hungry right now' because normally, () marks the change of a state, but has many other uses as well. For example, in the sentence, (): 'So where are you going?', () is used as a discourse particle.\nVerbs.\nVerbs do not inflect. They do not change with person, tense, voice, mood, or number; nor are there any participles. The language being analytic and case-less, the relationship between subject, direct and indirect object is conveyed through word order and auxiliary verbs. Transitive verbs follow the pattern \"subject-verb-object\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn order to convey tense, aspect and mood (TAM), the Thai verbal system employs auxiliaries and verb serialization. TAM markers are however not obligatory and often left out in colloquial use. In such cases, the precise meaning is determined through context. This results in sentences lacking both TAM markers and overt context being ambiguous and subject to various interpretations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe sentence can thus be interpreted as 'I am eating there', 'I eat there habitually', 'I will eat there' or 'I ate there'. Aspect markers in Thai have been divided into four distinct groups based on their usage. These markers could appear either before or after the verb. The following list describes some of the most commonly used aspect markers. A number of these aspect markers are also full verbs on their own and carry a distinct meaning. For example () as a full verb means 'to stay, to live or to remain at'. However, as an auxiliary it can be described as a \"temporary aspect\" or \"continuative marker\".\nThe imperfective aspect marker (, , currently) is used before the verb to denote an ongoing action (similar to the \"-ing\" suffix in English). is commonly interpreted as a progressive aspect marker. Similarly, (, ) is a post-verbal aspect marker which corresponds to the continuative or temporary aspect.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComparably, (, , still) is used in an incomplete action, and usually collocates with () or any second marker in common use.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe marker (, ) is usually analyzed as a past tense marker when it occurs before the verb. As a full verb, means 'to get or receive'. However, when used after a verb, takes on a meaning of potentiality or successful outcome of the main verb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n (, ; 'already') is treated as a marker indicating the perfect aspect. That is to say, marks the event as being completed at the time of reference. has two other meanings in addition to its use as a TAM marker. can either be a conjunction for sequential actions or an archaic word for 'to finish'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFuture can be indicated by (, ; 'will') before the verb or by a time expression indicating the future. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDative marker (, ; 'give') often used in a sentence to indicate prepositional or double objects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe passive voice is indicated by the insertion of (, ) before the verb. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe construction is traditionally an adversative passive, a feature common to many Southeast Asian languages where a passive construction is restricted to unfavorable meanings (e.g. \"he was killed\" but not \"he was rewarded\"), but in current usage is found with virtually all transitive verbs. This neutral usage first arose as an Anglicism as Thailand became Westernized in the early 20th century, but has since become pervasive. The adversative passive persists in the similar construction with (, ).\nNegation is indicated by placing (, ; not) before the verb.\nThai exhibits serial verb constructions, where verbs are strung together. Some word combinations are common and may be considered set phrases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNouns.\nNouns are uninflected and have no gender; there are no articles. Thai nouns are bare nouns and can be interpreted as singular, plural, definite or indefinite. Some specific nouns are reduplicated to form collectives: (, 'child') is often repeated as () to refer to a group of children. The word (, ) may be used as a prefix of a noun or pronoun as a collective to pluralize or emphasise the following word. (, , , 'we', masculine; , , emphasised 'we'; , '(the) dogs'). Plurals are expressed by adding classifiers, used as measure words (), in the form of noun-number-classifier:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhile in English, such classifiers are usually absent (\"four chairs\") or optional (\"two bottles of beer\" \"or\" \"two beers\"), a classifier is almost always used in Thai (hence \"chair four item\" and \"beer two bottle\").\nPossession in Thai is indicated by adding the word () in front of the noun or pronoun, but it may often be omitted. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNominal phrases.\nNominal phrases in Thai often use a special class of words classifiers. As previously mentioned, these classifiers are obligatory for noun phrases containing numerals e.g.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnlike any numeral, ('one') can mark on both positions of classifier, but in different functions. The post-head one potentially marks a referent as indefinite article.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the previous example () acts as the classifier in the nominal phrase. This follows the form of noun-cardinal-classifier mentioned above. Classifiers are also required to form quantified noun phrases in Thai with some quantifiers such as ('all'), ('some'). The examples below are demonstrated using the classifier , which is used for people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHowever, classifiers are not utilized for negative quantification. Negative quantification is expressed by the pattern (, ) + NOUN.\nDemonstratives.\nThai has a three-way distinction for its demonstratives: \"proximal\" (, ; 'this/these'), \"medial\" (, ; 'that/those'), and \"distal\" (, ; 'that/those over there') which is rarely used. The tone is changed depending on usage: as a pronoun, the proximal demonstrative is \" (, )\"; while \" (, )\" is a modifier placed after nouns, prepositions, classifiers, etc. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe word (, ) plays the role of an interrogative determiner or pronoun.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe syntax for demonstrative phrases, however, differ from that of cardinals and follow the pattern \"noun-classifier-demonstrative\". For example, the noun phrase \"this dog\" would be expressed in Thai as (literally 'dog (classifier) this').\nPronouns.\nSubject pronouns are often omitted, with nicknames used where English would use a pronoun. See Thai name#Nicknames for more details. Pronouns, when used, are ranked in honorific registers, and may also make a T\u2013V distinction in relation to kinship and social status. Specialised pronouns are used for royalty, and for Buddhist monks. The following are appropriate for conversational use:\nThe reflexive pronoun is (), which can mean any of: myself, yourself, ourselves, himself, herself, themselves. This can be mixed with another pronoun to create an intensive pronoun, such as (, lit: I myself) or (, lit: you yourself). Thai also does not have a separate possessive pronoun. Instead, possession is indicated by the particle (). For example, \"my mother\" is (, lit: mother of I). This particle is often implicit, so the phrase is shortened to (). Plural pronouns can be easily constructed by adding the word () in front of a singular pronoun as in () meaning 'they' or () meaning the plural sense of 'you'. The only exception to this is (), which can be used as singular (informal) or plural, but can also be used in the form of (), which is only plural.\nThai has many more pronouns than those listed above. Their usage is full of nuances. For example:\nParticles.\nThe particles are often untranslatable words added to the end of a sentence to indicate respect, a request, encouragement or other moods (similar to the use of intonation in English), as well as varying the level of formality. They are not used in elegant (written) Thai. The most common particles indicating respect are (, , with a high tone) when the speaker is a man, and (, , with a falling tone) when the speaker is a woman. Used in a question or a request, the particle (falling tone) is changed to a (high tone).\nOther common particles are:\nRegister.\nCentral Thai is composed of several distinct registers, forms for different social contexts:\nMost Thais can speak and understand all of these contexts. Street and Elegant Thai are the basis of all conversations. Rhetorical, religious, and royal Thai are taught in schools as part of the national curriculum.\nAs noted above, Thai has several registers, each having certain usages, such as colloquial, formal, literary, and poetic. Thus, the word 'eat' can be (; common), (; vulgar), (; vulgar), (; formal), (; formal), (; religious), or (; royal), as illustrated below:\nThailand also uses the distinctive Thai six-hour clock in addition to the 24-hour clock.\nVocabulary.\nOther than compound words and words of foreign origin, most words are monosyllabic.\nChinese-language influence was strong until the 13th century when the use of Chinese characters was abandoned, and replaced by Sanskrit and Pali scripts. However, the vocabulary of Thai retains many words borrowed from Middle Chinese.\nKhmer was used as a prestige language in the early days of the Thai kingdoms which are believed to have been bilingual societies proficient in Thai and Khmer. There are over 2,500 Thai words derived from Khmer, surpassing the number of Tai cognates. These Khmer words span across all semantic fields. Thai scholar Uraisi Varasarin classified them into over 200 sub-categories. As a result, it is impossible for Thais, past and present, to engage in a conversation without incorporating Khmer loanwords in any given topic. The influence is particularly preponderant in regard to royal court terminology.\nLater, most vocabulary was borrowed from Sanskrit and P\u0101li; Buddhist terminology is particularly indebted to these. Indic words have a more formal register, and may be compared to Latin and French borrowings in English. Since the beginning of the 20th century, however, the English language has had the greatest influence, especially for scientific, technical, international, and other modern terms.\nChinese-origin.\nFrom Middle Chinese or Teochew Chinese.\nKhmer-origin.\nFrom Old Khmer\nPortuguese-origin.\nThe Portuguese were the first Western nation to arrive in what is modern-day Thailand in the 16th century during the Ayutthaya period. Their influence in trade, especially weaponry, allowed them to establish a community just outside the capital and practise their faith, as well as exposing and converting the locals to Christianity. Thus, Portuguese words involving trade and religion were introduced and used by the locals.\nWriting system.\nThai is written in the Thai script, an abugida written from left to right. The language and its script are closely related to the Lao language and script. Most literate Lao are able to read and understand Thai, as more than half of the Thai vocabulary, grammar, intonation, vowels and so forth are common with the Lao language.\nThe Thais adopted and modified the Khmer script to create their own writing system. While in Thai the pronunciation can largely be inferred from the script, the orthography is complex, with silent letters to preserve original spellings and many letters representing the same sound. While the oldest known inscription in the Khmer language dates from 611 CE, inscriptions in Thai writing began to appear around 1292 CE. Notable features include:\nTranscription.\nThere is no universally applied method for transcribing Thai into the Latin alphabet. For example, the name of the main airport is transcribed variably as Suvarnabhumi, Suwannaphum, or Suwunnapoom. Guide books, textbooks and dictionaries follow different systems. For this reason, many language courses recommend that learners master the Thai script.\nOfficial standards are the Royal Thai General System of Transcription (RTGS), published by the Royal Institute of Thailand, and the almost identical ISO 11940-2 defined by the International Organization for Standardization. The RTGS system is increasingly used in Thailand by central and local governments, especially for road signs. Its main drawback is that it does not indicate tone or vowel length. As the system is based on pronunciation, not orthography, reconstruction of Thai spelling from RTGS romanisation is not possible.\nTransliteration.\nThe ISO published an international standard for the transliteration of Thai into Roman script in September 2005 (ISO 11940). By adding diacritics to the Latin letters it makes the transcription reversible, making it a true transliteration. Notably, this system is used by Google Translate, although it does not seem to appear in many other contexts, such as textbooks and other instructional media.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48648", "revid": "1148557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48648", "title": "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone", "text": "1997 fantasy novel by J. K. Rowling\nHarry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone is a fantasy novel written by British author J. K. Rowling. It is the first novel in the \"Harry Potter\" series and was Rowling's debut novel. It follows Harry Potter, a young wizard who discovers his magical heritage on his eleventh birthday when he receives a letter of acceptance to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Harry makes close friends and a few enemies during his first year at the school. With the help of his friends, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger, he faces an attempted comeback by the dark wizard Lord Voldemort, who killed Harry's parents but failed to kill Harry when he was just 15 months old.\nThe book was first published in the United Kingdom on 26 June 1997 by Bloomsbury. It was published in the United States the following year by Scholastic Corporation under the title Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone. It won most of the British book awards that were judged by children and other awards in the US. The book reached the top of the \"New York Times\" list of best-selling fiction in August 1999, and stayed near the top of that list for much of 1999 and 2000. It has been translated into at least 73 other languages and made into a feature-length film of the same name, as have all six of its sequels. The novel has sold in excess of 120 million copies, making it the fourth best-selling book of all time.\nMost reviews were very favourable, commenting on Rowling's imagination, humour, simple, direct style and clever plot construction, although a few complained that the final chapters seemed rushed. The writing has been compared to that of Jane Austen, one of Rowling's favourite authors; Roald Dahl, whose works dominated children's stories before the appearance of Harry Potter; and the ancient Greek story-teller Homer. While some commentators thought the book looked backward to Victorian and Edwardian boarding school stories, others thought it placed the genre firmly in the modern world by featuring contemporary ethical and social issues, as well as showing overcoming obstacles like bullying.\nThe \"Harry Potter\" series has been used as a source of object lessons in educational techniques, sociological analysis, and marketing.\nPlot.\nHarry Potter lives with his abusive uncle and aunt, Vernon and Petunia Dursley, and their bullying, spoiled son, Dudley. On Harry's 11th birthday, he learns that he is a wizard when a man named Rubeus Hagrid invites him to attend Hogwarts, a school of magic. Hagrid explains that when Harry was an infant, a Dark wizard named Voldemort murdered his parents and tried to kill him as well. However, Voldemort's killing curse rebounded and seemingly destroyed him, leaving a lightning bolt-shaped scar on Harry's forehead.\nHagrid takes Harry to Diagon Alley, where the latter discovers his fame among wizards while buying a wand, an owl named Hedwig, and other school supplies. A month later, Harry takes the Hogwarts Express to Hogwarts. He befriends Ron Weasley, a first-year student, during the journey. He also meets Hermione Granger and has a confrontation with Draco Malfoy. At Hogwarts, a magical Sorting Hat assigns each first-year student to a House. Harry, Ron, and Hermione are assigned to Gryffindor, although the Hat considers putting Harry in Slytherin.\nHarry's broomstick flying ability earns him a place on the Gryffindor Quidditch team as the Seeker. He develops a dislike for the Potions professor Severus Snape, who seems to hate Harry. Harry and Ron discover a gigantic three-headed dog guarding a trapdoor one night. The two boys later save Hermione from a troll and begin a friendship with her. During Harry's first Quidditch match, his broomstick attempts to throw him off. Snape's strange behaviour during the match convinces Hermione that he jinxed Harry's broom. On Christmas, Harry receives an anonymous gift \u2013 his father's invisibility cloak. While using the cloak to explore the school undisturbed, he discovers the Mirror of Erised, which shows the viewer what they most desire. Harry sees his family in the mirror.\nHarry, Ron, and Hermione learn that the three-headed dog is guarding a magical object called the Philosopher's Stone, which grants its user immortality. A centaur named Firenze warns Harry that Voldemort is plotting to steal the Stone to restore his body. When the headmaster, Albus Dumbledore, is lured away from Hogwarts, Harry and his friends fear the theft is imminent and descend through the trapdoor to retrieve the artefact. Various obstacles force Ron and Hermione to remain behind while Harry approaches the Stone. He encounters Professor Quirrell, the Defence Against the Dark Arts professor, who explains that he serves Voldemort and that it was he who jinxed Harry's broom; Snape was trying to save him during the match. Quirrell attempts to retrieve the Stone from the Mirror of Erised, but cannot figure out how. When Harry looks in the Mirror, he feels the Stone drop into his pocket. Quirrell then reveals that Voldemort has possessed his body, and shows Harry Voldemort's face on the back of his head. Quirrell attempts to seize the Stone, but his flesh burns upon contact with Harry. As Harry and Quirrell struggle, Harry's scar begins to burn, and he passes out.\nHarry awakens in the school's infirmary. Dumbledore explains that Harry survived because he is protected by a magical charm created when his mother died trying to protect him. Quirrell's hatred and greed caused him to burn upon contact with Harry, and Voldemort abandoned him to die. Dumbledore also reveals that the Stone has been destroyed. During the school's year-end feast, Gryffindor is awarded the House Cup. Harry then returns to the Dursleys for the summer.\nCharacters.\nOther members of staff include: the dumpy Herbology teacher and Head of Hufflepuff House Professor Sprout, Professor Flitwick, the tiny and excitable Charms teacher and Head of Ravenclaw House, the soporific History of magic teacher, Professor Binns, a ghost who does not seem to have noticed his own death, and Madam Hooch, the Quidditch coach, who is strict, but a considerate and methodical teacher. The poltergeist Peeves wanders around the castle causing trouble wherever he can.\nIn the book, Rowling introduces an eclectic cast of characters. The first character to be introduced is Vernon Dursley, Harry's uncle. Most of the actions centre on the eponymous hero, Harry Potter, an orphan who escapes his miserable childhood with the Dursley family. Rowling imagined him as a \"scrawny, black-haired, bespectacled boy who didn't know he was a wizard\" and says she transferred part of her pain about losing her mother to him. During the book, Harry makes two close friends, Ronald Weasley and Hermione Granger. Ron is described by Rowling as the ultimate best friend, \"always there when you need him\". Rowling has described Hermione as a \"very logical, upright and good\" character with \"a lot of insecurity and a great fear of failure beneath her swottiness\".\nRowling also imagined a supporting cast of adults. The headmaster of Hogwarts is the powerful, but kind wizard Albus Dumbledore, who becomes Harry's confidant. Rowling described him as \"the epitome of goodness\". His right hand is severe Minerva McGonagall, the friendly half-giant Rubeus Hagrid, who saved Harry from the Dursley family and the sinister Severus Snape. Professor Quirrell is also featured in the novel.\nThe main antagonists are Draco Malfoy, an elitist, bullying classmate, and Lord Voldemort, the most powerful evil wizard who becomes disembodied when he tries to kill baby Harry. According to a 1999 interview with Rowling, the character of Voldemort was created as a literary foil for Harry and his backstory was intentionally not fleshed-out at first:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The basic idea... Harry, I saw Harry very very very clearly. Very vividly. And I knew he didn't know he was a wizard.\u00a0... And so then I kind of worked backwards from that position to find out how that could be, that he wouldn't know what he was.\u00a0... When he was one year old, the most evil wizard for hundreds and hundreds of years attempted to kill him. He killed Harry's parents, and then he tried to kill Harry\u2014he tried to curse him.\u00a0... And\u2014so\u2014but for some mysterious reason, the curse didn't work on Harry. So he's left with this lightning bolt shaped scar on his forehead and the curse rebounded upon the evil wizard, who has been in hiding ever since.\nDevelopment, publication and reception.\nDevelopment.\nThe book, which was Rowling's debut novel, was written between approximately June 1990 and some time in 1995. In 1990, Jo Rowling, as she preferred to be known, wanted to move with her boyfriend to a flat in Manchester and in her words, \"One weekend after flat hunting, I took the train back to London on my own and the idea for Harry Potter fell into my head... A scrawny, little, black-haired, bespectacled boy became more and more of a wizard to me... I began to write \"Philosopher's Stone\" that very evening. Although, the first couple of pages look nothing like the finished product.\" Then, Rowling's mother died and, to cope with her pain, Rowling transferred her own anguish to the orphan Harry. Rowling spent six years working on \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\".\nRowling sent the book to a literary agent and a publisher and then the second agent she approached spent a year trying to sell the book to publishers, most of whom thought it was too long at about 90,000\u00a0words. Barry Cunningham, who was building a portfolio of distinctive fantasies by new authors for Bloomsbury Children's Books, recommended accepting the book and the eight-year-old daughter of Bloomsbury's chief executive said it was \"so much better than anything else\".\nAfter it was accepted by Bloomsbury, she obtained a grant of \u00a38,000 from the Scottish Arts Council, which enabled her to plan the sequels.\nPublication and reception in the United Kingdom.\nBloomsbury accepted the book, paying Rowling a \u00a32,500 advance and Cunningham sent proof copies to carefully chosen authors, critics and booksellers in order to obtain comments that could be quoted when the book was launched. He was less concerned about the book's length than about its author's name, since the title sounded like a boys' book to him and he believed boys preferred books by male authors. Rowling therefore adopted the pen name J. K. Rowling just before publication.\nIn June 1997, Bloomsbury published \"Philosopher's Stone\" with an initial print run of 500 copies in hardback, three hundred of which were distributed to libraries. Her original name, \"Joanne Rowling\", can be found on the copyright page of all British editions until September 1999. (The 1998 first American edition would remove reference to \"Joanne\" completely.) The short initial print run was standard for first novels and Cunningham hoped booksellers would read the book and recommend it to customers. Examples from this initial print run have sold for as much as US$471,000 in a 2021 Heritage auction. Thomas Taylor created the cover for the first edition.\nLindsey Fraser, who had previously supplied one of the blurb comments, wrote what is thought to be the first published review, in \"The Scotsman\" on 28 June 1997. She described \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" as \"a hugely entertaining thriller\" and Rowling as \"a first-rate writer for children\". Another early review, in \"The Herald\", said: \"I have yet to find a child who can put it down.\" Newspapers outside Scotland started to notice the book, with glowing reviews in \"The Guardian\" and \"The Sunday Times\" and in September 1997 \"Books for Keeps\", a magazine that specialised in children's books, gave the novel four stars out of five. \"Sunday Times\" said: \"comparisons to Dahl are, this time, justified\", while \"The Guardian\" called it \"a richly textured novel given lift-off by an inventive wit\" and \"The Scotsman\" said it had \"all the makings of a classic\".\nIn 1997 the UK edition won a National Book Award and a gold medal in the 9- to 11-year-olds category of the Nestl\u00e9 Smarties Book Prize. The \"Smarties\" award, which is voted for by children, made the book well known within six months of publication, while most children's books have to wait for years. The following year, \"Philosopher's Stone\" won almost all the other major British awards that were decided by children. It was also shortlisted for children's books awards adjudicated by adults, but did not win. Sandra Beckett commented that books that were popular with children were regarded as undemanding and as not of the highest literary standards\u00a0\u2013 for example, the literary establishment disdained the works of Dahl, an overwhelming favourite of children before the appearance of Rowling's books. In 2003, the novel was listed at number 22 on the BBC's survey The Big Read.\n\"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" won two publishing industry awards given for sales rather than literary merit, the British Book Awards Children's Book of the Year and the Booksellers' Association / \"Bookseller\" Author of the Year. By March 1999 UK editions had sold just over 300,000 copies and the story was still the UK's best-selling title in December 2001. A Braille edition was published in May 1998 by the Scottish Braille Press.\nPlatform &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;9+3\u20444, from which the Hogwarts Express left London, was commemorated in the real-life King's Cross railway station with a sign and a trolley apparently passing through the wall.\nUS publication and reception.\nScholastic Corporation bought the US rights at the Bologna Book Fair in April 1997 for US$105,000, an unusually high sum for a children's book. Scholastic's Arthur Levine thought that \"philosopher\" sounded too archaic for readers and after some discussion (including the proposed title \"Harry Potter and the School of Magic\"), the American edition was published in September 1998 under the title Rowling suggested, \"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone\". Rowling later said that she regretted this change and would have fought it if she had been in a stronger position at the time. Philip Nel has pointed out that the change lost the connection with alchemy and some other changes lost the meaning of other terms changed in translation, for example from \"crumpet\" to \"muffin\". While Rowling accepted the change from both the British English \"mum\" and Seamus Finnigan's Irish variant \"mam\" to the American variant \"mom\" in \"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone\", she vetoed this change in the later books, which was then reversed in later editions of \"Philosopher's Stone\". However, Nel considered that Scholastic's translations were considerably more sensitive than most of those imposed on British English books of the time and that some other changes could be regarded as useful copyedits. Since the UK editions of early titles in the series were published months prior to the American versions, some American readers became familiar with the British English versions owing to having bought them from online retailers.\nAt first the most prestigious reviewers ignored the book, leaving it to book trade and library publications such as \"Kirkus Reviews\" and \"Booklist\", which examined it only by the entertainment-oriented criteria of children's fiction. However, more penetrating specialist reviews (such as one by \"Cooperative Children's Book Center Choices\", which noted complexity, depth and consistency in the world that Rowling had built) attracted the attention of reviewers in major newspapers. Although \"The Boston Globe\" and Michael Winerip in \"The New York Times\" complained that the final chapters were the weakest part of the book, they and most other American reviewers gave glowing praise.\nA year later, the US edition was selected as an American Library Association Notable Book, a \"Publishers Weekly\" Best Book of 1998 and a New York Public Library 1998 Best Book of the Year and won \"Parenting Magazine\"'s Book of the Year Award for 1998, the \"School Library Journal\" Best Book of the Year and the American Library Association Best Book for Young Adults. In 2012 it was ranked number 3 on a list of the top 100 children's novels published by \"School Library Journal\".\nIn August 1999, \"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone\" topped the \"New York Times\" list of best-selling fiction and stayed near the top of the list for much of 1999 and 2000, until the \"New York Times\" split its list into children's and adult sections under pressure from other publishers who were eager to see their books given higher placings. \"Publishers Weekly\"'s report in December 2001 on cumulative sales of children's fiction placed \"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone\" 19th among hardbacks (over 5 million copies) and 7th among paperbacks (over 6.6\u00a0million copies).\nIn May 2008, Scholastic announced the creation of a 10th Anniversary Edition of the book that was released on 1 October 2008 to mark the tenth anniversary of the original American release. For the fifteenth anniversary of the books, Scholastic re-released \"Sorcerer's Stone\", along with the other six novels in the series, with new cover art by Kazu Kibuishi in 2013.\nTranslations.\nBy mid-2008, official translations of the book had been published in 67 languages. By November 2017, the book had been translated into 80 languages, the 80th being Lowland Scots. Bloomsbury have published translations in Latin and in Ancient Greek, with the latter being described as \"one of the most important pieces of Ancient Greek prose written in many centuries\".\nStyle and themes.\nPhilip Nel has drawn attention to Jane Austen's influence on Rowling, whom the writer has admired since the age of twelve. The styles of both novelists encourage rereading, as details that appear insignificant are discovered, upon revisiting, to foreshadow important events or characters much later in the story (for example, the brief mention of Sirius Black near the beginning of \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" foreshadows his importance as a major character in the third to fifth books). Like Austen's heroines, Harry often finds himself re-examining his beliefs as the books draw to a close. Also reminiscent of Austen is the lively social custom of the communal reading of letters. Furthermore, both authors satirise social behaviour and give characters names that reinforce their personalities. However, for Nel, one point of divergence between the two authors is that Rowling's humor tends towards caricature, with names resembling those found in the works of Charles Dickens. Amanda Cockrell further noted that Rowling's names invoke the dominant trait of their owners through allusions drawn from sources as varied as Roman mythology and eighteenth-century German literature. Rowling, like C.\u00a0S. Lewis (author of the Narnia series), blurs the distinction between juvenile and adult fiction. Nel also noted that, like many good writers for children, Rowling combines several literary genres\u200d\u2014\u200cfantasy, young adult fiction, boarding school stories, and \"Bildungsroman\", among others.\nSome reviewers compared \"Philosopher's Stone\" to the stories of Roald Dahl, who died in 1990. Many writers since the 1970s had been hailed as his successor, but none had attained anything near his popularity with children and, in a poll conducted shortly after the launch of \"Philosopher's Stone\", seven of the ten most popular children's books were by Dahl, including the one in top place. The only other children's author of comparable popularity in the late 1990s was an American, R. L. Stine. Some of the story elements in \"Philosopher's Stone\" resembled parts of Dahl's stories. For example, the hero of \"James and the Giant Peach\" lost his parents and had to live with a pair of unpleasant aunts\u200d\u2014\u200cone fat and one thin rather like Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, who treated Harry as a servant. However Harry Potter was a distinctive creation, able to take on the responsibilities of an adult while remaining a child inside.\nLibrarian Nancy Knapp and marketing professor Stephen Brown noted the liveliness and detail of descriptions, especially of shop scenes such as Diagon Alley. Tad Brennan commented that Rowling's writing resembles that of Homer: \"rapid, plain, and direct in expression\". Stephen King admired \"the sort of playful details of which only British fantasists seem capable\" and concluded that they worked because Rowling enjoys a quick giggle and then moves briskly forward.\nNicholas Tucker described the early \"Harry Potter\" books as looking back to Victorian and Edwardian children's stories: Hogwarts was an old-style boarding school in which the teachers addressed pupils formally by their surnames and were most concerned with the reputations of the houses with which they were associated; characters' personalities were plainly shown by their appearances, starting with the Dursleys; evil or malicious characters were to be crushed rather than reformed, including Argus Filch's cat Mrs Norris; and the hero, a mistreated orphan who found his true place in life, was charismatic and good at sports, but considerate and protective towards the weak. Several other commentators have noted that the books present a rigidly stratified society and include many social stereotypes. However, Karin Westerman drew parallels with 1990s Britain: a class system that was breaking down but defended by those whose power and status it upheld; the multi-ethnic composition of Hogwarts' students; the racial tensions between the various intelligent species; and school bullying.\nSusan Hall wrote that there is no rule of law in the books, as the actions of Ministry of Magic officials are unconstrained by laws, accountability or any kind of legal challenge. This provides Voldemort an opportunity to offer his own horrific version of order. As a side-effect, Harry and Hermione, who were brought up in the rigidly regulated Muggle world, find solutions by thinking in ways unfamiliar to wizards. For example, Hermione notes that one obstacle to finding the Philosopher's Stone is a test of logic rather than magical power, and that most wizards have no chance of solving it.\nNel suggested that the unflattering characterisation of the dully conventional, status-conscious, materialistic Dursleys was Rowling's reaction to the family policies of the British government in the early 1990s, which treated the married heterosexual couple as the \"preferred norm\", at a time when the author was a single mother. Harry's relationships with adult and juvenile wizards spring from affection and loyalty. This is evident from his pleasure in being an occasional temporary member of the Weasley family, and in his treatment of first Rubeus Hagrid and later Remus Lupin and Sirius Black as father-figures.\nLegacy.\nSequels.\nThe second book, \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\", was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998 and later, in the US on 2 June 1999. \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" was then published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September 1999. \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\" was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic. \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\" is the longest book in the series at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version. It was published worldwide in English on 21 June 2003. \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\" was published on 16 July 2005 and sold 11 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release. The seventh and final novel, \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\", was published on 21 July 2007. The book sold 11 million copies within 24 hours of its release: 2.7 million copies in the UK and 8.3 million in the US.\nIllustrated version.\nAn illustrated version of \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" was released on 6 October 2015, with illustrations by Jim Kay. The book carries over 100 illustrations and will be followed by illustrated versions of all seven books from the series by the same artist.\nAudio books.\nOn 20 November 2015, \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" was released in audio book format simultaneously both in the UK and the US by Pottermore Publishing. The UK edition is narrated by Stephen Fry and the US edition is narrated by Jim Dale. On 4 November 2025, \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" was released as a full-cast audio edition internationally by Pottermore Publishing and Amazon's subsidiary, Audible.\nPodcast version.\nIn May 2020, a reading podcast by Spotify was created and entitled \"Harry Potter at Home: Readings\". Each chapter is narrated by a celebrity guest from the \"Harry Potter\" and \"Wizarding World\" franchises.\nFilm adaptation.\nIn 1999, Rowling sold the film rights of the first two \"Harry Potter\" books to Warner Bros. for a reported \u00a31\u00a0million. Rowling demanded that the principal cast be kept strictly British, but allowed for the casting of Irish actors such as Richard Harris as Dumbledore and of foreign actors as characters of the same nationalities in later books. After extensive casting, filming began in September 2000 at Leavesden Film Studios and in London, with production ending in July 2001. \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" was released in London on 14 November 2001. Reviewers' comments were positive, as reflected by an 81% Fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes and by a score of 65% at Metacritic, representing \"generally favourable reviews\".\nVideo games.\nFive independent video games by different developers were released between 2001 and 2003 by Electronic Arts, that were loosely based on the film and book:\nUses in education and business.\nWriters on education and business subjects have used the book as an object lesson. Writing about clinical teaching in medical schools, Jennifer Conn contrasted Snape's technical expertise with his intimidating behaviour towards students. Quidditch coach Madam Hooch on the other hand illustrated useful techniques in the teaching of physical skills, including breaking down complex actions into sequences of simple ones and helping students to avoid common errors. Joyce Fields wrote that the books illustrate four of the five main topics in a typical first-year sociology class: \"sociological concepts including culture, society, and socialisation; stratification and social inequality; social institutions; and social theory\".\nStephen Brown noted that the early \"Harry Potter\" books, especially \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\", were a runaway success despite inadequate and poorly organised marketing. Brown advised marketing executives to be less preoccupied with rigorous statistical analyses and the \"analysis, planning, implementation, and control\" model of management. Instead he recommended that they should treat the stories as \"a marketing masterclass\", full of enticing products and brand names. For example, a real-world analogue of Bertie Bott's Every Flavour Beans was introduced under licence in 2000 by toymaker Hasbro.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48649", "revid": "191757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48649", "title": "Harry Potter and the Sorceror's Stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "48650", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48650", "title": "Orthodox Bahais", "text": ""}
{"id": "48651", "revid": "1292955172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48651", "title": "Fritigern", "text": "Gothic king (fl. 370s)\nFritigern (fl. 370s) was a Thervingian Gothic chieftain whose decisive victory at Adrianople during the Gothic War (376\u2013382) led to favourable terms for the Goths when peace was made with Gratian and Theodosius I in 382.\nName.\n\"Fritigern\" appears in the Latinized form \"Fritigernus\".\nThe Gothic name is reconstructed as *\"Frithugairns\" \"desiring peace\".\nThe Germanized name under which Fritigern is honored in the Walhalla temple (1842) is \"Friediger\".\nConflicts against Athanaric.\nThe earliest references to Fritigern concern the period between \nthe attack on the Thervingi by Valens (367/9) and \nthe Hunnic raids on the Thervingi (ca. 376). \nIn this time, a civil war may have broken out between Fritigern and Athanaric, a prominent Therving ruler. \nThe conflict between Fritigern and Athanaric is mentioned by \nSocrates Scholasticus, Sozomen, and Zosimus, but not by Ammianus Marcellinus and Philostorgius.\nBefore or during this civil war, Fritigern converted to Arian Christianity. \nAthanaric's persecution of Christians mentioned by Sozomen, falls into this period.\nAthanaric seems to have won this war, as he later led the Thervingi in battle against the Huns in 376.\nAccording to Socrates, Fritigern and Athanaric were rival leaders of the (Therving) Goths. As this rivalry grew into warfare, Athanaric gained the advantage, and Fritigern asked for Roman aid. The Emperor Valens and the Thracian field army intervened, Valens and Fritigern defeated Athanaric, and Fritigern converted to Christianity, following the same teachings as Valens. Sozomen follows Socrates' account.\nAccording to Zosimus, Athanaric (Athomaricus) was the king of the Goths (Scythians). Sometime after their victory at Adrianople, and after the accession of Theodosius, Fritigern, Alatheus, and Saphrax moved north of the Danube and defeated Athanaric, before returning south of the Danube.\nDanube crossing.\nIn 376, the Thervings came under increasing pressure from the Huns, who had already conquered their kinsmen, the Greuthungi. \nFritigern asked Valens to allow the Thervingi to cross the northern Roman border and settle in Moesia or Thracia, with the Danube River and Roman frontier forts protecting them from the Huns. \nValens agreed to permit Fritigern's followers to enter the empire. In return, they would be subject to military service, but would be treated the same as other Roman subjects. As it turned out, neither happened.\nMeanwhile, Athanaric and many of his followers retreated to Caucaland (\"the Highlands\", presumably the Eastern Carpathians and Transylvania).\nDuring the autumn of 376, the Romans helped Alavivus and Fritigern's people cross the Danube and settle in the province of Moesia. In the winter of 376/7, a famine hit the areas settled by the Thervingi and their appeals for help went unanswered. \nThe Roman governors of the area, Lupicinus and Maximus, treated them badly. They sold them food only at extremely high prices, which forced many Goths to sell their children as slaves. \nThey invited several Thervingi leaders to a feast, in which they killed some and took others hostage. \nAlavivus most likely remained a hostage, but Fritigern was able to escape and he became leader of the Thervingi. Soon he declared war on the Roman Empire.\nWar against Valens.\nFritigern decisively defeated Lupicinus at the Battle of Marcianople in 376. \nThe Goths went on to pillage Moesia, and by 377 had gained control over most of the neighboring, richer province of Thracia. \nValens, recognizing the severity of the situation, sent his general Traianus and asked for the aid \nof Western emperor Gratian, who sent Richomeres\nand Frigeridus to contain the Goths east of the Haemus.\nAt the Battle of the Willows, combined troops of the Western and Eastern Empire barely withstood a larger number of Goths, forcing Fritigern to withdraw into a wagon fort to recuperate. \nValens now sent Saturninus to support Traianus.\nSaturninus and Traianus built a number of fortifications to contain the Gothic camp, hoping to starve them out during the winter of 377/8 and to force them into an open field battle. Fritigern refused to abandon his fort, and instead managed to enlist the support of Hunnic and Alanic cavalry.\nSaturninus could no longer maintain his blockade and was forced to retreat, returning freedom of movement to Fritigern who again took to pillaging the countryside. \nIn the summer of 377, the Goths had regained access to the Hellespont and the Black Sea. They sacked Dibaltum\nand Augusta Trajana, forcing Frigiderus to retreat to Illyria.\nThe Goths now threatened Constantinople itself, \nand Valens was forced to extract significant forces from the Persian front, granting considerable concessions to the Sassanids.\nAccording to Socrates Scholasticus, the citizens of the capital accused Valens of neglecting their defense, urging him to confront the invaders.\nValens moved his army to Melantias on 12 June, and sent \nSebastianus with an advance force to engage Gothic raiding parties.\nSebastianus successfully destroyed a number of raiding parties, forcing Fritigern to consolidate his forces in the area of Cabyle.\nGratian was detained in the north in his campaign against the Alemanni (Battle of Argentovaria), and unable to support Valens, who had been waiting to engage the Goths throughout June and July. When Valens heard that the Goths were moving towards Adrianople, \nhe decamped and marched to meet them. \nAround 7 August, Richomeres returned from the Western campaign with the message that Gratian was now approaching.\nAccording to Ammianus, Victor cautioned Valens to wait for Gratian, while Sebastianus urged for an immediate assault.\nFritigern sent envoys with two letters on the night of 8 August.\nThe first letter offered peace and a military alliance in exchange for territory in Thrace. The second letter, addressed privately to Valens, assured that he wished for peace, but asked Valens to remain mobilized so that he, Fritigern, could convince his own people of maintaining the peace.\nValens rejected the proposal and marched to engage the Goths on the following day. Fritigern won a respite by further peace negotiations allowing his allied Greuthungi cavalry to draw near.\nIn the ensuing Battle of Adrianople, the Goths won a decisive victory.\nThe Roman army was routed and suffered heavy losses. Valens himself was killed in the aftermath of the battle.\nFritigern besieged the city of Adrianople itself, without success.\nThe Goths retook control of much of the Balkan peninsula in the aftermath of the battle. The Eastern empire, now without an emperor, feared that the Gothic populations would ally themselves with Fritigern leading to widespread insurgence. Julius, successor to Lupicinus, \nordered the massacre of all Goths living near the frontier.\nBy 379, word of the massacres reached the Goths living in the interior provinces, leading to riots in Asia Minor. The Romans reacted by massacring the Goths in the interior provinces as well.\nFritigern continued the war for two years, with mixed success. Theodosius I succeeded Valens as emperor on 19 January 379. Gratian did acknowledge Theodosius as his co-emperor and granted him control over the imperial dioceses of Dacia and Macedonia, but he promptly returned to his northern front to deal with the Alemanni, leaving Theodosius to deal with the Gothic problem.\nTheodosius drafted a new army from farmers and mercenaries.\nMany attempted to avoid the draft, some mutilating their own thumbs to avoid military service, and Theodosius responded with harsh punishments for deserters, forcing even those who had mutilated themselves into service.\nTheodosius' general Modares, a Goth himself, won a minor victory against Fritigern.\nIt appears that at this point, the Greuthungi split off the Gothic army and went to Illyricum. The Thervingi under Fritigern moved towards Greece, into Macedonia and Thessaly. Theodosius moved to intercept them, but his army disintegrated from desertions at Thessalonica, many of the barbarian mercenaries joining Fritigern.\nAt this point, Gratian was once again willing to come to aid, and his generals \nArbogast and Bauto successfully drove the Goths back into Thrace by the summer of 381. \nPeace negotiations were opened, with \nRichomeres and Saturninus conducting the negotiations for the Romans.\nPeace was declared on 3 October 382.\nFritigern is not mentioned again in any source after 381, and his fate is uncertain, he may have been killed in the Greek campaign, or he may have been deposed as a condition for peace.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48653", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48653", "title": "States", "text": ""}
{"id": "48656", "revid": "31876559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48656", "title": "Victor Lustig", "text": "Austro-Hungarian con artist (1890\u20131947)\nVictor Lustig (; 4 January 1890 \u2013 11 March 1947) was a con artist from Austria-Hungary, who undertook a criminal career that involved conducting scams across Europe and the United States during the early 20th century. Lustig is widely regarded as one of the most notorious con artists of his time, and is infamous for being \"the man who sold the Eiffel Tower twice\" and for conducting the \"Rumanian Box\" scam.\nEarly life.\nLustig was born in Hostinn\u00e9, at the time more widely known by its German name Arnau (an der Elbe), part of the Kingdom of Bohemia, Austria-Hungary, as the second of three children, to Ludwig and Amelia \"Fanny\" Lustig. Raised in a German-speaking middle-class Catholic family, Lustig grew up in a four-room house at Tyrsovy street, near the central market square. Lustig's father was a tobacco goods salesman and at one point a mayor of Hostinn\u00e9, who was reportedly physically abusive towards his children and wife, who was fifteen years his junior. At age eight, Lustig was forced to sign a written oath to abstain from alcohol and always attend church. Lustig also had to attend violin lessons, which he hated, and during an argument over this, his father beat Lustig over the head with the instrument. His parents divorced around 1898, although they still lived together during the 1900 census.\nAs a child, Lustig frequently travelled across Europe with his father on business trips to Prague and Zurich, recalling that seeing Paris for the first time at age seven, the inner city appeared \"exquisite\" while the outer areas were a \"sad, soiled place that slitered around in a sea of immorality\".\nOn his first day of infant school, Lustig was immediately expelled for obscenity, after telling a female teacher \"Leck mich am Arsch\" (\"Kiss my ass\"). He was subsequently transferred to a one-room school in \u010cermn\u00e1, around 5 kilometres from Hostinn\u00e9. Classmates later recalled that Lustig was well-liked for his headstrong personality and expressive impressions of military leaders. Meanwhile, a 1902 school report described Lustig as \"retarded morally, an idiot in other respects\". By age thirteen, Lustig had taken up boxing and despite chronic health issues, such as recurring migraines and breathing difficulties due to sinus swelling, he had an unbroken attendance record.\nIn 1904, Lustig ran away from home for a week before returning to Hostinn\u00e9. He was subsequently sent to a boarding school in Dresden, where he learnt English, French, Italian, and Hungarian (other sources claim he learnt five or six languages) and took a course in design. While his graunddaughter Bettina claimed that Lustig excelled in his studies and continued his education there until his early twenties, most biographers state that he dropped out before his 17th birthday. Lustig's childhood friend Karl Harrer stated that Lustig had returned to Hostinn\u00e9 after receiving a poor grade on his design portfolio in June 1906. The two got drunk, with Harrer listening to Lustig complain about the elitist attitudes at his boarding school and the general unfairness of the world. The following year, Harrer received postcards by Lustig from Vienna, with the final correspondence claiming that he would study law at Charles University.\nIn 1909, shortly after starting a semester at the Sorbonne in Paris, Lustig took to gambling. During this time he also sustained a defining scar on the left side of his face from the jealous boyfriend of a woman he consorted with. Upon leaving school, Lustig applied both his quick wit and sizing up of a situation and his fluency in several languages to embark on a life of crime, eventually focusing on conducting a variety of scams and cons that provided him with property and money, and which transformed him into a professional con man.\nCareer.\nMany of Lustig's initial cons were committed on ocean liners sailing between the Atlantic ports of France and New York City. He would pose as a musical producer seeking investors in a non-existent Broadway production. When the services of Trans-Atlantic liners were suspended in the wake of World War I, Lustig found himself in search of new territory to make an income from and opted to travel to the United States. \nIn May 1922, Lustig posed as Robert Duval and visited a bank in Springfield, Missouri. He purchased some land from the bank and overpaid with Liberty bonds. His change amounted to $10,000 in the bank's cash, and before leaving Lustig also pocketed his bonds. He was arrested in New York City and extradited by Governor Nathan L. Miller. Around this time, Lustig's infamy was growing among law enforcement.\nEiffel Tower scam.\nIn 1925, Lustig traveled back to France. While staying in Paris, he chanced upon a newspaper article discussing the problems faced with maintaining the Eiffel Tower, which gave him inspiration for a new con. The monument had begun falling into disrepair, and the city was finding it increasingly expensive to maintain and repaint it. Part of the article made a passing comment that overall public opinion on the monument would move towards calls for its removal, which was the key to convincing Lustig that using it as part of his next con would be lucrative. After researching what he needed to help him utilize the information from the article, Lustig set to work preparing the scam, which included hiring a forger to produce fake government stationery for him.\nOnce he was ready, Lustig invited a small group of scrap metal dealers to a confidential meeting at an expensive hotel, whereupon he identified himself to them as the Deputy Director-General of the Minist\u00e8re de Postes et T\u00e9l\u00e9graphes (Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs). In the meeting, he convinced the men that the upkeep of the Eiffel Tower was becoming too much for Paris and that the French government wished to sell it for scrap, but that because such a deal would be controversial and likely spark public outcry, nothing could be disclosed until all the details were thought out. Lustig revealed that he was in charge of selecting the dealer who would receive ownership of the structure, claiming that the group had been selected carefully because of their reputations as \"honest businessmen\". His speech included genuine insight about the monument's place in the city and how it did not fit in with the city's other great monuments like the Gothic cathedrals or the Arc de Triomphe.\nDuring his time with the dealers, Lustig kept watch on who would be the most likely to fall for his scam and found his mark in Andr\u00e9 Poisson\u2014an insecure man who wished to rise up amongst the inner circles of the Parisian business community. As Poisson showed the keenest interest in purchasing the monument, Lustig decided to focus on him once the dealers sent their bids to him. Arranging a private meeting with Poisson, Lustig convinced him that he was a corrupt official, claiming that his government position did not give him a generous salary for the lifestyle he wished to enjoy. Believing the sale of the Eiffel Tower would secure him a place amongst the top businessmen, Poisson agreed to pay a large bribe to secure ownership of the Eiffel Tower. However, once Lustig received his bribe and the funds for the monument's \"sale\" (around 70,000 francs), he soon fled to Austria.\nLustig suspected that when Poisson found out he had been conned, he would be too ashamed and embarrassed to inform the French police of what he had been caught up in, yet despite this belief, he maintained a check on newspapers while in Austria. His suspicions soon proved to be correct when he could find no reference of his con within their pages, and thus he decided to return to Paris later that year to pull off the scheme once more. However, when Lustig attempted to con another group of dealers and had managed to find a mark among them willing to buy the Eiffel Tower, the police were informed about the scam and he fled to the U.S. to evade arrest.\nRumanian Box scam.\nOne of Lustig's most notable scams was known as the \"money box\" or \"Rumanian Box\". It involved selling unsuspecting marks a machine that could duplicate any currency that was inserted into it, the only catch being that the device needed six hours to print a copy. The machine was a specially designed mahogany box, roughly the size of a steamer trunk. The box featured two small slots to take in the money and the printing paper. It also held a fake mechanism with dummy levers.\nLustig would demonstrate the machine by asking the mark for a specific bill (e.g. $100). He would insert it and the blank paper, then wait with the mark for the machine to work. Lustig had already stocked the machine with a genuine bill to match the one the mark inserted. When the planted bill was produced, Lustig would take the mark to a bank to authenticate the note. Once the mark was convinced, Lustig would sell the money box for an exorbitant sum.\nLustig once sold a money box to a Texas sheriff for thousands of dollars. Upon realizing he had been tricked, the sheriff pursued Lustig to Chicago. The cornered Lustig conned the sheriff into believing that he was not operating the device correctly. Lustig gave him a large sum of cash as compensation, but the bills were counterfeit. This counterfeiting would eventually lead to Lustig's arrest by American law enforcement officers.\nLater years.\nOn 5 July 1929, Lustig and William McSherry were arrested in Paris. Lustig was traveling as \"Robert Miller\", and both men had a variety of forged identification documents and letters of credit. They also had a money box with them. Upon his arrest, Lustig claimed to be an associate of Al Capone. Chicago police were unfamiliar with Lustig, however.\nWhen the Great Depression hit, Lustig concocted a risky scam aimed at Capone, knowing that he faced certain death if his mark realized he was being conned. For Lustig, the scam was not a straight-out con, but one designed to get his target to part with a relatively small amount of cash. Lustig asked Capone to invest $50,000 in a crooked scheme, then kept the money given to him in a safe deposit box for two months before returning it, claiming the deal had fallen through. Capone got the impression that he was dealing with an honest man. At this point, Lustig told Capone that the failure of the deal meant he had lost all means of supporting himself. He then convinced Capone to give him $5,000 ($1,000,according to other sources)\u3000to \"tide him over\", as Lustig had originally planned.\nIn 1930, Lustig went into a partnership with two men from Nebraska\u2014pharmacist William Watts and chemist Tom Shaw\u2014to conduct a large scale counterfeiting operation. Watts and Shaw engraved the plates that would be used to print the counterfeit dollar bills, while Lustig organised a ring of couriers to distribute the forgeries, ensuring that they were kept in the dark regarding the production of the counterfeits. The operation managed to inject thousands of dollars of counterfeit money (nicknamed \"Lustig money\") to the U.S. economy each month for the next five years, though the increasing amount entering circulation eventually drew the attention of federal agents.\nCapture.\nWhen Lustig's mistress, Billy May, learned that he was betraying her for a younger woman, she decided to take revenge and placed an anonymous phone call to the federal authorities. On 10 May 1935, Lustig was arrested in New York and charged with counterfeiting. Although he openly admitted to his partners' involvement in the operation, he himself feigned ignorance in the matter. However, Lustig's refusal to disclose information on a key found in his possession proved to be his undoing, as it was later found to open a locker in the Times Square subway station containing $51,000 in counterfeit bills and the plates with which they had been printed.\nThe day before his trial, Lustig managed to escape from the Federal House of Detention, The Tombs, in New York City by faking illness and using a specially made rope to climb out of the building, but he was recaptured 27 days later in Pittsburgh. Lustig pleaded guilty at his trial and was sentenced to fifteen years in prison on Alcatraz Island, California for his original charge, with a further five years for his prison escape.\nDeath.\nOn 9 March 1947, Lustig contracted pneumonia and died two days later at 8:30pm at the Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri. On his death certificate his occupation was listed as apprentice salesman and counterfeiter.\nTen Commandments.\nA set of instructions known as the \"Ten Commandments for Con Men\" has been attributed to Lustig:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. Be a patient listener (it is this, not fast talking, that gets a con man his coups).\n2. Never look bored.\n3. Wait for the other person to reveal any political opinions, then agree with them.\n4. Let the other person reveal religious views, then have the same ones.\n5. Hint at sex talk, but don't follow it up unless the other person shows a strong interest.\n6. Never discuss illness, unless some special concern is shown.\n7. Never pry into a person's personal circumstances (they'll tell you all eventually).\n8. Never boast. Just let your importance be quietly obvious. [The rule against boasting does not always apply in the United States today.]\n9. Never be untidy.\n10. Never get drunk.\nThese commandments are elaborated on in David Maurer's \"The Big Con\" by two ropers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48657", "revid": "1315510982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48657", "title": "Albert Abrams", "text": "American doctor\nAlbert Abrams (December 8, 1863 \u2013 January 13, 1924) was a fraudulent American physician, well known during his life for inventing machines, such as the \"Oscilloclast\" and the \"Radioclast\", which he falsely claimed could diagnose and cure almost any disease. These claims were challenged from the outset. Towards the end of his life, and again shortly after his death, many of his machines and conclusions were demonstrated to be intentionally deceptive or false.\nBiography.\nAlbert Abrams was born in San Francisco on December 8, 1863, to Marcus Abrams and Rachel Leavey, although other dates have also been reported. On October 8, 1878, he inscribed at Medical College of the Pacific, worked as an assistant of Prof. Douglass and Prof. Hirschfelder, and got a medical degree on October 30, 1881. Then he allegedly went to Heidelberg, Germany, and graduated there in November 1882\nbefore undertaking further studies in London, Berlin, Vienna, and Paris.\nAccording to Wilson, Abrams was awarded an M.D. by the Cooper College in 1883. He served on the teaching staff of the College for a total of fourteen years: five years (1885\u20131889) as Demonstrator of Pathology; four years (1890\u20131893) as Adjunct to the Chair of Clinical Medicine and Demonstrator of Pathology; and five years (1894\u20131898) as Professor of Pathology.\nHe was described by one Jewish newspaper as \u201cour talented young professor.\u201d He was elected vice-president of the California State Medical Society in 1889 and was made president of the San Francisco Medico-Chirurgical Society in 1893. In the beginning of the 1900s he had become a respected expert in neurology. From 1904 he was president of the Emanuel Polyclinic in San Francisco.\nAbrams published numerous books from 1891 to 1923.\nHe died January 13, 1924, from a broncho-pneumonia in San Francisco.\nPractice.\nHeidelberg doctorate claim.\nAbrams was accused of fraudulently claiming a medical qualification from the University of Heidelberg; however, documents from Archive of University Heidelberg confirm that Albert Abrams received a medical degree there on 21 November 1882.\nIn Abrams' view, American medicine was dominated by physicians with excessive admiration for German doctors and researchers. In earlier writings, he insulted physicians by calling them \"Dr. Hades\" or \"Dr. Inferior\", by comparing their looks to typhoid and other germs, and by making fun of various abstruse therapies that at the time were considered \"scientific\" by the medical establishment. In a poem that he wrote on balloon therapy, for instance, the doctors take their patients up in the air but do not know how to bring the balloon down again. The poem ends with the lines: \"But they never came back. That's why we confess / A\u00ebronautic therapy is not a success.\"\nSpondylotherapy.\nAbrams developed a medical technique called spondylotherapy, which was inspired by chiropractic and osteopathic ideas. The basic principle is the stimulation of nerves originating from the spinal cord, which can trigger reflex actions on viscera or inner organs. The stimulation is performed by controlled concussion with a plexor / pleximeter combination directly on the spinous processes, by sinusoidal electric currents or by application of ice. Abrams published the book \"Spondylotherapy\" in several editions between 1910 and 1918. A simplified version of spondylotherapy was first published by Alva Emeey Gregory, M.D. in 1914.\nElectronic Reactions of Abrams.\nAbrams promoted an idea that electrons were the basic element of all life. He called this ERA, for Electronic Reactions of Abrams, and introduced a number of different machines which he claimed were based on these principles.\nThe machines.\nThe Dynomizer looked something like a radio, and Abrams claimed it could diagnose any known disease from a single drop of blood or alternatively the subject's handwriting. He performed diagnoses on dried blood samples sent to him on pieces of paper in envelopes through the mail. Apparently Abrams even claimed he could conduct medical practice over the telephone with his machines, and that he could determine personality characteristics.\nThe Dynomizer was big business; by 1918, courses in spondylotherapy and ERA cost $200 (about the same purchasing power as $3,150 in 2014); equipment was leased at about $200 with a monthly $5 charge thereafter. The lessee had to sign a contract stating the device would never be opened. Abrams explained that this would disrupt their delicate adjustment, but the rule also served to prevent the Abrams devices from being examined. He then widened his claims to treating the diagnosed diseases. Abrams came up with new and even more impressive gadgets, the \"Oscilloclast\" and the \"Radioclast\", which came with tables of frequencies that were designed to \"attack\" specific diseases. Clients were told cures required repeated treatments.\nDynomizer operators tended to give alarming diagnoses, involving combinations of such maladies as cancer, diabetes and syphilis. Abrams often included a disease called \"bovine syphilis\", unknown to other medical practitioners. He claimed the Oscilloclast was capable of defeating most of these diseases, most of the time.\nBy 1921, there were claimed to be 3,500 practitioners using ERA technology. Conventional medical practitioners were extremely suspicious. When people opened Abrams's boxes, they found \"simple wiring, a few resistors, a small motor that only made a humming noise, and nothing that could in any way perform a diagnosis or 'broadcast' or even produce radio waves.\"\nIn the 1970s, Bob DeVries, a product designer for Hewlett-Packard, had a chance to repair an old Oscilloclast (1934). It was owned by a lady whose father had been a president of Abrams' Electronic Medical Foundation and improver of their devices; she had several such devices and believed that electric therapy to be beneficial, from her own experience. DeVries not only restored the old oscilloclast to working order, but also developed a transistorized version for his client, which they called a \"Pulsed Oscillator\".\nInvestigation.\nThe dispute between Abrams and his followers and the American Medical Association (AMA) was intensified. Defenders included American radical author Upton Sinclair and the famously credulous Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the creator of Sherlock Holmes. Resolution of the dispute through the intervention of a scientifically respected third party was pursued. \"Scientific American\" magazine decided to investigate Dr. Abrams' claims. \"Scientific American\" was interested in the matter as readers were writing letters to the editor saying that Abrams' revolutionary machines were one of the greatest inventions of the century and so needed to be discussed in the pages of the magazine.\n\"Scientific American\" assembled a team of investigators who worked with a senior Abrams associate given the pseudonym \"Doctor X\". The investigators developed a series of tests and the magazine asked readers to suggest their own tests. The investigators asked Doctor X to identify six vials containing unknown pathogens. It seems likely that Doctor X honestly believed in his Abrams machines; in fact, he allowed the \"Scientific American\" investigators to observe his procedure. Doctor X got the contents of all six vials completely wrong. He examined the vials and pointed out that they had labels in red ink, which produced vibrations that confounded the instruments. The investigators gave him the vials again with less offensive labels, and he got the contents wrong again.\nThe results were published in \"Scientific American\", and investigators continued their work. Abrams offered to \"cooperate\" with the investigators, but always failed to do so on various pretexts. Abrams never actually participated in the investigation, and in ERA publications asserted he was a victim of unjust persecution.\nDebunking.\nAn AMA member sent a blood sample to an Abrams practitioner, and got back a diagnosis that the patient had malaria, diabetes, cancer and syphilis. The blood sample was in fact from a Plymouth Rock rooster.\nSimilar samples were sent to other Abrams practitioners, and a few found themselves facing fraud charges in court. In a case in Jonesboro, Arkansas, Abrams was called to be a witness, but he died of pneumonia at age 60 shortly before the trial began in January 1924. After his death, investigators with the Food and Drug Administration opened some of the doctor's boxes. One produced a magnetic field, similar to a doorbell; another was a low-powered radio wave transmitter.\nPsychologist Donovan Rawcliffe claimed that Abrams' devices had no scientific validity but his successors had \"founded a good many special clinics in the United States and their number has by no means diminished in the ensuing years.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48659", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48659", "title": "Skunk Weed", "text": ""}
{"id": "48660", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48660", "title": "Fuzzy control system", "text": "Method to analyze non-binary inputs\nA fuzzy control system is a control system based on fuzzy logic \u2013 a mathematical system that analyzes analog input values in terms of logical variables that take on continuous values between 0 and 1, in contrast to classical or digital logic, which operates on discrete values of either 1 or 0 (true or false, respectively).\nFuzzy logic is widely used in machine control. The term \"fuzzy\" refers to the fact that the logic involved can deal with concepts that cannot be expressed as the \"true\" or \"false\" but rather as \"partially true\". Although alternative approaches such as genetic algorithms and neural networks can perform just as well as fuzzy logic in many cases, fuzzy logic has the advantage that the solution to the problem can be cast in terms that human operators can understand, such that that their experience can be used in the design of the controller. This makes it easier to mechanize tasks that are already successfully performed by humans.\nHistory and applications.\nFuzzy logic was proposed by Lotfi A. Zadeh of the University of California at Berkeley in a 1965 paper. He elaborated on his ideas in a 1973 paper that introduced the concept of \"linguistic variables\", which in this article equates to a variable defined as a fuzzy set. Other research followed, with the first industrial application, a cement kiln built in Denmark, coming on line in 1976.\nFuzzy systems were initially implemented in Japan.\nWork on fuzzy systems is also proceeding in North America and Europe, although on a less extensive scale than in Japan.\nResearch and development is also continuing on fuzzy applications in software, as opposed to firmware, design, including fuzzy expert systems and integration of fuzzy logic with neural-network and so-called adaptive \"genetic\" software systems, with the ultimate goal of building \"self-learning\" fuzzy-control systems. These systems can be employed to control complex, nonlinear dynamic plants, for example, human body.\nFuzzy sets.\nThe input variables in a fuzzy control system are in general mapped by sets of membership functions similar to this, known as \"fuzzy sets\". The process of converting a crisp input value to a fuzzy value is called \"fuzzification\". The fuzzy logic based approach had been considered by designing two fuzzy systems, one for error heading angle and the other for velocity control.\nA control system may also have various types of switch, or \"ON-OFF\", inputs along with its analog inputs, and such switch inputs of course will always have a truth value equal to either 1 or 0, but the scheme can deal with them as simplified fuzzy functions that happen to be either one value or another.\nGiven \"mappings\" of input variables into membership functions and truth values, the microcontroller then makes decisions for what action to take, based on a set of \"rules\", each of the form:\n IF brake temperature IS warm AND speed IS not very fast \n THEN brake pressure IS slightly decreased.\nIn this example, the two input variables are \"brake temperature\" and \"speed\" that have values defined as fuzzy sets. The output variable, \"brake pressure\" is also defined by a fuzzy set that can have values like \"static\" or \"slightly increased\" or \"slightly decreased\" etc.\nFuzzy control in detail.\nFuzzy controllers are very simple conceptually. They consist of an input stage, a processing stage, and an output stage. The input stage maps sensor or other inputs, such as switches, thumbwheels, and so on, to the appropriate membership functions and truth values. The processing stage invokes each appropriate rule and generates a result for each, then combines the results of the rules. Finally, the output stage converts the combined result back into a specific control output value.\nThe most common shape of membership functions is triangular, although trapezoidal and bell curves are also used, but the shape is generally less important than the number of curves and their placement. From three to seven curves are generally appropriate to cover the required range of an input value, or the \"universe of discourse\" in fuzzy jargon.\nAs discussed earlier, the processing stage is based on a collection of logic rules in the form of IF-THEN statements, where the IF part is called the \"antecedent\" and the THEN part is called the \"consequent\". Typical fuzzy control systems have dozens of rules.\nConsider a rule for a thermostat:\n IF (temperature is \"cold\") THEN turn (heater is \"high\")\nThis rule uses the truth value of the \"temperature\" input, which is some truth value of \"cold\", to generate a result in the fuzzy set for the \"heater\" output, which is some value of \"high\". This result is used with the results of other rules to finally generate the crisp composite output. Obviously, the greater the truth value of \"cold\", the higher the truth value of \"high\", though this does not necessarily mean that the output itself will be set to \"high\" since this is only one rule among many. \nIn some cases, the membership functions can be modified by \"hedges\" that are equivalent to adverbs. Common hedges include \"about\", \"near\", \"close to\", \"approximately\", \"very\", \"slightly\", \"too\", \"extremely\", and \"somewhat\". These operations may have precise definitions, though the definitions can vary considerably between different implementations. \"Very\", for one example, squares membership functions; since the membership values are always less than 1, this narrows the membership function. \"Extremely\" cubes the values to give greater narrowing, while \"somewhat\" broadens the function by taking the square root.\nIn practice, the fuzzy rule sets usually have several antecedents that are combined using fuzzy operators, such as AND, OR, and NOT, though again the definitions tend to vary: AND, in one popular definition, simply uses the minimum weight of all the antecedents, while OR uses the maximum value. There is also a NOT operator that subtracts a membership function from 1 to give the \"complementary\" function.\nThere are several ways to define the result of a rule, but one of the most common and simplest is the \"max-min\" inference method, in which the output membership function is given the truth value generated by the premise.\nRules can be solved in parallel in hardware, or sequentially in software. The results of all the rules that have fired are \"defuzzified\" to a crisp value by one of several methods. There are dozens, in theory, each with various advantages or drawbacks.\nThe \"centroid\" method is very popular, in which the \"center of mass\" of the result provides the crisp value. Another approach is the \"height\" method, which takes the value of the biggest contributor. The centroid method favors the rule with the output of greatest area, while the height method obviously favors the rule with the greatest output value.\nThe diagram below demonstrates max-min inferencing and centroid defuzzification for a system with input variables \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" and an output variable \"n\". Note that \"mu\" is standard fuzzy-logic nomenclature for \"truth value\":\nNotice how each rule provides a result as a truth value of a particular membership function for the output variable. In centroid defuzzification the values are OR'd, that is, the maximum value is used and values are not added, and the results are then combined using a centroid calculation.\nFuzzy control system design is based on empirical methods, basically a methodical approach to trial-and-error. The general process is as follows:\nAs a general example, consider the design of a fuzzy controller for a steam turbine. The block diagram of this control system appears as follows:\nThe input and output variables map into the following fuzzy set:\n\u2014where:\n N3: Large negative.\n N2: Medium negative.\n N1: Small negative.\n Z: Zero.\n P1: Small positive.\n P2: Medium positive.\n P3: Large positive.\nThe rule set includes such rules as:\n rule 1: IF temperature IS cool AND pressure IS weak, \n THEN throttle is P3.\n rule 2: IF temperature IS cool AND pressure IS low, \n THEN throttle is P2.\n rule 3: IF temperature IS cool AND pressure IS ok, \n THEN throttle is Z.\n rule 4: IF temperature IS cool AND pressure IS strong, \n THEN throttle is N2.\nIn practice, the controller accepts the inputs and maps them into their membership functions and truth values. These mappings are then fed into the rules. If the rule specifies an AND relationship between the mappings of the two input variables, as the examples above do, the minimum of the two is used as the combined truth value; if an OR is specified, the maximum is used. The appropriate output state is selected and assigned a membership value at the truth level of the premise. The truth values are then defuzzified. \nFor example, assume the temperature is in the \"cool\" state, and the pressure is in the \"low\" and \"ok\" states. The pressure values ensure that only rules 2 and 3 fire:\nThe two outputs are then defuzzified through centroid defuzzification: \nThe output value will adjust the throttle and then the control cycle will begin again to generate the next value.\nBuilding a fuzzy controller.\nConsider implementing with a microcontroller chip a simple feedback controller:\nA fuzzy set is defined for the input error variable \"e\", and the derived change in error, \"delta\", as well as the \"output\", as follows:\n LP: large positive\n SP: small positive\n ZE: zero\n SN: small negative\n LN: large negative\nIf the error ranges from -1 to +1, with the analog-to-digital converter used having a resolution of 0.25, then the input variable's fuzzy set (which, in this case, also applies to the output variable) can be described very simply as a table, with the error / delta / output values in the top row and the truth values for each membership function arranged in rows beneath:\n _______________________________________________________________________\n -1 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1\n _______________________________________________________________________\n mu(LP) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.3 0.7 1\n mu(SP) 0 0 0 0 0.3 0.7 1 0.7 0.3\n mu(ZE) 0 0 0.3 0.7 1 0.7 0.3 0 0\n mu(SN) 0.3 0.7 1 0.7 0.3 0 0 0 0\n mu(LN) 1 0.7 0.3 0 0 0 0 0 0\n _______________________________________________________________________ \u2014or, in graphical form (where each \"X\" has a value of 0.1):\n LN SN ZE SP LP\n | |\n -1.0 | XXXXXXXXXX XXX : : : |\n -0.75 | XXXXXXX XXXXXXX : : : |\n -0.5 | XXX XXXXXXXXXX XXX : : |\n -0.25 | : XXXXXXX XXXXXXX : : |\n 0.0 | : XXX XXXXXXXXXX XXX : |\n 0.25 | : : XXXXXXX XXXXXXX : |\n 0.5 | : : XXX XXXXXXXXXX XXX |\n 0.75 | : : : XXXXXXX XXXXXXX |\n 1.0 | : : : XXX XXXXXXXXXX |\n +------------------------------------------------------------------+\nSuppose this fuzzy system has the following rule base:\n rule 1: IF e = ZE AND delta = ZE THEN output = ZE\n rule 2: IF e = ZE AND delta = SP THEN output = SN\n rule 3: IF e = SN AND delta = SN THEN output = LP\n rule 4: IF e = LP OR delta = LP THEN output = LN\nThese rules are typical for control applications in that the antecedents consist of the logical combination of the error and error-delta signals, while the consequent is a control command output. \nThe rule outputs can be defuzzified using a discrete centroid computation:\n SUM( I = 1 TO 4 OF ( mu(I) * output(I) ) ) / SUM( I = 1 TO 4 OF mu(I) )\nNow, suppose that at a given time: \n e = 0.25\n delta = 0.5\nThen this gives:\n ________________________\n e delta\n ________________________\n mu(LP) 0 0.3\n mu(SP) 0.7 1\n mu(ZE) 0.7 0.3\n mu(SN) 0 0\n mu(LN) 0 0\n ________________________\nPlugging this into rule 1 gives:\n rule 1: IF e = ZE AND delta = ZE THEN output = ZE\n mu(1) = MIN( 0.7, 0.3 ) = 0.3\n output(1) = 0\n-- where:\nThe other rules give:\n rule 2: IF e = ZE AND delta = SP THEN output = SN\n mu(2) = MIN( 0.7, 1 ) = 0.7 \n output(2) = -0.5\n rule 3: IF e = SN AND delta = SN THEN output = LP\n mu(3) = MIN( 0.0, 0.0 ) = 0\n output(3) = 1\n rule 4: IF e = LP OR delta = LP THEN output = LN\n mu(4) = MAX( 0.0, 0.3 ) = 0.3\n output(4) = -1\nThe centroid computation yields:\n formula_1\n formula_2\n formula_3\u2014for the final control output. Simple. Of course the hard part is figuring out what rules actually work correctly in practice.\nIf you have problems figuring out the centroid equation, remember that a centroid is defined by summing all the moments (location times mass) around the center of gravity and equating the sum to zero. So if formula_4 is the center of gravity, formula_5 is the location of each mass, and formula_6 is each mass, this gives:\n formula_7\n formula_8\n formula_9\n formula_10\nIn our example, the values of mu correspond to the masses, and the values of X to location of the masses \n(mu, however, only 'corresponds to the masses' if the initial 'mass' of the output functions are all the same/equivalent. If they are not the same, i.e. some are narrow triangles, while others maybe wide trapezoids or shouldered triangles, then the mass or area of the output function must be known or calculated. It is this mass that is then scaled by mu and multiplied by its location X_i).\nThis system can be implemented on a standard microprocessor, but dedicated fuzzy chips are now available. For example, Adaptive Logic INC of San Jose, California, sells a \"fuzzy chip\", the AL220, that can accept four analog inputs and generate four analog outputs. A block diagram of the chip is shown below:\nAntilock brakes.\nAs an example, consider an anti-lock braking system, directed by a microcontroller chip. The microcontroller has to make decisions based on brake temperature, speed, and other variables in the system.\nThe variable \"temperature\" in this system can be subdivided into a range of \"states\": \"cold\", \"cool\", \"moderate\", \"warm\", \"hot\", \"very hot\". The transition from one state to the next is hard to define.\nAn arbitrary static threshold might be set to divide \"warm\" from \"hot\". For example, at exactly 90 degrees, warm ends and hot begins. But this would result in a discontinuous change when the input value passed over that threshold. The transition wouldn't be smooth, as would be required in braking situations.\nThe way around this is to make the states \"fuzzy\". That is, allow them to change gradually from one state to the next. In order to do this, there must be a dynamic relationship established between different factors.\nStart by defining the input temperature states using \"membership functions\":\nWith this scheme, the input variable's state no longer jumps abruptly from one state to the next. Instead, as the temperature changes, it loses value in one membership function while gaining value in the next. In other words, its ranking in the category of cold decreases as it becomes more highly ranked in the warmer category.\nAt any sampled timeframe, the \"truth value\" of the brake temperature will almost always be in some degree part of two membership functions: i.e.: '0.6 nominal and 0.4 warm', or '0.7 nominal and 0.3 cool', and so on.\nThe above example demonstrates a simple application, using the abstraction of values from multiple values. This only represents one kind of data, however, in this case, temperature.\nAdding additional sophistication to this braking system, could be done by additional factors such as traction, speed, inertia, set up in dynamic functions, according to the designed fuzzy system.\nLogical interpretation of fuzzy control.\nIn spite of the appearance there are several difficulties to give a rigorous logical interpretation of the \"IF-THEN\" rules. As an example, interpret a rule as \"IF (temperature is \"cold\") THEN (heater is \"high\")\" by the first order formula \"Cold(x)\u2192High(y)\" and assume that r is an input such that \"Cold(r)\" is false. Then the formula \"Cold(r)\u2192High(t)\" is true for any \"t\" and therefore any \"t\" gives a correct control given \"r\". A rigorous logical justification of fuzzy control is given in H\u00e1jek's book (see Chapter 7) where fuzzy control is represented as a theory of H\u00e1jek's basic logic.\nIn Gerla 2005 another logical approach to fuzzy control is proposed based on fuzzy logic programming: Denote by \"f\" the fuzzy function arising of an IF-THEN systems of rules. Then this system can be translated into a fuzzy program P containing a series of rules whose head is \"Good(x,y)\". The interpretation of this predicate in the least fuzzy Herbrand model of P coincides with f. This gives further useful tools to fuzzy control.\nFuzzy qualitative simulation.\nBefore an Artificial Intelligence system is able to plan the action sequence, some kind of model is needed. For video games, the model is equal to the game rules. From the programming perspective, the game rules are implemented as a Physics engine which accepts an action from a player and calculates, if the action is valid. After the action was executed, the game is in follow up state. If the aim isn't only to play mathematical games but determine the actions for real world applications, the most obvious bottleneck is, that no game rules are available. The first step is to model the domain. System identification can be realized with precise mathematical equations or with Fuzzy rules.\nUsing Fuzzy logic and ANFIS systems (Adaptive network based fuzzy inference system) for creating the forward model for a domain has many disadvantages. A qualitative simulation isn't able to determine the correct follow up state, but the system will only guess what will happen if the action was taken. The Fuzzy qualitative simulation can't predict the exact numerical values, but it's using imprecise natural language to speculate about the future. It takes the current situation plus the actions from the past and generates the expected follow up state of the game.\nThe output of the ANFIS system isn't providing correct information, but only a Fuzzy set notation, for example [0,0.2,0.4,0]. After converting the set notation back into numerical values the accuracy get worse. This makes Fuzzy qualitative simulation a bad choice for practical applications.\nApplications.\nFuzzy control systems are suitable when the process complexity is high including uncertainty and nonlinear behavior, and there are no precise mathematical models available. Successful applications of fuzzy control systems have been reported worldwide mainly in Japan with pioneering solutions since 80s.\nSome applications reported in the literature are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48661", "revid": "42866089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48661", "title": "Statistician", "text": "Person who works with theoretical or applied statistics\nA statistician is a person who works with theoretical or applied statistics. The profession exists in both the private and public sectors. \nIt is common to combine statistical knowledge with expertise in other subjects, and statisticians may work as employees or as statistical consultants.\nOverview.\nAccording to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of 2014, 26,970 jobs were classified as \"statistician\" in the United States. Of these people, approximately 30 percent worked for governments (federal, state, or local). As of October 2021, the median pay for statisticians in the United States was $92,270. \nAdditionally, there is a substantial number of people who use statistics and data analysis in their work but have job titles other than \"statistician\", such as actuaries, applied mathematicians, economists, data scientists, data analysts (predictive analytics), financial analysts, psychometricians, sociologists, epidemiologists, and quantitative psychologists. Statisticians are included with the professions in various national and international occupational classifications. \nIn many countries, including the United States, employment in the field requires either a master's degree in statistics or a related field or a PhD. \nAccording to one industry professional, \"Typical work includes collaborating with scientists, providing mathematical modeling, simulations, designing randomized experiments and randomized sampling plans, analyzing experimental or survey results, and forecasting future events (such as sales of a product).\"\nAccording to the BLS, \"Overall employment grow 33% from 2016 to 2026, much faster than average for all occupations. Businesses will need these workers to analyze the increasing volume of digital and electronic data.\" In October 2021, the CNBC rated it the fastest growing job in science and technology of the next decade, with a projected growth rate of 35.40%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48662", "revid": "94871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48662", "title": "Computer number format", "text": "Internal representation of numeric values in a digital computer\nA computer number format is the internal representation of numeric values in digital device hardware and software, such as in programmable computers and calculators. Numerical values are stored as groupings of bits, such as bytes and words. The encoding between numerical values and bit patterns is chosen for convenience of the operation of the computer; the encoding used by the computer's instruction set generally requires conversion for external use, such as for printing and display. Different types of processors may have different internal representations of numerical values and different conventions are used for integer and real numbers. Most calculations are carried out with number formats that fit into a processor register, but some software systems allow representation of arbitrarily large numbers using multiple words of memory.\nBinary number representation.\nComputers represent data in sets of binary digits. The representation is composed of bits, which in turn are grouped into larger sets such as bytes.\nA \"bit\" is a binary digit that represents one of two states. The concept of a bit can be understood as a value of either \"1\" or \"0\", \"on\" or \"off\", \"yes\" or \"no\", \"true\" or \"false\", or encoded by a switch or toggle of some kind.\nWhile a single bit, on its own, is able to represent only two values, a string of bits may be used to represent larger values. For example, a string of three bits can represent up to eight distinct values as illustrated in Table 1.\nAs the number of bits composing a string increases, the number of possible \"0\" and \"1\" combinations increases exponentially. A single bit allows only two value-combinations, two bits combined can make four separate values, three bits for eight, and so on, increasing with the formula 2n. The amount of possible combinations doubles with each binary digit added as illustrated in Table 2.\nGroupings with a specific number of bits are used to represent varying things and have specific names.\nA \"byte\" is a bit string containing the number of bits needed to represent a character. On most modern computers, this is an eight bit string. Because the definition of a byte is related to the number of bits composing a character, some older computers have used a different bit length for their byte. In many computer architectures, the byte is the smallest addressable unit, the atom of addressability, say. For example, even though 64-bit processors may address memory sixty-four bits at a time, they may still split that memory into eight-bit pieces. This is called byte-addressable memory. Historically, many CPUs read data in some multiple of eight bits. Because the byte size of eight bits is so common, but the definition is not standardized, the term octet is sometimes used to explicitly describe an eight bit sequence.\nA \"nibble\" (sometimes \"nybble\"), is a number composed of four bits. Being a half-byte, the nibble was named as a play on words. A person may need several nibbles for one bite from something; similarly, a nybble is a part of a byte. Because four bits allow for sixteen values, a nibble is sometimes known as a hexadecimal digit.\nOctal and hexadecimal number display.\nOctal and hexadecimal encoding are convenient ways to represent binary numbers, as used by computers. Computer engineers often need to write out binary quantities, but in practice writing out a binary number such as 1001001101010001 is tedious and prone to errors. Therefore, binary quantities are written in a base-8, or \"octal\", or, much more commonly, a base-16, \"hexadecimal\" (\"hex\"), number format. In the decimal system, there are 10 digits, 0 through 9, which combine to form numbers. In an octal system, there are only 8 digits, 0 through 7. That is, the value of an octal \"10\" is the same as a decimal \"8\", an octal \"20\" is a decimal \"16\", and so on. In a hexadecimal system, there are 16 digits, 0 through 9 followed, by convention, with A through F. That is, a hexadecimal \"10\" is the same as a decimal \"16\" and a hexadecimal \"20\" is the same as a decimal \"32\". An example and comparison of numbers in different bases is described in the chart below.\nWhen typing numbers, formatting characters are used to describe the number system, for example 000_0000B or 0b000_00000 for binary and 0F8H or 0xf8 for hexadecimal numbers.\nConverting between bases.\nEach of these number systems is a positional system, but while decimal weights are powers of 10, the octal weights are powers of 8 and the hexadecimal weights are powers of 16. To convert from hexadecimal or octal to decimal, for each digit one multiplies the value of the digit by the value of its position and then adds the results. For example:\n formula_1\nRepresenting fractions in binary.\nFixed-point numbers.\nFixed-point formatting can be useful to represent fractions in binary.\nThe number of bits needed for the precision and range desired must be chosen to store the fractional and integer parts of a number. For instance, using a 32-bit format, 16 bits may be used for the integer and 16 for the fraction.\nThe eight's bit is followed by the four's bit, then the two's bit, then the one's bit. The fractional bits continue the pattern set by the integer bits. The next bit is the half's bit, then the quarter's bit, then the eighth's bit, and so on. For example:\nThis form of encoding cannot represent some values in binary. For example, the fraction , 0.2 in decimal, the closest approximations would be as follows:\nEven if more digits are used, an exact representation is impossible. The number , written in decimal as 0.333333333..., continues indefinitely. If prematurely terminated, the value would not represent precisely.\nFloating-point numbers.\nWhile both unsigned and signed integers are used in digital systems, even a 32-bit integer is not enough to handle all the range of numbers a calculator can handle, and that's not even including fractions. To approximate the greater range and precision of real numbers, we have to abandon signed integers and fixed-point numbers and go to a \"floating-point\" format.\nIn the decimal system, we are familiar with floating-point numbers of the form (scientific notation):\n 1.1030402 \u00d7 105 = 1.1030402 \u00d7 100000 = 110304.02\nor, more compactly:\n 1.1030402E5\nwhich means \"1.1030402 times 1 followed by 5 zeroes\". We have a certain numeric value (1.1030402) known as a \"significand\", multiplied by a power of 10 (E5, meaning 105 or 100,000), known as an \"exponent\". If we have a negative exponent, that means the number is multiplied by a 1 that many places to the right of the decimal point. For example:\n 2.3434E\u22126 = 2.3434 \u00d7 10\u22126 = 2.3434 \u00d7 0.000001 = 0.0000023434\nThe advantage of this scheme is that by using the exponent we can get a much wider range of numbers, even if the number of digits in the significand, or the \"numeric precision\", is much smaller than the range. Similar binary floating-point formats can be defined for computers. There is a number of such schemes, the most popular has been defined by Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). The IEEE 754-2008 standard specification defines a 64 bit floating-point format with:\nWith the bits stored in 8 bytes of memory:\nwhere \"S\" denotes the sign bit, \"x\" denotes an exponent bit, and \"m\" denotes a significand bit. Once the bits here have been extracted, they are converted with the computation:\n &lt;sign&gt; \u00d7 (1 + &lt;fractional significand&gt;) \u00d7 2&lt;exponent&gt; \u2212 1023\nThis scheme provides numbers valid out to about 15 decimal digits, with the following range of numbers:\nThe specification also defines several special values that are not defined numbers, and are known as \"NaNs\", for \"Not A Number\". These are used by programs to designate invalid operations and the like. \nSome programs also use 32-bit floating-point numbers. The most common scheme uses a 23-bit significand with a sign bit, plus an 8-bit exponent in \"excess-127\" format, giving seven valid decimal digits.\nThe bits are converted to a numeric value with the computation:\n &lt;sign&gt; \u00d7 (1 + &lt;fractional significand&gt;) \u00d7 2&lt;exponent&gt; \u2212 127\nleading to the following range of numbers:\nSuch floating-point numbers are known as \"reals\" or \"floats\" in general, but with a number of variations:\nA 32-bit float value is sometimes called a \"real32\" or a \"single\", meaning \"single-precision floating-point value\".\nA 64-bit float is sometimes called a \"real64\" or a \"double\", meaning \"double-precision floating-point value\".\nThe relation between numbers and bit patterns is chosen for convenience in computer manipulation; eight bytes stored in computer memory may represent a 64-bit real, two 32-bit reals, or four signed or unsigned integers, or some other kind of data that fits into eight bytes. The only difference is how the computer interprets them. If the computer stored four unsigned integers and then read them back from memory as a 64-bit real, it almost always would be a perfectly valid real number, though it would be junk data.\nOnly a finite range of real numbers can be represented with a given number of bits. Arithmetic operations can overflow or underflow, producing a value too large or too small to be represented.\nThe representation has a limited precision. For example, only 15 decimal digits can be represented with a 64-bit real. If a very small floating-point number is added to a large one, the result is just the large one. The small number was too small to even show up in 15 or 16 digits of resolution, and the computer effectively discards it. Analyzing the effect of limited precision is a well-studied problem. Estimates of the magnitude of round-off errors and methods to limit their effect on large calculations are part of any large computation project. The precision limit is different from the range limit, as it affects the significand, not the exponent.\nThe significand is a binary fraction that doesn't necessarily perfectly match a decimal fraction. In many cases a sum of reciprocal powers of 2 does not match a specific decimal fraction, and the results of computations will be slightly off. For example, the decimal fraction \"0.1\" is equivalent to an infinitely repeating binary fraction: 0.000110011 ...\nNumbers in programming languages.\nProgramming in assembly language requires the programmer to keep track of the representation of numbers. Where the processor does not support a required mathematical operation, the programmer must work out a suitable algorithm and instruction sequence to carry out the operation; on some microprocessors, even integer multiplication must be done in software.\nHigh-level programming languages such as Ruby and Python offer an abstract number that may be an expanded type such as \"rational\", \"bignum\", or \"complex\". Mathematical operations are carried out by library routines provided by the implementation of the language. A given mathematical symbol in the source code, by operator overloading, will invoke different object code appropriate to the representation of the numerical type; mathematical operations on any number\u2014whether signed, unsigned, rational, floating-point, fixed-point, integral, or complex\u2014are written exactly the same way.\nSome languages, such as REXX and Java, provide decimal floating-points operations, which provide rounding errors of a different form.\nNotes and references.\n\"The initial version of this article was based on a public domain article from https://. \"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48664", "revid": "51014777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48664", "title": "Yosemite National Park", "text": "National park in California, United States\nYosemite National Park ( ) is a national park of the United States in California. It is bordered on the southeast by the Sierra National Forest and on the northwest by Stanislaus National Forest. The park is managed by the National Park Service and covers in four counties\u00a0\u2013 centered in Tuolumne and Mariposa, extending north and east to Mono and south to Madera. Designated a World Heritage Site in 1984, Yosemite is internationally recognized for its granite cliffs, waterfalls, clear streams, groves of giant sequoia, lakes, mountains, meadows, glaciers, and biological diversity. Almost 95 percent of the park is designated wilderness. Yosemite is one of the largest and least fragmented habitat blocks in the Sierra Nevada mountain range.\nIts geology is characterized by granite and remnants of older rock. About 10\u00a0million years ago, the Sierra Nevada was uplifted and tilted to form its unique slopes, which increased the steepness of stream and river beds, forming deep, narrow canyons. About one million years ago, glaciers formed at higher elevations. They moved downslope, cutting and sculpting the U-shaped Yosemite Valley.\nHumans may have first entered the area 10,000 to 8,000 years ago, with Native Americans having inhabited the region for nearly 4,000 years. European Americans entered the area by 1833, and settlers first entered the valley in 1851, with James D. Savage credited as discovering the area that became Yosemite National Park.\nYosemite was critical to the development of the concept of national parks. Galen Clark and others lobbied to protect Yosemite Valley from development, ultimately leading to President Abraham Lincoln's signing of the Yosemite Grant of 1864 that declared Yosemite as federally preserved land. In 1890, environmentalist John Muir led a successful movement to motivate Congress to establish Yosemite Valley and its surrounding areas as a National Park. This helped pave the way for the National Park System. Yosemite draws about four million visitors annually. Most visitors spend the majority of their time in the valley's . The park set a visitation record in 2016, surpassing five million visitors for the first time. In 2024, the park received over four million visitors.\nToponym.\nThe word \"Yosemite\" (derived from \"yohhe'meti\", \"they are killers\" in Miwok) historically referred to the name that the Miwok gave to the Ahwahneechee, the resident indigenous tribe. Previously, the region had been called \"Ahwahnee\" (\"big mouth\") by the Ahwahneechee. The term \"Yosemite\" in Miwok is easily confused with a similar term for \"grizzly bear\", and is still a common misconception.\nHistory.\nAhwahneechee and the Mariposa Wars.\nThe first humans of Yosemite called themselves the Ahwahneechee, meaning \"dwellers\" in Ahwahnee. The Ahwahneechee People were the only tribe that lived within the park boundaries, but other tribes lived in surrounding areas. Together they formed a larger Indigenous population in California, called the Southern Sierra Miwok. They are related to the Northern Paiute and Mono tribes. Other tribes like the Central Sierra Miwoks and the Yokuts, who both lived in the San Joaquin Valley and central California, visited Yosemite to trade and intermarry. This resulted in a blending of culture that helped preserve their presence in Yosemite after early American settlements and urban development threatened their survival. Vegetation and game in the region were similar to modern times; acorns were a dietary staple, as well as other seeds and plants, salmon, and deer.\nThe 1848\u20131855 California Gold Rush was a major event impacting the native population. It drew more than 90,000 European Americans to the area in 1849, causing competition for resources between gold miners and residents. About 70 years before the Gold Rush, the indigenous population was estimated to be 300,000, quickly dropping to 150,000, and just ten years later, only about 50,000 remained. The reasons for such a decline included disease, birth rate decreases, starvation, and conflict. The conflict in Yosemite, which is known as the Mariposa War, was part of the California genocide, which was the systemic killing of indigenous peoples throughout the State between the 1840s and 1870s. It started in December 1850 when California funded a state militia to drive Native people from contested territory to suppress Native American resistance to the European American influx.\nYosemite tribes often stole from settlers and miners, sometimes killing them, in retribution for the extermination/domestication of their people, and loss of their lands and resources. The War and formation of the Mariposa Battalion was partially the result of a single incident involving James Savage, a Fresno trader whose trading post was attacked in December 1850. After the incident, Savage rallied other miners and gained the support of local officials to pursue a war against the Natives. He was appointed United States Army Major and leader of the Mariposa Battalion at the beginning of 1851. He and Captain John Boling were responsible for pursuing the Ahwahneechee people, led by Chief Tenaya and driving them west, and out of Yosemite. In March 1851 under Savage's command, the Mariposa Battalion captured about 70 Ahwahneechee and planned to take them to a reservation in Fresno, but they escaped. Later in May, under the command of Boling, the battalion captured 35 Ahwahneechee, including Chief Tenaya, and marched them to the reservation. Most were allowed to eventually leave, and the rest escaped. Tenaya and others fled across the Sierra Nevada and settled with the Mono Lake Paiutes. Tenaya and some of his companions were ultimately killed in 1853, either over stealing horses or a gambling conflict. The survivors of Tenaya's group and other Ahwahneechee were absorbed into the Mono Lake Paiute tribe.\nAccounts from this battalion were the first well-documented reports of European Americans entering Yosemite Valley. Attached to Savage's unit was Doctor Lafayette Bunnell, who later wrote about his awestruck impressions of the valley in \"The Discovery of the Yosemite\". Bunnell is credited with naming Yosemite Valley, based on his interviews with Chief Tenaya. Bunnell wrote that Chief Tenaya was the founder of the Ahwahnee colony. Bunnell falsely believed that the word \"Yosemite\" meant \"full-grown grizzly bear\".\nIndigenous peoples' continuing presence.\nAfter the Mariposa War, Native Americans continued to live in the Yosemite area in reduced numbers. The remaining Yosemite Ahwahneechee tribe members there were forced to relocate to a village constructed in 1851 by the state government. They learned to live within this camp and their limited rights, adapting to the changed environment by entering the tourism industry through employment and small businesses, manufacturing and selling goods, and providing services. In 1953, the National Park Service banned all non-employee Natives from residing in the Park and evicted the non-employees who had residence. In 1969, with only a few families left in the Park, the National Park Service evicted the remaining Native people living within the Park (all Park employees and their families) to a government housing area for park employees and destroyed the village as part of a fire-fighting exercise. A reconstructed \"Indian Village of Ahwahnee\" sits behind the Yosemite Museum, located next to the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center.\nBy the late 19th century, the population of all native inhabitants in Yosemite was difficult to determine; estimates ranged from thirty to several hundred. The Ahwahneechee people and their descendants were hard to identify. The last full-blooded Ahwahneechee died in 1931. Her name was Totuya, or Maria Lebrado. She was the granddaughter of Chief Tenaya and one of many forced out of her ancestral homelands. The Ahwahneechee live through the memory of their descendants, their fellow Yosemite Natives, and through the Yosemite exhibit in the Smithsonian and the Yosemite Museum. As a method of self-preservation and resilience, the Indigenous people of California proposed treaties in 1851 and 1852 that would have established land reservations for them, but Congress refused to ratify them. The Southern Sierra Miwuk Nation is seeking tribal sovereignty and federal recognition. The National Park Service created policies to protect sacred sites and allow Native People to return to their homelands and use National Park resources.\nEarly tourists.\nIn 1855, entrepreneur James Mason Hutchings, artist Thomas Ayres, and two others were the first tourists to visit. Hutchings and Ayres were responsible for much of Yosemite's earliest publicity, writing articles and special issues about the valley. Ayres' style was detailed with exaggerated angularity. His works and written accounts were distributed nationally, and an exhibition of his drawings was held in New York City. Hutchings' publicity efforts between 1855 and 1860 increased tourism to Yosemite. Natives supported the growing tourism industry by working as laborers or maids. Later, they performed dances for tourists, acted as guides, and sold handcrafted goods, notably woven baskets. The Indian village and its peoples fascinated visitors, especially James Hutchings, who advocated for Yosemite tourism. He and others considered the indigenous presence to be one of Yosemite's greatest attractions.\nWawona was an early Indian encampment for Nuchu and Ahwahneechee people who were captured and relocated to a reservation on the Fresno River by Savage and the Mariposa Battalion in March 1851. Galen Clark discovered the Mariposa Grove of giant sequoia in Wawona in 1857. He had simple lodgings and roads built. In 1879, the Wawona Hotel was built to serve tourists visiting Mariposa Grove. As tourism increased, so did the number of trails and hotels to build on it.\nThe Wawona Tree, also known as the Tunnel Tree, was a giant sequoia that grew in the Mariposa Grove. It was tall, and was in circumference. When a carriage-wide tunnel was cut through the tree in 1881, it became even more popular as a tourist photo attraction. Carriages and automobiles traversed the road that passed through the tree. The tree was permanently weakened by the tunnel, and it fell in 1969 under a heavy load of snow. It was estimated to have been 2,100 years old.\nYosemite's first concession was established in 1884 when John Degnan and his wife established a bakery and store. In 1916, the National Park Service granted a 20-year concession to the Desmond Park Service Company. It bought out or built hotels, stores, camps, a dairy, a garage, and other park facilities. The Hotel Del Portal was completed in 1908 by a subsidiary of the Yosemite Valley Railroad. It was located at El Portal, California just outside of Yosemite.\nThe Curry Company started in 1899, led by David and Jennie Curry, to provide concessions. They founded Camp Curry, now Curry Village.\nPark service administrators felt that limiting the number of concessionaires in the park would be more financially sound. The Curry Company and its rival, the Yosemite National Park Company, were forced to merge in 1925 to form the Yosemite Park &amp; Curry Company (YP&amp;CC). The company built the Ahwahnee Hotel in 1926\u201327.\nYosemite Grant.\nConcerned by the impact of commercial interests, citizens, including Galen Clark and Senator John Conness, advocated protection for the area. The 38th United States Congress passed legislation that was signed by President Abraham Lincoln on June 30, 1864, creating the Yosemite Grant. This is the first time land was set aside specifically for preservation and public use by the U.S. government, and set a precedent for the 1872 creation of Yellowstone national park, the nation's first. Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove were ceded to California as a state park, and a board of commissioners was established two years later.\nGalen Clark was appointed by the commission as Grant's first guardian, but neither Clark nor the commissioners had the authority to evict homesteaders (which included Hutchings). The issue was not settled until 1872, when the homesteader land holdings were invalidated by the U.S. Supreme Court. Clark and the commissioners were ousted in a dispute that reached the Supreme Court in 1880. The two Supreme Court decisions affecting management of the Yosemite Grant are considered precedents in land management law. Hutchings became the new park guardian.\nTourist access to the park improved, and conditions in the Valley became more hospitable. Tourism significantly increased after the first transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, while the long horseback ride to reach the area was a deterrent. Three stagecoach roads were built in the mid-1870s to provide better access for the growing number of visitors.\nJohn Muir was a Scottish-born American naturalist and explorer. Muir's leadership ensured that many National Parks were left untouched, including Yosemite.\nMuir wrote articles popularizing the area and increasing scientific interest in it. Muir was one of the first to theorize that the major landforms in Yosemite Valley were created by alpine glaciers, bucking established scientists such as Josiah Whitney. Muir wrote scientific papers on the area's biology. Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted emphasized the importance of conservation of Yosemite Valley.\nIncreased protection efforts.\nOvergrazing of meadows (especially by sheep), logging of giant sequoia, and other damage led Muir to become an advocate for further protection. Muir convinced prominent guests of the importance of putting the area under federal protection. One such guest was Robert Underwood Johnson, editor of \"Century Magazine\". Muir and Johnson lobbied Congress for the Act that created Yosemite National Park on October 1, 1890. The State of California, however, retained control of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove. Muir's writings raised awareness about the damage caused by sheep grazing, and he actively campaigned to virtually eliminate grazing from Yosemite's high country.\nThe newly created national park came under the jurisdiction of the United States Army's Troop I of the 4th Cavalry on May 19, 1891, which set up camp in Wawona with Captain Abram Epperson Wood as acting superintendent. By the late 1890s, sheep grazing was no longer a problem, and the Army made other improvements. However, the cavalry could not intervene to ease the worsening conditions. From 1899 to 1913, cavalry regiments of the Western Department, including the all Black 9th Cavalry (known as the \"Buffalo Soldiers\") and the 1st Cavalry, stationed two troops at Yosemite.\nMuir and his Sierra Club continued to lobby the government and influential people for the creation of a unified Yosemite National Park. In May 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt camped with Muir near Glacier Point for three days. On that trip, Muir convinced Roosevelt to take control of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove away from California and return it to the federal government. In 1906, Roosevelt signed a bill that shifted control.\nNational Park Service.\nThe National Park Service (NPS) was formed in 1916, and Yosemite was transferred to that agency's jurisdiction. Tuolumne Meadows Lodge, Tioga Pass Road, and campgrounds at Tenaya and Merced lakes were also completed in 1916. Automobiles started to enter the park in ever-increasing numbers following the opening of all-weather highways to the park. The Yosemite Museum was founded in 1926 through the efforts of Ansel Franklin Hall. In the 1920s, the museum featured Native Americans practicing traditional crafts, and many Southern Sierra Miwok continued to live in Yosemite Valley until they were evicted from the park in the 1960s. Although the NPS helped create a museum that included Native American culture, its early actions and organizational values were dismissive of Yosemite Natives and the Ahwahneechee. NPS in the early 20th century criticized and restricted the expression of indigenous culture and behavior. For example, park officials penalized Natives for playing games and drinking during the Indian Field Days of 1924. In 1929, Park Superintendent Charles G. Thomson concluded that the Indian village was aesthetically unpleasant and was limiting white settler development and ordered the camp to be burned down. In 1969, many Native residents left in search of work as a result of the decline in tourism. NPS demolished their empty houses, evicted the remaining residents, and destroyed the entire village. This was the last Indigenous settlement within the park.\nIn 1903, a dam in Hetch Hetchy Valley in the northwestern region of the park was proposed. Its purpose was to provide water and hydroelectric power to San Francisco. Muir and the Sierra Club opposed the project, while others, including Gifford Pinchot, supported it. In 1913, the O'Shaughnessy Dam was approved via passage of the Raker Act.\nIn 1918, Clare Marie Hodges was hired as the first female Park Ranger in Yosemite. Following Hodges in 1921, Enid Michael was hired as a seasonal Park Ranger and continued to serve in that position for 20 years.\nIn 1937, conservationist Rosalie Edge, head of the Emergency Conservation Committee (ECC), successfully lobbied Congress to purchase about of old-growth sugar pines on the perimeter of Yosemite National Park that were to be logged.\nBy 1968, traffic congestion and parking in Yosemite Valley during the summer months had become a concern. NPS reduced artificial inducements to visit the park, such as the \"Firefall\", in which red-hot embers were pushed off a cliff near Glacier Point at night.\nIn 1984, preservationists persuaded Congress to designate , or about 89 percent of the park, as the Yosemite Wilderness. As a wilderness area, it would be preserved in its natural state with humans being only temporary visitors.\nIn 2016, The Trust for Public Land (TPL) purchased Ackerson Meadow, a on the western edge of the park for $2.3\u00a0million. Ackerson Meadow was originally included in the proposed 1890 park boundary, but never acquired by the federal government. The purchase and donation of the meadow was made possible through a cooperative effort by TPL, NPS, and Yosemite Conservancy. On September 7, 2016, NPS accepted the donation of the land, making the meadow the largest addition to Yosemite since 1949. With extensive erosion from years of cattle ranching, the land is being transformed back into a healthy meadow.\nIn 2025, laid-off National Park Service workers displayed a giant upside down American flag as a \"distress signal\" at El Capitan to protest layoffs recently made by the Trump administration.\nGeography.\nYosemite National Park is located in the central Sierra Nevada. Three wilderness areas are adjacent to Yosemite: the Ansel Adams Wilderness to the southeast, the Hoover Wilderness to the northeast, and the Emigrant Wilderness to the north.\nThe park contains thousands of lakes and ponds, of streams, of hiking trails, and of roads. Two federally designated Wild and Scenic Rivers, the Merced and the Tuolumne, begin within Yosemite's borders and flow westward through the Sierra foothills into the Central Valley of California.\nRocks and erosion.\nAlmost all of the landforms are cut from the granitic rock of the Sierra Nevada Batholith (a batholith is a large mass of intrusive igneous rock that formed deep below the surface). About five percent of the park's landforms (mostly in its eastern margin near Mount Dana) are metamorphosed volcanic and sedimentary rocks. These roof pendants once formed the roof over the underlying granitic magma.\nErosion acting upon different types of uplift-generated joint and fracture systems is responsible for producing the valleys, canyons, domes, and other features. These joints and fracture systems do not move, and are therefore not faults. Spacing between joints is controlled by the amount of silica in the granite and granodiorite rocks; more silica tends to form a more resistant rock, resulting in larger spaces between joints and fractures.\nPillars and columns, such as Washington Column and Lost Arrow, are generated by cross joints. Erosion acting on master joints is responsible for shaping valleys and later canyons. The single most erosive force over the last few million years has been large alpine glaciers, which turned the previously V-shaped river-cut valleys into U-shaped glacial-cut canyons (such as Yosemite Valley and Hetch Hetchy Valley). Exfoliation (caused by the tendency of crystals in plutonic rocks to expand at the surface) acting on granitic rock with widely spaced joints is responsible for producing domes such as Half Dome and North Dome and inset arches like Royal Arches.\nPopular features.\nYosemite Valley represents only one percent of the park area. The Tunnel View gives a view of the valley. El Capitan is a prominent granite cliff that looms over the valley, and is a rock climbing favorite because of its sheer size, diverse climbing routes, and year-round accessibility. Granite domes such as Sentinel Dome and Half Dome rise , respectively, above the valley floor. The park contains dozens of other granite domes.\nThe high country of Yosemite contains other important features such as Tuolumne Meadows, Dana Meadows, the Clark Range, the Cathedral Range, and the Kuna Crest. The Sierra Crest and the Pacific Crest Trail run through Yosemite. Mount Dana and Mount Gibbs are peaks of red metamorphic rock. Granite peaks include Mount Conness, Cathedral Peak, and Matterhorn Peak. Mount Lyell is the highest point in the park, standing at . The Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in the park and one of the few remaining in the Sierra.\nThe park has three groves of ancient giant sequoia (\"Sequoiadendron giganteum\") trees; the Mariposa Grove (200 trees), the Tuolumne Grove (25 trees), and the Merced Grove (20 trees). This species grows larger in volume than any other and is one of the tallest and longest-lived.\nWater and ice.\nThe Tuolumne and Merced River systems originate along the crest of the Sierra in the park and have carved river canyons deep. The Tuolumne River drains the entire northern portion of the park, an area of approximately . The Merced River begins in the park's southern peaks, primarily the Cathedral and Clark Ranges, and drains an area of approximately .\nHydrologic processes, including glaciation, flooding, and fluvial geomorphic response, have been fundamental in creating park landforms. The park contains approximately 3,200 lakes (greater than 100 m2), two reservoirs, and of streams. Wetlands flourish in valley bottoms throughout the park, and are often hydrologically linked to nearby lakes and rivers through seasonal flooding and groundwater. Meadow habitats, distributed at elevations from in the park, are generally wetlands, as are the riparian habitats found on the banks of Yosemite's watercourses.\nYosemite is famous for its high concentration of waterfalls in a small area. Numerous sheer drops, glacial steps, and hanging valleys in the park feature spectacular cascades, especially during April, May, and June (as the snow melts). Located in Yosemite Valley, Yosemite Falls is the fourth tallest waterfall in North America at according to the World Waterfall Database. Also in the valley is the much lower volume Ribbon Falls, which has the highest single vertical drop, . Perhaps the most prominent of the valley waterfalls is Bridalveil Fall. Horsetail Fall flows over the eastern edge of El Capitan. This small waterfall usually flows only during winter and is easy to miss. On rare occasions during mid- to late February, it can glow orange when backlit by sunset. This unique lighting effect happens only on evenings with a clear sky. Minor haze or cloudiness can spoil the effect. Although entirely natural, the phenomenon is reminiscent of the human-caused Firefall that historically occurred from Glacier Point. Wapama Falls in Hetch Hetchy Valley is another notable waterfall. Hundreds of ephemeral waterfalls become active in the park after heavy rains or melting snowpack.\nPark glaciers are relatively small and occupy areas that are in almost permanent shade, such as north- and northeast-facing cirques. Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in Yosemite (the Palisades Glaciers are the largest in the Sierra Nevada) and covers . None of the Yosemite glaciers are a remnant of the Ice Age alpine glaciers responsible for sculpting the Yosemite landscape. Instead, they were formed during one of the neoglacial episodes that have occurred since the thawing of the Ice Age (such as the Little Ice Age). Many Yosemite glaciers have disappeared, such as the Black Mountain Glacier that was marked in 1871 and had gone by the mid-1980s. Yosemite's final two glaciers \u2013 the Lyell and Maclure glaciers \u2013 have receded over the last 100 years and are expected to disappear as a result of climate change.\nClimate.\nYosemite has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Csa\"), meaning most precipitation falls during the mild winter, and the other seasons are nearly dry (less than three percent of precipitation falls during the long, hot summers). Because of orographic lift, precipitation increases with elevation up to where it slowly decreases to the crest. Precipitation amounts vary from at elevation to at . Snow does not typically accumulate until November in the high country. It deepens into March or early April.\nMean daily temperatures range from to at Tuolumne Meadows at . At the Wawona Entrance (elevation ), mean daily temperature ranges from . At the lower elevations below , temperatures are hotter; the mean daily high temperature at Yosemite Valley (elevation ) varies from . At elevations above , the hot, dry summer temperatures are moderated by frequent summer thunderstorms, along with snow that can persist into July. The combination of dry vegetation, low relative humidity, and thunderstorms results in frequent lightning-caused fires as well.\nAt park headquarters (elevation ), January averages , while July averages . In summer, the nights are much cooler than the days. An average of 45.5 days have highs of or higher and an average of 105.6 nights with freezing temperatures. Freezing temperatures have been recorded in every month of the year. The record high temperature was on July 22 and July 24, 1915, while the record low temperature was on January 1, 2009. Average annual precipitation is nearly , falling on 67 days. The wettest year was 1983 with and the driest year was 1976 with . The most precipitation in one month was in December 1955, and the most in one day was on December 23, 1955. Average annual snowfall is . The snowiest winter was 1948\u20131949 with . The most snow in one month was in January 1993.\nIn addition to the typical weather patterns, Yosemite is also impacted by the Mono winds, which are strong, dry winds that blow down the Sierra Nevada slopes, especially during the late fall through spring. \nGeology.\nTectonic and volcanic activity.\nThe location of the park was a passive continental margin during the Precambrian and early Paleozoic. Sediment was derived from continental sources and was deposited in shallow water. These rocks became deformed and metamorphosed.\nHeat generated from the Farallon Plate subducting below the North American Plate led to the creation of an island arc of volcanoes on the west coast of proto-North America between the late Devonian and Permian periods. Material accreted onto the western edge of North America, and mountains were raised to the east in Nevada.\nThe first phase of regional plutonism started 210\u00a0million years ago in the late Triassic and continued throughout the Jurassic to about 150\u00a0million years before present (BP), which led to the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith. The resulting rocks were mostly granitic in composition and lay about below the surface. Around the same time, the Nevadan orogeny built the Nevadan mountain range (also called the Ancestral Sierra Nevada) to a height of .\nThe second major pluton emplacement phase lasted from about 120\u00a0million to 80\u00a0million years ago during the Cretaceous. This was part of the Sevier orogeny.\nStarting 20\u00a0million years ago (in the Cenozoic) and lasting until 5\u00a0million years ago, a now-extinct extension of Cascade Range volcanoes erupted, bringing large amounts of igneous material to the area. These igneous deposits blanketed the region north of the Yosemite region. Volcanic activity persisted past 5\u00a0million years BP east of the current park borders in the Mono Lake and Long Valley areas.\nUplift and erosion.\nStarting 10\u00a0million years ago, vertical movement along the Sierra fault started to uplift the Sierra Nevada. Subsequent tilting of the Sierra block and the resulting accelerated uplift of the Sierra Nevada increased the gradient of western-flowing streams. The streams consequently ran faster and thus cut their valleys more quickly. Additional uplift occurred when major faults developed to the east, forming Owens Valley from Basin and Range-associated extensional forces. Sierra uplift accelerated again about two million years ago during the Pleistocene.\nThe uplifting and increased erosion exposed granitic rocks to surface pressures, resulting in exfoliation (responsible for the rounded shape of the many domes in the park) and mass wasting following the numerous fracture joint planes (cracks, especially vertical ones) in the now solidified plutons. Pleistocene glaciers further accelerated this process, while glacial meltwater transported the resulting talus and till from valley floors.\nNumerous vertical joint planes controlled where and how fast erosion took place. Most of these long, linear, and very deep cracks trend northeast or northwest and form parallel, often regularly spaced sets.\nGlacial sculpting.\nA series of glaciations further modified the region starting about 2 to 3\u00a0million years ago and ending sometime around 10,000 BP. At least four major glaciations occurred in the Sierra, locally called the Sherwin (also called the pre-Tahoe), Tahoe, Tenaya, and Tioga. The Sherwin glaciers were the largest, filling Yosemite and other valleys, while later stages produced much smaller glaciers. A Sherwin-age glacier was almost surely responsible for the major excavation and shaping of Yosemite Valley and other canyons in the area.\nGlacial systems reached depths of up to and left their marks. The longest glacier ran down the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne River for , passing well beyond Hetch Hetchy Valley. Merced Glacier flowed out of Yosemite Valley and into the Merced River Gorge. Lee Vining Glacier carved Lee Vining Canyon and emptied into Lake Russel (the much-enlarged ice age version of Mono Lake). Only the highest peaks, such as Mount Dana and Mount Conness, were not covered by glaciers. Retreating glaciers often left recessional moraines that impounded lakes such as the long Lake Yosemite (a shallow lake that periodically covered much of the floor of Yosemite Valley).\nEcology.\nHabitats.\nThe park has an elevation range from and contains five major vegetation zones: chaparral and oak woodland, lower montane forest, upper montane forest, subalpine zone, and alpine. Of California's 7,000 plant species, approximately 50% occur in the Sierra Nevada, and more than 20% within the park. The park contains suitable habitat for more than 160 rare plants, with rare local geologic formations and unique soils characterizing the restricted ranges many of these plants occupy.\nWith its scrubby sun-baked chaparral, stately groves of pine, fir, and sequoia, and expanses of alpine woodlands and meadows, Yosemite National Park preserves a Sierra landscape as it prevailed before Euro-American settlement. In contrast to surrounding lands, which have been significantly altered by logging, the park contains some of old-growth forest. Taken together, the park's varied habitats support over 250 species of vertebrates, which include fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.\nYosemite's western boundary has habitats dominated by mixed coniferous forests of ponderosa pine, sugar pine, incense cedar, white fir, Douglas fir, and a few stands of giant sequoia, interspersed by areas of black oak and canyon live oak. These habitats support relatively high wildlife diversity. Wildlife include black bear, coyote, raccoon, mountain kingsnake, Gilbert's skink, white-headed woodpecker, bobcat, river otter, gray fox, red fox, brown creeper, two species of skunk, cougar, spotted owl, and bats.\nAt higher elevations, the coniferous forests become purer stands of red fir, western white pine, Jeffrey pine, lodgepole pine, and the occasional foxtail pine. Fewer wildlife species tend to be found in these habitats because of their higher elevation and lower complexity. Animals include golden-mantled ground squirrel, chickaree, fisher, Steller's jay, water ouzel, hermit thrush, and American goshawk. Reptiles are not common, but include rubber boa, western fence lizard, and northern alligator lizard.\nAs the landscape rises, trees become smaller and more sparse, with stands broken by areas of exposed granite. These include lodgepole pine, whitebark pine, and mountain hemlock that, at highest elevations, give way to vast expanses of granite as the treeline is reached. The climate in these habitats is harsh, and the growing season is short, but species such as pika, yellow-bellied marmot, white-tailed jackrabbit, Clark's nutcracker, and black rosy finch are adapted to these conditions. Treeless alpine habitats are favored by Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep. This species is found in the Yosemite area only around Tioga Pass, where a small, reintroduced population exists.\nAt a variety of elevations, meadows provide important habitat. Animals come to feed on the green grasses and use the flowing and standing water found in many meadows. Predators follow these animals. The interface between meadow and forest is favored by many animal species because of the proximity of open areas for foraging and cover for protection. Species that are highly dependent upon meadow habitat include great grey owl, willow flycatcher, Yosemite toad, and mountain beaver.\nManagement issues.\nThe black bears of Yosemite were once famous for breaking into parked cars to steal food. They were an encouraged tourist sight for many years at the park's garbage dumps, where they congregated to eat garbage, and tourists gathered to photograph them. Increasing bear/human encounters and increasing property damage led to an aggressive campaign to discourage bears from interacting with people and their stuff. The open-air dumps were closed; trash receptacles were replaced with bear-proof receptacles; campgrounds were equipped with bear-proof food lockers so that people would not leave food in their vehicles. Because bears who show aggression towards people usually are destroyed, park personnel have come up with innovative ways to lead bears to associate humans and their property with experiences such as getting hit with a rubber bullet. As of 2001[ [update]], about 30 bears a year were captured and ear-tagged and their DNA sampled so that, when bear damage occurs, rangers can ascertain which bear was causing the problem.\nDespite the richness of high-quality habitats in Yosemite, the brown bear, California condor, and least Bell's vireo have become extinct in the park within historical time, and another 37 species currently have special status under either California or federal endangered species legislation. The most serious current threats include loss of a natural fire regime, exotic species, air pollution, habitat fragmentation, and climate change. On a more local basis, factors such as road kill and the availability of human food have affected some wildlife species.\nYosemite National Park has documented the presence of more than 130 non-native plant species within park boundaries. They were introduced into Yosemite following the migration of early Euro-American settlers in the late 1850s. Natural and human-caused disturbances, such as wildland fires and construction activities, have contributed to a rapid increase in the spread of non-native plants. Some of these species invade and displace the native plant communities, impacting park resources. Non-native plants can bring about significant ecosystem changes by altering native plant communities and the processes that support them. Some non-native species may cause an increase in fire frequency or increase the available soil nitrogen that allows other non-native plants to establish. Many non-native species, such as yellow star thistle (\"Centaurea solstitialis\"), can produce a long tap root that allows them to out-compete the native plants for available water.\nBull thistle (\"Cirsium vulgare\"), common mullein (\"Verbascum thapsus\"), and Klamath weed (\"Hypericum perforatum\") have been identified as noxious pests in Yosemite since the 1940s. More recently recognized species are yellow star thistle (\"Centaurea solstitialis\"), sweet clover (\"Melilot\" spp.), Himalayan blackberry (\"Rubus armeniacus\"), cut-leaved blackberry (\"Rubus laciniatus\") and large periwinkle (\"Vinca major\").\nIncreasing ozone pollution causes tissue damage to sequoia trees, making them more vulnerable to insect infestation and disease. Since the cones of these trees require fire-touched soil to germinate, historic fire suppression has reduced their ability to reproduce. Planned prescribed fires may help the germination issue.\nWildfires.\nIndigenous residents intentionally set small fires in the early 1860s and before to clear the ground of brush as part of their farming practices. These fires are comparable to contemporary practices such as controlled burns that are done by the U.S. Forest Service and others. Although it was not their primary reason, Yosemite Natives helped preserve biodiversity and resilience by lighting these small fires. Native Americans used fire as an early wildlife management tool to keep certain lands clear, resulting in more food for large animals and decreasing the chance of large forest fires, which now devastate forest ecosystems. Some early uncontrolled forest fires were set accidentally by the militia group led by Major John Savage when the group burned down the Ahwahneechee camp in an attempt to expel them. The house fires eventually spread to a large section of the forest, and the militia group ended up having to abandon their raid to save their own camp from the conflagration.\nForest fires clear the park of dead vegetation, making way for new growth. Small fires damage the income generated by tourism. During late July and early August 2018, the Valley and other sections of the park, temporarily closed due to the Ferguson Fire at its western boundary. The closing was the largest in almost thirty years.\nActivities.\nPublic access.\nYosemite National Park is open year-round, though certain roads close during snowy months, usually from November through May or June. Certain trails also close during winter, including The 4-Mile Trail and part of The Mist Trail.\nTraffic congestion in the valley is heavy during the peak summer season (June to August), and a free shuttle bus system operates in the valley. Parking in the valley during the summer is often full. Amtrak and the Yosemite Area Regional Transportation System (YARTS) provide public transit into Yosemite from four gateway communities: Merced, Fresno, Sonora, and Mammoth Lakes/Lee Vining. The Merced route provides service year-round. \nThe natural and cultural history of Yosemite Valley is presented at the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center, the adjoining Yosemite Museum, and the Nature Center at Happy Isles. The parks' two National Historic Landmarks are the Sierra Club's LeConte Memorial Lodge (Yosemite's first public visitor center), and the Ahwahnee Hotel. Camp 4 is on the National Register of Historic Places.\nHiking.\nOver of trails are available to hikers\u2014everything from an easy stroll to a challenging mountain hike, or backpacking trips. The popular Half Dome hike to the summit of Half Dome requires a permit whenever the cables are up (usually from Memorial Day weekend to Columbus Day). A maximum of 300 hikers, selected by lottery, are permitted to advance beyond the base of the subdome each day, including 225 day hikers and 75 backpackers.\nThe park can be divided into five sections\u2014Yosemite Valley, Wawona/Mariposa Grove/Glacier Point, Tuolumne Meadows, Hetch Hetchy, and Crane Flat/White Wolf. Numerous books describe park trails, while the National Park Service provides free information.\nBetween late spring and early fall, much of the park can be accessed for backpacking trips. All overnight trips into the back country require a wilderness permit and most require approved bear-resistant food storage.\nDriving.\nWhile some locations in Yosemite are accessible only on foot, other locations can be reached via road. The most famous road is Tioga Road.\nBicycles are allowed on the roads, but only of paved off-road trails are available in Yosemite Valley itself; mountain biking is not allowed.\nClimbing.\nRock climbing is an important part of Yosemite. In particular the valley is surrounded by summits such as Half Dome and El Capitan. Camp 4 is a walk-in campground in the Valley that was instrumental in the development of rock climbing as a sport, and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Climbers can generally be spotted in the snow-free months on anything from ten-foot-high (3\u00a0m) boulders to the face of El Capitan. Classes on rock climbing are offered there.\nTuolumne Meadows is well known for rock and mountain climbing.\nWinter activities.\nAway from the Valley, the park is snowed in during the winter months, with many roads closed. Downhill skiing is available at the Badger Pass Ski Area\u2014the oldest downhill skiing area in California, operating from mid-December through early April. Much of the park is open to cross-country skiing and snowshoeing, and backcountry ski huts are available. Wilderness permits are required for backcountry overnight ski trips.\nThe Bracebridge dinner is an annual holiday event, held since 1927 at the Ahwahnee Hotel, inspired by Washington Irving's descriptions of Squire Bracebridge and English Christmas traditions of the 18th century in his \"Sketch Book\". Between 1929 and 1973, the show was organized by Ansel Adams.\nOther.\nYosemite has 13 official campgrounds.\nBicycle rentals are available from spring through fall. Over of paved bike paths are available in Yosemite Valley. In addition, bicyclists can ride on roads. Helmets are required for children under 18 years of age. Off-trail riding and mountain biking are not permitted in the park.\nWater activities are plentiful during warmer months. Rafting can be done through the valley on the Merced River from late May to July. Swimming pools are available at Yosemite Lodge and Curry Village.\nIn popular culture.\nThe opening scenes of \"\" (1989) were filmed in Yosemite National Park. Films such as \"The Last of the Mohicans\" (1920) and \"Maverick\" (1994) have also been shot there. The 2014 documentary \"Valley Uprising\" is centered around Yosemite Valley and its history with an emphasis on climbing culture. The Academy Award-winning 2018 documentary \"Free Solo\" was filmed in Yosemite. The 2018 Travis Scott album Astroworld's twelfth song is titled \"Yosemite\". \"The Dawn Wall,\" a 2017 documentary, was filmed there. The park is a playable map in the park management simulation game, Jurassic World Evolution 2. \"Untamed\", a 2025 drama murder mystery series, though set almost entirely in Yosemite, was filmed in the Canadian province of British Columbia.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48666", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48666", "title": "Tocantins River", "text": "River in Brazil\nThe Tocantins River ( , Parkat\u00eaj\u00ea: \"Pyti\" [p\u0268\u02c8ti]) is a river in Brazil, the central fluvial artery of the country. In the Tupi language, its name means \"toucan's beak\" (\"Tuk\u00e3\" for \"toucan\" and \"Ti\" for \"beak\"). It runs from south to north for about . While sometimes included in definitions of the Amazon basin, the Tocantins is not a branch of the Amazon River, since its waters flow into the Atlantic Ocean via an eastern channel of the Amazon Delta, alongside those of the Amazon proper. It flows through four Brazilian states (Goi\u00e1s, Tocantins, Maranh\u00e3o, and Par\u00e1) and gives its name to one of Brazil's newest states, formed in 1988 from what was until then the northern portion of Goi\u00e1s.\nThe Tocantins is one of the largest clearwater rivers in South America.\nCourse.\nIt rises in the mountainous district known as the Pireneus, west of the Federal District, but its western tributary, the Araguaia River, has its extreme southern headwaters on the slopes of the Serra dos Caiap\u00f3s. The Araguaia flows before its confluence with the Tocantins, to which it is almost equal in volume. Besides its main tributary, the Rio das Mortes, the Araguaia has twenty smaller branches, offering many miles of canoe navigation. In finding its way to the lowlands, it breaks frequently into waterfalls and rapids, or winds violently through rocky gorges, until, at a point about above its junction with the Tocantins, it saws its way across a rocky dyke for in roaring cataracts.\nTwo other tributaries, called the Maranh\u00e3o and Paranatinga, collect an immense volume of water from the highlands which surround them, especially on the south and south-east. Between the latter and the confluence with the Araguaia, the Tocantins is occasionally obstructed by rocky barriers which cross it almost at a right angle.\nFauna.\nThe Tocantins basin (which includes the Araguaia River) is the home of several large aquatic mammals such as Amazonian manatee, Araguaian river dolphin and tucuxi, and larger reptiles such as black caiman, spectacled caiman and yellow-spotted river turtle.\nThe Tocantins River Basin has a high richness of fish species, although it is relatively low by Amazon basin standards. More than 350 fish species have been registered, including more than 175 endemics. The most species rich families are Characidae (tetras and allies), Loricariidae (pleco catfish and allies) and Rivulidae (South American killifish). While most species essentially are of Amazonian origin, there are also some showing a connection with the Paran\u00e1 and S\u00e3o Francisco rivers. The Tocantins and these two rivers flow in different directions, but all have their source in the Brazilian Plateau in a region where a low watershed allows some exchange between them. There are several fish species that migrate along the Tocantins to spawn, but this has been restricted by the dams. Following the construction of the massive Tucuru\u00ed Dam, the flow of the river changed. Some species have been adversely affected and there has been a substantial reduction in species richness in parts of the river.\nThe S\u00e3o Domingos karst in the upper Tocantins basin is home to an unusually high number of cavefish species (more than any other region in the Americas): \"Ancistrus cryptophthalmus\", several \"Ituglanis\" species, \"Pimelodella spelaea\", \"Aspidoras mephisto\", an undescribed \"Cetopsorhamdia\" species and \"Eigenmannia vicentespelaea\". The last is the only known cave-adapted knifefish and one of only two known non-catfish in caves of the South American mainland (the other is the characid \"Stygichthys typhlops\").\nIn its lower reaches, the Tocantins separates the Tocantins\u2013Araguaia\u2013Maranh\u00e3o moist forests ecoregion to the east from the Xingu\u2013Tocantins\u2013Araguaia moist forests ecoregion to the west. It acts as a barrier that prevents dispersal of flora and fauna between these ecoregions.\nDams.\nDownstream from the Araguaia confluence, in the state of Par\u00e1, the river used to have many cataracts and rapids, but they were flooded in the early 1980s by the artificial lake created by the Tucuru\u00ed Dam, one of the world's largest. When the second phase of the Tucuru\u00ed project was completed on November 30, 2010, a system of locks called Eclusas do Tucuru\u00ed was established with the goal of making a long extension of the river navigable.\nIn total there are seven dams on the river (Serra da Mesa dam, Cana Brava dam, S\u00e3o Salvador dam, Peixe Angical dam, Luiz Eduardo Magalh\u00e3es (Lajeado) dam, Estreito dam, and Tucuru\u00ed dam), of which the largest are the Tucuru\u00ed and the Serra da Mesa dam.\nGeology.\nThe flat, broad valleys, composed of sand and clay, of both the Tocantins and its Araguaia branch are overlooked by steep bluffs. They are the margins of the great sandstone plateaus, from elevation above sea-level, through which the rivers have eroded their deep beds. Around the estuary of the Tocantins the great plateau has disappeared, having been replaced by a part of the forest-covered, half submerged alluvial plain, which extends far to the north-east and west. The Par\u00e1 River, generally called one of the mouths of the Amazon, is only the lower reach of the Tocantins. If any portion of the waters of the Amazon runs round the southern side of the large island of Maraj\u00f3 into the river Para, it is only through tortuous, natural canals, which are in no sense outflow channels of the Amazon.\nDischarge.\nThe Tocantins River records a mean discharge rate of and a specific discharge rate of . The sub-basins have the following specific discharge rates: Tocantins (), Araguaia (), Par\u00e1 () and Guam\u00e1 ().\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48668", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48668", "title": "Perlite", "text": "Amorphous volcanic glass\nPerlite is an amorphous volcanic glass that has a relatively high water content, typically formed by the hydration of obsidian. It occurs naturally and has the unusual property of greatly expanding when heated sufficiently. It is an industrial mineral, suitable \"as ceramic flux to lower the sintering temperature\", and a commercial product useful for its low density after processing.\nProperties.\nPerlite softens when it reaches temperatures of . Water trapped in the structure of the material vaporises and escapes, and this causes the expansion of the material to 7\u201316 times its original volume. The expanded material is a brilliant white, due to the reflectivity of the trapped bubbles. Unexpanded (\"raw\") perlite has a bulk density around 1100\u00a0kg/m3 (1.1 g/cm3), while typical expanded perlite has a bulk density of about 30\u2013150\u00a0kg/m3 (0.03\u20130.150 g/cm3).\nSources and production.\nPerlite is a non-renewable resource. The world reserves of perlite are estimated at 700 million tonnes.\nThe confirmed resources of perlite existing in Armenia amount to 150 million m3, whereas the total amount of projected resources reaches up to 3 billion m3. Considering specific density of 1.1 ton/m3 confirmed reserves in Armenia amount to 165 million tons.\nOther reported reserves are: Greece - 120 million tonnes, Turkey, USA and Hungary - about 49-57 million tonnes.\nPerlite world production, led by China, Turkey, Greece, USA, Armenia and Hungary, summed up to 4.6 million tonnes in 2018.\nOsham hills of Patanvav, Gujarat, India are the only source of mineral Perlite in India.\nThe largest landslide in Icelandic history (the Lo\u00f0mundarskri\u00f0ur in Lo\u00f0mundarfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur) was assisted by the mountain's high perlite composition. Plans to mine and export the perlite in the mid 20th century fell through.\nUses.\nBecause of its low density and relatively low price (about US$150 per tonne of unexpanded perlite), many commercial applications for perlite have been developed.\nConstruction and manufacturing.\nIn the construction and manufacturing fields, it is used in lightweight plasters, concrete and mortar, insulation and ceiling tiles. It may also be used to build composite materials that are sandwich-structured or to create syntactic foam.\nPerlite filters are fairly common in filtering beer before it is bottled.\nSmall quantities of perlite are also used in foundries, cryogenic insulation, and ceramics (as a clay additive). It is also used by the explosives industry.\nAquatic filtration.\nPerlite is an excellent filtration aid and is used extensively as an alternative to diatomaceous earth. The popularity of perlite usage as a filter medium is growing considerably worldwide. Several products exist in the market to provide perlite based filtration. Several perlite filters and perlite media have met NSF-50 approval (Aquify PMF Series and AquaPerl), which standardizes water quality and technology safety and performance. Perlite can be safely disposed of through existing sewage systems, although some pool operators choose to separate the perlite using settling tanks or screening systems to be disposed of separately.\nBiotechnology.\nDue to thermal and mechanical stability, non-toxicity, and high resistance against microbial attacks and organic solvents, perlite is widely used in biotechnological applications. Perlite was found to be an excellent support for immobilization of biocatalysts such as enzymes for bioremediation and sensing applications.\nAgriculture.\nIn horticulture, perlite can be used as a soil amendment or alone as a medium for hydroponics or for starting cuttings. When used as an amendment, it has high permeability and low water retention and helps prevent soil compaction.\nCosmetics.\nPerlite is used in cosmetics as an absorbent and mechanical exfoliant. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSubstitutes.\nPerlite can be replaced for all of its uses. Substitutes include:\nOccupational safety.\nAs perlite contains silicon dioxide, goggles and silica filtering masks are recommended when handling large quantities.\nUnited States.\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for perlite exposure in the workplace as 15\u00a0mg/m3 total exposure and 5\u00a0mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 10\u00a0mg/m3 total exposure and 5\u00a0mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48669", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48669", "title": "Munich Olympic Massacre", "text": ""}
{"id": "48671", "revid": "12471094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48671", "title": "Downing College, Cambridge", "text": "College of the University of Cambridge\nDowning College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge and currently has around 950 students. Founded in 1800, it was the only college to be added to the university between 1596 and 1869, and is often described as the oldest of the new colleges and the newest of the old. Downing College was formed \"for the encouragement of the study of Law and Medicine and of the cognate subjects of Moral and Natural Science\", and has developed a reputation amongst Cambridge colleges for Law and Medicine.\nIn 2012, Downing was named one of the two most eco-friendly Cambridge colleges.\nHistory.\nUpon the death of Sir George Downing, 3rd Baronet in 1749, the wealth left by his grandfather, Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet, who served both Cromwell and Charles II and built 10 Downing Street (a door formerly from Number 10 is in use in the college), was applied by his will. Under this will, as he had no direct issue (he was legally separated from his wife), the family fortune was left to his cousin, Sir Jacob Downing, 4th Baronet, and if he died without heir, to three cousins in succession. If they all died without issue, the estates were to be used to found a college at Cambridge called Downing.\nSir Jacob died in 1764, and as the other named heirs had also died, the college should have come into existence then, but Sir Jacob's widow, Margaret, refused to give up the estates and the various relatives who were Sir George's legal heirs had to take costly and prolonged action in the Court of Chancery to compel her to do so. She died in 1778 but her second husband and the son of her sister continued to resist the heirs-at-law's action until 1800 when the court decided in favour of Sir George's will and George III granted Downing a royal charter, marking the official foundation of the college.\nBuildings.\nThe architect William Wilkins was commissioned by the trustees of the Downing estate, who included the Master of Clare College and St John's College and the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, to design the plan for the college. Wilkins, a disciple of the neo-classical architectural style, designed the first wholly campus-based college plan in the world based on a magnificent entrance on Downing Street reaching back to form the largest court in Cambridge, extending to Lensfield Road. But this was not to be.\nThe estate was much reduced by the suit in Chancery, and the grand plans failed. Much of the north side of what was then the Pembroke Leys was sold to the university and is now home to scientific buildings (\"The Downing Site\"). In fact, only limited East and West ranges were initially built, with the plans for a library and chapel on the south face of the college shelved.\nThe third side of the square was only completed in 1951 with the building of the college chapel. Where the fourth side would have been is now a large paddock (known simply as \"The Paddock\"), with many trees. Though not fully enclosed, the court formed before the Downing College is perhaps largest in Cambridge or Oxford (a title contested with Trinity College's Great Court).\nThe most recent building additions are the Howard Lodge accommodation, the Howard Building, and most recent of all the Howard Theatre which opened in 2010. These were sponsored by the Howard Foundation, and are located behind the main court around their own small garden. These facilities are used for conference and businesses gatherings outside the student term.\nHeong Gallery.\nThe Heong Gallery, opened in February 2016, is a modern and contemporary art gallery at Downing. It is named for Alwyn Heong, an alumnus of the college, who is a supporter of the visual arts. The conversion of a stables building by Caruso St John won a RIBA regional award.\nStudent life.\nDowning students remain prominent in the university world; in the past few years Cambridge Union Presidents, Blues captains, Law and Economic Society Presidents and more have hailed from the college. Downing has a particular reputation as the 'Law College'.\n\"The Griffin\" has been the undergraduate student magazine for over 100 years.\nSport.\nThe college fields teams in a range of sports including, men's football, men's and women's rugby, tennis and ultimate.\nDowning College Rugby Union Football Club is one of Cambridge\u2019s top teams, having secured victory in both the 2019 Cuppers and 2022 Shield competitions. The rise of Downing has also included a win in the Plate competition during the 2017/18 season.\nDowning College Boat Club is successful too, with the Women's first boat gaining Lents Headship of the river in 2004 and most recently in 2020, and the Mays Headship in the 2014 and 2015 May Bumps. The men's first boat has held the headship several times in the 1980s and 1990s (for example in 1994 to 1996) while gaining the Mays headship in 1996\nand the Lents Headship in 2014, on each occasion recognising the tradition of \"burning the boat\" (using an old wooden 8 oared boat), while the rowers of the winning boat jump the flames. They both currently hold positions at or near the top in both University bumps races [Lents and Mays].\nPeople associated with Downing.\nThe college is renowned for its strong legal tradition, being built up by Clive Parry, his pupil and successor John Hopkins and Graham Virgo. Legal notables who have been honorary fellows of the college include the late Sir John Smith, the pre-eminent criminal lawyer of his generation; Lord Collins of Mapesbury, the first solicitor to be appointed to the Court of Appeal and House of Lords; and Sir Robert Jennings, former President of the International Court of Justice.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48672", "revid": "35821677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48672", "title": "Turku", "text": "City in southwest Finland\nTurku ( ; ; , ) is a city in Finland and the regional capital of Southwest Finland. It is located on the southwestern coast of the country at the mouth of the River Aura. The population of Turku is approximately , while the metropolitan area has a population of approximately . It is the \u2013most populous municipality in Finland, and the third\u2013most populous urban area in the country after Helsinki and Tampere.\nTurku is Finland's oldest city. It is not known when Turku was granted city status. Pope Gregory IX first mentioned the town of \"Aboa\" in his \"Bulla\" in 1229, and this year is now used as the founding year of the city. Turku was the most important city in the eastern part (today's Finland) of the Kingdom of Sweden. After the Finnish War, Finland became an autonomous Grand Duchy of the Russian Empire in 1809, and Turku became the capital of the Grand Duchy. However, Turku lost its status as capital only three years later in 1812, when Tsar Alexander I of Russia decided to move the capital to Helsinki. It was only after the last great fire in 1827 that most government institutions were moved to Helsinki along with the Royal Academy of Turku, founded in 1640, which later became the University of Helsinki, thus consolidating Helsinki's position as the new capital. Turku was Finland's most populous city until the late 1840s and remains the regional capital, an important business and cultural centre, and a port.\nDue to its long history, Turku has been the site of many important events and, as a former capital, has had a major influence on Finnish history. Together with Tallinn, the capital of Estonia, Turku was named European Capital of Culture for 2011. In 1996, the city of Turku was declared the \"Christmas City\" of Finland. Turku has also been officially declared the Food Capital of Finland, as it is home to some of Finland's oldest and highest-quality restaurants, as well as a historically famous fish market held twice a year. Turku's canteen and caf\u00e9 culture has often been compared to French food culture, which is why Turku is sometimes known as the \"Paris of Finland\", and explains the existence of the Swedish saying \"Varf\u00f6r Paris, vi har ju \u00c5bo!\" (\"Why [should we concern ourselves with] Paris? We have Turku!\").\nTurku is a bilingual municipality with Finnish and Swedish as its official languages. The population consists of Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages, which is well above the national average.\nDue to its location, the Port of Turku is an important commercial and passenger seaport, with over three million passengers travelling to Stockholm and Mariehamn each year.\nNames and etymology.\nThe Finnish name \"Turku\" is related to the word \"torg\", which is found in the Scandinavian and modern Russian languages and means \"market\". Although direct borrowing from Old Russian \"t\u016drg\u016d\" (\u0442\u044a\u0440\u0433\u044a) is often assumed, it is more likely that the word spread through Varangian trade networks than through the presence of Russian merchants in Finland. According to linguist Kaisa H\u00e4kkinen, the word likely entered Finnish via Estonian, where still retains the meaning \"market\". Over time, the original meaning faded in Finnish, and by the Middle Ages, \"turku\" had become synonymous with the town's name. Today the word survives primarily in idiomatic expressions.\nFor the Swedish name, the most widely accepted interpretation holds that \"\u00c5bo\" is a simple combination of \"\u00e5\" (\"river, creek, large stream\") and \"bo\" (\"dwelling, settlement\"), referring to a settlement by the Aura River. Nevertheless, several alternative interpretations have been proposed. One suggests that the name derives from the personal name \"Abraham\", possibly in a shortened form such as \"Abo\". Another theory considers \"\u00c5bo\" a reinterpretation or translation of the Finnish name \"Turku\". A third possibility links the name to monastic naming traditions, particularly the Dominican monastery at \u00c5hus in Sk\u00e5ne, which may have served as a model when the Dominican order established a monastery in the area during the 13th century. Linguist Mikko Heikkil\u00e4 has also proposed that \u00c5bo developed from an earlier, unattested form \"Aborg\", which would have originally referred to the Vanhalinna hillfort in nearby Lieto.\nIn Finnish, the genitive of \"Turku\" is \"Turun\", meaning \"of Turku\". The Finnish names of organizations and institutes of Turku often begin with this word, as in \"Turun yliopisto\" for the University of Turku.\nHistory.\nTurku has a long history as Finland's largest city and occasionally as the administrative center of the country, but for the last two hundred years has been surpassed by Helsinki. The city's identity stems from its status as the oldest city in Finland and the country's first capital. Originally, the word \"Finland\" referred only to the area around Turku (hence the title, \"Finland Proper\" for the region).\nEarly history.\nSettlement in the Turku area is relatively recent, for southwestern Finland remained below sea level for an extended period due to the Ice Age. Due to tectonic uplift, the Turku region transformed from an outlying archipelago to a shoreline during 3000-2000 BCE. The area was densely populated during the Iron Age as it was the most important agricultural region in the region. Ancient cemeteries dating from 550 to 1150 have been discovered in the region. Some cemeteries were utilized during the initial migratory phase, while some were solely utilized during the Viking Age, and others were established in the 12th century. There are also remains of houses and villages and old forts from the late Iron Age.\nAccording to legend, the English bishop Henry baptised the first Finns into Christianity in 1150. However, the first Christian graves date from the 10th and 11th centuries, and the first archaeological evidence of a church dates from the 12th century. In the 11th century, the Turku region began to develop as a port. The oldest known road, H\u00e4meen h\u00e4rk\u00e4tie, connected to region and the Old Castle of Lieto to Tavastia in the 9th century at the latest. Early literary sources such as Al-Idrisi's world map from 1154 mention Turku.\nSwedish era.\nAccording to the permission granted by Pope Gregory IX on 23 January 1229, the episcopal seat was moved from Nousiainen to Koroinen, which is located near the current center of Turku. There is nothing to suggest that the actual city of Turku still existed at this point; however, the city was not founded on uninhabited land, but there were fields and probably also a peasant village. Since no reliable document has survived about the year of the city's founding, it has also been speculated that the city was founded in the 1280s or 1290s by the joint initiative of the king, the bishop, and the Dominican Convent of Saint Olaf, which itself was founded in 1249.\nTurku Cathedral was consecrated in 1300. During the Middle Ages, Turku was the seat of the Bishop of Turku (a title later upgraded to Archbishop of Turku), covering then the eastern half of the Kingdom of Sweden (most of the present-day Finland) until the 17th century. Even if Turku had no official capital status, it was for a long time the most important city in Finland as part of the trade and shipping of the Hanseatic League. In the 14th century, two-thirds of the city's burghers were German, but gradually the proportion of domestic burghers increased. In addition to the ecclesiastical authority, the only lawspeakers in Finland operated in Turku, and from the 15th century to the 16th century, the court exercising the country's highest judicial power, the Land Court of Turku, met in the city.\nAt the beginning of the 16th century, in connection with the disputes of the Kalmar Union, the Danes destroyed the city twice, in 1509 under the leadership of Admiral Otte Rud and in 1522 under the leadership of Admiral S\u00f8ren Norby, until Erik Fleming's troops expelled the Danes from Finland in 1523. After the beginning of peace, Gustav Vasa, who had just become king, thoroughly got to know different parts of his kingdom, the center of the king's first visit to Finland being Turku Castle, where he lived during his visit. The new king also brought with him the religious reformation, and the first to preach the new doctrine was Petrus S\u00e4rkilahti. S\u00e4rkilahti's student Mikael Agricola, who is known as the \"father of Finnish literary language\", continued the religious reform first as the headmaster of the cathedral school and later as the Bishop of Turku. Duke John (later John III), the son of Gustav Vasa, received the title of Duke of Finland and ruled his territory from Turku Castle before becoming next king of Sweden after his brother, Eric XIV.\nIn the aftermath of the War against Sigismund, the city was the site of the \u00c5bo Bloodbath. After that, the 17th century began as more peaceful period for Turku, when the focus was mainly on emphasizing Turku's position as the center of a wide area by establishing numerous new administrative and school institutions. In 1640, the first university in Finland, the Royal Academy of Turku, was founded in Turku by order of Queen Christina. This project was also supported by Count Per Brahe, the Governor General of Finland, and Isaacus Rothovius, the Bishop of Turku. Turku was also the meeting place for the States of Finland in 1676.\nGrand Duchy of Finland (Russian rule).\nAfter the Finnish War, Sweden ceded Finland to Imperial Russia at the Treaty of Fredrikshamn in 1809. There was no resistance of any kind in Turku when the Russians marched into the city in October 1809 in connection with the Finnish War. Despite the occupation, life in Turku continued peacefully. The Court of Appeal of Turku continued its session when the Russians arrived, and later in the spring Jacob Tengstr\u00f6m, the Archbishop of Turku and Finland, and the teaching staff of the Turku Academy swore an oath of loyalty to their new ruler.\nTurku became briefly the official capital, but soon lost the status to Helsinki, as Emperor Alexander I felt that Turku was too far from Russia and too aligned with Sweden to serve as the capital of the Grand Duchy of Finland. The change officially took place in 1812. The government offices that remained in Turku were finally moved to the new capital after the Great Fire of Turku, which destroyed a large portion of the city in 1827. After the fire, a new and safer city plan was drawn up by German architect Carl Ludvig Engel, who had also designed the new capital, Helsinki. The new city plan, based on a regular grid plan, was more spacious and fire-safe than before, and after the reconstruction, Turku was one of the most unified architecture in Europe. Turku remained the largest city in Finland for another twenty years.\nIn the middle of the 19th century, Turku was, after Helsinki, the most important craft city in Finland, but the Industrial Revolution with steam and electric machines was experienced in Turku only around 1900. The First World War provided a boost to the city's industry, as the export difficulties affected the wood industry, which Turku didn't have much of, and it was easy to get much-needed raw materials from neutral Sweden.\nAfter independence.\nIn 1918, a new university, the \u00c5bo Akademi \u2013 the only Swedish-language university in Finland \u2013 was founded in Turku. Two years later, the Finnish-language University of Turku was founded alongside it. These two universities are the second and third to be founded in Finland, both by private donations.\nIn the 20th century, Turku was called \"Finland's gateway to the West\" by historians such as Jarmo Virmavirta. The city enjoyed good connections with other Western European countries and cities, especially since the 1940s with Stockholm across the Gulf of Bothnia. In the 1960s, Turku became the first Western city to sign a twinning agreement with Leningrad in the Soviet Union, leading to greater inter-cultural exchange and providing a new meaning to the city's 'gateway' function. After the fall of communism in Russia, many prominent Soviets came to Turku to study Western business practices, among them Vladimir Putin, then Leningrad's deputy mayor.\nAs for architecture in the city, both the body of architectural styles as well as the prevalent way of living have experienced significant changes in the 20th century. While having survived relatively intact throughout the years of war 1939\u20131945, the city faced increasing changes in the 1950s and 1960s due to rising demands for apartments, the eagerness to rebuild, and most of all the new development of infrastructure (especially increased automobile traffic). The wooden one- to two-story houses that were the dominant mode of building in the city were mostly demolished in the 1950s and 1960s to both enable more efficient building and to ease vehicle traffic. This resulted in the destruction of buildings that were, in later decades, seen as beautiful and worth saving. Some individual buildings remain controversial to this day when it comes to their demolition in the decades after the war. For example, the building of Hotel Phoenix that stood on corner of the Market Square was torn down to make way for a large, multistory apartment building in 1959. The building was significant both for its location and history: having stood on one of the most valuable lots in the city center since 1878, the building had, for example, served as the first main building of the University of Turku. Other buildings whose demolition was seen as scandalous, either already at the time of action or proved to be so in later years, include The Nobel House (subject of the very first photograph ever taken in Finland) and the building of Old Hotel B\u00f6rs which was built in jugendstil in 1909 by Frithiof Strandell.\nGeography.\nSituated at the mouth of the Aura River in the south-western corner of Finland, Turku covers an area of on both banks of the river. The eastern side, where Turku Cathedral is located, is the older and original centre. It is popularly known as \"t\u00e4l pual jokke\" (\"this side of the river\"). The western side, where Turku Castle is located, is the newer part. It is called \"tois pual jokke\" (\"the other side of the river\"). In modern times, both banks of the Aura River are equally the centre of the city.\nThere are ten bridges over the Aura river in Turku. The oldest of the current bridges is Auransilta, which was constructed in 1904. The newest bridge is Kirjastosilta ('library bridge'), a pedestrian-only bridge built in 2013. The \"F\u00f6ri\", a small ferry that transports pedestrians and bicycles across the river without payment, is a well-known feature of the city.\nAdministrative subdivisions.\nThe city is divided into 78 districts and nine wards. These do not operate as units of local government. However, some social programmes are district-based, especially in the eastern part of the city, where unemployment is high in some areas. The largest populated districts are Varissuo and Runosm\u00e4ki. By area, Kakskerta and Paattinen are the largest districts.\nAs many of the small neighbouring municipalities from the north and south of the city were annexed during the mid-20th century, Turku is today shaped like an elongated pear. The city centre and most of the suburban areas lie in the middle, separated from the less densely populated northern rural areas by the Turku bypass, that forms part of European route E18. Islands such as Ruissalo, Hirvensalo and Kakskerta, forming the southern part of the city, are also sparsely populated and mostly contain summer residences, with the exception of some districts in Hirvensalo which are currently growing into upper-middle-class suburbs.\nClimate.\nSituated by the Baltic Sea and sheltered by the islands of the Archipelago Sea, Turku has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"). Like much of southern Finland, the city experiences warm summers, with temperatures ranging up to 30\u00a0\u00b0C (86\u00a0\u00b0F), and relatively cold winters with frequent snowfall. The warmest month of the year is July, with an average temperature of , whereas the coldest month is February. The average year-round temperature is around . Winter usually starts in early December, and spring in late March.\nPrecipitation in Turku averages a year. The rainiest month of the year is August, when the city receives on average of rainfall. In April, the driest month of the year, the figure is only . The average air pressure at sea level is , with little variance throughout the year.\nOperational since 1955, the city's weather station is located at an altitude of at Turku Airport. The weather in the city itself is affected by the proximity of the sea, so the wintertime temperatures are often milder than those measured at the airport. The moderating impact of the sea helps oak maple and ash trees, which are quite rare elsewhere in Finland, to thrive by the areas along the shoreline and in the archipelago.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Turku has inhabitants, making it the most populous municipality in Finland. The Turku metropolitan area has a population of , and the larger Turku sub-region has a population of . This makes it the third-largest region in Finland after Helsinki and Tampere. Turku is home to 4% of Finland's population. 17 per cent of the population has a foreign background, which is almost twice as high as the national average. However, it is lower than in the major Finnish cities of Helsinki, Espoo or Vantaa.\nThe city's population density is 794.4 inhabitants per square kilometre. The median age in the city is 42.1, lower than the national average of 43.6.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Turku is officially bilingual, with both Finnish and Swedish as official languages. As of 2024[ [update]], the majority of the population, persons (), spoke Finnish as their first language. The number of Swedish speakers was persons () of the population. Foreign languages were spoken by of the population. As English and Swedish are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon.\nMore than a hundred different languages are spoken as mother tongues in Turku, and citizens from more than 130 countries live in the city. The people of Turku also represent all major religions. The most commonly spoken foreign languages are Russian (1.9%), Arabic (1.8%), Albanian (1.2%), Kurdish (1.2%), Ukrainian (0.9%) and Somali (0.9%).\nImmigration.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there were 35,088 people with a foreign background living in Turku, or 17% of the population. There were 31,223 residents who were born abroad, or 15% of the population. The number of foreign citizens in Turku was 21,665.\nThe relative share of immigrants in Turku's population is well above the national average. Moreover, the city's new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years.\nMost foreign-born citizens came from the former Soviet Union, Iraq, Estonia, Sweden, Iran, the former Yugoslavia, Ukraine and Somalia.\nReligion.\nIn 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 56.3% of the population of Turku. Other religious groups accounted for 3.3% of the population. 40.4% of the population had no religious affiliation.\nEconomy.\nThe Turku region boasts 22,000 enterprises, two universities and four polytechnics. The city has also business branches with local expertise in the maritime, life sciences, information technology, entertainment, biotechnology, and sustainable development industries. The city's economic hub revolves around the Port of Turku and other service-oriented sectors. The dockyard of Meyer Turku and the maritime business cluster reign as the leading industrial employer in the area. The city also boasts a high-tech centre in the Turku Science Park area, with a growing role in the information technology and biotechnology industries in recent decades.\nThe Turku region hosts the business service centre \"Potkuri\" and the start-up community \"SparkUp\". In addition, the \"West Finland Film Commission\" works to promote favourable operating conditions for companies in the AV industry and for the production of films and TV series in the Turku region. \"Turku Future Technologies\" is a development centre and research and innovation network supported by eight Finnish universities. \"Smart Chemistry Park\" is a collaborative platform and network for the bio- and circular economy as well as the chemical industry in Raisio. Meanwhile, \"Blue Industry Park\" is a growing cluster for maritime and manufacturing industries.\nAt least the following major Finnish companies have their corporate headquarters in Turku: HKScan and Hesburger. Other major companies which have operations in Turku include Bayer, Fl\u00e4kt Woods, Meyer Werft, Orion Corporation and W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4.\nCulture.\nCultural venues in Turku include several museums, theatres, cinemas, art galleries, and music. Turku offers a variety of cultural events. The most important one is the declaration of Christmas Peace on 24 December in the Old Great Square. The tradition is about 700 years old. Other notable events include the Medieval Market, the Music Festival, the Book Fair, the Film Day, the Animated Film Festival TAFF, the Jazz Festival, the Paavo Nurmi Games of athletics, the Ruisrock rock festival, the Down by the Laituri music festival and the New Performance Turku Biennale.\nTurku was the European Capital of Culture in 2011, and the city council has approved numerous projects to boost the city's image in preparation for that status.\nMedieval buildings.\nAccording to archaeological evidence, the construction of Turku began in the late 13th Century. However, only a few of its medieval buildings have survived to the present day. The primary factor was the Great Fire in 1827, which decimated three quarters of the city. Turku Cathedral, constructed in the 13th century, is one of the oldest still-functioning buildings. It is also Finland's only medieval basilica church. Another surviving edifice from the medieval era is Turku Castle, which was established in the 1280s and underwent several expansions in the 15th century. Only the ruins remain of the bishop's church in Koroistenniemi, Koroinen, but the white cross serves as a reminder of the bishop's castle that existed centuries ago. Qwensel House, the oldest wooden house in Turku dating back to the 18th century, has been converted into a museum. No other medieval buildings have survived to the present day.\nMuseums.\nMost of Turku's museums are situated beside the Aura River. The Turku Art Museum is housed in a granite castle, with exhibits of both classical and contemporary art. Turku Cathedral and its museum, located on the banks of the Aura River, provide information about the history and artifacts of the church. Adjacent to the cathedral, Ett Hem, a 19th-century bourgeois residence, and the Sibelius Museum, which displays a collection of musical instruments, can be found. Aboa Vetus &amp; Ars Nova presents a fusion of medieval ruins and modern art. On Vartiovuori, lies the Luostarinm\u00e4ki Craftsman Museum, which represents a wooden housing locality dating back to the 18th century.\nThe Pharmacy Museum and Qwensel House hold the distinction of being Turku's earliest wooden abode, offering a glimpse into the bourgeois life of the 18th century and a 19th-century drugstore. The contemporary art museum, WAM, is named after Turku's sculptor, W\u00e4in\u00f6 Aaltonen. Additionally, the Biological Museum serves as a diorama museum covering Finnish wildlife and fauna. Forum Marinum is a maritime museum of exhibits and museum vessels, including the frigate \"Suomen Joutsen\" and the last commercial steam ship in Scandinavia \"MS Bore\". Turku Castle is an attraction with over 700 years of history.\nTheatres.\nThere are half a dozen theatres situated in Turku, with the largest being the Turku City Theatre. Located in the city centre on the banks of the River Aura, it offers a varied programme of classical and contemporary drama. Other theatres in Turku include Linnateatteri, \u00c5bo Svenska Teater, TEHDAS and Turun Nuori Teatteri, in addition to smaller establishments such as the puppet theatre, Aura of Puppets, and the summer theatres, Samppalinna and Vartiovuori.\nMusic.\nTurku is a music hub that provides a variety of musical experiences. The Turku Philharmonic Orchestra is the oldest ensemble in Finland, tracing its origins to the establishment of the \"Turun Soitannollinen Seura\" in 1790. The orchestra has a reputation for its classical repertoire and frequently conducts concerts throughout Finland.\nTurku boasts a selection of music festivals, catering to diverse tastes and moods. The longest running rock festival in Finland, Ruisrock, is held on the island of Ruissalo. Aura Fest is a new city-based festival, set to debut in the summer of 2022. DBTL is another city festival, situated along the banks of the Aura River. Turku Jazz is an annual festival in July. August sees the Turku Music Festival, dedicated to classical music.\nAssociation and city rivalry.\nThe Finnish people associate Turku with its \"old and historic\" charm. Established in 1957, \"Turkuseura-\u00c5bosamfundet ry\" is a bilingual, politically neutral historical society with 2,200 members. Its main focus is to cherish Turku's culture and dialect, and to preserve local history and traditions. The society strives to promote and enhance Turku's positive image.\nTurku and Tampere are two cities in Finland that exhibit a cordial rivalry through humorous banter. Humorous topics include Tampere's traditional dish, \"mustamakkara\", Turku's Aura River, and distinct regional accents. Both cities boast excellent culinary scenes, which attract food lovers. Since 1997, students from Tampere have annually visited Turku to participate in the custom of leaping on the market square. This lively event is thought to nudge the city towards the Baltic Sea and counteract post-glacial rebound.\nSports.\nTurku has two major football teams: FC Inter, playing in the top national league, \"Veikkausliiga\", and TPS in \"Ykk\u00f6nen\", one level below. Both teams are based at Veritas Stadion in Kupittaa.\nThe HC TPS is an ice hockey team that competes in the top level, \"SM-liiga\", and has secured 11 national championships. They play their games at Gatorade Center in Artukainen.\nThe city also hosts the annual Paavo Nurmi Marathon, named after the legendary Turku-born runner Paavo Nurmi.\nTurku is home to the Eagles Rugby Football Club, a division champion affiliated with Suomen Rugbyliitto, which trains and competes at Impivaara Jalkapallonhalli and Kuppitaanpuisto.\nTurku Titans is a lacrosse club with a rich history, having scored three silver and one gold medals in Finland's national lacrosse league. The Titans' women's team has also achieved success. Furthermore, the city hosted the FIL U19 2012 World Lacrosse Championships.\nFinnish tennis player Jarkko Nieminen, from the nearby county of Masku, is among the most accomplished players in Finland.\nGovernment and politics.\nTurku is an important administrative centre, being the regional capital, and hosting the seat of the Archbishop of Finland and a Court of Appeal. Minna Arve has been the mayor of Turku since 2017. Since August 2021 her role as the mayor has been an elected office instead of a hired position.\nThe city council of Turku has 67 seats. Following the 2021 municipal election, the council seats are allocated in the following way: National Coalition Party 16 seats, Social Democrats 13, Left Alliance 11, Green League 10, True Finns 9, Centre Party 3, Swedish People's Party 3, Movement Now 1, and Christian Democrats 1. The current chair of the city board is Sini Ruohonen from National Coalition Party.\nResults of the 2019 Finnish parliamentary election in Turku:\nTransport.\nFor a city of its size, Turku has a moderate public transport network of bus routes, which is comparable to the bus network of similar-sized Tampere. The bus network is managed and supervised by the \"Turku City Region's Public Transport Committee\" (F\u00d6LI) (, ), and is operated mainly by private companies. Bus traffic to and in the neighbouring municipalities of Kaarina, Lieto, Naantali, Raisio and Rusko are also handled by F\u00d6LI. The bus rates are the same when traveling within these municipalities.\nRail traffic to and from Turku is handled by the Finnish national carrier, VR. The number of services has fallen and only the railways towards Tampere and Helsinki are now in use. The railway stations currently used for passenger traffic are the Turku Central railway station in Pohjola, and two smaller stations in Kupittaa and the Port of Turku.\nThere is no local rail traffic at the moment, as the city's popular tram services were discontinued in 1972, and the various local railway lines to neighbouring towns and municipalities were all abolished during the late 20th century. However, there are plans for a light rail system in the Turku region in the near future. According to the current estimate the tramway's construction will start in 2026 and finish in 2031. The first route will be constructed between Turku Port\u2212City Centre\u2212Varissuo residential area. Route's estimated length is 11 kilometers (6.8 miles) with 17 stops.\nThe first outdoor inclined elevator, the Funicular, is located in Turku. The elevator offers unimpeded access to Kakolanm\u00e4ki hill, where there is no other public transport. The Funicular has two stations, and the travelling time between the stations is approximately one minute. It is possible to hop on and off at both stations, and travelling is free of charge. The elevator's rail is about 130 metres long, and the height difference between the two stations is about 30 metres.\nThe State of Finland has announced plans to support Espoo with 30% of full expenses on a new metro rail, the Regional Council of Southwest Finland is going to use this as a test case for a new light rail network in Turku.\nThe Turku Bus Station and the Turku Central railway station are currently located in different places. The City of Turku is planning to combine these two in a new greater station complex in the near future. This new travel center will consist of a hotel and several shopping estates. This center will connect all public transportation from commuter trains to long-distance buses.\nTurku's most significant highways for traffic are Highway 1 leading to Helsinki; Highway 10 leading to H\u00e4meenlinna; Highway 9 leading to Tampere, Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, Kuopio and Joensuu; Highway 8 leading to Pori, Vaasa and Oulu; and the Turku Ring Road, which protrudes circumferentially from Turku.\nTurku Airport is located to the north of the city centre, partly in the neighbouring municipality of Rusko. The airport is served by six passenger airlines, including airBaltic and SAS Scandinavian, and one cargo airline.\nThere are also daily ferry services from the Port of Turku to Sweden and \u00c5land, operated by Silja Line and Viking Line. These are something of a Finnish cultural tradition (see ruotsinlaiva), and people often travel long distances across Finland to Turku just to take a cruise across the Gulf of Bothnia.\nThe Archipelago Sea boat traffic is handled by, among others, SS Ukkopekka, an old steamship that cruises on the route Turku-Naantali-Turku.\nTurku is the only city in Finland to have three long-distance railway stations: Turku Central, Turku Harbour (see \"Port of Turku\"), and Kupittaa.\nEducation.\nTurku has a longer educational history than any other Finnish city: the first school in the city, the Cathedral School, was founded along with Turku Cathedral in the late 13th century. The first university in Finland, the Royal Academy of Turku (now University of Helsinki), was established in the city in 1640. In 1820, the first school in Finland conforming to the Bell-Lancaster method was founded in Turku with the aim of making primary education more inclusive to the lower classes.\nTurku is home to about 40 000 higher education students. There are two universities and several \"polytechnics\" in the town.\nThe Finnish University of Turku is the fourth-largest university in Finland (22,300 students in 2022), as measured by student enrollment, and one of the oldest as well, having been founded in 1920. Approximately 9% of all students are international students. \u00c5bo Akademi, founded in 1918 as the second university of Finland, is one of the country's two Swedish-language universities. Turku School of Economics merged with The University of Turku in 2010, and \u00c5bo handelsh\u00f6gskola, its Swedish counterpart, with \u00c5bo Akademi in 1980. The central hospital of Turku, Turku University Hospital, is affiliated with the university and is used as a teaching hospital.\nTurku University of Applied Sciences (TUAS) is the second largest polytechnic in Finland (12,000 students in 2022) after Metropolia University of Applied Sciences. TUAS consists of six campus buildings in Turku and one separate campus in town of Salo. Bachelors of Business Administration, Social Services and Health Care Nursing study at Salo IoT Campus. TUAS offers Bachelor and Master studies in over 70 fields of education.\nAlso, Novia University of Applied Sciences and Diaconia University of Applied Sciences have campuses in the town.\nTurku is one of only two cities in Finland to have an established international school (the other city being Helsinki). Turku International School, located in the eastern district of Varissuo, has been operating since 2003. By an agreement signed between the city of Turku and the University of Turku, Turun normaalikoulu takes care of the teaching in the international school.\nMedia.\nThe most widely read newspaper of Turku and the area around it is the daily regional morning newspaper \"Turun Sanomat\", which has a readership of over 70% of the population every day. \"\u00c5bo Underr\u00e4ttelser\", a Swedish-language newspaper published in Turku, is the oldest newspaper in Finland, having been published since 1824. The free-of-charge \"Turkulainen\" newspaper was also among the most popular newspapers, together with the local edition of \"Metro International\" and the national evening tabloid \"Ilta-Sanomat\". \"Turkulainen\" was founded in 1958, but the newspaper has been on a publishing break since 2020. There are also a number of local newspapers such as \"Kulmakunta\" (for the eastern suburbs of Turku, including Varissuo and Lauste), and \"Rannikkoseutu\" (for the area around the neighbouring cities of Raisio and Naantali).\nThe first Finnish newspaper, \"Tidningar Utgifne Af et S\u00e4llskap i \u00c5bo\", in Swedish, was begun in Turku in 1771, as well as the first Finnish-language newspaper, \"Suomenkieliset Tieto-Sanomat\", which was begun in 1775.\nThe newspaper \"Turun Sanomat\" also operated a regional television station, called \"Turku-TV\", but the station stopped operating in 2012. The Finnish national broadcaster \"Yleisradio\" screens local news, daily from Monday to Friday, for the residents of southwestern Finland (including the regions of Southwest Finland and Satakunta). All Finnish national TV channels are viewable and national radio channels audible in the Turku area. In addition, a number of local radio stations, e.g. \"Auran Aallot\", \"Radio Sata\" and \"Radio Robin Hood\" are operational. Local public service radio stations are \"Yle Turun Radio\" broadcasting in Finnish (the regional version of Yle Radio Suomi) and \"Yle Vega \u00c5boland\" broadcasting in Swedish (the regional version of Yle Vega).\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nTurku is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn March 2022, Turku suspended the agreement with Saint Petersburg, Russia (twinning since 1953) due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nCo-operation agreements.\nTurku has co-operation agreements with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48673", "revid": "19652573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48673", "title": "Calvert County, Maryland", "text": "County in Maryland, United States\nCalvert County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. As of the 2020 United States census, its population was 92,783. Its county seat is Prince Frederick. The county's name is derived from the family name of the Barons of Baltimore, the proprietors of the English Colony of Maryland. Calvert County is included in the Washington\u2013Arlington\u2013Alexandria metropolitan statistical area. It occupies the Calvert Peninsula, which is bordered on the east by Chesapeake Bay and on the west by the Patuxent River. The county has one of the highest median household incomes in the United States. It is one of the older counties in Maryland, after St. Mary's, Kent, and Anne Arundel Counties. The county is part of the Southern Maryland region of the state.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn 1608, Captain John Smith was the first European to sail past what is now Calvert County while exploring the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay. On his map, he accurately represented the Patuxent River, as well as several Native-American villages. The area was described as wooded and had been occupied by the Patuxent people, who were overall peaceful to the early Europeans. Their diet was composed of fish from the river and corn cultivated in man-made clearings with a supplement of game from the forests. These clearings were very desirable, and conflict occurred when the settlers attempted to seize these areas from the Native Americans. Leonard Calvert, the first governor of Maryland, organized troops of armed men in 1639 to protect the settlers.\nThe first written mention of European settlers on the northern shore of the Patuxent River is found in the records of the Maryland Assembly in 1642. A Henry Bishop \"stood up in the Assembly and exhibited himself as a Burgess of St. Leonard's and pleaded that it be acknowledged as a Hundred\" near St. Leonard's Creek. This shows that European settlement along the river and its tributaries had been taking place for several years already.\nBy 1646, the colonists had spread all along the Patuxent River and along the bay side of Calvert County. Most of the transportation of goods and people took place on the water, as the land was occupied by dense forests. Large creeks were navigated by sailing boats, and plantations used their wharves to ship goods. Ferry services were set up to cross the river and the bay, with rates fixed by law.\nCreation of Charles County.\nThe county was originally named Charles County (much larger and unrelated to the present-day Charles County) in 1650 when Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore established it with Robert Brooke as its \"Commander\". It was named after Charles I of England. At the time, the new county included the current area of Calvert County, as well as the southern and western shores of the Patuxent River up to its headwaters. The county seat was called Calverton (sometimes called Battle Town) and was located on the north shore at the mouth of Battle Creek until 1725. In 1658, the county was renamed Calvert County. It also included all of Prince George's County and parts of Montgomery County.\nPuritans coming from Virginia had settled in Anne Arundel County and overflowed into Calvert County. All new settlers in Maryland were required to take an oath of allegiance to Lord Baltimore per the \"Conditions of Plantation\". This was a major point of tension between the Puritan settlers and Lord Baltimore. The civil war was ongoing in Britain, where the Puritans had gained control. Oliver Cromwell dismissed Parliament there and assumed the role of Lord Protector. In 1652, he sent a force of 750 men to subdue the plantations of the Chesapeake Bay under the new government. Virginia and Maryland surrendered to the Puritans and Robert Brooke cooperated with the Puritans.\nOn July 3, 1654, Lord Baltimore abolished Charles County and removed all authority from Brooke. He re-established the county as Calvert County with the same territory, but the Puritan Assembly was in power and changed the name to Patuxent County on October 20, 1654, after the Patuxent River and to remove any connection with the Calvert family. The county kept this name under the Puritan regime until 1658, when the name of Calvert County was restored.\nAccording to the local \"Trail of Souls Project\", in 1860, 4,609 enslaved people and 1,841 free people of color lived there, with a total county population around 10,000 people.\nOnce made up primarily of farms and tobacco fields, the county's agriculture transformed in the mid-1990s. The prices for tobacco were declining. The State of Maryland instituted a tobacco buyout program, which offered farmers to transition to different crops and away from tobacco; 195 contracts were signed between Calvert County farmers and property owners and the Southern Maryland Agricultural Development Commission. The funds were used for infrastructure and equipment upgrades. Today, the county produces fruits, vegetables, and meat, as well as other crops.\nThe county has become a fast-growing exurban neighbor of Washington, DC. Many home prices have nearly quadrupled in the past decade, with many four-bedroom homes in the northern half of the county costing over $1,000,000. The popular weekend resort towns of Solomons, Chesapeake Beach, and North Beach are notable.\nThe county has numerous properties on the National Register of Historic Places.\nPolitics and government.\nCounty government.\nCalvert County is governed by a board composed of five elected county commissioners, the traditional form of county government in Maryland. They meet in Prince Frederick, the county seat.\nEmergency services.\nCalvert County Fire, Rescue, and EMS Stations include:\nUntil 2018, Calvert County was the only county in Maryland that still had a 100% all-volunteer fire, rescue, and EMS service. On January 20, 2018, the Calvert County Board of County Commissioners approved a phased-in approach of hiring paramedics, starting in fiscal year 2019.\nThe county also maintains a Sheriff's Office, the Calvert County Sheriff\u2019s Office was established in 1654, and is the primary law enforcement agency for Calvert County. The current sheriff is Ricky Cox. The agency is supported by the Maryland State Police, and Maryland Natural Resources Police.\nNational politics.\nIn the early 19th century, in the contests between the Hamiltonian Federalist and Jeffersonian Democratic-Republican parties of the First Party System, it backed the Federalists four out of seven times, only going for the Democratic-Republicans in their greatest landslides of 1804 and 1816, as well as the 1820 election in which President James Monroe ran effectively unopposed.\nIn the 1824 election, which began the second party system, the people of Calvert County voted for John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson, who went on to help found the Democratic Party before the 1828 election. Until the Civil War, Calvert County voted only for the candidates of the Whig Party, the Democrat's primary opposition. After that party's dissolution in the early 1850s, it supported the Nativist Know-Nothing party in 1856 and the largely Whiggish Constitutional Union party in 1860.\nIn the Civil War election of 1864, Calvert swung sharply along with the rest of southern Maryland to give over 90% of the vote to Democratic challenger George McClellan, and again to the Democratic standard-bearer Horatio Seymour four years later. The brief Democratic era was likely due to strong Confederate sympathy in southern Maryland.\nIn presidential elections, Calvert County has historically and at present leaned strongly towards the Republican Party. It was won by that party in every election from 1884 to 1936 \u2013 with the sequence broken in 1940 due to local support for Franklin Delano Roosevelt's efforts at helping Britain in World War II \u2013 and in modern times, no Democratic presidential nominee has won Calvert County since Jimmy Carter did so in 1976.\nSince then, Calvert County has remained mostly aligned with the Republican Party. It briefly turned in favor of the Democrats in the dealigned 1960s and 70s, after which it became a Republican stronghold in the 1980s. In modern elections, it leans Republican though Democrats have gained votes. President Joe Biden came only 5% from winning the county in 2020, the closest any Democrat has come since Jimmy Carter carried it in 1976.\nIt is part of the 5th Congressional District, along with much of southern Maryland. The current representative is Democratic former House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which (38%) are covered by water. It is the smallest county in Maryland by land area and third-smallest by total area. The county also includes five islands: Solomons Island, Broomes Island, Buzzard Island, Hog Island, and Molly's Leg.\nThe county's coast along the Chesapeake Bay is a long, relatively smooth bight, a feature that is unique in the Chesapeake Bay.\nGeology.\nA geological formation spanning across Maryland, Virginia, and Delaware is named after the county, the Calvert Formation. It is visible within the Calvert Cliffs State Park, where it is exposed in cliffs. Located on the western shore of the county, the Calvert Cliffs are famous for their fossil deposits and are a popular collecting location of marine vertebrates, shark teeth, and birds, as well as freshwater and marine turtles and tortoises. Some crocodile teeth have also been found, which indicates that they may have been nesting in the sands at the time the formation was created.\nThe county landscape is composed of three platforms - the Talbot Terrace, the Wicomico Terrace, and the Sunderland Terrace (also known as the Ridge). These terraces correspond to three periods where the water level rose and later fell, leaving sand deposits. The oldest was created during the Miocene age, when the entire county peninsula found itself underwater. Marine deposits, clay, and mud containing seashells and fossils were left behind, leading to the Calvert Cliffs seen today after the sea receded and the waves started eroding the deposit. These three terraces are visible in various parts of the county and are most obvious on the bay side where they rise to a height of 100 ft.\nClimate.\nCalvert County lies in the humid subtropical climate zone (\"Cfa\") in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, with hot, humid summers and mild to chilly winters with plentiful precipitation year-round. In the Trewartha climate classification, the county is classified as oceanic (\"Do\") except in the extreme south, which is \"Cf\". Its proximity to the Chesapeake Bay has a moderating effect on temperatures compared with locales further inland. Average monthly temperatures in Prince Frederick range from 35.9\u00a0\u00b0F in January to 77.9\u00a0\u00b0F in July.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, 88,737\u00a0people, 30,873\u00a0households, and 23,732\u00a0families were residing in the county. The population density was . The 33,780 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 81.4% White, 13.4% Black or African American, 1.4% Asian, 0.4% American Indian, 0.7% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 2.7% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 19.6% were German, 17.6% were Irish, 13.9% were English, 8.4% were Italian, and 7.4% were American.\nOf the 30,873\u00a0households, 40.4% had children under 18 living with them, 60.6% were married couples living together, 11.3% had a female householder with no husband present, 23.1% were not families, and 18.1% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.85 and the average family size was 3.23. The median age was 40.1 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $90,838 and for a family was $102,638. Males had a median income of $66,909 versus $49,337 for females. The per capita income for the county was $36,323. About 2.8% of families and 4.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.3% of those under 18 and 5.3% of those 65 or over.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the racial and ethnic make-up of the Calvert County population was 79.65% non-Hispanic Whites, 13.44% Blacks, 0.37% Native Americans, 1.42% Asians, 0.05% Pacific Islanders, 0.12% non-Hispanics reporting some other race, 2.40% non-Hispanics reporting multiple races, and 2.75% Hispanic.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, 74,563 people, 25,447 households, and 20,154 families resided in the county. The population density was . The 27,576 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 83.93% White, 13.11% African American, 0.30% Native American, 0.88% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.49% from other races, and 1.27% from two or more races. About 1.52% of the population were Hispanics or Latinos of any race. \nThere were 25,447 households, out of which 41.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.80% were married couples living together, 9.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.80% were non-families. 16.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.91 and the average family size was 3.26.\nIn the county, the age distribution was 29.6% under 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 31.7% from 25 to 44, 23.4% from 45 to 64, and 8.9% who were 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.3 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 94.0 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $65,945, and for a family was $71,545 (these figures had risen to $88,989 and $100,229, respectively, as of a 2007 estimate). Males had a median income of $48,664 versus $32,265 for females. The per capita income for the county was $25,410. About 3.1% of families and 4.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.1% of those under 18 and 5.7% of those 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nCalvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant is located on the western shore of Chesapeake Bay at Lusby, as is the Cove Point LNG Terminal.\nThe Chesapeake Biological Laboratory, part of the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science is located in Solomons.\nA branch of the United States Naval Research Laboratory is located at Chesapeake Beach.\nThe Patuxent River Naval Air Station is located immediately to the south of Calvert County, in St. Mary's County.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the county's \"2019 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report\", the top employers in the county are:\nEducation.\nCalvert County is served by Calvert County Public Schools. The county's education system consists of 13 elementary schools, six middle schools, four high schools, a vocational education center, and a variety of other facilities.\nAlso, one private school, the Calverton School. provides prekindergarten through grade 12 education. Additionally, a private Catholic prekindergarten through grade 8 school, Cardinal Hickey Academy, is located in Owings.\nTransportation.\nThe main artery serving Calvert County is Maryland Route 4 (which begins in Washington, DC, as Pennsylvania Avenue before crossing into Prince George's County and Anne Arundel County, Maryland). Route 4 in Calvert County begins at the northern tip of the county at Lyons Creek, about 3 miles north of Dunkirk. At Sunderland, Route 4 meets Maryland Route 2 (traveling south as a two-lane road from Annapolis) and the two roads merge as Maryland Route 2\u20134. Route 2-4 continues south through Prince Frederick, St. Leonard, and Lusby. At Solomons, Routes 2 and 4 split again, with Route 2 heading towards downtown Solomons and Route 4 crossing the Patuxent River at the Governor Thomas Johnson Bridge into St. Mary's County.\nRoute 2-4 is designated Solomons Island Road throughout much of the county, with the section south of Prince Frederick being recently renamed Louis Goldstein Highway in memory of Louis L. Goldstein, the former comptroller of Maryland and Calvert County resident.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, Route 2-4 underwent an extensive expansion project, with the formerly two-lane road becoming a four-lane dual highway. Certain portions of the highway were realigned, with the former roadway becoming Maryland Route 765. The final portion of the dualized Route 2-4 between St. Leonard and Solomons was completed in 1988. In 2009, a portion of Route 2\u20134 in Prince Frederick was expanded to three lanes, along with sidewalks added.\nOther major roadways in Calvert County include:\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\nThe Census Bureau recognizes the following census-designated places in the county:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDunkirk, Huntingtown, Lusby, Owings, Prince Frederick, St. Leonard, and Solomons have all been designated by Calvert County government as being \"town centers\". The \"town center\" designation means while these communities may not have incorporated central governments, they do have specified boundaries surrounding the central business and residential areas for zoning purposes. The reason behind the \"town center\" designation is to cluster new development within established areas with existing infrastructure, thus discouraging urban sprawl. The implementation of the \"town center\" concept in Calvert County over the past two decades has for the most part been successful in preserving rural and agricultural areas outside the designated \"town centers\", and stands as a key example of the smart growth planning strategy.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\nCalvert County has been the setting for several movies and television programs. The opening scene of the 1993 Clint Eastwood movie \"In the Line of Fire\" was filmed at Flag Harbor Marina in St. Leonard. More recently, the Calvert County Sheriff's Department has been featured on several reality television programs, including \"Speeders\" on the truTV network, \"MTV's Busted\", and was featured weekly on A&amp;E's \"Live PD\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48677", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48677", "title": "Munich Olympic massacre", "text": ""}
{"id": "48678", "revid": "50295774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48678", "title": "Mahatma", "text": "Honorific term in India\nMahatma (English pronunciation: , , from sa \" \u092e\u0939\u093e (mah\u0101)\"\u00a0'great' and \" \u0906\u0924\u094d\u092e\u093e (\u0101tm\u0101)\"\u00a0'soul') is an honorific used in India. The term is commonly used for Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who is often referred to simply as \"Mahatma Gandhi\" (lit.\u2009'Venerable Gandhi'). Albeit less frequently, this epithet has also been used with regard to such people as Basava (1131\u20131167), Swami Shraddhanand (1856\u20131926), Lalon Shah (1772\u20131890), Ayyankali (1863\u20131941), and Jyotirao Phule (1827\u20131890). \nThe term \"mah\u0101tm\u0101\" has also been historically used for a class of religious scholars in Jainism; for the selected religious leaders in Theosophy; and for local religious teachers in the Divine Light Mission church.\nIn Theosophy.\nThe word, used in a technical sense, was popularized in theosophical literature in the late 19th century, when Helena Blavatsky, one of the founders of the Theosophical Society, claimed that her teachers were adepts (or Mahatmas) who reside in Asia. According to the Theosophical teachings, the Mahatmas are not disembodied beings, but highly evolved people involved in overseeing the spiritual growth of individuals and the development of civilizations. Blavatsky was the first person in modern times to claim contact with these Adepts, especially the \"Masters\" Koot Hoomi and Morya. Alvin Boyd Kuhn wrote about mah\u0101tm\u0101s:\nThe Masters whom Theosophy presents to us are simply high-ranking students in life's school of experience. They are members of our own evolutionary group, not visitants from the celestial spheres. They are supermen only in that they have attained knowledge of the laws of life and mastery over its forces with which we are still struggling.\nAfter Blavatsky's death in 1891, numerous individuals have claimed to be in contact with her Adept Teachers. These individuals have stated that they are new \"messengers\" of the Masters and they have conveyed various esoteric teachings. Currently, various Theosophical movements refer to them as Ascended Masters, although their character and teachings are in several respects different from those described by Blavatsky.\nCriticism.\nThere has been a great deal of controversy concerning the existence of adepts. Blavatsky's critics have doubted the existence of her Masters. See, for example, W. E. Coleman's exposes.\nK. Paul Johnson in his books speculates that the \"Masters\" that Blavatsky wrote about and produced letters from were actually idealizations of people who were her mentors. Aryel Sanat, author of \"The inner life of Krishnamurti: private passion and perennial wisdom\", wrote that Johnson \"claims in all of his books that there were no Masters at all in early Theosophical Society history, and that Helena Blavatsky invented them (as others had claimed she had invented her travels)\". Sanat wrote that Johnson \"deliberately ignores the main sources of evidence for their real physical existence\". What Sanat thought these were is not made quite clear.\nGandhi.\nAccording to some authors, Rabindranath Tagore is said to have used this title for Gandhi on 6 March 1915. Some claim that he was called Mahatma by the residents of Gurukul Kangadi in April 1915, and he in turn called the founder Munshiram a Mahatma (who later became Swami Shraddhanand). However, a document honoring him with the title \"Mahatma\" on 21 January 1915, in Jetpur, Gujarat, by Nautamlal Bhagvanji Mehta is preserved at the National Gandhi Museum in New Delhi, India. A private letter from Gandhi's friend Pranjivan Mehta to Gopal Krishna Gokhale in 1909 referred to Gandhi with the title and thus remains the earliest written record available to use the title. The use of the term Mahatma in Jainism to denote a class of lay priests, has been noted since the 17th century. A Mahatma is someone who practices Trikaranasuddhi.\nIn the Divine Light Mission.\nThe Divine Light Mission (DLM) was a Sant Mat-based movement begun in India in the 1930s by Hans Maharaj and formally incorporated in 1960. The DLM had as many as 2,000 Mahatmas, all from India or Tibet, who taught the DLM's secret meditation techniques called \"Knowledge\". The Mahatmas, called \"realized souls\", or \"apostles\", also served as local leaders. After Hans Ji's death in 1966 his youngest son, Prem Rawat (known then as Guru Maharaj Ji or Bagyogeshwar), succeeded him. The young guru appointed some new Mahatmas, including one from the United States. In one incident, a prominent Indian Mahatma nearly beat a man to death in Detroit for throwing a pie at the guru. In the early 1980s, Prem Rawat replaced the Divine Light Mission organization with the Elan Vital and replaced the Mahatmas with initiators. The initiators did not have the revered status of the Mahatmas, and they were drawn mostly from Western followers. In the 2000s, the initiators were replaced by a video in which Rawat teaches the techniques himself.\nIn Jainism.\nAmong the Jains the term Mahatma is used for the class for scholars who are householders.\nMahatma Hirananda of Mewar.\nThe colophon of the Mewar Ramayana, described as \"one of the most beautiful manuscripts in the world\", states that the text, commissioned by Acharya Jasvant for the library of Maharana Jagat Singh I of Mewar, was written by one Mahatma Hirananda and finished on Friday 25 November 1650. Being a Jain scribe, Mahatma Hirananda incorporated traditional Jain scribal elements into the manuscript.\nJain Mahatmas in \"Dabestan-e Mazaheb\".\nThe \"Dabestan-e Mazaheb,\" written around 1655 CE, is a text that describes various religions and philosophies the author encountered. Its Section 11 is dedicated to Jainism. It states: \"Similar to the dervishes of both classes (Monk and Jatis) is a third sect, called Mah\u00e1-\u00e1tma; group separated from the Oswal Jains, have the dress and appearance of Jatis; however, do not pluck their hair with tweezers, but cut it. They live the social life and spread the teaching of Mahavir and other Jain Tirthankars in the society. They accumulate money, cook their meals in their houses, drink cold water, and take to them a wife.\" The term Mahatma was thus used for priests/scholars who were not celibate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48679", "revid": "39273215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48679", "title": "Third Estate", "text": ""}
{"id": "48680", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48680", "title": "440s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 449 BC \u2013 440 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48682", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48682", "title": "Kirkstall Abbey", "text": "Cistercian monastery in West Yorkshire, England\nKirkstall Abbey is a ruined Cistercian monastery in Kirkstall, north-west of Leeds city centre in West Yorkshire, England. It is set in a public park on the north bank of the River Aire. It was founded c.\u20091152. It was disestablished during the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII.\nThe picturesque ruins have been drawn and painted by artists such as J. M. W. Turner, Thomas Girtin and John Sell Cotman.\nKirkstall Abbey was acquired by the Leeds Corporation as a gift from Colonel North and opened to the public in the late 19th century. The gatehouse became a museum, which is now part of the Leeds Museums &amp; Galleries group.\nFoundation.\nHenry de Lacy (died 1177), Baron of Pontefract and of Clitheroe, promised to dedicate an abbey to the Virgin Mary should he survive a serious illness. He recovered and agreed to give the Abbot of Fountains Abbey land at Barnoldswick in the West Riding of Yorkshire (now in Lancashire) on which to found a daughter abbey. Abbot Alexander with twelve Cistercian monks from Fountains went to Barnoldswick in May 1147 and after demolishing the existing church attempted to build the abbey on Henry de Lacy's land. They stayed for six years but found the place inhospitable. Abbot Alexander set about finding a more suitable place for the abbey and came across a site in the heavily wooded Aire Valley occupied by hermits.\nAlexander sought help from de Lacy, who was sympathetic and helped acquire the land from William de Poitou. The monks moved from Barnoldswick to Kirkstall, displacing the hermits, some of whom joined the abbey, the rest being paid to move. The buildings were mostly completed between 1152, when the monks arrived in Kirkstall, and the end of Alexander's abbacy in 1182. Millstone Grit for building came from Bramley Fall on the opposite side of the river.\nBuildings.\nThe English Cistercian houses, of which there are remains at Fountains, Rievaulx, Kirkstall, Tintern and Netley, were mainly arranged after the same plan, with slight local variations. As an example, below is the groundplan of Kirkstall Abbey, one of the best preserved.\nThe church is of the Cistercian type, with a short chancel (3), and transepts (4) with three eastward chapels to each, divided by solid walls. The building is plain, the windows are unornamented, and the nave (1) has no triforium. The windows and doorways have round heads, whereas the vaulting arches are pointed and the moldings and capitals also show early Gothic features. During the 15th century, the great east window was replaced with a smaller one. The tower over the crossing was made higher in the 16th century, just before dissolution.\nThe cloister to the south (5) occupies the whole length of the nave. On the east side stands the two-aisled chapter house (7), between which and the south transept is a small sacristy, and on the other side two small apartments, one of which was probably the parlour (8). Beyond this is the calefactory or day-room of the monks. Above this whole range of building runs the monks' dormitory, opening by stairs into the south transept of the church.\nOn the south side of the cloister (5) there are the remains of the old refectory, running, as in Benedictine houses, from east to west, and the new refectory (12), which, with the increasing occupancy of the house, superseded it, reoriented, as is usual in Cistercian houses, from north to south. Adjacent to this apartment are the remains of the kitchen, pantry and buttery. The arches of the lavatory are to be seen near the refectory entrance. The western side of the cloister is occupied by vaulted cellars, supporting on the upper story the dormitory of the lay brothers (9).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExtending from the south-east angle of the main group of buildings are the walls and foundations of a secondary group of buildings (17, 18). These have been identified as the hospitium or the abbot's house, but they occupy the position in which the infirmary is more usually found. The hall was a very spacious apartment, measuring in length by in breadth, which was divided by two rows of columns. The fish-ponds lay between the monastery and the river to the south. The abbey mill was situated about 80 yards to the north-west. The millpool may be distinctly traced, together with the goit or mill stream.\nDissolution and later history.\nOn 22 November 1539 the abbey was surrendered to Henry VIII's commissioners in the Dissolution of the monasteries. It was awarded to Thomas Cranmer in 1542, but reverted to the crown when Cranmer was executed in 1556. Sir Robert Savile purchased the estate in 1584, and it remained in his family's hands for almost a hundred years. In 1671 it passed into the hands of the Brudenell family, the Earls of Cardigan. Much of the stone was removed for re-use in other buildings in the area, including the steps leading to the river bank by Leeds Bridge, in the town centre.\nDuring the 18th century the picturesque ruins attracted artists of the Romantic movement and were painted by artists including J. M. W. Turner, John Sell Cotman and Thomas Girtin. In 1889 the abbey was sold to Colonel John North, who presented it to Leeds City Council. The Council undertook a major restoration project and the abbey was opened to the public in 1895.\nThe African American novelist William Wells Brown visited Kirkstall Abbey in 1851, writing about his experience. Using poetry and poetic language, he described the 'pensive beauty' of the desolate ruins in their 'pastoral luxuriance' showing his appreciation of British literature as well as an interest in nature and local history.\nLittle excavation took place before 1890, after which William St John Hope led an investigation of the abbey walls and some trees were removed. Extensive excavations were carried out during the 1950s by Leeds City Museums staff (now Leeds Museums &amp; Galleries) under the direction of W. V. Wade of Leeds University.\nThe abbey today.\nThe abbey is a Grade I listed building and scheduled ancient monument. After a \u00a35.5\u00a0million renovation programme there is a new visitor centre with interactive exhibits which illustrates the history of the abbey and the lives of the monks. Entry to the Abbey itself is via the visitor centre.\nThe grounds surrounding the abbey form a public park which includes landscaped grounds, open grassland, tennis courts, children's play area, rugby union and football pitches.\nOn the other side of the main road, the Grade II* listed former abbey gatehouse now forms the Abbey House Museum.\nCultural events.\nThe \"Leeds Shakespeare Festival\", performed by the British Shakespeare Company, took place annually in the cloisters from 1995 until 2009. The abbey grounds are a public park, and are used for occasional events such as the annual Kirkstall Festival and the Kirkstall Fantasia open-air concerts.\nThe Abbey was used on 19 March 2011 for the live BBC Three event \"Frankenstein's Wedding... Live in Leeds\", a live music drama starring Andrew Gower and Lacey Turner as fiancees Victor Frankenstein and Elizabeth Lavenza.\nOn 10 and 11 September 2011 the Kaiser Chiefs played two concerts at Kirkstall Abbey to a maximum audience of 10,000 on each day.\nThe BBC Television series \"Gunpowder\" (2017) used Kirkstall Abbey as a filming location.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48683", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48683", "title": "Yogiism", "text": ""}
{"id": "48684", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48684", "title": "Merostomata", "text": "Class of arthropods\nMerostomata is a class of chelicerate arthropods that contains the extinct Eurypterida (sea scorpions) and the extant Xiphosura (horseshoe crabs). The term was originally used by James Dwight Dana to refer to Xiphosura only, but was emended by Henry Woodward to cover both groups.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Merostomata\" derives from the Greek roots (', \"thigh\") and (', \"mouth\"), in reference to the animals' possession of appendages which are mouthparts at their proximal end, but swimming legs at their distal end.\nHistory.\nThe scientific consensus at the beginning of the 20th century was that these two marine groups were closely related, and only more distantly related to the terrestrial Arachnida. Some more recent analyses suggest the grouping Merostomata is not monophyletic, with Xiphosura being basal to a clade comprising Eurypterida and Arachnida. Other recent analyses support the monophyly of this group. The Xiphosura are estimated to have diverged from the Arachnida https://\u00a0million years ago.\nThe shared features of the two groups traditionally grouped in the Merostomata are now thought to be retentions of primitive conditions (symplesiomorphies), thus the name Merostomata has been recommended to be abandoned.\nHowever, a 2022 analysis recovered the monophyly of Merostomata, as opposed to a monophyletic Arachnida, with Xiphosura as the only modern representative in a derived position, indicating the convergence of several characteristics that supposedly united the arachnids.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48685", "revid": "13403767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48685", "title": "Quantum suicide and immortality", "text": "Quantum mechanics thought experiment\nQuantum suicide is a thought experiment in quantum mechanics and the philosophy of physics. Purportedly, it can falsify any interpretation of quantum mechanics other than the many-worlds interpretation by means of a variation of the Schr\u00f6dinger's cat thought experiment from the cat's point of view. Quantum immortality refers to the subjective experience of surviving quantum suicide. It is sometimes conjectured to be applicable to real-world causes of death as well.\nAs a thought experiment, quantum suicide is an intellectual exercise in which an abstract setup is followed through to its logical consequences merely to prove a theoretical point. Virtually all physicists and philosophers of science who have described it, especially in popularized treatments, underscore that it relies on contrived, idealized circumstances that may be impossible or exceedingly difficult to realize, and that its theoretical premises are controversial even among supporters of the many-worlds interpretation. Thus, as cosmologist Anthony Aguirre warns, \"it would be foolish (and selfish) in the extreme to let this possibility guide one's actions in any life-and-death question.\"\nHistory.\nHugh Everett III did not mention quantum suicide or quantum immortality in writing; his work was intended as a solution to the paradoxes of quantum mechanics. According to Eugene Shikhovtsev's biography of Everett, \"Everett firmly believed that his many-worlds theory guaranteed him immortality: his consciousness, he argued, is bound at each branching to follow whatever path does not lead to death\". Peter Byrne, another biographer of Everett, reports that Everett also privately discussed quantum suicide (such as playing high-stakes Russian roulette and surviving in the winning branch), but adds, \"It is unlikely, however, that Everett subscribed to this [quantum immortality] view, as the only sure thing it guarantees is that the majority of your copies will die, hardly a rational goal.\"\nAmong scientists, the thought experiment was introduced by Euan Squires in 1986. It was published independently by Hans Moravec in 1987 and Bruno Marchal in 1988; it was also described by Huw Price in 1997, who credited it to Dieter Zeh, and independently presented formally by Max Tegmark in 1998. It was discussed by philosophers Peter J. Lewis in 2000 and David Lewis in 2001.\nThought experiment.\nThe quantum suicide thought experiment involves a similar apparatus to Schr\u00f6dinger's cat\u2014a box that kills the occupant in a given time frame with probability one-half due to quantum measurement. The only difference is that the experimenter recording observations is inside the box. The significance of this thought experiment is that someone whose life or death depends on a qubit could possibly distinguish between interpretations of quantum mechanics. By definition, fixed observers cannot.\nAt the start of the first iteration, under both interpretations, the probability of surviving the experiment is 50%, as given by the squared norm of the wave function. At the start of the second iteration, assuming a single-world interpretation of quantum mechanics (like the widely held Copenhagen interpretation), the wave function has already collapsed; thus, if the experimenter is already dead, there is a 0% chance of survival for any further iterations. But on the many-worlds interpretation, a superposition of the live experimenter \"necessarily\" exists (as does the one who dies). Now, barring the possibility of life after death, after every iteration only one of the two experimenter superpositions\u2014the live one\u2014can have conscious experience. Putting aside the philosophical problems associated with individual identity and its persistence, under the many-worlds interpretation, the experimenter, or at least a version of them, continues to exist through all of their superpositions where the outcome of the experiment is that they live. In other words, a version of the experimenter survives all iterations of the experiment. Since the superpositions where a version of the experimenter lives occur by quantum necessity (under the many-worlds interpretation), it follows that their survival, after any realizable number of iterations, is physically necessary; hence, the notion of quantum \"immortality\".\nA version of the experimenter surviving stands in stark contrast to the implications of the Copenhagen interpretation, according to which, although the survival outcome is possible in every iteration, its probability tends towards zero as the number of iterations increases. According to the many-worlds interpretation, the scenario has the opposite property: the probability of a version of the experimenter living is necessarily one for any number of iterations.\nIn the book \"Our Mathematical Universe\", Max Tegmark lays out three criteria that, in abstract, a quantum suicide experiment must fulfill: \nAnalysis of real-world feasibility.\nIn response to questions about \"subjective immortality\" from normal causes of death, Tegmark suggested that the flaw in that reasoning is that dying is not a binary event as in the thought experiment; it is a progressive process, with a continuum of states of decreasing consciousness. He says that in most real causes of death, one experiences such a gradual loss of self-awareness. It is only within the confines of an abstract scenario that an observer finds they defy all odds. Referring to the above criteria, he elaborates as follows: \"Most accidents and common causes of death clearly don't satisfy all three criteria, suggesting you won't feel immortal after all. In particular, regarding criterion 2, under normal circumstances dying isn't a binary thing where you're either alive or dead [...] What makes the quantum suicide work is that it forces an abrupt transition.\"\nDavid Lewis' commentary and subsequent criticism.\nThe philosopher David Lewis explored the possibility of quantum immortality in his 2001 lecture \"How Many Lives Has Schr\u00f6dinger's Cat?\", his first academic foray into the field of the interpretation of quantum mechanics\u2014and his last, due to his death less than four months later. In the lecture, published posthumously in 2004, Lewis rejected the many-worlds interpretation, allowing that it offers initial theoretical attractions but arguing that it has irremediable flaws, mainly regarding probabilities, and came to tentatively endorse the Ghirardi\u2013Rimini\u2013Weber theory instead. Lewis concluded the lecture by saying that the quantum suicide thought experiment, if applied to real causes of death, entails what he deemed a \"terrifying corollary\": as all causes of death are ultimately quantum-mechanical in nature, on the many-worlds interpretation, an observer should subjectively \"expect with certainty to go on forever surviving whatever dangers [he or she] may encounter\", as there will always be possibilities of survival, no matter how unlikely; faced with branching events of survival and death, an observer should not \"equally expect to experience life and death\", as there is no such thing as experiencing death, and should thus divide his or her expectations only among branches where they survive. But though survival is guaranteed, good health and integrity are not. This leads to a Tithonus-like deterioration of one's body that continues indefinitely, leaving the subject forever just short of death.\nInterviewed for the 2004 book \"Schr\u00f6dinger's Rabbits\", Tegmark rejected this scenario because \"the fading of consciousness is a continuous process. Although I cannot experience a world line in which I am altogether absent, I can enter one in which my speed of thought is diminishing, my memories and other faculties fading [...] I am confident that even if he cannot die all at once, he can gently fade away.\" In the same book, philosopher of science and many-worlds proponent David Wallace attacks the case for real-world quantum immortality on the basis that death can be understood as a continuum of decreasing states of consciousness not only in time, as per Tegmark, but also in space: \"our consciousness is not located at one unique point in the brain, but is presumably a kind of emergent or holistic property of a sufficiently large group of neurons [...] our consciousness might not be able to go out like a light, but it can dwindle exponentially until it is, for all practical purposes, gone.\"\nDirectly responding to Lewis's lecture, British philosopher and many-worlds proponent David Papineau, while finding Lewis's other objections to the many-worlds interpretation lacking, strongly denies that any modification to the usual probability rules is warranted in death situations. Assured subjective survival can follow from the quantum suicide idea only if an agent reasons in terms of \"what will be experienced next\" instead of the more obvious \"what will happen next, whether will be experienced or not\". He writes, \"it is by no means obvious why Everettians should modify their intensity rule in this way. For it seems perfectly open for them to apply the unmodified intensity rule in life-or-death situations, just as elsewhere. If they do this, then they can expect all futures in proportion to their intensities, whether or not those futures contain any of their live successors. For example, even when you know you are about to be the subject in a fifty-fifty Schr\u00f6dinger\u2019s experiment, you should expect a future branch where you perish, to just the same degree as you expect a future branch where you survive.\"\nOn a similar note, quoting Lewis's position that death should not be expected as an experience, philosopher of science Charles Sebens concedes that, in a quantum suicide experiment, \"It is tempting to think you should expect survival with certainty.\" But, he says, expectation of survival could follow only if the quantum branching and death are absolutely simultaneous; otherwise, normal chances of death apply: \"If death is indeed immediate on all branches but one, the thought has some plausibility. But if there is any delay it should be rejected. In such a case, there is a short period of time when there are multiple copies of you, each (effectively) causally isolated from the others and able to assign a credence to being the one who will live. Only one will survive. Surely rationality does not compel you to be maximally optimistic in such a scenario.\" Sebens also explores the possibility that death might not be simultaneous with branching but still faster than a human can mentally realize the experiment's outcome. Again, an agent should expect to die with normal probabilities: \"Do the copies need to last long enough to have thoughts to cause trouble? I think not. If you survive, you can consider what credences you should have assigned during the short period after splitting when you coexisted with the other copies.\"\nIn the journal \"Ratio\", philosopher Istv\u00e1n Aranyosi, while noting that the \"tension between the idea of states being both actual and probable is taken as the chief weakness of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics\" wrote that most critical commentary on Lewis's immortality argument has revolved around its premises. But even if, for the sake of argument, one entirely accepted Lewis's assumptions, Aranyosi strongly denies that the \"terrifying corollary\" would follow. Instead, the two most likely scenarios would be what Aranyosi calls the \"comforting corollary\", in which an observer should never expect to get very sick in the first place, and the \"momentary life\" picture, in which an observer should expect \"eternal life, spent almost entirely in an unconscious state\", punctuated by extremely brief, amnesiac moments of consciousness. Thus, Aranyosi concludes that while \"[w]e can't assess whether one or the other [of the two alternative scenarios] gets the lion's share of the total intensity associated with branches compatible with self-awareness, [...] we can be sure that they together (i.e. their disjunction) do indeed get the lion's share, which is much reassuring.\"\nAnalysis by other proponents of the many-worlds interpretation.\nPhysicist David Deutsch, a proponent of the many-worlds interpretation, has said of quantum suicide that \"that way of applying probabilities does not follow directly from quantum theory, as the usual one does. It requires an additional assumption, namely that when making decisions one should ignore the histories in which the decision-maker is absent...my guess is that the assumption is false.\"\nTegmark now believes experimenters should only expect a normal probability of survival, not immortality. The experimenter's probability amplitude in the wavefunction decreases significantly, meaning they exist with a much lower measure than they had before. Per the anthropic principle, a person is less likely to find themself in a world where they are less likely to exist, that is, a world with a lower measure has a lower probability of being observed by them. Therefore, the experimenter will have a lower probability of observing the world in which they survive than the earlier world in which they set up the experiment. Lev Vaidman also pointed out this problem of reduced measure in the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\". In his 2001 paper \"Probability and the many-worlds interpretation of quantum theory\", Vaidman writes that an agent should not agree to undergo a quantum suicide experiment: \"The large 'measures' of the worlds with dead successors is a good reason not to play.\" Vaidman argues that death's instantaneity may seem to imply subjective survival of the experimenter, but that normal probabilities nevertheless apply even in this special case: \"Indeed, the instantaneity makes it difficult to establish the probability postulate, but after it has been justified in the wide range of other situations it is natural to apply the postulate for all cases.\"\nIn his 2013 book \"The Emergent Multiverse\", Wallace writes that the reasons to expect subjective survival in the thought experiment \"do not really withstand close inspection\", but concedes that it would be \"probably fair to say [...] that precisely because death is philosophically complicated, my objections fall short of being a knock-down refutation\". Besides restating that there appears to be no motive to reason in terms of expectations of experience instead of expectations of what will happen, he suggests that a decision-theoretic analysis shows that \"an agent who prefers certain life to certain death is rationally compelled to prefer life in high-weight branches and death in low-weight branches to the opposite.\"\nPhysicist Sean M. Carroll, another proponent of the many-worlds interpretation, has said of quantum suicide that neither experiences nor rewards should be thought of as shared between future versions of oneself, as distinct persons come into existence when the world splits. He adds that you cannot pick out some future versions of yourself as \"really you\", and that quantum suicide still cuts off the existence of some of them, which is worth objecting to just as in a single world.\nAnalysis by skeptics of the many-worlds interpretation.\nin his book \"Cosmological Koans\", cosmologist Anthony Aguirre, while personally skeptical of most accounts of the many-worlds interpretation, writes, \"Perhaps reality actually is this bizarre, and we really do subjectively 'survive' any form of death that is both instantaneous and binary\" But Aguirre notes that most causes of death do not fulfill these two requirements: \"If there are degrees of survival, things are quite different.\" If loss of consciousness were binary as in the thought experiment, the quantum suicide effect would prevent an observer from subjectively falling asleep or undergoing anesthesia, conditions in which mental activities are greatly diminished but not altogether abolished. Consequently, upon most causes of death, even outwardly sudden, if the quantum suicide effect holds true an observer is more likely to progressively slip into an attenuated state of consciousness rather than remain fully awake by some very improbable means. Aguirre adds that quantum suicide as a whole might be characterized as a sort of \"reductio ad absurdum\" against both the many-worlds interpretation and theory of mind. He finally hypothesizes that a different understanding of the relationship between the mind and time should remove the bizarre implications of necessary subjective survival.\nIn his book \"Beyond Weird\", physicist and writer Philip Ball, a critic of the many-worlds interpretation, calls the quantum suicide experiment \"cognitively unstable\" and exemplary of the difficulties of the many-worlds theory with probabilities. He acknowledges Vaidman's argument that an experimenter should subjectively expect outcomes in proportion of the \"measure of existence\" of the worlds in which they happen, but ultimately rejects this explanation. \"What this boils down to is the interpretation of probabilities in the MWI. If all outcomes occur with 100% probability, where does that leave the probabilistic character of quantum mechanics?\" Furthermore, Ball argues that such arguments highlight what he sees as another major problem of the many-worlds interpretation, connected but independent from the issue of probability: the incompatibility with the notion of selfhood. Ball ascribes most attempts of justifying probabilities in the many-worlds interpretation to \"saying that quantum probabilities are just what quantum mechanics look like \"when consciousness is restricted to only one world\"\", but says \"there is in fact no meaningful way to explain or justify such a restriction.\" Before performing a quantum measurement, an \"Alice before\" experimenter \"can't use quantum mechanics to predict what will happen to her in a way that can be articulated\u2014because there is no logical way to talk about 'her' at any moment except the conscious present (which, in a frantically splitting universe, doesn't exist). Because it is logically impossible to connect the perceptions of Alice Before to Alice After [the experiment], \"Alice\" has disappeared. [...] [The MWI] eliminates any coherent notion of what we can experience, or have experienced, or are experiencing right now.\" \nPhilosopher of science Peter J. Lewis, a critic of the many-worlds interpretation, considers the whole thought experiment an example of the difficulty of accommodating probability within the many-worlds framework: \"Standard quantum mechanics yields probabilities for various future occurrences, and these probabilities can be fed into an appropriate decision theory. But if every physically possible consequence of the current state of affairs is certain to occur, on what basis should I decide what to do? For example, if I point a gun at my head and pull the trigger, it looks like Everett's theory entails that I am certain to survive\u2014and that I am certain to die. This is at least worrying, and perhaps rationally disabling.\" In his book \"Quantum Ontology\", Lewis writes that for the subjective immortality argument to be drawn out of the many-worlds theory, one must adopt an understanding of probability\u2014the so-called \"branch-counting\" approach, in which an observer can meaningfully ask \"which post-measurement branch will I end up on?\"\u2014that experimental, empirical evidence rules out, as it would yield probabilities that do not match with the well-confirmed Born rule. Lewis identifies instead in the Deutsch-Wallace decision-theoretic analysis the most promising (although still in his judgment incomplete) way to address probabilities on the many-worlds interpretation, in which it is not possible to count branches (or, similarly, the persons that \"end up\" on each branch). Lewis concludes, \"The immortality argument is perhaps best viewed as a dramatic demonstration of the fundamental conflict between branch-counting (or person-counting) intuitions about probability and the decision theoretic approach. The many-worlds theory, to the extent that it is viable, does not entail that you should expect to live forever.\"\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48686", "revid": "22380047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48686", "title": "Owain Gwynedd", "text": "King of Gwynedd from 1137 to 1170\nOwain ap Gruffudd (, d.\u200923 or 28 November 1170) or Owain Gwynedd () was King of Gwynedd from 1137 until his death in 1170, succeeding his father Gruffudd ap Cynan. He is known as Owain Gwynedd to distinguish him from the contemporary Powysian ruler, Owain Cyfeiliog, whose name was also Owain ap Gruffudd. Owain Gwynedd was the first recorded Welsh ruler to style himself king of Wales and Prince of the Welsh.\nEarly life.\nOwain Gwynedd was a member of the House of Aberffraw, the senior branch of the dynasty of Rhodri Mawr (Rhodri the Great). His father, Gruffudd ap Cynan, was a strong and long-lived ruler who had made the principality of Gwynedd the most influential in Wales during the sixty-two years of his reign, using the island of Anglesey as his power base. His mother, Angharad ferch Owain, was the daughter of Owain ab Edwin of Tegeingl. Owain Gwynedd was the second son of Gruffudd and Angharad. His elder brother, Cadwallon, was killed in fighting in Powys in 1132 against Meirionnydd.\nOwain is thought to have been born on Anglesey about the year 1100, he was Gruffudd ap Cynan's second child, grandchild of Owain ab Edwin of Tegeingl via his mother Angharad ferch Owain. By about 1120 Gruffudd had grown too old to lead his forces in battle and Owain and his brothers Cadwallon and later Cadwaladr led the forces of Gwynedd against the Normans and against other Welsh princes with great success. His elder brother Cadwallon was killed in a battle against the forces of Powys in 1132, leaving Owain as his father's heir. Owain and Cadwaladr, in alliance with Gruffudd ap Rhys of Deheubarth, won a major victory over the Normans at Crug Mawr near Cardigan in 1136 and annexed Ceredigion to their father's realm.\nAccession to the throne and early campaigns.\nOn behalf of his father, Gruffudd ap Cynan, Gwynedd directed military operations to the \"cantrefs of Meirionnydd, Rhos, Rhufoniog and Dyffryn Clwyd to Gwynedd proper\", and it was against the Normans, with Gruffudd ap Rhys he secured a victory at the Battle of Crug Mawr and the temporary occupation of Kingdom of Ceredigion. On Gruffudd's death in 1137, Owain inherited a portion of a well-established kingdom, but had to share it with Cadwaladr. In 1143 Cadwaladr was implicated in the murder of Anarawd ap Gruffudd of Deheubarth, and Owain responded by sending his son Hywel ab Owain Gwynedd to strip him of his lands in the north of Ceredigion. Though Owain was later reconciled with Cadwaladr, from 1143, Owain ruled alone over most of North Wales. In 1155 Cadwaladr was driven into exile.\nOwain took advantage of The Anarchy, a civil war between Stephen, King of England, and the Empress Matilda, to push Gwynedd's boundaries further east than ever before. In 1146 he captured Mold Castle and about 1150 captured Rhuddlan and encroached on the borders of Powys. The prince of Powys, Madog ap Maredudd, with assistance from Ranulf de Gernon, 4th Earl of Chester, gave battle at Coleshill, but Owain was victorious.\nWar with King Henry II.\nAll went well until the accession of King Henry II of England in 1154. Henry invaded Gwynedd in 1157 with the support of Madog ap Maredudd of Powys and Owain's brother Cadwaladr. The invasion met with mixed fortunes. Henry's forces ravaged eastern Gwynedd and destroyed many churches thus enraging the local population. The two armies met at Ewloe. Owain's men ambushed the royal army in a narrow, wooded valley, routing it completely with King Henry himself narrowly avoiding capture. The fleet accompanying the invasion made a landing on Anglesey where it was defeated. Ultimately, at the end of the campaign, Owain was forced to come to terms with Henry, being obliged to surrender Rhuddlan and other conquests in the east.\nMadog ap Maredudd died in 1160, enabling Owain to regain territory in the east. In 1163 he formed an alliance with Rhys ap Gruffudd of Deheubarth to challenge English rule. King Henry again invaded Gwynedd in 1165, but instead of taking the usual route along the northern coastal plain, the king's army invaded from Oswestry and took a route over the Berwyn hills. The invasion was met by an alliance of all the Welsh Princes, with Owain as the undisputed leader. However, apart from a small melee at the Battle of Crogen, there was little fighting, for the Welsh weather came to Owain's assistance as torrential rain forced Henry to retreat in disorder. The infuriated Henry mutilated a number of Welsh hostages, including two of Owain's sons. \nOwain wrote two letters to Louis VII of France, describing himself as \"King of Wales\" and \"King of the Welsh\". In the last of his letters to Louis VII of France, he offered to become a vassal of the French king and assist in attacking Henry if the French would make war on him. This time Owain styled himself (Prince of Wales), the first time he or anyone is known to have used such a title. \nAt the time, the word \"prince\", deriving as it did from the Latin \"princeps\", meant \"first person, chief leader; ruler, sovereign.\" It wasn't until the 14th century that it came to mean \"heir to the throne\". Thus, Owain, by designating himself princeps, was calling himself the principal ruler of Wales.\nHenry did not invade Gwynedd again, and Owain was able to regain his eastern conquests, recapturing Rhuddlan Castle in 1167 after a siege of three months.\nDisputes with the church and succession.\nThe last years of Owain's life were spent in disputes with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Becket, over the appointment of a new Bishop of Bangor. When the see became vacant Owain had his nominee, Arthur of Bardsey, elected. The archbishop refused to accept this, so Owain had Arthur consecrated in Ireland. The dispute continued, and the see remained officially vacant until well after Owain's death. He was also put under pressure by the Archbishop and the Pope Alexander III to put aside his second wife, Cristin verch Goronwy, who was his first cousin, this relationship making the marriage invalid under church law. Despite being excommunicated for his defiance, Owain steadfastly refused to put Cristin aside. Owain died in 1170, and despite having been excommunicated was buried in Bangor Cathedral by the local clergy. The annalist writing Brut y Tywysogion recorded his death \"after innumerable victories and unconquered from his youth\".\nHe is believed to have commissioned \"The Life of Gruffudd ap Cynan\", an account of his father's life. Following his death, civil war broke out between his sons. Owain was married twice, first to Gwladus ferch Llywarch ap Trahaearn, by whom he had two sons, Maelgwn ab Owain Gwynedd and Iorwerth Drwyndwn, the father of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (Llywelyn the Great), then to Cristin, by whom he had three sons including Dafydd ab Owain Gwynedd and Rhodri ab Owain Gwynedd. He also had a number of illegitimate sons, who by Welsh law had an equal claim on the inheritance if acknowledged by their father.\nHeirs and successors.\nGwynedd was married, firstly to Gwladus daughter of Llywarch ap Trahaearn and then his cousin Cristin verch Goronwy. Owain had originally designated Rhun ab Owain Gwynedd as his successor. Rhun was Owain's favourite son, and his premature death in 1146 plunged his father into a deep melancholy, from which he was only roused by the news that his forces had captured Mold Castle. Owain then designated Hywel ab Owain Gwynedd as his successor, but after his death, Hywel was first driven to seek refuge in Ireland by Cristin's sons, Dafydd and Rhodri, then Hywel was killed at the battle of Pentraeth when he returned with an Irish army. Dafydd and Rhodri split Gwynedd between them, but a generation passed before Gwynedd was restored to its former glory under Owain's grandson Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (Llywelyn the Great).\nAccording to legend, one of Owain's sons was Prince Madoc of Wales (Madog), who is popularly supposed to have fled across the Atlantic and colonised America; this tradition is part of the Pre-Columbian transoceanic contact theories.\nFiction.\nOwain is a recurring character in the Brother Cadfael series of novels by Ellis Peters, often referred to, and appearing in the novels \"Dead Man's Ransom\" and \"The Summer of the Danes\". He acts shrewdly to keep Wales' borders secure, and sometimes to expand them, during the civil war between King Stephen and Matilda, and sometimes acts as an ally to Cadfael and his friend, Sheriff Hugh Beringar. Cadwaladr also appears in both these novels as a source of grief for his brother. Owain appears as a minor character in novels of Sharon Kay Penman concerning Henry II and Eleanor of Aquitaine (\"When Christ and His Saints Slept\" and \"Time and Chance\"). Her focus with respect to Owain is on the fluctuating and factious relationship between England and Wales.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48690", "revid": "4871659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48690", "title": "Caratacus", "text": "1st-century AD British chieftain of the Catuvellauni tribe\nCaratacus was a 1st-century\u00a0AD British chieftain of the Catuvellauni tribe, who resisted the Roman conquest of Britain.\nBefore the Roman invasion, Caratacus is associated with the expansion of his tribe's territory. His apparent success led to Roman invasion, nominally in support of his defeated enemies. He resisted the Romans for almost a decade, using guerrilla warfare, but when he offered a set-piece battle he was defeated by Roman forces. After defeat he fled to the territory of Queen Cartimandua, who captured him and handed him over to the Romans. He was sentenced to death but made a speech before his execution that persuaded the Emperor Claudius to spare him. Caratacus' speech to Claudius has been a popular subject in visual art.\nName.\nCaratacus' name appears as both \"Caratacus\" and \"Caractacus\" in manuscripts of Tacitus, and as \"\u039a\u03b1\u03c1\u03ac\u03c4\u03b1\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2\" and \"\u039a\u03b1\u03c1\u03c4\u03ac\u03ba\u03b7\u03c2\" in manuscripts of Dio. Older reference works tend to favour the spelling \"Caractacus\", coins minted during his rule show the beginning of his name CARA' on the obverse, but some modern scholars agree, based on historical linguistics and source criticism, that the original Common Brittonic form was \"*Karat\u0101kos\", pronounced , cognate with Welsh \"Caradog\", Breton \"Karadeg\", and Irish \"Carthach\", meaning \"loving, beloved, dear; friend\".\nHistory.\nClaudian invasion.\nCaratacus is named by Dio Cassius as a son of the Catuvellaunian king Cunobelinus. Based on coin distribution Caratacus appears to have been the prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of his uncle Epaticcus, who expanded Catuvellaunian power westwards most likely from his palace in Verulam, the heartland of the Catuvellauni, into the territory of the Atrebates. After Epaticcus died in about AD\u00a035, the Atrebates, under Verica, regained some of their territory, but it appears Caratacus completely conquered the Atrebates, since Dio tells us Verica was ousted, fled to Rome and appealed to the emperor Claudius for help. This was the excuse used by Claudius to launch his invasion of Britain in the summer of 43. \nThe invasion targeted Caratacus' stronghold of Camulodunon (modern Colchester), previously the seat of his father Cunobelinus. Cunobelinus had died some time before the invasion. Caratacus and his brother Togodumnus led the initial defence of the country against Aulus Plautius's four legions, thought to have been around 40,000 men, primarily using guerrilla tactics. They lost much of the south-east after being defeated in two crucial battles, the Battle of the River Medway and River Thames. \nDio reports that Togodumnus was killed (although both Miles Russell and John Hind argue that Dio was mistaken in reporting Togodumnus' death, that he was defeated but survived and was later appointed by the Romans as a friendly king over a number of territories, becoming the loyal king referred to by Tacitus as Cogidubnus or Togidubnus) and the Romans conquered the Catuvellaunian territories. Their stronghold of Camulodunon was converted into the first Roman colonia in Britain, Colonia Victricensis.\nResistance to Rome.\nWe next hear of Caratacus in Tacitus's \"Annals\", leading the Silures and Ordovices of Wales against Plautius' successor as governor, Publius Ostorius Scapula. Finally, in 50, Scapula managed to defeat Caratacus in a set-piece battle somewhere in Ordovician territory, capturing Caratacus' wife and daughter and receiving the surrender of his brothers. Caratacus himself escaped and fled north to the lands of the Brigantes (modern Yorkshire), where the Brigantian queen, Cartimandua, handed him over to the Romans in chains. This was one of the factors that led to two Brigantian revolts against Cartimandua and her Roman allies, once later in the 50s and once in 69, led by Venutius, who had once been Cartimandua's husband. With the capture of Caratacus, much of southern Britain from the Humber to the Severn was pacified and garrisoned throughout the 50s.\nLegends place Caratacus' last stand at either Caer Caradoc near Church Stretton or British Camp in the Malvern Hills, but the description of Tacitus makes either unlikely:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Caratacus] resorted to the ultimate hazard, adopting a place for battle so that entry, exit, everything would be unfavourable to us and for the better to his own men, with steep mountains all around, and, wherever a gentle access was possible, he strewed rocks in front in the manner of a rampart. And in front too there flowed a stream with an unsure ford, and companies of armed men had taken up position along the defences.\nAlthough the Severn is visible from British Camp, it is nowhere near it, so this battle must have taken place elsewhere. A number of locations have been suggested, including a site near Brampton Bryan. Bari Jones, in \"Archaeology Today\" in 1998, identified Blodwel Rocks at Llanymynech in Powys as representing a close fit with Tacitus' account.\nCaptive in Rome.\nAfter his capture, Caratacus was sent to Rome as a war prize, presumably to be killed after a triumphal parade. Although a captive, he was allowed to address the Roman Senate. Tacitus records a version of his speech in which he says that his stubborn resistance made Rome's glory in defeating him all the greater:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the degree of my nobility and fortune had been matched by moderation in success, I would have come to this City as a friend rather than a captive, nor would you have disdained to receive with a treaty of peace one sprung from brilliant ancestors and commanding a great many nations. But my present lot, disfiguring as it is for me, is magnificent for you. I had horses, men, arms, and wealth: what wonder if I was unwilling to lose them? If you wish to command everyone, does it really follow that everyone should accept your slavery? If I were now being handed over as one who had surrendered immediately, neither my fortune nor your glory would have achieved brilliance. It is also true that in my case any reprisal will be followed by oblivion. On the other hand, if you preserve me safe and sound, I shall be an eternal example of your clemency.\nHe made such an impression that he was pardoned and allowed to live in peace in Rome. After his liberation, according to Dio Cassius, Caratacus was so impressed by the city of Rome that he said \"And can you, then, who have got such possessions and so many of them, still covet our poor huts?\"\nLegend.\nMedieval Welsh traditions.\nCaratacus' memory may have been preserved in medieval Welsh tradition. A genealogy in the Welsh Harley MS 3859 (c.\u20091100) includes the generations \"Caratauc map Cinbelin map Teuhant\", corresponding, via established processes of language change, to \"Caratacus, son of Cunobelinus, son of Tasciovanus\", preserving the names of the three historical figures in correct relationship.\nCaratacus does not appear in Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"History of the Kings of Britain\" (1136), although he appears to correspond to Arviragus, the younger son of Kymbelinus, who continues to resist the Roman invasion after the death of his older brother Guiderius. In Welsh versions his name is Gweirydd, son of Cynfelyn, and his brother is called Gwydyr; the name Arviragus is taken from a poem by Juvenal.\nCaradog, son of Bran, who appears in medieval Welsh literature, has also been identified with Caratacus, although nothing in the medieval legend corresponds except his name. He appears in the \"Mabinogion\" as a son of Bran the Blessed, who is left in charge of Britain while his father makes war in Ireland, but is overthrown by Caswallawn (the historical Cassivellaunus, who lived a century earlier than Caratacus). The Welsh Triads agree that he was Bran's son, and name two sons, Cawrdaf and Eudaf.\nTwo hills in Shropshire bear the name Caer Caradoc (Welsh \u2013 Caer Caradog), meaning fort of Caradoc, and have popular associations with him. One is an Iron Age hill fort and Scheduled Monument near the town of Clun. It overlooks the village of Chapel Lawn. The other Caer Caradoc is a prominent hill and Iron Age hill fort near Church Stretton, 16 miles (26\u00a0km) to the north-east.\nModern traditions.\nCaradog began to be identified with Caratacus only after the rediscovery of the works of Tacitus and new material appeared based on this identification. An 18th-century tradition, popularised by the Welsh antiquarian and forger Iolo Morganwg, credits Caradog, on his return from imprisonment in Rome, with the introduction of Christianity to Britain. Iolo also makes the legendary king Coel Hen a son of Caradog's son Saint Cyllin. Richard Williams Morgan said a reference to Cyllin as a son of Caratacus was found in the family records of Iestyn ab Gwrgant and used this as evidence of the early entry of Christianity to Britain: \"Cyllin ab Caradog, a wise and just king. In his days many of the Cymry embraced the faith in Christ through the teaching of the saints of Cor-Eurgain, and many godly men from the countries of Greece and Rome were in Cambria. He first of the Cymry gave infants names; for before, names were not given except to adults, and then from something characteristic in their bodies, minds, or manners.\"\nAnother tradition, which has remained popular among British Israelites and others, makes Caratacus already a Christian before he came to Rome, Christianity having been brought to Britain by either Joseph of Arimathea or St Paul, and identifies a number of early Christians as his relatives.\nOne is Pomponia Graecina, wife of Aulus Plautius, the conqueror of Britain, who as Tacitus relates, was accused of following a \"foreign superstition\", which the tradition considers to be Christianity. Tacitus describes her as the \"wife of the Plautius who returned from Britain with an ovation\", which led John Lingard (1771\u20131851) to conclude, in his \"History and Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church\", that she was British; however, this conclusion is a misinterpretation of what Tacitus wrote. An ovation was a military parade in honour of a victorious general, so the person who \"returned from Britain with an ovation\" is clearly Plautius, not Pomponia. This has not prevented the error being repeated and disseminated widely.\nAnother is Claudia Rufina, a historical British woman known to the poet Martial. Martial describes Claudia's marriage to a man named Pudens, almost certainly Aulus Pudens, an Umbrian centurion and friend of the poet who appears regularly in his \"Epigrams\". It has been argued since the 17th century that this pair may be the same as the Claudia and Pudens mentioned as members of the Roman Christian community in \"2 Timothy\" in the New Testament. Some go further, claiming that Claudia was Caratacus' daughter, and that the historical Pope Linus, who is described as the \"brother of Claudia\" in an early church document, was Caratacus' son. Pudens is identified with St. Pudens, and it is claimed that the basilica of Santa Pudenziana in Rome, and with which St. Pudens is associated, was once called the \"Palatium Britannicum\" and was the home of Caratacus and his family.\nThis theory was popularised in a 1961 book called \"The Drama of the Lost Disciples\" by George Jowett, but Jowett did not originate it. He cites renaissance historians such as Archbishop James Ussher, Caesar Baronius and John Hardyng, as well as classical writers like Caesar, Tacitus and Juvenal, although his classical citations at least are wildly inaccurate, many of his assertions are unsourced, and many of his identifications entirely speculative. He also frequently cites \"St. Paul in Britain\", an 1860 book by R. W. Morgan, and advocates other tenets of British Israelism, in particular that the British are descended from the lost tribes of Israel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48691", "revid": "1652743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48691", "title": "Ernest Jones", "text": "Welsh neurologist, psychiatrist and psychoanalyst (1879\u20131958)\nAlfred Ernest Jones (1 January 1879 \u2013 11 February 1958) was a Welsh neurologist and psychoanalyst. A lifelong friend and colleague of Sigmund Freud from their first meeting in 1908, he became his official biographer. Jones was the first English-speaking practitioner of psychoanalysis and became its leading exponent in the English-speaking world. As President of both the International Psychoanalytical Association and the British Psycho-Analytical Society in the 1920s and 1930s, Jones exercised a formative influence in the establishment of their organisations, institutions and publications.\nEarly life and career.\nErnest Jones was born in Gowerton (formerly Ffosfelin), Wales, an industrial village on the outskirts of Swansea, the first child of Thomas and Ann Jones. His father was a self-taught colliery engineer who went on to establish himself as a successful businessman, becoming accountant and company secretary at the Elba Steelworks in Gowerton. His mother, Mary Ann (n\u00e9e Lewis), was from a Welsh-speaking Carmarthenshire family which had relocated to Swansea. Jones was educated at Swansea Grammar School, Llandovery College, and Cardiff University in Wales. Jones studied at University College London and meanwhile he obtained the Conjoint diplomas LRCP and MRCS in 1900. A year later, in 1901, he obtained an M.B. degree with honours in medicine and obstetrics. Within five years he received an MD degree and a Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP) in 1903. He was particularly pleased to receive the University's gold medal in obstetrics from his distinguished fellow-Welshman, Sir John Williams.\nAfter obtaining his medical degrees, Jones specialised in neurology and took a number of posts in London hospitals. It was through his association with the surgeon Wilfred Trotter that Jones first heard of Freud's work. Having worked together as surgeons at University College Hospital, he and Trotter became close friends, with Trotter taking the role of mentor and confidant to his younger colleague. They had in common a wide-ranging interest in philosophy and literature, as well as a growing interest in Continental psychiatric literature and the new forms of clinical therapy it surveyed. By 1905 they were sharing accommodation above Harley Street consulting rooms with Jones's sister, Elizabeth, installed as housekeeper. Trotter and Elizabeth Jones later married. Appalled by the treatment of the mentally ill in institutions, Jones began experimenting with hypnotic techniques in his clinical work.\nJones first encountered Freud's writings directly in 1905, in a German psychiatric journal in which Freud published the famous Dora case-history. It was thus he formed \"the deep impression of there being a man in Vienna who actually listened with attention to every word his patients said to him...a revolutionary difference from the attitude of previous physicians...\"\nJones's early attempts to combine his interest in Freud's ideas with his clinical work with children resulted in adverse effects on his career. In 1906 he was arrested and charged with two counts of indecent assault on two adolescent girls whom he had interviewed in his capacity as an inspector of schools for \"mentally defective\" children. At the court hearing Jones maintained his innocence, claiming the girls were fantasising about any inappropriate actions by him. The magistrate concluded that no jury would believe the testimony of such children and Jones was acquitted. In 1908, employed as a pathologist at a London hospital, Jones accepted a colleague's challenge to demonstrate the repressed sexual memory underlying the hysterical paralysis of a young girl's arm. Jones duly obliged but, before conducting the interview, he omitted to inform the girl's consultant or arrange for a chaperone. Subsequently, he faced complaints from the girl's parents over the nature of the interview and he was forced to resign his hospital post.\nPersonal life.\nJones's first serious relationship was with Loe Kann, a wealthy Dutch \u00e9migr\u00e9 referred to him in 1906 after she had become addicted to morphine during treatment for a serious kidney condition. Their relationship lasted until 1913. It ended with Kann in analysis with Freud and Jones, at Freud's behest, undergoing analysis with S\u00e1ndor Ferenczi.\nA tentative romance with Freud's daughter, Anna, did not survive the disapproval of her father. Before her visit to Britain in the autumn of 1914, which Jones chaperoned, Freud advised him: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She does not claim to be treated as a woman, being still far away from sexual longings and rather refusing man. There is an outspoken understanding between me and her that she should not consider marriage or the preliminaries before she gets 2 or 3 years older.\nIn 1917, Jones married the Welsh musician Morfydd Llwyn Owen. They were holidaying in South Wales the following year when Morfydd became ill with acute appendicitis. Jones hoped to get his former colleague and brother-in-law, the leading surgeon Wilfred Trotter, to operate but when this proved impossible emergency surgery was carried out at his father's Swansea home by a local surgeon, with chloroform administered as the anaesthetic. As Jones recounts: \"after a few days [she] became delirious with a high temperature. We thought there was blood poisoning till I got Trotter from London. He at once recognized delayed chloroform poisoning ... We fought hard, and there were moments when we seemed to have succeeded, but it was too late.\" Jones arranged for his wife to be buried in Oystermouth Cemetery on the outskirts of Swansea with her gravestone bearing an inscription from Goethe's \"Faust\": \"Das Unbeschreibliche, hier ist's getan\".\nFollowing some inspired matchmaking by his Viennese colleagues, in 1919 Jones met and married Katherine Jokl, a Jewish economics graduate from Moravia. She had been at school in Vienna with Freud's daughters. They had four children in what proved to be a long and happy marriage, though both struggled to overcome the loss of their eldest child, Gwenith, at the age of 7, during the interwar influenza epidemic. Their son Mervyn Jones became a writer.\nPsychoanalytical career.\nWhilst attending a congress of neurologists in Amsterdam in 1907, Jones met Carl Jung, from whom he received a first-hand account of the work of Freud and his circle in Vienna. Confirmed in his judgement of the importance of Freud's work, Jones joined Jung in Z\u00fcrich to plan the inaugural Psychoanalytical Congress. This was held in 1908 in Salzburg, where Jones met Freud for the first time. Jones travelled to Vienna for further discussions with Freud and introductions to the members of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. Thus began a personal and professional relationship which, to the acknowledged benefit of both, would survive the many dissensions and rivalries which marked the first decades of the psychoanalytic movement, and would last until Freud's death in 1939.\nWith his career prospects in Britain in serious difficulty, Jones sought refuge in Canada in 1908. He took up teaching duties in the Department of Psychiatry of the University of Toronto (from 1911, as Associate Professor of Psychiatry). In addition to building a private psychoanalytic practice, he worked as pathologist to the Toronto Asylum and Director of its psychiatric outpatient clinic. Following further meetings with Freud in 1909 at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, where Freud gave a series of lectures on psychoanalysis, and in the Netherlands the following year, Jones set about forging strong working relationships with the nascent American psychoanalytic movement. He gave some 20 papers or addresses to American professional societies at venues ranging from Boston, to Washington and Chicago. In 1910 he co-founded the American Psychopathological Association and the following year the American Psychoanalytic Association, serving as its first Secretary until 1913.\nJones undertook an intensive programme of writing and research, which produced the first of what were to be many significant contributions to psychoanalytic literature, notably monographs on \"Hamlet\" and \"On the Nightmare\". A number of these were published in German in the main psychoanalytic periodicals published in Vienna; these secured his status in Freud's inner circle during the period of the latter's increasing estrangement from Jung. In this context in 1912 Jones initiated, with Freud's agreement, the formation of a Committee of loyalists charged with safeguarding the theoretical and institutional legacy of the psychoanalytic movement. This development also served the more immediate purpose of isolating Jung and, with Jones in strategic control, eventually manoeuvring him out of the Presidency of the International Psychoanalytical Association, a post he had held since its inception. When Jung's resignation came in 1914, it was only the outbreak of the Great War that prevented Jones from taking his place.\nReturning to London in 1913, Jones set up in practice as a psychoanalyst, founded the London Psychoanalytic Society, and continued to write and lecture on psychoanalytic theory. A collection of his papers was published as \"Papers on Psychoanalysis\", the first account of psychoanalytic theory and practice by a practising analyst in the English language.\nBy 1919, the year he founded the British Psychoanalytical Society, Jones could report proudly to Freud that psychoanalysis in Britain \"stands in the forefront of medical, literary and psychological interest\" (letter 27 January 1919 (Paskauskas 1993)). As President of the Society \u2013 a post he would hold until 1944 \u2013 Jones secured funding for and supervised the establishment in London of a \"Clinic\" offering subsidised fees, and an Institute of Psychoanalysis, which provided administrative, publishing and training facilities for the growing network of professional psychoanalysts.\nJones went on to serve two periods as President of the International Psychoanalytic Association from 1920 to 1924 and 1932 to 1949, where he had significant influence. In 1920 he founded the \"International Journal of Psychoanalysis\", serving as its editor until 1939. The following year he established the International Psychoanalytic Library, which published some 50 books under his editorship. Jones soon obtained from Freud rights to the English translation of his work. In 1924 the first two volumes of Freud's \"Collected Papers\" was published in translations edited by Jones and supervised by Joan Riviere, his former analysand and, at one stage, ardent suitor. After a period in analysis with Freud, Riviere worked with Jones as the translation editor of the \"International Journal of Psychoanalysis.\" She then was part of a working group Jones set up to plan and deliver James Strachey's translations for the standard edition of Freud's work.\nLargely through Jones' energetic advocacy, the British Medical Association officially recognised psychoanalysis in 1929. The BBC subsequently removed him from a list of speakers declared to be dangerous to public morality. In the 1930s Jones and his colleagues made a series of radio broadcasts on psychoanalysis.\nAfter Adolf Hitler took power in Germany, Jones helped many displaced and endangered Jewish analysts to resettle in England and other countries. Following the Anschluss of March 1938, Jones flew into Vienna at considerable personal risk to play a crucial role in negotiating and organising the emigration of Freud and his circle to London.\nJones\u2013Freud controversy.\nJones's early published work on psychoanalysis had been devoted to expositions of the fundamentals of Freudian theory, an elaboration of its theory of symbolism, and its application to the analysis of religion, mythology, folklore and literary and artistic works. Under the influence of Melanie Klein, Jones' work took a new direction.\nKlein had made an impact in Berlin in the new field of child analysis and had impressed Jones in 1925 when he attended her series of lectures to the British Society in London. At Jones's invitation she moved to London the following year; she soon acquired a number of devoted and influential followers. Her work had a dramatic effect on the British Society, polarising its members into rival factions as it became clear that her approach to child analysis was seriously at odds with that of Anna Freud, as set out in her 1927 book \"An Introduction to the Technique of Child Analysis\". The disagreement centred around the clinical approach to the pre-Oedipal child; Klein argued for play as an equivalent to free association in adult analyses. Anna Freud opposed any such equivalence, proposing an educative intervention with the child until an appropriate level of ego development was reached at the Oedipal stage. Klein held this to be a collusive inhibition of analytical work with the child.\nInfluenced by Klein, and initiating what became known as the Jones\u2013Freud controversy, Jones set out to explore a range of interlinked topics in the theory of early psychic development. These included the structure and genesis of the superego and the nature of the feminine castration complex. He coined the term \"phallocentrism\" in a critique of Freud's account of sexual difference. He argued together with Klein and her Berlin colleague, Karen Horney, for a primary femininity, saying that penis envy arose as a defensive formation rather than arising from the fact, or \"injury\", of biological asymmetry. In a corresponding reformulation of the castration complex, Jones introduced the concept of \"aphanisis\" to refer to the fear of \"the permanent extinction of the capacity (including opportunity) for sexual enjoyment\".\nThese departures from orthodoxy were noted in Vienna and were topics that were featured in the regular Freud\u2013Jones correspondence, the tone of which became increasingly fractious. Faced with accusations from Freud of orchestrating a campaign against him and his daughter, Jones sought to allay Freud's concerns without abandoning his new critical standpoint. Eventually, following a series of exchange lectures between the Vienna and London societies, which Jones arranged with Anna Freud, Freud and Jones resumed their usual cordial exchanges.\nWith the arrival in Britain of refugee German and Viennese analysts in the 1930s, including Anna Freud in 1938, the hostility between the orthodox Freudians and Kleinians in the British Society grew more intense. Jones chaired a number of \"extraordinary business meetings\" with the aim of defusing the conflict, and these continued into the war years. The meetings, which became known as the controversial discussions, were established on a more regular basis from 1942. By that time, Jones had removed himself from direct participation, owing to ill health and the difficulties of war-time travel from his home in Elsted, West Sussex. He resigned from the presidency of the British Society in 1944, the year in which, under the presidency of Sylvia Payne, there finally emerged a compromise agreement which established parallel training courses providing options to satisfy the concerns of the rival groups that had formed: followers of Anna Freud, followers of Melanie Klein and a non-aligned group of Middle or Independent Group analysts. It was agreed further that all the key policy making committees of the BPS should have representatives from the three groups.\nLater life and death.\nAfter the end of the war, Jones gradually relinquished his many official posts whilst continuing his psychoanalytic practice, writings and lecturing. The major undertaking of his final years was his monumental account of Freud's life and work, published to widespread acclaim in three volumes between 1953 and 1957. In this he was ably assisted by his German-speaking wife, who translated much of Freud's early correspondence and other archive documentation made available by Anna Freud. His uncompleted autobiography, \"Free Associations\", was published posthumously in 1959.\nAlways proud of his Welsh origins, Jones became a member of the Welsh Nationalist Party, Plaid Cymru. He had a particular love of the Gower Peninsula, which he had explored extensively in his youth. Following the purchase of a holiday cottage in Llanmadoc, this area became a regular holiday retreat for the Jones family. He was instrumental in helping secure its status in 1956, as the first region of the UK to be designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.\nBoth of Jones's main leisure pursuits resulted in significant publications. A keen ice skater since his schooldays, Jones published an influential textbook on the subject. His passion for chess inspired a psychoanalytical study of the life of American chess genius, Paul Morphy.\nJones was made a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians (FRCP) in 1942, Honorary President of the International Psychoanalytical Association in 1949, and was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Science degree at Swansea University (Wales) in 1954.\nJones died in London on 11 February 1958, and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium. His ashes were buried in the grave of the oldest of his four children in the churchyard of St Cadoc's Cheriton on the Gower Peninsula.\nWorks.\n includes a comprehensive bibliography of Jones' writings.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48694", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48694", "title": "Richard Llewellyn", "text": "British novelist (1906\u20131983)\nRichard Dafydd Vivian Llewellyn Lloyd (n\u00e9\u00a0Richard Herbert Vivian Lloyd; 8 December 1906, London \u2013 30 November 1983, Dublin), known by his pen name Richard Llewellyn ( , ), was a British novelist of a Welsh background, who is best remembered for his 1939 novel \"How Green Was My Valley\", which chronicles life in a coal mining village in the South Wales Valleys.\nBiography.\nRichard Herbert Vivian Lloyd (he later used the name \"Richard Dafydd Vivian Llewellyn Lloyd\") was born in Hendon, Middlesex in 1906, the second child and only son of William Llewellyn Lloyd, a hotel clerk and later the assistant secretary to a club, and Sarah Anne, \"n\u00e9e\" Thomas. Only after his death was it discovered that Llewellyn's claim that he was born in St Davids, West Wales, was false.\nIn the U.S., Llewellyn won the National Book Award for favourite novel of 1940, voted by members of the American Booksellers Association.\nHe lived a peripatetic existence, travelling widely throughout his life. Before World War II he spent periods working in hotels, wrote a play, worked as a coal miner and produced his best-known novel. During World War II he rose to the rank of Captain in the Welsh Guards. His sister Gwladys (a Royal Red Cross commandant) and her two daughters were killed during the bombing of London, in June 1944. Following the war he worked as a journalist, covering the Nuremberg Trials, and then as a screenwriter for MGM. During his lifetime, he lived in a variety of countries, including Italy, China, Brazil, Argentina, Kenya and Israel, in addition to Britain and Ireland.\nLlewellyn married twice: his first wife was Nona Theresa Catherine Sonsteby, whom he married in 1952 and divorced in 1968; his second wife was editor Susan Frances Heimann, whom he married in 1974.\nRichard Llewellyn died of a heart attack in St. Vincent's Hospital, Dublin on 30 November 1983.\nThemes.\nSeveral of his novels dealt with a Welsh theme, the best-known being \"How Green Was My Valley\" (1939), which won international acclaim and was made into a classic Hollywood film. It immortalised the way of life of the South Wales Valleys coal mining communities, where Llewellyn spent a small amount of time with his grandfather. Three sequels followed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48696", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48696", "title": "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "48697", "revid": "18165071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48697", "title": "Richard Hughes (British writer)", "text": "British writer (1900\u20131976)\nRichard Arthur Warren Hughes (19 April 1900 \u2013 28 April 1976) was a British writer of poems, short stories, novels and plays.\nBiography.\nHe was born in Weybridge, Surrey. His father was Arthur Hughes, a civil servant, and his mother, Louisa Grace Warren, had been brought up in the West Indies in Jamaica. He was educated first at Charterhouse School and graduated from Oriel College, Oxford in 1922.\nA Charterhouse schoolmaster had sent Hughes's first published work to the magazine \"The Spectator\" in 1917. The article, written as a school essay, was an unfavourable criticism of \"The Loom of Youth\", by Alec Waugh, a recently published novel which caused a furore for its account of homosexual passions between British schoolboys in a public school. At Oxford, he met Robert Graves, also an Old Carthusian, and they co-edited a poetry publication, \"Oxford Poetry\", in 1921. Hughes's short play \"The Sisters' Tragedy\" was being staged in the West End of London at the Royal Court Theatre by 1922. He was the author of the world's first radio play, \"A Comedy Of Danger\", commissioned from him for the BBC by Nigel Playfair and broadcast on 15 January 1924.\nHughes was employed as a journalist and travelled widely before he married the painter Frances Bazley (1905\u20131985) in 1932. They settled for a period in Norfolk and then in 1934 at Castle House, Laugharne in South Wales. Dylan Thomas stayed with Hughes and wrote his book \"Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog\" whilst living at Castle House. Hughes was instrumental in Thomas relocating permanently to the area.\nHe wrote only four novels, the most famous of which is \"The Innocent Voyage\" (1929), or \"A High Wind in Jamaica\", as Hughes renamed it soon after its initial publication. Set in the 19th century, it explores the events which follow the accidental capture of a group of English children by pirates: the children are revealed as considerably more amoral than the pirates (it was in this novel that Hughes first described the cocktail Hangman's Blood). In 1938, he wrote an allegorical novel, \"In Hazard\", based on the true story of the \"S.S. Phemius\", which was caught in the 1932 Cuba hurricane for four days during its maximum intensity. He wrote volumes of children's stories, including \"The Spider's Palace\".\nDuring the war, Hughes had a desk job in the Admiralty. He met the architects Jane Drew and Maxwell Fry, whose children stayed with the Hughes family for much of that time. After the end of the war, he spent ten years writing scripts for Ealing Studios, and published no more novels until 1961. Of the trilogy \"The Human Predicament\", only the first two volumes, \"The Fox in the Attic\" (1961) and \"The Wooden Shepherdess\" (1973), were complete when he died; twelve chapters, less than 50 pages, of the final volume are now published. In these, he describes the course of European history from the 1920s through World War II, including real characters and events\u2014such as Hitler's escape after the abortive Munich putsch\u2014as well as fictional.\nLater in life, Hughes relocated to Ynys in Gwynedd. He was churchwarden of Llanfihangel-y-traethau, the village church, where he was buried when he died at home in 1976.\nHughes was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and, in the United States, an honorary member of both the National Institute of Arts and Letters and the American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was awarded the OBE (Officer of the Order of the British Empire) in 1946.\nFamily.\nRichard and Frances Hughes had five children. Their second child, Penelope Hughes, published a memoir, \"Richard Hughes: Author, Father\", in 1984.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHughes also ghost-wrote \"The Story of the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith\" (1925) for Nigel Playfair, and collaborated with J. D. Scott on an official government publication, \"The Administration of War Production\" (1955).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48698", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48698", "title": "Leptis Magna", "text": "Ancient city in modern Libya\nLeptis or Lepcis Magna, () also known by other names in antiquity, was a prominent city of the Carthaginian Empire and Roman Libya at the mouth of the Wadi Lebda in the Mediterranean.\nEstablished as a Punic settlement prior to 500 BC, the city experienced significant expansion under Roman Emperor Septimius Severus (r.\u2009193\u00a0\u2013\u00a0211), who was born in the city. The 3rd Augustan Legion was stationed here to defend the city against Berber incursions. After the legion's dissolution under Gordian III in 238, the city was increasingly open to raids in the later part of the 3rd century. Diocletian reinstated the city as provincial capital, and it grew again in prosperity until it fell to the Vandals in 439. It was reincorporated into the Eastern Empire in 533 but continued to be plagued by Berber raids and never recovered its former importance. It fell to the Muslim invasion in c.\u2009647 and was subsequently abandoned.\nAfter being abandoned, the city was remarkably preserved as it lay buried beneath layers of sand dunes. In the 1920s, the city was unearthed by Italian archaeologists during Italy's occupation of Libya. Its ruins are within present-day Al-Khums, Libya, east of Tripoli. They are among the best-preserved Roman sites in the Mediterranean.\nNames.\nThe Punic name of the settlement was written LPQ () or LPQY (). This has been tentatively connected to the Semitic root (present in Arabic) LFQ, meaning \"to build\" or \"to piece together\", presumably in reference to the construction of the city.\nThis name was hellenized as \"L\u00e9ptis\" (), also known as \"L\u00e9ptis Meg\u00e1l\u0113\" (, \"Greater Leptis\") distinguishing it from the \"Lesser Leptis\" closer to Carthage in modern-day Tunisia. It was also known by the Greeks as \"Ne\u00e1polis\" (, \"New Town\"). The latinization of these names was Lepcis or Leptis Magna (\"Greater Leptis\"), which also appeared as the \"Leptimagnese City\" (). The Latin demonym was \"Leptitan\" (). It was also known as \"UlpiaTraiana\" as a Roman colony, after Emperor Trajan of the Ulpia gens. Its Italian name is \"LeptiMaggiore\", and in Arabic it is named \"Labdah\" ().\nHistory.\nPunics.\nThe Punic city was founded in the second half of the 7th centuryBC. Little is known about Leptis during this time, but it appears to have been powerful enough to repel Dorieus's attempt to establish a Greek colony nearby around 515BC. Like most Punic settlements, Leptis became part of the Carthaginian Empire and fell under Rome's control with Carthage's defeat in the Punic Wars. Leptis remained highly independent for a period after about 111BC.\nRoman Republic.\nThe Roman Republic sent some colonists together with a small garrison in order to control the city. The city prospered and was even allowed to coin its own money in silver and bronze. Reflecting its blend of cultures, its coins bore Punic inscriptions but images of Hercules and Dionysus. Soon Italian merchants settled in the city and started a profitable commerce with the Libyan interior. The city depended primarily on the fertility of its surrounding farmland, where many olive-presses have been excavated. By 46BC, its olive oil production was of such an extent that the city was able to provide three million pounds of oil annually to Julius Caesar as tax.\nRoman Empire.\nKenneth D. Matthews Jr. writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During the reign of Augustus, Leptis Magna was classified as a \"civitas libera et immunis\", or a free community, over which the governor had an absolute minimum of control. As such Leptis retain its two \"suphetes\" at the head of its government, with the \"mhzm\", similar to the Roman \"aediles\", as minor magistrates. In addition there were such sacred officials as the \"\u02beaddir \u02beararim\" or \"praefectus sacrorum\", the \"n\u0113quim \u0113l\u012bm\", and probably a sacred college of fifteen members.\nLeptis Magna remained as such until the reign of the Roman emperor Tiberius, when the city and the surrounding area were formally incorporated into the empire as part of the province of Africa. It soon became one of the leading cities of Roman Africa and a major trading post. The city grew rapidly under Roman administration. During the reign of Nero, an amphitheater was constructed. The settlement was elevated to \"municipium\" in AD 64 or 65 and to \"colonia\" under Trajan (r.\u200998\u00a0\u2013\u00a0117). The first known bishop of Leptis Magna was a certain priest called Victor who became pope in 189.\nLeptis achieved its greatest prominence beginning in AD193, as the hometown of emperor Septimius Severus. Septimius favored his hometown above all other provincial cities, and the buildings and wealth he lavished on it made Leptis Magna the third-most important city in Africa, rivaling Carthage and Alexandria. In AD205, he and the imperial family visited the city and bestowed great honors. Among the changes that Severus introduced were the creation of a magnificent new forum and the rebuilding of the docks. The natural harbor had a tendency to silt up, but the Severan changes made this worse, and the eastern wharves are extremely well preserved, since they were scarcely used.\nLeptis prospered through trans-Saharan trade in various valuable goods, including ivory, wild animals for the gladiatorial arena, gold dust, carbuncle, precious woods like ebony, and ostrich feathers.\nLeptis overextended itself during this period. During the Crisis of the 3rd Century, when trade declined precipitously, Leptis Magna's importance also fell into a decline, and by the middle of the 4th century, even before it was completely devastated by the 365 tsunami, large parts of the city had been abandoned. Ammianus Marcellinus recounts that the crisis was worsened by a corrupt Roman governor named Romanus, who demanded bribes to protect the city during a major tribal raid. The ruined city could not pay these and complained to the emperor Valentinian I. Romanus then bribed people at court and arranged for the Leptan envoys to be punished \"for bringing false accusations\". It enjoyed a minor renaissance beginning in the reign of the emperor Theodosius I.\nVandal Kingdom.\nIn 439, Leptis Magna and the rest of the cities of Tripolitania fell under the control of the Vandals when their king, Gaiseric, captured Carthage from the Romans and made it his capital. Unfortunately for the future of Leptis Magna, Gaiseric ordered the city's walls demolished so as to dissuade its people from rebelling against Vandal rule. The people of Leptis and the Vandals both paid a heavy price for this in AD523 when a group of Berber raiders sacked the city.\nByzantine Empire.\nBelisarius, general of Emperor Justinian I, recaptured Leptis Magna in the name of the Roman Empire ten years later, and in 533\u20134 it was re-incorporated into the empire. Leptis became a provincial capital of the Eastern Empire, but never recovered from the destruction wreaked upon it by the Berbers. In 544, under the prefecture of Sergius, the city came under intensified attack of Berber tribes, and after some successes, Sergius was reduced to retreating into the city, with the Leuathae tribal confederation camped outside the gate demanding payments. Sergius admitted eighty deputies into the city to present their demands, but when Sergius moved to leave the conference he was detained by the robe by one deputy and crowded by others. This provoked an officer of the prefect's guard to kill the deputy laying hands on the prefect, which resulted in a general massacre. The Berbers reacted with an all-out attack and Sergius was eventually forced to abandon Leptis and retreat to Carthage.\nIslamic conquest.\nBy the 6th century, the city was fully Christianized. During the decade 565\u2013578 AD, Christian missionaries from Leptis Magna even began to move once more among the Berber tribes as far south as the Fezzan in the Libyan desert and converted the Garamantes. Numerous new churches were built in the 6th century, but the city continued to decline, and by the time of the Arab conquest around 647 the city was mostly abandoned except for a Byzantine garrison force and a population of less than 1,000 inhabitants. By the 10th century, the city of Al-Khums had fully absorbed it.\nExcavation.\nToday, the site of Leptis Magna is the site of some of the most impressive ruins of the Roman period.\nPart of an ancient temple was brought from Leptis Magna to the British Museum in 1816 and installed at the Fort Belvedere royal residence in England in 1826. It now lies in part of Windsor Great Park. The ruins are located between the south shore of Virginia Water and Blacknest Road close to the junction with the A30 London Road and Wentworth Drive.\nWhen Italians conquered Italian Libya in the early 20th century, they dedicated huge efforts to the rediscovery of Leptis Magna. In the early 1930s, Italian archeological research was able to show again the buried remains of nearly all the city. A 4th to 3rd centuryBC necropolis was found under the Roman theatre.\nIn June 2005, it was revealed that archaeologists from the University of Hamburg had been working along the coast of Libya when they uncovered a 30 ft length of five colorful mosaics created during the 1st or 2nd century. The mosaics show with exceptional clarity depictions of a warrior in combat with a deer, four young men wrestling a wild bull to the ground, and a gladiator resting in a state of fatigue and staring at his slain opponent. The mosaics decorated the walls of a cold plunge pool in a \"balneae\" within a Roman villa at Wadi Lebda in Leptis Magna. The gladiator mosaic is noted by scholars as one of the finest examples of representational mosaic art ever seen\u2014a \"masterpiece comparable in quality with the Alexander Mosaic in Pompeii.\" The mosaics were originally discovered in the year 2000 but were kept secret in order to avoid looting. They are currently on display in the Leptis Magna Museum.\nThere were reports that Leptis Magna was used as a cover for tanks and military vehicles by pro-Gaddafi forces during the First Libyan Civil War in 2011. When asked if the historic site could be targeted in an airstrike, NATO refused to rule out the possibility of such an action, saying that it had not been able to confirm the rebels' report that weapons were being hidden at the location. Shortly after the war, Libyan archaeologist Hafed Walda reported that Leptis Magna, along with nearby Rasaimergib Fort and the western Tripolis of Sabratha, had \"so far seen no visible loss\" from either fighting on the ground or bombings conducted by international forces.\nIn the midst of the Second Libyan Civil War and the disappearance of governmental and international support for the site, people living in the area organized to voluntarily protect and maintain Leptis Magna.\nClimate change.\nSince they are located on the coast, Leptis Magna ruins are vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included them in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of over 4\u00b0C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for about 10,000 years under all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5\u00b0C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~ with a range of ) well before the year 4000. Thus, it is a matter of time before the Leptis Magna ruins are threatened by rising water levels, unless they can be protected by adaptation efforts such as sea walls.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48699", "revid": "8868555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48699", "title": "Jack Jones (novelist)", "text": "Welsh miner, Trade Union official, politician and playwright (1884\u20131970)\nJack Jones (24 November 1884 \u2013 7 May 1970) was a Welsh miner, Trade Union official, politician, novelist and playwright.\nBackground.\nJack Jones was born in 1884 at Tai-Harri-Blawdd in Merthyr Tydfil, the eldest of nine surviving children of David Jones, a coal miner, and his wife Sarah Ann. He was educated at St David\u2019s Elementary School, Merthyr Tydfil, Glamorgan. He married Laura Grimes Evans in 1908. They had four sons (two died young) and one daughter.\nCareer.\nIn 1896 he joined his father to work in the mines aged 12. In 1901 at the age of 17 he joined the army and was posted to South Africa with his regiment the Militia Battalion of the Welch. However he was very unhappy there and ended up deserting. Once recaptured, he was transferred to India. When he eventually returned to Wales he went back to working in the coal mines. In 1914 Jones was summoned back to his regiment and sent to the front lines in France and later on Belgium. After suffering shrapnel wounds he was invalided home and appointed as recruiting officer for Merthyr Tydfil. He became honorary secretary of his local miners' lodge. In 1923 he was appointed as the full-time secretary-representative of the miners at Blaengarw. In 1926 during the General Strike as part of his job as a miners agent, he travelled around South Wales urging miners to continue supporting the strike. In 1927 he resigned from his full-time post with the miners union. In early 1928 he was employed by Liberal Party headquarters as a speaker. He continued in this job until 1930. By 1934 he had started to earn a living as a writer. He went on two lecture tours in America and the European battlefronts during the Second World War (1939-1945).\nPolitics.\nIn 1920 Jones became a member of the Communist Party. He attended a convention in Manchester on behalf of his local miners lodge with the purpose of establishing the party; at this meeting he was chosen to be Corresponding Secretary for the South Wales Region. He later founded a branch at Merthyr Tydfil. In 1923 he left the Communist Party and joined the Labour Party. He undertook a number of speaking engagements for the party including speaking in support of Labour leader Ramsay MacDonald at Aberavon. In 1927 he produced his first article for the press entitled \"The Need for a Lib-Lab Coalition\". He was becoming disenchanted with the Labour party and its support for nationalisation. He was drawn to support the Liberal Party through its new policies on coal and power. and had joined by the beginning of 1928. Liberal leader David Lloyd George who had been impressed by his rhetoric, recruited him to the Liberal headquarters speaking staff. He travelled around Britain speaking in support of the Liberal party's new industrial policies. In May 1928 he was selected by Neath Liberal Association to be their prospective parliamentary candidate. Neath was a safe Labour seat that the Liberals last won in 1918; at the last election in 1924 the Liberals had not run a candidate. He stood as Liberal candidate for Neath at the 1929 General Election and polled nearly 30%;\nElectorate 59,584\n! scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\" style=\"width: 130px\"|Party\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 17em\"|Candidate\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 5em\"|Votes\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 3.5em\"|%\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 3.5em\"|&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;\n!scope=row style=\"text-align:left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=\"fn\" | William Jenkins\n!scope=row style=\"text-align:left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=\"fn\" | Jack Jones\n!scope=row style=\"text-align:left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=\"fn\" | David J Evans\n! scope=row colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align: right; margin-right: 0.5em\" | Majority\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align: right; margin-right: 0.5em\" scope=row | Turnout\n!scope=row style=\"font-weight:normal; color:inherit; text-align:right;\" | Swing\nHe did not stand for parliament again. He was retained by Liberal headquarters as a speaker for another 12 months after the election. During the 1930s he made another political change and was a speaker for Oswald Mosley's New Party. In the 1945 election he supported 'National' candidate Sir James Grigg.\nWriting career.\nDuring his 20s Jack Jones began to educate himself and develop his love of the theatre and writing, often taking part in local dramatic productions. In 1926 he successfully entered a short play he had written entitled \"Dad's Double\" into a competition in Manchester.\nHe began writing seriously during a period of unemployment. His first novel, \"Saran\", was never published, but a reduced version of it appeared as \"Black Parade\" (1935). By 1939, he had written the novels \"Rhondda Roundabout\" (1934), and \"Bidden to the Feast\" (1938), a play, \"Land of my Fathers\" (1937), and his first autobiography, \"Unfinished Journey\" (1937). The London stage version of Rhondda Roundabout was acclaimed. He wrote the dialogue for the film \"The Proud Valley\", in which he also had a minor acting role. During the Second World War he was a speaker for the Ministry of Information and the National Savings Movement. He wrote \"The Man David\" (1944), a life of David Lloyd George.\nAfter the war he wrote two volumes of autobiography, \"Me and Mine\" (1946) and \"Give Me Back My Heart\" (1950), three novels, \"Off to Philadelphia in the Morning\" (1947) made into a BBC drama of the same name in 1978, \"Some Trust in Chariots\" (1948), and \"River Out of Eden\" (1951), and a play \"Transatlantic Episode\" (1947). His later works, \"Lily of the Valley\" and \"Lucky Year\" (1952), \"Time and the Business\" (1953), \"Choral Symphony\" (1955) and \"Come, Night; End, Day\" (1956) were less well received. In 1954, he married his second wife, Gladys Morgan. He was elected first President of the English section of Yr Academi Gymreig. Until his death in May 1970 he continued writing; these works remained unpublished, including a biographical novel, \"A Burnt Offering\", based on the life of Dr William Price (1800\u20131893), Llantrisant, pioneer of cremation.\nHonours.\nIn 1948 he was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his services to the community and to literature. In February 1970 he won an award from the Arts Council of Wales for `his distinguished contribution to the literature of Wales'. Jack Jones died on 7 May 1970.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48701", "revid": "14377864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48701", "title": "Thomas Cromwell", "text": "English statesman and politician (1485\u20131540)\nThomas Cromwell (; c.\u20091485 \u2013 28 July 1540) was an English statesman and lawyer who served as chief minister to King Henry VIII from 1534 to 1540, when he was beheaded on orders of the King, who later blamed false charges for the execution.\nCromwell was one of the most powerful proponents of the English Reformation. As the King's chief secretary, he instituted new administrative procedures that transformed the workings of government. He helped to engineer an annulment of the King's marriage to Catherine of Aragon so that Henry could lawfully marry Anne Boleyn. Henry failed to obtain the approval of Pope Clement VII for the annulment in 1533, so Parliament endorsed the King's claim to be Supreme Head of the Church of England, giving him the authority to annul his own marriage. Cromwell subsequently charted an evangelical and reformist course for the Church of England from the unique posts of Vicegerent in Spirituals and Vicar-general (the two titles refer to the same position).\nDuring his rise to power, becoming Baron Cromwell, he made many enemies, including Anne Boleyn, with his fresh ideas and lack of inherited nobility. He played a prominent role in her downfall. He fell from power in 1540, despite being created Earl of Essex that year, after arranging the King's marriage to the German princess Anne of Cleves. The marriage was a disaster for Cromwell, ending in an annulment six months later. Cromwell was arraigned under an act of attainder (32 Hen. 8. c. \"62\") and was executed for treason and heresy on Tower Hill on 28 July 1540. The King later expressed regret at the loss of his chief minister, and his reign never recovered from the incident.\nFamily background and early life.\nPutney.\nThomas Cromwell is thought to have been born by or around 1485 in Putney, then a village in Surrey providing a ferry service across the Thames upstream from London. His grandfather, John, had moved to the area from Nottinghamshire to run a fulling mill (for wool processing) leased to him by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had a mansion further upstream at Mortlake and was lord of the local manor of Wimbledon. His father, Walter (c.\u20091450\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091514), was an ambitious yeoman landowner who plied various trades, operating as a sheep farmer and wool processor (\"fuller\" and \"shearman\"), while also running a tavern and a brewery. A popular tradition that he was also a blacksmith is plausible, although the association could have arisen from his use of the alternative surname of \"Smith\" (as in \"Cromwell alias Smyth\"). As a successful tradesman, Cromwell's father was regularly called upon for jury service and was elected Constable of Putney in 1495. He had frequent brushes with the law himself in the local manorial court, often on relatively minor matters, but also for assault and, ultimately, in 1514, for \"falsely and fraudulently\" removing evidence from the court roll regarding his manorial tenancy, a judgement that led to confiscation of all his accumulated lands.\nLittle is known about Cromwell's mother, even though she came from a recognised gentry family, the Meverells of Staffordshire. Generally referred to as \"Katherine Meverell\", her first name is uncertain. She married Cromwell's father in 1474 while living in Putney in the house of a local attorney, John Welbeck.\nCromwell is assumed to have been the youngest of three children. He had two sisters: the elder, Katherine, married Morgan Williams, a Welsh lawyer's son who came to Putney as a follower of King Henry VII when he established himself in the nearby Richmond Palace; the younger, Elizabeth, married William Wellyfed, a sheep farmer. Katherine and Morgan's son, Richard, was employed in his uncle's service and by the autumn of 1529 had changed his name to Cromwell. Richard was the great-grandfather of Oliver Cromwell.\nNo record survives of Cromwell's childhood days in Putney, and it is unknown whether he was ever sent to school or had to serve an apprenticeship. Various people from Putney crop up in his adult life, and he maintained close relations with his two sisters and their extended families.\nEarly life.\nFrance, Italy and the Low Countries.\nCromwell acknowledged to Thomas Cranmer, the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he had been a \"ruffian ... in his young days\". Around the start of the 16th century, for reasons which remain unclear, he left his family in Putney and crossed the Channel to continental Europe, allegedly after spending some time in prison. Accounts of his activities in France, Italy and the Low Countries are problematic. The tradition that he quickly became a mercenary and marched with the French army to Italy, where in 1503 he fought in the Battle of Garigliano, stems from a novella by the contemporary Italian writer Matteo Bandello in which Cromwell is portrayed as a page to a foot-soldier, carrying his pike and helmet. This account was treated as fact by many later writers, including John Foxe in his \"Actes and Monuments\" of 1563. Despite the obvious exaggerations contained in Bandello's novella, MacCulloch points out that the \"picaresque\" narrative provides the best available clues to shine some light on the obscurity of Cromwell's first Italian trip.\nWhile in Italy, Cromwell seems to have entered service in the household of the Frescobaldi family of Florentine bankers (Bandello has an implausibly young Francesco Frescobaldi graciously saving him from starvation on the streets of Florence). It appears that he later worked as a cloth merchant in the Low Countries, where his frequentation of English Merchant Adventurers allowed him to develop useful contacts and gain familiarity with several languages. Cromwell, who was known to have a prodigious memory, was probably already fluent in French and Italian, as well as being proficient in Latin, with some knowledge also of Ancient Greek.\nReturn to Italy.\nAt some point Cromwell returned to Italy: the records of the English Hospital in Rome indicate that he stayed there in June 1514, while documents in the Vatican Archives suggest that he was an agent for the Archbishop of York, Cardinal Christopher Bainbridge, and handled English ecclesiastical issues before the Roman Rota.\nIn 1517\u20131518, he travelled to Rome again, this time to gain Pope Leo X's approval for plenary indulgences to be sold by the St Mary's Guild, Boston as part of a thriving trade. During this lengthy trip, Cromwell studied in detail Erasmus's new edition of the gospels. His reading made him, for the first time, doubt the legitimacy of the practice he was advocating. Tracy Borman has suggested that it was at this point Cromwell developed his contempt for the papacy, because of the ease with which he had been able to manipulate the Pope into granting the Boston petition without due consideration.\nMarriage and issue.\nAt one point during these years, Cromwell returned to England, where around 1515 he married Elizabeth Wyckes (d. 1529). She was the widow of Thomas Williams, a Yeoman of the Guard, and the daughter of a Putney shearman, Henry Wyckes, who had later served as a Gentleman Usher to King Henry VII. \nThe couple had three children:\nCromwell's wife died in 1529 and his daughters, Anne and Grace, are believed to have died not long after their mother. Their deaths may have been caused by the sweating sickness. Provisions made for Anne and Grace in Cromwell's will, dated 12 July 1529, were crossed out at some later date. Gregory outlived his father by only 11 years, succumbing to sweating sickness in 1551.\nCromwell also had an illegitimate daughter, Jane (c.\u20091530\u20131580), whose early life is a complete mystery. According to novelist Hilary Mantel, \"Cromwell had an illegitimate daughter, and beyond the fact that she existed, we know very little about her. She comes briefly into the records, in an incredibly obscure way\u2014she's in the archives of the county of Chester.\" Jane was born to an unknown mother during the time Cromwell was mourning the loss of his wife and daughters. Jane presumably was educated and resided in Cromwell's homes, but in 1539, Margaret Vernon, the worldly prioress of Little Marlow Priory (who had also helped to raise Gregory Cromwell) suggested she take Jane to begin her education away from home. In that same year Jane's half-brother Gregory (at age nineteen) and his wife Elizabeth moved into Leeds Castle, Kent, in preparation for Gregory's election as a knight of the shire (Member of Parliament) for the county. Jane, then nine years of age, accompanied him. Cromwell's records show him paying Elizabeth for clothing and expenses for Jane. It is unknown what became of Jane's mother, though historian Caroline Angus argues that Jane's mother was Elizabeth Gregory, a former household servant who was left a surprisingly large amount of money and items in Cromwell's will. Elizabeth Gregory was listed among family members in the will, despite not being any relation to the Cromwell, Williams, Wyckes or Williamson families. Cromwell was known to be one of the few men at court without mistresses and tried to keep this indiscretion secret.\nJane married William Hough (c.\u20091527\u20131585), of Leighton in the Wirral Hundred, around 1550. William Hough was the son of Richard Hough (1505\u20131574) who was Cromwell's agent in Chester from 1534 to 1540. Jane and her husband remained staunch Catholics, who, together with their daughter, Alice, her husband, William Whitmore, and their children, all came to the attention of the authorities as recusants during the reign of Elizabeth I.\nLawyer, Member of Parliament, adviser to Wolsey.\nBy 1520, Cromwell was firmly established in London mercantile and legal circles. In 1529, he obtained a seat in the House of Commons as a burgess, though the constituency he represented has not been identified with certainty. He prepared a daring speech against King Henry's declared intention of leading an invasion of France, although it was expressed tactfully in terms of concern for the King's safety while on campaign and fear of the costs such an overbold policy would entail; it was the latter point that embodied Cromwell's true concern. There is no record of when Cromwell actually delivered the speech in the chamber and some modern historians, including Michael Everett and Robert Woods, have suggested that the whole episode was no more than a ploy, sanctioned by Henry himself, to allow him to withdraw graciously from his rash threat of war.\nAfter Parliament had been dissolved, Cromwell wrote a letter to a friend, jesting about the session's lack of productivity:I amongst other have indured a parlyament which contenwid by the space of xvii hole wekes wher we communyd of warre pease Stryffe contencyon debatte murmure grudge Riches poverte penurye trowth falshode Justyce equyte dicayte [deceit] opprescyon Magnanymyte actyvyte foce [force] attempraunce [moderation] Treason murder Felonye consyli... [conciliation] and also how a commune welth myght be ediffyed and a[lso] contenewid within our Realme. Howbeyt in conclusyon we have d[one] as our predecessors have been wont to doo that ys to say, as well we myght and lefte wher we begann.\nFor a short while early in 1523 Cromwell became an adviser to Thomas Grey, 2nd Marquess of Dorset, drafting a parliamentary bill to relieve his sponsor of taxation on some property in Cumberland. Although the bill was not introduced in the 1523 session of Parliament, this may indicate that the unidentified seat for which Cromwell was returned in that year was Carlisle, Cumberland, to present the Marquess's bill. Early in 1524 he became a member of the household of Lord Chancellor Cardinal Thomas Wolsey although, initially, he maintained his private legal practice; in that year he was elected a member of Gray's Inn, a lawyers' guild. Cromwell assisted in the dissolution of nearly thirty monasteries to raise funds for Wolsey to found The King's School, Ipswich (1528), and Cardinal College, in Oxford (1529). In 1527 Wolsey appointed Cromwell a member of his personal council, as one of his most senior and trusted advisers. By the end of October of that year, however, Wolsey had fallen from power. Cromwell had made enemies by aiding Wolsey to suppress the monasteries, but was determined not to fall with his master, as he told George Cavendish, then a Gentleman Usher and later Wolsey's biographer:I do entend (god wyllyng) this after none, whan my lord hathe dyned to ride to london and so to the Court, where I wyll other make or marre, or ere [before] I come agayn, I wyll put my self in the prese [press] to se what any man is Able to lay to my charge of ontrouthe or mysdemeanor.\nCavendish acknowledges that Cromwell's moves to mend the situation were by means of engaging himself in an energetic defence of Wolsey (\"There could nothing be spoken against my lord... but he [Cromwell] would answer it incontinent[ly]\") rather than by distancing himself from his old master's actions, and this display of \"authentic loyalty\" only enhanced his reputation, not least in the mind of the King.\nRoyal favourite.\nCromwell successfully overcame the shadow cast over his career by Wolsey's downfall. By November 1529, he had secured a seat in Parliament as a member for Taunton and was reported to be in favour with the King. Early in this short session of Parliament (November to December 1529) Cromwell involved himself with legislation to restrict absentee clergy from collecting stipends from multiple parishes (\"clerical farming\") and to abolish the power of Rome to award dispensations for the practice.\nAt some point during the closing weeks of 1530, the King appointed him to the Privy Council. Cromwell held numerous offices during his career in the King's service, including:\nCromwell also possessed numerous other minor offices.\nAnne Boleyn.\nFrom 1527, Henry VIII sought to have his marriage to Queen Catherine of Aragon annulled, so that he could lawfully marry Anne Boleyn. At the centre of the campaign to secure the annulment was the emerging doctrine of royal supremacy over the church. By the autumn of 1531, Cromwell had taken control of the supervision of the King's legal and parliamentary affairs, working closely with Thomas Audley, and had joined the inner circle of the council. By the following spring, he had begun to exert influence over elections to the House of Commons.\nThe third session of what is now known as the Reformation Parliament had been scheduled for October 1531, but was postponed until 15 January 1532 because of Henry's indecision as to the best way to proceed towards his annulment. Cromwell favoured the assertion of royal supremacy over the recalcitrant Church, and he manipulated support in the House of Commons for the measure by resurrecting anti-clerical grievances, the \"supplication against the ordinaries\" expressed earlier, in the session of 1529. Once he achieved his goal of managing affairs in Parliament, he never relinquished it. In March 1532, speaking without royal permission, he urged the House of Commons to draw up a list of clerical abuses in need of reform. On 18 March 1532, the Commons delivered a supplication to the King, denouncing clerical abuses and the power of the ecclesiastical courts, and describing Henry as \"the only head, sovereign lord, protector and defender\" of the Church. On 14 May 1532, Parliament was prorogued. Two days later, Sir Thomas More resigned as Lord Chancellor, realising that the battle to save the King's marriage to Catherine was lost. More's resignation from the Council represented a triumph for Cromwell and the pro-Reformation faction at court.\nThe King's gratitude to Cromwell was expressed in a grant of the lordship of the manor of Romney in the Welsh Marches (recently confiscated from the family of the executed Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham) and appointment to three relatively minor offices: Master of the Jewels on 14 April 1532, Clerk of the Hanaper on 16 July, and Chancellor of the Exchequer on 12 April 1533. None of these offices afforded much income, but the appointments were an indication of royal favour, and gave Cromwell a position in three major institutions of government: the royal household, the Chancery, and the Exchequer.\nHenry and Anne married on 25 January 1533, after a secret marriage on 14 November 1532 that may have taken place in Calais.\nOn 26 January 1533, Audley was appointed Lord Chancellor and his replacement as Speaker of the House of Commons was Cromwell's old friend (and former lawyer to Cardinal Wolsey) Humphrey Wingfield. Cromwell further increased his control over parliament through his management of by-elections: since the previous summer, assisted by Thomas Wriothesley, then Clerk of the Signet, he had prepared a list of suitably amenable \"burgesses, knights and citizens\" for the vacant parliamentary seats.\nThe parliamentary session began on 4 February 1533, and Cromwell introduced a new bill restricting the right to make appeals to Rome, reasserting the long-standing contention that England was an \"empire\" and thus not subject to external jurisdiction. On 30 March, Thomas Cranmer was consecrated as Archbishop of Canterbury and the Convocation immediately declared the King's marriage to Catherine unlawful. In the first week of April 1533, Parliament passed Cromwell's bill into law, as the Ecclesiastical Appeals Act 1532 (24 Hen. 8. c. 12), ensuring that any adjudication concerning the King's marriage could not be challenged in Rome. On 11 April, Archbishop Cranmer sent the King formal notice that the validity of his marriage to Catherine was to be the subject of an ecclesiastical court hearing. The trial began on 10 May 1533 at Dunstable Priory (near to where Catherine was staying at Ampthill Castle) and on 23 May the Archbishop pronounced the court's verdict, declaring the marriage \"null and invalid...contrary to the law of God\". Five days later he pronounced the King's marriage to Anne to be lawful, and on 1 June, she was crowned queen.\nIn December, the King authorised Cromwell to discredit the papacy. The minister organised a campaign throughout the nation, attacking the Pope in sermons, pamphlets and plays mounted in parish churches. In 1534 a new Parliament was summoned, again under Cromwell's supervision, to enact the legislation necessary to make a formal break of England's remaining ties with Rome. Archbishop Cranmer's verdict took statutory form as the Succession to the Crown Act 1533 (25 Hen. 8. c. 22), the Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533 (25 Hen. 8. c. 21) reiterated royal supremacy and the Submission of the Clergy Act 1533 (25 Hen. 8. c. 19) incorporated into law the clergy's surrender in 1532. On 30 March 1534, Audley gave royal assent to the legislation in the presence of the King.\nKing's chief minister.\nIn April 1534, Henry confirmed Cromwell as his principal secretary and chief minister, a position which he had held for some time in all but name. Cromwell immediately took steps to enforce the legislation just passed by Parliament. Before the members of both houses returned home on 30 March, they were required to swear an oath accepting the Act of Succession: all the King's subjects were now required to swear to the legitimacy of the marriage and, by implication, to accept the King's new powers and the break from Rome. On 13 April, the London clergy accepted the oath. On the same day, the commissioners offered it to Sir Thomas More and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, both of whom refused it. More was taken into custody on the same day and was moved to the Tower of London on 17 April. Fisher joined him there four days later. On 7 May Cromwell led a deputation from the commissioners to Fisher and More, to persuade them to accept the Act and save themselves. This failed and, within a month, both prisoners were executed.\nOn 18 April, an order was issued that all citizens of London were to swear their acceptance of the Oath of Succession. Similar orders were issued throughout the country. When Parliament reconvened in November, Cromwell brought in the most significant revision of the treason laws since 1352, making it treasonous to speak rebellious words against the Royal Family, to deny their titles, or to call the King a heretic, tyrant, infidel, or usurper. The Act of Supremacy 1534 (26 Hen. 8. c. 1) also clarified the King's position as Head of the Church and the First Fruits and Tenths Act 1534 (26 Hen. 8. c. 3) substantially increased clerical taxes. Cromwell also strengthened his own control over the Church.\nDuring November 1534, another provision of the Act of Succession was in preparation: the appointment of three \"vicegerentes\" to supervise all ecclesiastical institutions. When the measure was put into effect on 21 January 1535, however, only one name remained: that of Cromwell. The King appointed him Royal Vicegerent and Vicar-General, and issued a warrant to authorise a visitation of all the country's churches, monasteries and clergy. Neville Williams explains that as Vicegerent in spiritual affairs, Cromwell held sway over church doctrine and religious policy, while from the Vicar General title, he drew his authority over monasteries and other church institutions. By September 1535 Cromwell had appointed his own officials for church administration, with authority over the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, to oversee all church affairs. He never declared that this visitation was ever complete, so he retained its extensive powers in his own hands. In this capacity, Cromwell conducted a census in 1535 to enable the government to evaluate and tax church property more effectively.\nA lasting achievement of Cromwell's vicegerency was his direction of Autumn 1538 that every parish in the country should securely maintain a record of all christenings, marriages and burials. Although intended as a means to identify Anabaptists (dissenting religious refugees from the Low Countries and elsewhere who did not practise infant baptism) the measure proved to be of great benefit to the posterity of English historians.\nFall of Anne Boleyn.\nThe final session of the Reformation Parliament began on 4 February 1536. By 18 March, the Suppression of Religious Houses Act 1535 (27 Hen. 8. c. 28), an act for the suppression of the Lesser Monasteries, those with a gross income of less than \u00a3200 per annum, had passed both houses. This caused a clash with Anne Boleyn, formerly one of Cromwell's strongest allies, who wanted the proceeds of the dissolution used for educational and charitable purposes, not paid into the King's coffers.\nAnne instructed her chaplains to preach against the Vicegerent, and in a blistering sermon on Passion Sunday, 2 April 1536, her almoner, John Skypp, denounced Cromwell and his fellow Privy Councillors before the entire court. Skypp's diatribe was intended to persuade courtiers and Privy Councillors to change the advice they had been giving the King and to reject the temptation of personal gain. Skypp was called before the council and accused of malice, slander, presumption, lack of charity, sedition, treason, disobedience to the gospel, attacking \"the great posts, pillars and columns sustaining and holding up the commonwealth\" and inviting anarchy. Cromwell took no action against Skypp beyond the unsympathetic questioning, and he remained as the Queen's almoner, attending her when she was awaiting execution in the Tower of London.\nAnne, who had many enemies at court, had never been popular with the people and had so far failed to produce a male heir. The King was becoming impatient, now enamoured of the young Jane Seymour and being encouraged by Anne's enemies, particularly Sir Nicholas Carew and the Seymours. In circumstances that have divided historians, Anne was accused of adultery with: Mark Smeaton, a musician of the royal household; Sir Henry Norris, the King's groom of the stool and one of his closest friends; Sir Francis Weston; Sir William Brereton; and her brother, George Boleyn, 2nd Viscount Rochford. The Imperial Ambassador, Eustace Chapuys, wrote to Charles V that: he himself [Cromwell] has been authorised and commissioned by the King to prosecute and bring to an end the mistress's trial, to do which he had taken considerable trouble... He set himself to devise and conspire the said affair. Regardless of the role Cromwell played in Anne Boleyn's fall, and his confessed animosity to her, Chapuys's letter states that Cromwell claimed that he was acting with the King's authority. Some historians, such as Alison Weir and Susan Bordo, are convinced that her fall and execution were engineered by Cromwell, while others, such as Diarmaid MacCulloch and John Schofield, accept that the King instigated the process. Alexander Alesius, a theologian and associate of Cromwell, wrote that it had indeed been Cromwell who hinted to Henry of Anne's infidelity, but the King had in turn instructed Cromwell to turn the rumours into proceedings.\nThe Queen and her brother stood trial on Monday 15 May, while the four others accused with them were condemned on the Friday beforehand. The men were executed on 17 May 1536 and, on the same day, Cranmer declared Henry's marriage to Anne invalid, a ruling that illegitimised their daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Two days later, Anne herself was executed. On 30 May, the King married Jane Seymour. On 8 June, a new Parliament passed the Second Succession Act, securing the rights of Queen Jane's heirs to the throne.\nBaron Cromwell and Lord Privy Seal.\nCromwell's position was now stronger than ever. He succeeded Anne Boleyn's father, Thomas Boleyn, 1st Earl of Wiltshire, as Lord Privy Seal on 2 July 1536, resigning the office of Master of the Rolls, which he had held since 8 October 1534. On 8 July 1536, he was raised to the peerage as Baron Cromwell of Wimbledon.\nReligious reform.\nCromwell orchestrated the Dissolution of the Monasteries and visitations to the universities and colleges in 1535, which had strong links to the church. This resulted in the dispersal and destruction of many books deemed \"popish\" and \"superstitious\". This has been described as \"easily the greatest single disaster in English literary history\". Oxford University was left without a library collection until Sir Thomas Bodley's donation in 1602.\nIn July 1536, the first attempt was made to clarify religious doctrine after the break with Rome. Bishop Edward Foxe tabled proposals in Convocation, with strong backing from Cromwell and Cranmer, which the King later endorsed as the Ten Articles and which were printed in August 1536. Cromwell circulated injunctions for their enforcement that went beyond the Articles themselves, provoking opposition in September and October in Lincolnshire and then throughout the six northern counties. These widespread popular uprisings of the laity, collectively known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, found support among the gentry and even the nobility.\nThe rebels' grievances were wide-ranging, but the most significant was the suppression of the monasteries, blamed on the King's \"evil counsellors\", principally Cromwell and Cranmer. One of the leaders of the rebellion was Thomas Darcy, 1st Baron Darcy of Darcy, who gave Cromwell the prophetic warning during his interrogation in the Tower: \"[...] men who have been in cases like with their prince as ye be now have come at the last to the same end that ye would now bring me unto.\" The suppression of the risings spurred further Reformation measures. In February 1537, Cromwell convened a vicegerential synod of bishops and academics. The synod was co-ordinated by Cranmer and Foxe, and they prepared a draft document by July: \"The Institution of a Christian Man\", more commonly known as the Bishops' Book. By October, it was in circulation, although the King had not yet given it his full assent. However, Cromwell's success in Church politics was offset by the fact that his political influence had been weakened by the emergence of a Privy Council, a body of nobles and office-holders that first came together to suppress the Pilgrimage of Grace. The King confirmed his support of Cromwell by appointing him to the Order of the Garter on 5 August 1537, but Cromwell was nonetheless forced to accept the existence of an executive body dominated by his conservative opponents.\nIn January 1538, Cromwell pursued an extensive campaign against what the opponents of the old religion termed \"idolatry\"; statues, rood screens, and images were attacked, culminating in September with the dismantling of the shrine of St. Thomas Becket at Canterbury. Early in September, Cromwell also completed a new set of vicegerential injunctions declaring open war on \"pilgrimages, feigned relics or images, or any such superstitions\" and commanding that \"one book of the whole Bible in English\" be set up in every church. Moreover, following the \"voluntary\" surrender of the remaining smaller monasteries during the previous year, the larger monasteries were now also \"invited\" to surrender throughout 1538, a process legitimised in the 1539 session of Parliament and completed in the following year.\nResistance to further religious reform.\nThe King was becoming increasingly unhappy about the extent of religious changes, and the conservative faction was gaining strength at court. Cromwell took the initiative against his enemies. He imprisoned Henry Courtenay, 1st Marquess of Exeter, Sir Edward Neville, and Sir Nicholas Carew on charges of treason in November 1538 (the \"Exeter Conspiracy\"), using evidence acquired from Sir Geoffrey Pole under interrogation in the Tower. Sir Geoffrey, \"broken in spirit\", was pardoned but the others were executed.\nOn 17 December 1538, the Inquisitor-General of France forbade the printing of Miles Coverdale's Great Bible. Cromwell persuaded the King of France to release the unfinished books so that printing could continue in England. The first edition was finally available in April 1539. The publication of the Great Bible was one of Cromwell's principal achievements, being the first authoritative version in English.\nThe King, however, continued to resist further Reformation measures. A Parliamentary committee was established to examine doctrine, and the Duke of Norfolk presented six questions on 16 May 1539 for the House to consider, which were duly passed as the Act of Six Articles shortly before the session ended on 28 June. The Six Articles reaffirmed a traditional view of the Mass, the Sacraments, and the priesthood.\nAnne of Cleves.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHenry's third wife, Jane, died in 1537, less than two weeks after the birth of her only child, the future Edward VI. In early October 1539, the King finally accepted Cromwell's suggestion that he should marry Anne of Cleves, the sister of William, Duke of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg, partly on the basis of a portrait which Hans Holbein had painted of her. On 27 December, Anne of Cleves arrived at Dover. On New Year's Day 1540, the King met her at Rochester, at first disguised, where he embraced and kissed Anne, though Anne \"regarded him little\". He later claimed to be repelled by her physically: \"I like her not!\" The wedding ceremony, Archbishop Cranmer officiating, took place on 6 January in the Queen's Closet at Greenwich Palace, but the marriage was not consummated. Henry said that he found it impossible to enjoy conjugal relations with a woman whom he found so unattractive.\nEarl of Essex.\nOn 18 April 1540, Henry granted Cromwell the earldom of Essex and the senior court office of Lord Great Chamberlain. Despite these signs of royal favour, Cromwell's tenure as the King's chief minister was nearing its end. The King's anger at being manoeuvered into marrying Anne of Cleves was the opportunity Cromwell's conservative opponents, most notably the Duke of Norfolk, had been hoping for.\nDownfall and execution.\nDuring 1536, Cromwell had proved himself an agile political survivor. The gradual movement towards Protestantism at home and the King's ill-fated marriage to Anne of Cleves, which Cromwell engineered in January 1540, proved costly. Some historians believe that Hans Holbein the Younger was partly responsible for Cromwell's downfall because he had shown the King a flattering portrait of Anne, which may have deceived him and that, when Henry finally met her, the King was reportedly shocked by her plain appearance. Cromwell had passed on to Henry some exaggerated claims of Anne's beauty. However, Nicholas Wotton, one of the envoys sent to Cleves, considered Holbein's portrait a good likeness; according to the depositions of witnesses assembled for Henry's divorce hearing, it was this first disastrous meeting with Anne that caused him to dislike his fourth wife.\nHenry VIII confided in Cromwell that he had been unable to consummate the union with Anne and he allowed Cromwell to impart this information to William FitzWilliam, 1st Earl of Southampton, who, as Lord High Admiral, had conveyed Anne from Calais. Back home at Austin Friars, and uncertain how to deal with this new problem, Cromwell also told Thomas Wriothesley, his principal secretary (who also served the King in various important positions). When Henry's humiliation became common knowledge, Southampton (who was anxious to avoid the King's displeasure for his part in bringing Anne to London), or possibly Wriothesley's close friend Edmund Bonner, Bishop of London, made sure that Cromwell was blamed for the indiscretion. Wriothesley, the Bishop, and the Lord Admiral were erstwhile friends of Cromwell and their self-serving disloyalty indicated that the minister's position was already known to be weakening.\nA long-mooted Franco-Imperial alliance (contrary to England's interests) had failed to materialise. The King had sent the Duke of Norfolk to the French King Francis I to offer Henry's support in his unresolved dispute with Emperor Charles V, and the mission had been received favourably. This changed the balance of power in England's favour and demonstrated that Cromwell's earlier foreign policy of wooing support from the Duchy of Cleves had unnecessarily caused his King's conjugal difficulty. Furthermore, the possibility of war was arising between the Duke of Cleves and Charles V and, if this materialised, Henry would be trapped by his new alliance with Cleves into declaring war on France, an unwelcome reversal of previous policy.\nEarly in 1540 Cromwell's religiously conservative, aristocratic enemies, headed by the Duke of Norfolk and supported by Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester (given the nickname \"Wily Winchester\" by polemical historian John Foxe for his mischievous counsels to the King) decided that the country's trend towards \"doctrinal radicalism\" in religion, as expressed in a series of parliamentary debates held throughout that spring, had gone too far. They saw in Catherine Howard, Norfolk's niece, \"considerately put in the King's way by that pander, her uncle of Norfolk\", an opportunity to displace their foe. Catherine's assignations with the King were openly facilitated by the Duke and the Bishop and as she \"strode...towards the throne\" the two conspirators found themselves edging once more into political power. It would have been a simple matter for Cromwell to arrange an annulment of Henry's marriage to the tractable Anne, but this would have put him in greater jeopardy as it would clear the way for Catherine to marry the King. At this point, however, cynical self-interest may have made Henry hesitate to act immediately against Cromwell, as the minister was guiding two important revenue bills (the Subsidy Bill\u2014whereby Cromwell sought to extend the principle that taxation could be levied for general government purposes rather than a specified objective\u2014and a bill to confiscate the assets of the Order of St John) through Parliament; Henry was anxious that any unpopularity caused by the measures would fall on Cromwell and not himself.\nCromwell was arrested at a Council meeting at Westminster on 10 June 1540 and accused of various charges. \"Cromwell may have been arrested for his promotion of religious reformation, but few could doubt that Henry was also punishing Cromwell for the humiliation of his latest marriage.\" His enemies took every opportunity to humiliate him: The Duke of Norfolk snatched the St George's collar (insignia of the Order of the Garter) from Cromwell's shoulders, saying: \"A traitor must not wear it\", while the prisoner's former friend Sir William Fitzwilliam, Earl of Southampton untied the ceremonial garter of the Order. His initial reaction was defiance: \"This then is my reward for faithful service!\" he cried out, and angrily defied his fellow councillors to call him a traitor. He was taken by barge to the Tower and imprisoned.\nA bill of attainder containing a long list of indictments, including supporting Anabaptists, corrupt practices, leniency in matters of justice, acting for personal gain, protecting Protestants accused of heresy and thus failing to enforce the Act of Six Articles, and plotting to marry King Henry's daughter Mary, was introduced into the House of Lords a week later. It was augmented with a further charge of sacramentarianism, for which the Six Articles allowed only the death penalty, two days after that. It passed on 29 June 1540.\nAll Cromwell's honours were forfeited and it was publicly proclaimed that he could be called only \"Thomas Cromwell, cloth carder\". The King deferred the execution until his marriage to Anne of Cleves could be annulled; Cromwell was being spared for the time being in case he was needed to give evidence of the King's distaste for Anne. Anne, however, agreed to an amicable annulment (and was treated with great generosity by Henry as a result). Hoping for clemency, Cromwell wrote in support of the annulment, in his last personal address to the King. He ended the letter: \"Most gracious Prince, I cry for mercy, mercy, mercy.\"\nCromwell was condemned to death without trial, lost all his titles and property and was publicly beheaded on Tower Hill on 28 July 1540, on the same day as the King's marriage to Catherine Howard. Cromwell made a prayer and speech on the scaffold, professing to die \"in the traditional [Catholic] faith\" and denying that he had aided heretics. This was a necessary disavowal, to protect his family. The circumstances of his execution are a source of debate: while some accounts state that the executioner had great difficulty severing his head, others claim that this is and that it took only one blow. Afterwards, his head was set on a spike on London Bridge.\nEdward Hall said of Cromwell's downfall,\nMany lamented but more rejoiced, and specially such as either had been religious men, or favoured religious persons; for they banqueted and triumphed together that night, many wishing that that day had been seven years before; and some fearing lest he should escape, although he were imprisoned, could not be merry. Others who knew nothing but truth by him both lamented him and heartily prayed for him. But this is true that of certain of the clergy he was detestably hated, &amp; specially of such as had borne swynge [beaten hard], and by his means was put from it; for in deed he was a man that in all his doings seemed not to favour any kind of Popery, nor could not abide the snoffyng pride of some prelates, which undoubtedly, whatsoever else was the cause of his death, did shorten his life and procured the end that he was brought unto.\nHenry came to regret Cromwell's killing and later accused his ministers of bringing about Cromwell's downfall by \"pretexts\" and \"false accusations\". Over important issues and policies, he had always been liable to be manoeuvred into a hasty decision by the intrigues of the factions within his court. On 3 March 1541, the French ambassador, Charles de Marillac, reported in a letter that the King was now said to be lamenting that,\nunder pretext of some slight offences which he had committed, they had brought several accusations against him, on the strength of which he had put to death the most faithful servant he ever had.\nThere remains an element of what Geoffrey Elton describes as \"mystery\" about Cromwell's demise. In April 1540, just three months before he went to the block, and less than two months before he was arrested, he was created Earl of Essex and Lord Great Chamberlain. The arbitrary and unpredictable streak in the King's personality, which more than once exercised influence during his reign, had surfaced again and washed Cromwell away in its wake.\nPersonal religious beliefs.\nAlthough Cromwell always maintained a primarily political outlook on general affairs, there is consensus among scholars that at least while he held power he was a Protestant, with a Lutheran mindset. For him, the Henrician Reformation was certainly more than a jurisdictional revolution masquerading in religious garb. For instance, in the mid-1530s, he promoted Protestant ideas to forge an alliance with German Lutheran states, but his support for the Protestant cause is too general to be accurately explained in narrow political terms.\nIn 1535, Cromwell succeeded in having clearly identified reformers, such as Hugh Latimer, Edward Foxe and Nicholas Shaxton, appointed to the episcopacy. He encouraged and supported the work of reformers, such as Robert Barnes; and he obtained the licence to publish the Matthew's Bible, providing significant funding for the printing of this English translation of the Bible and sending one to every parish in England. By 1538, it was compulsory for all churches to own a Bible, in accordance with Cromwell's injunctions. The revised version, the Great Bible, was widely available by 1539 and included a picture of Henry VIII, Thomas Cranmer and Cromwell on the title page.\nWhen Cromwell fell from favour in 1540, his alleged support for Anabaptism was cited. Although the charge was spurious, the fact that it was levelled at all demonstrates the reputation for evangelical sympathies Cromwell had developed.\nHistorical significance.\nUntil the 1950s, historians discounted Cromwell's role, stating he was little more than the agent of the despotic King Henry VIII. The 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" article (written by Albert Pollard) states \"his power has been overrated.\" Geoffrey Elton, however, in \"The Tudor Revolution\" (1953), featured him as the central figure in the Tudor revolution in government, the presiding genius, much more so than the King, in handling the break with Rome and in creating the laws and administrative procedures that reshaped post-Reformation England. Elton wrote that Cromwell had been responsible for translating royal supremacy into parliamentary terms, creating powerful new organs of government to take charge of Church lands, and largely removing the medieval features of central government.\nSubsequent historians have agreed with Elton as to Cromwell's importance, though not with his claims of \"revolution\". Leithead (2004) wrote, \"Against significant opposition he secured acceptance of the king's new powers, created a more united and more easily governable kingdom, and provided the crown, at least temporarily, with a very significant landed endowment.\" Diarmaid MacCulloch credits the advancement of the most significant politicians and administrators of the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, including William Cecil and Nicholas Bacon, to the influence and guidance of Thomas Cromwell at the start of their careers.\nDuring Cromwell's years in power, he skilfully managed Crown finances and extended royal authority. In 1536, he established the Court of Augmentations to handle the massive windfall to the royal coffers from the Dissolution of the Monasteries. Two other important financial institutions, the Court of Wards and the Court of First Fruits and Tenths, owed their existence to him, although they were not set up until after his death. He strengthened royal authority in the north of England, through reform of the Council of the North, extended royal power and introduced Protestantism in Ireland, and was the architect of the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, which promoted stability and gained acceptance for the royal supremacy in Wales. He also introduced important social and economic reforms in England in the 1530s, including action against enclosures, the promotion of English cloth exports and the poor relief legislation of 1536.\nDescendants.\nThomas Cromwell's son Gregory Cromwell, 1st Baron Cromwell, married Elizabeth Seymour, the sister of Queen Jane Seymour and widow of Sir Anthony Ughtred. They had five children:\nThomas Cromwell had an illegitimate daughter called Jane.\nPuritan leader Oliver Cromwell was the great-grandson of Sir Richard Cromwell, Thomas Cromwell's nephew.\nHans Holbein portraits.\nThomas Cromwell was a patron of Hans Holbein the Younger, as were Thomas More and Anne Boleyn. In the New York Frick Collection, two portraits by Holbein hang facing each other on the same wall of the Study, one depicting Thomas Cromwell, the other Thomas More, Cromwell's executed political and religious opponent. In 2023, the Book of Hours depicted in the Frick Collection portrait of Cromwell was put on display at Hever Castle, Kent.\nFictional portrayals.\nCromwell has been portrayed in a number of plays, feature films, and television miniseries, usually as a villainous character. More recently, however, Hilary Mantel's two Man Booker Prize-winning novels \"Wolf Hall\" (2009) and \"Bring up the Bodies\" (2012), and the final volume in the trilogy, \"The Mirror &amp; the Light\" (2020), have shown Cromwell in a more sympathetic light. In the novels, Cromwell is imbued with family affections, genuine respect for Cardinal Wolsey, zeal for the Reformation, and support for a limited degree of social reform, while the villainous character is Thomas More.\nThe television series \"Wolf Hall\" (2015) is based on the first two of the novels in Mantel's trilogy, while its sequel \"\" (2024) is based on the third.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48706", "revid": "43969826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48706", "title": "Rancid (band)", "text": "American punk rock band\nRancid is an American punk rock band formed in Berkeley, California, in 1991. Founded by Tim Armstrong and Matt Freeman, former members of the band Operation Ivy, Rancid is often credited (alongside Green Day and the Offspring) as being among the wave of bands that revived mainstream interest in punk rock in the United States during the mid-1990s. Over its -year career, Rancid has retained much of its original fan-base, most of which was connected to its underground musical roots.\nRancid has had two lineup changes since its inception, with Tim Armstrong and Matt Freeman being continuous members. Their current lineup consists of Armstrong on guitar and vocals, Freeman on bass and vocals, Lars Frederiksen on guitar and vocals, and Branden Steineckert on drums. The band was formed by Armstrong, Freeman, and former drummer Brett Reed, who left the band in 2006 and was replaced by Steineckert. This lineup recorded their first album, with Frederiksen joining the band on their subsequent tour.\nTo date, Rancid has released ten studio albums, one split album, one compilation, two extended plays, and a series of live online-only albums, and has been featured on a number of compilation albums. The band has sold over four million records worldwide, making it one of the most successful punk rock groups of all time. The band rose to popularity in 1994 with its second studio album, \"Let's Go\", featuring the single \"Salvation\". In the following year, Rancid released its highly successful album \"...And Out Come the Wolves\", which produced its best-known songs \"Roots Radicals\", \"Ruby Soho\", and \"Time Bomb\", and was certified gold and platinum by the RIAA, selling over one million copies in the United States alone. Its next six albums \u2013 \"Life Won't Wait\" (1998), \"Rancid\" (2000), \"Indestructible\" (2003), \"Let the Dominoes Fall\" (2009), \"...Honor Is All We Know\" (2014) and \"Trouble Maker\" (2017) \u2013 were also critically acclaimed, though not as commercially successful as \"...And Out Come the Wolves\". The band released their tenth album, \"Tomorrow Never Comes\", in 2023.\nHistory.\nBackground and early history (1987\u20131993).\nChildhood friends Tim Armstrong and Matt Freeman grew up together in Albany, California, a small, then\u2013working-class community near Berkeley. The two had been playing together in the influential ska punk band Operation Ivy from 1987 to 1989. The band became popular in the punk scene at 924 Gilman Street, a club and concert venue featuring Bay Area punk bands. When Operation Ivy broke up, Armstrong and Freeman decided to form a new band, and formed a ska punk band called Downfall, which disbanded after a few months. They then started a hardcore punk band called Generator, which also disbanded shortly after. They also started the ska influenced Dance Hall Crashers, though they left the band shortly after it was formed. During this time, Armstrong was struggling with alcoholism, and to keep him focused on other interests, Freeman suggested they form a new band. In 1991, they recruited Armstrong's roommate Brett Reed as their drummer and formed Rancid.\nA few months after the band's inception, Rancid began performing around the Berkeley area, and quickly developed a fan following. Rancid's first recorded release was a 1992 EP for Operation Ivy's old label Lookout! Records. Shortly after releasing the extended play, the band left Lookout! and was signed to Bad Religion guitarist Brett Gurewitz's record label, Epitaph Records. Rancid released its self-titled debut album through Epitaph in 1993.\nBreakthrough success (1994\u20131996).\nWhile Rancid was writing for a follow-up album, Billie Joe Armstrong joined them to co-write the song \"Radio\", which resulted in Armstrong playing a live performance with Rancid. Tim had previously asked Lars Frederiksen to be Rancid's second guitarist, but he turned down the request initially as he was playing with the UK Subs at the time. After Billie Joe turned down the request, Frederiksen changed his mind and joined Rancid.\nFrederiksen played with the band on its second studio album \"Let's Go\" (1994). That year, its then-label-mates, the Offspring, experienced huge success with its album \"Smash\". Rancid supported the Offspring's 1994 tour, which helped \"Let's Go\" reach number 97 on \"Billboard\"'s Heatseekers and the \"Billboard\" 200 charts, respectively. The album also provided its first widespread exposure when MTV broadcast the video for the single \"Salvation\". \"Let's Go\" was certified gold on July 7, 2000, and with the success of the album, the band was pursued by a number of major record labels, including Madonna's label Maverick Records. Many rumors circulated during this time period. Some of the rumors were Epitaph employees were not allowed to discuss matters with the press, Rancid convinced an A&amp;R man from Epic to shave a blue mohawk, and Madonna sent the band nude pictures of herself.\nThe band eventually decided to remain signed to Epitaph, and the next year released its third album \"...And Out Come the Wolves\" on August 22, 1995. The album quickly surpassed \"Let's Go\" in terms of success, and reached number 45 on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart. on January 22, 1996, the album was certified gold. and in 2004 it was certified platinum. The album received positive reviews, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described the album as having \"classic moments of revivalist punk\". Erlewine praised the music and claims the album \"doesn't mark an isolationist retreat into didactic, defiantly underground punk rock\". Three of the album's singles, \"Roots Radicals\", \"Time Bomb\", and \"Ruby Soho\" all charted on the \"Billboard\" Modern Rock Tracks, and earned Rancid its heaviest airplay on MTV and radio stations to date. The band also performed \"Roots Radicals\" and \"Ruby Soho\" on \"Saturday Night Live\". They also performed as a mainstage act on that years Lollapalooza tour.\nMiddle years (1997\u20132003).\nAfter two years of touring for \"...And Out Come the Wolves\", Rancid returned to the studio in 1997 to begin recording its fourth studio album, \"Life Won't Wait\", which was released on June 30, 1998. The album branched out from Rancid's previous musical styles, and combined punk rock with elements of roots reggae, rockabilly, dub, hip-hop, and funk, drawing comparisons to the Clash's \"Sandinista!\". Though the album did not achieve the success of \"...And Out Come the Wolves\", it has since garnered a strong cult following in recent times. During the summer of that year they took part in the Warped Tour 1998. In 1999, Rancid decided to end its seven-year relationship with Epitaph and signed with Armstrong's founded Hellcat Records (which is a sub-label of Epitaph).\nA second self-titled album was released on August 1, 2000 and would be its first album released through Hellcat. The album failed to achieve the success of Rancid's previous three albums and reached number 68 on the \"Billboard\" charts. On the album, the group largely abandoned its ska-punk influences, recording a more hardcore-influenced album. The next year the band took part in the Vans Warped 2001 tour.\nThe three original members of Rancid released three songs under the name Devil's Brigade in 2002, one on the \"Give 'Em the Boot III\" compilation album, and two on a 12-inch vinyl record. In March of the same year, a split album with NOFX titled \"BYO Split Series Volume III\" was released, in which Rancid covered NOFX songs and NOFX covered Rancid songs.\nAfter a break from touring in 2001, Rancid returned to the studio with Gurewitz in 2002 to record its sixth studio album, \"Indestructible\", which was released on August 19, 2003 and was their highest-charting album to date, reaching number 15. Unlike the band's previous albums, \"Indestructible\" was distributed by not only Epitaph/Hellcat but major record label, Warner Bros. Records, a move that received some backlash from the band's fans who questioned their loyalty to the independent scene. When released, the album didn't feature the Warner logo anywhere on the packaging, a move to hide the major label move from fans. The album was warmly received by most critics however met with mixed reviews from fans, some of which felt the album contained a \"poppier\" sound (some accusing Warner of having an influence on the music) while others felt it was a mixture of \"..And Out Come the Wolves\" and \"Life Won't Wait\". The album's music video for the first single, \"Fall Back Down\" was also met with some criticism from fans due to members of Good Charlotte and Kelly Osbourne making appearances.\nHiatus (2004\u20132005).\nIn 2004, after a tour for \"Indestructible\", Rancid went on an extended hiatus. The band members worked with side projects, although it had not officially disbanded. Armstrong continued to play with his side project the Transplants, who released their second album, \"Haunted Cities\", in 2005. He also contributed guitar and backing vocals on Cypress Hill's song \"What's Your Number?\" from its tenth album \"Till Death Do Us Part\". Armstrong also released a solo album, \"A Poet's Life\" in May 2007. Frederiksen continued working with his side-project Lars Frederiksen and the Bastards and released their second studio album, \"Viking\", in 2004, the album was co-written and co-produced by Armstrong. Freeman briefly toured with Social Distortion in 2004 as John Maurer's replacement until the band found its current bassist Brent Harding. Freeman and Frederiksen both had children during this time as well\u2014Freeman had two, and Frederiksen had one.\nReformation and \"Let the Dominoes Fall\" (2006\u20132010).\nIn early 2006, Rancid reformed to embark on a successful tour and played a number of acoustic performances as part of Hellcat Records' Hellcat Nights concert series at the Echo. It was the band's first live performance since its hiatus. On April 13, 2006, Rancid announced plans for a worldwide tour beginning in July 2006, and the release of a DVD consisting of 31 of its music videos, as well as a tentative release date of Spring 2007 for a new as-yet-unnamed studio album.\nSimilar to a number of other bands signed to Lookout! Records, in September 2006, Rancid had taken its self-titled extended play from the label's catalog.\nOn November 3, 2006, Reed left Rancid and was replaced by Branden Steineckert, formerly a member of the Used.\nRancid released a compilation album, \"B Sides and C Sides\", on December 11, 2007. The album consists of various b-sides, \"c-sides\", and songs from other compilations.\nRancid toured Japan in April 2008 for a number of shows following its two days headlining the Punkspring 2008 festival. Following the Japanese tour, Rancid embarked on a full tour of the United States during the summer and a tour of the United Kingdom in the winter.\nRancid used to host a one-hour once a week XM radio show. The show was called Rancid Radio and was on \"Fungus\" channel 53 Saturday at midnight. However, the show was canceled due to Fungus 53 being taken from XM's programming.\nAlthough plans for a follow-up to \"Indestructible\" had been mentioned during 2005, 2006 and 2007, it would not materialize until January 2008, when Rancid entered Skywalker Sound to record it. The resulting seventh studio album, \"Let the Dominoes Fall\", was released on June 2, 2009. In late May, the full album was streamed from the band's MySpace page. It was Rancid's first album without its \"classic\" lineup, with Branden Steineckert replacing Brett Reed on drums in 2006. The album was written at Branden's Unknown Studios in Utah and was recorded at Skywalker Sound in Nicasio, California. Music legend Booker T. Jones performed organ on one song. A deluxe version of the album included the CD, some of the songs recorded acoustically on another CD, and a making of the album DVD. \"Let the Dominoes Fall\" became the band's most successful album on the \"Billboard\" 200, peaking at number 11. Rancid toured North America in the summer of 2009 in support of \"Let the Dominoes Fall\", with Rise Against, Riverboat Gamblers, and Billy Talent as its opening bands. The tour began on June 4, 2009 in Vancouver, British Columbia and ended in Toronto, Ontario on July 31.\nOn June 10, 2009, the band appeared as the musical guest on \"The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien\" playing \"Last One to Die\" from \"Let the Dominoes Fall\".\n\"...Honor Is All We Know\" (2011\u20132016).\nRancid did a small US tour supporting Blink-182 from August 25 through September 4, 2011, to enable them to warm up before entering the studio in September 2011 to record their eighth album with Brett Gurewitz. A 2012 release date was expected. The band also mentioned that a 20th anniversary world tour would accompany the album. They were announced to headline one of the biggest punk festivals in the world, Groezrock in Belgium. Tim Armstrong stated that Rancid's new album would arrive after the Transplants released their new one.\nIn March 2012, Rancid played some shows with Cock Sparrer. It was the 40th anniversary show for Cock Sparrer, and the 20th anniversary for Rancid. To accompany the shows, Pirates Press Records released a split 7-inch between the bands which featured \"East Bay Night\" from Rancid. As part of their 20th anniversary, they headlined the Rebellion Festival in Blackpool along with Public Image Limited, Social Distortion and Buzzcocks sharing headline slots, and on December 8, 2012 played in Birmingham along with Cock Sparrer as part of Rebellion Festival.\nIn December 2012, Rancid released their first new studio song in three years, titled \"Fuck You\", which they made available for free download on their website. The song was included on \"Oi! This is Streetpunk, Volume Two\", which was released on December 12, 2012.\nIn 2012, Rancid released \"Rancid Essentials\", an online-exclusive massive box set celebrating the band's 20th anniversary through Pirates Press Records. The box set features all of Rancid's officially released albums and compilations including their debut self-titled EP from 1992 through 2009. 92 sides of music on 46 re-mastered 45\u00a0rpm 7-inches housed in a leather box. The albums were released each on their own on 7-inch.\nOn February 6, 2013, Rancid uploaded a picture to their Facebook page of the band in the studio with the caption, \"Recording has begun.\"\nIn a December 2013 interview on Reddit, Rancid drummer Branden Steineckert revealed that the new album was called \"...Honor Is All We Know\" and it would be released in 2014.\nIn 2015 they at Played Riot Fest &amp; ran special shows celebrating \"\u2026And Out Come the Wolves\" \"20th anniversary\".\nOn September 28, 2014, Rancid revealed the artwork and track listing for \"...Honor Is All We Know\". On the day after, they announced that the album would be released on October 27, 2014. On September 30, 2014, the band released a video of them performing three of the album's tracks. The album peaked at number 15 on the U.S. Billboard 200, and charted in the top 100 in several other countries. The album received generally positive reviews, with many critics highlighting its energetic, classic Rancid sound and live-show potential.\nIn March 2016, the band played on their first cruise ship, along with Flogging Molly, Fishbone, the Street Dogs, Frank Turner and others.\nOn March 25, 2017, Rancid played for the first time in Brazil at the Lollapalooza S\u00e3o Paulo in front of an audience estimated in 100,000 people who attended that first of 2 days festival. Line up of that Saturday included also acts like Criolo, the xx and Metallica. On the occasion, Lars Frederiksen dedicated the last song of the gig, Ruby Soho for \"Lemmy from Mot\u00f6rhead, the world is a much more fucked up place without you\".\n\"Trouble Maker\" and \"Tomorrow Never Comes\" (2017\u2013present).\nOn May 2, 2017, Rancid announced on their Facebook page that their ninth studio album, \"Trouble Maker\", would be released on June 9. The album debuted at number 23 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and number 2 on the U.S.Top Alternative Albums along with charting in 6 other countries. The album was seen positive reviews highlighting it its raw, political sound and classic punk energy. Rancid co-headlined the \"From Boston to Berkeley Tour\" with Dropkick Murphys in July and August 2017.\nIn June 2019, it was reported that Rancid had been working on their tenth studio album with a projected 2020 release, though the year passed without a new release.\nAlso in 2019, they headlined the traveling craft and beer festival The Bash, and toured North America in September, with support provided by Pennywise, Suicidal Tendencies, the English Beat, the Aquabats, Turnstile, Iron Reagan and Angel Du$t.\nRancid announced in June 2021 that they would be co-headlining the \"Boston to Berkeley II\" North American tour with Dropkick Murphys from August to October 2021.\nIn a November 2021 interview with \"Kerrang!\", Fredriksen confirmed that Rancid had been \"putting the finishing touches\" on their new album.\nOn April 18, 2023, Rancid announced that their tenth album, \"Tomorrow Never Comes\", would be released on June 2, 2023. The album debuted at 126 on the Billboard 200 and in the top 20 on both the U.S Top Rock Albums \"Billboard\" and Alternative Albums. The album received high praise from critics for its high energy, classic punk sound, and catchy melodies.\nIn 2024, Rancid joined Green Day and The Smashing Pumpkins for the North American leg of the Saviors tour.\nOn October 16, 2025 Rancid released a cover of the Mot\u00f6rhead song \"Sex &amp; Death\", which will be featured on the album 'Killed By Deaf - A Punk Tribute To Mot\u00f6rhead.\nMusical style and influences.\nRancid is known for combining \"high-energy punk with the infectious, quick-time bounce of second-wave ska\". Steve Huey of AllMusic said Rancid \"drew heavily on the political commentary and rock/reggae fusions of the Clash\", and that their sound showed an apparent \"fascination with ska while adding a bit of hardcore crunch\". \nThe Clash are a major influence, especially in their classic punk and reggae fusion work. Rancid often gets compared to group in terms of combining punk, ska, and political content.\nThe group's lyrics have touched upon topics such as street life, working-class struggles, resilience, community anger, combativeness, authenticity, nostalgia, the music industry and political topics.\nLegacy.\nRancid is credited (alongside Bad Religion, the Offspring, NOFX, Social Distortion, and Green Day) with popularizing mainstream interest in punk rock in the United States, particularly with the album \"...And Out Come the Wolves\" which became a cultural phenomenon and truly helped catapulted punk into the mainstream. The album has been listed as an essential punk album, and has been listed in \"Kerrang!, Revolver magazine\" and Rolling stone reader\u2019s poll top 10 best punk albums of all time. The band have garnered a reputation as one of the top acts in all of punk and have sold over 4 million records.\nThey have been described as absolutely crucial to the fusion of ska, reggae and punk rock. Notably the band\u2019s song \u201c\"Time Bomb\"\u201d introduced many to the 2-Tone aesthetic and culture. Their fusion of all theses styles has been widely noted as a foundational influence on many modern punk and ska-punk bands. Bands that blend up-tempo punk with reggae or ska often draw directly/indirectly from Rancid\u2019s style.\nIn August 2025, a trailer was released for the upcoming film \"And Out Come the Wolves,\" a direct reference to the bands 3rd studio album. The film will follow a fictional punk-themed plot that takes direct inspiration from band and the 90s east bay punk scene, with frontman Tim Armstrong being on set for a majority of the filming.\nBands and artists such as the Interrupters, Anti-Flag, Rise Against, Pennywise, Echo, P!nk, the Headlines, Dropkick Murphys, Street Dogs, and PUP have all cited Rancid as an influence.\nAwards and nominations.\nCalifornia Music Awards/Bammies\nLoudwire Music Awards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48707", "revid": "1317113158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48707", "title": "GNU Octave", "text": "Numerical analysis programming language\nGNU Octave is a scientific programming language for scientific computing and numerical computation. Octave helps in solving linear and nonlinear problems numerically, and for performing other numerical experiments using a language that is mostly compatible with MATLAB. It may also be used as a batch-oriented language. As part of the GNU Project, it is free software under the terms of the GNU General Public License.\nHistory.\nThe project was conceived around 1988. At first it was intended to be a companion to a chemical reactor design course. Full development was started by John W. Eaton in 1992. The first alpha release dates back to 4 January 1993 and on 17 February 1994 version 1.0 was released. Version 9.2.0 was released on 7 June 2024.\nThe program is named after Octave Levenspiel, a former professor of the principal author. Levenspiel was known for his ability to perform quick back-of-the-envelope calculations.\nDevelopments.\nIn addition to use on desktops for personal scientific computing, Octave is used in academia and industry. For example, Octave was used on a massive parallel computer at Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center to find vulnerabilities related to guessing social security numbers.\nAcceleration with OpenCL or CUDA is also possible with use of GPUs.\nOctave, the language.\nThe Octave language is an interpreted programming language. It is a structured programming language (similar to C) and supports many common C standard library functions, and also certain UNIX system calls and functions. However, it does not support passing arguments by reference although function arguments are copy-on-write to avoid unnecessary duplication.\nOctave programs consist of a list of function calls or a script. The syntax is matrix-based and provides various functions for matrix operations. It supports various data structures and allows object-oriented programming.\nIts syntax is very similar to MATLAB, and careful programming of a script will allow it to run on both Octave and MATLAB.\nBecause Octave is made available under the GNU General Public License, it may be freely changed, copied and used. The program runs on Microsoft Windows and most Unix and Unix-like operating systems, including Linux, Android, and macOS.\nNotable features.\nCommand and variable name completion.\nTyping a TAB character on the command line causes Octave to attempt to complete variable, function, and file names (similar to Bash's tab completion). Octave uses the text before the cursor as the initial portion of the name to complete.\nCommand history.\nWhen running interactively, Octave saves the commands typed in an internal buffer so that they can be recalled and edited.\nData structures.\nOctave includes a limited amount of support for organizing data in structures. In this example, we see a structure x with elements a, b, and c, (an integer, an array, and a string, respectively):\noctave:1&gt; x.a = 1; x.b = [1, 2; 3, 4]; x.c = \"string\";\noctave:2&gt; x.a\nans = 1\noctave:3&gt; x.b\nans =\n 1 2\n 3 4\noctave:4&gt; x.c\nans = string\noctave:5&gt; x\nx =\n scalar structure containing the fields:\n a = 1\n b =\n 1 2\n 3 4\n c = string\nShort-circuit Boolean operators.\nOctave's codice_1 and codice_2 logical operators are evaluated in a short-circuit fashion (like the corresponding operators in the C language), in contrast to the element-by-element operators codice_3 and codice_4.\nIncrement and decrement operators.\nOctave includes the C-like increment and decrement operators codice_5 and codice_6 in both their prefix and postfix forms.\nOctave also does augmented assignment, e.g. codice_7.\nUnwind-protect.\nOctave supports a limited form of exception handling modelled after the http:// of Lisp. The general form of an unwind_protect block looks like this:\nunwind_protect\n body\nunwind_protect_cleanup\n cleanup\nend_unwind_protect\nAs a general rule, GNU Octave recognizes as termination of a given codice_8 either the keyword codice_9 (which is compatible with the MATLAB language) or a more specific keyword codice_10 or, in some cases, codice_11. As a consequence, an codice_12 block can be terminated either with the keyword codice_13 as in the example, or with the more portable keyword codice_9.\nThe \"cleanup\" part of the block is always executed. In case an exception is raised by the \"body\" part, \"cleanup\" is executed immediately before propagating the exception outside the block codice_12.\nGNU Octave also supports another form of exception handling (compatible with the MATLAB language):\ntry\n body\ncatch\n exception_handling\nend\nThis latter form differs from an codice_12 block in two ways. First, \"exception_handling\" is only executed when an exception is raised by \"body\". Second, after the execution of \"exception_handling\" the exception is not propagated outside the block (unless a codice_17 statement is explicitly inserted within the \"exception_handling\" code).\nVariable-length argument lists.\nOctave has a mechanism for handling functions that take an unspecified number of arguments without explicit upper limit. To specify a list of zero or more arguments, use the special argument codice_18 as the last (or only) argument in the list. codice_18 is a cell array containing all the input arguments.\nfunction s = plus (varargin)\n if (nargin==0)\n s = 0;\n else\n s = varargin{1} + plus (varargin{2:nargin});\n end\nend\nVariable-length return lists.\nA function can be set up to return any number of values by using the special return value codice_20. For example:\nfunction varargout = multiassign (data)\n for k=1:nargout\n varargout{k} = data(:,k);\n end\nend\nC++ integration.\nIt is also possible to execute Octave code directly in a C++ program. For example, here is a code snippet for calling codice_21:\nColumnVector NumRands(2);\nNumRands(0) = 10;\nNumRands(1) = 1;\noctave_value_list f_arg, f_ret;\nf_arg(0) = octave_value(NumRands);\nf_ret = feval(\"rand\", f_arg, 1);\nMatrix unis(f_ret(0).matrix_value());\nC and C++ code can be integrated into GNU Octave by creating oct files, or using the MATLAB compatible MEX files.\nMATLAB compatibility.\nOctave has been built with MATLAB compatibility in mind, and shares many features with MATLAB:\nOctave treats incompatibility with MATLAB as a bug; therefore, it could be considered a software clone, which does not infringe software copyright as per \"Lotus v. Borland\" court case.\nMATLAB scripts from the MathWorks' FileExchange repository in principle are compatible with Octave. However, while they are often provided and uploaded by users under an Octave compatible and proper open source BSD license, the FileExchange Terms of use prohibit any usage beside MathWorks' proprietary MATLAB.\nSyntax compatibility.\nThere are a few purposeful, albeit minor, http:// :\nFunction compatibility.\nMany, but not all, of the numerous MATLAB functions are available in GNU Octave, some of them accessible through packages in https://. The functions available as part of either core Octave or Forge packages are listed https:// .\nA list of unavailable functions is included in the Octave function http://. Unimplemented functions are also listed under many Octave Forge packages in the https://.\nWhen an unimplemented function is called the following error message is shown:\n octave:1&gt; guide\n warning: the 'guide' function is not yet implemented in Octave\n Please read &lt;http://www.octave.org/missing.html&gt; to learn how you can contribute missing functionality.\n error: 'guide' undefined near line 1 column 1\nUser interfaces.\nOctave comes with an official graphical user interface (GUI) and an integrated development environment (IDE) based on Qt. It has been available since Octave 3.8, and has become the default interface (over the command-line interface) with the release of Octave 4.0. \nIt was well-received by an EDN contributor, who wrote \"[Octave] now has a very workable GUI\" in reviewing the then-new GUI in 2014.\nSeveral 3rd-party graphical front-ends have also been developed, like ToolboX for coding education.\nGUI applications.\nWith Octave code, the user can create GUI applications. See https://. Below are some examples:\nButton, edit control, checkbox\nf = figure;\nb1 = uicontrol (f, \"string\", \"A Button\", \"position\",[10 10 150 40]);\ne1 = uicontrol (f, \"style\", \"edit\", \"string\", \"editable text\", \"position\",[10 60 300 40]);\nc1 = uicontrol (f, \"style\", \"checkbox\", \"string\", \"a checkbox\", \"position\",[10 120 150 40]);\nTextbox\nprompt = {\"Width\", \"Height\", \"Depth\"};\ndefaults = {\"1.10\", \"2.20\", \"3.30\"};\nrowscols = [1,10; 2,20; 3,30];\ndims = inputdlg (prompt, \"Enter Box Dimensions\", rowscols, defaults);\nListbox with message boxes.\nmy_options = {\"An item\", \"another\", \"yet another\"};\n[sel, ok] = listdlg (\"ListString\", my_options, \"SelectionMode\", \"Multiple\");\nif (ok == 1)\n msgbox (\"You selected:\");\n for i = 1:numel (sel)\n msgbox (sprintf (\"\\t%s\", my_options{sel(i)}));\n endfor\nelse\n msgbox (\"You cancelled.\");\nendif\nRadiobuttons\nf = figure;\ngp = uibuttongroup (f, \"Position\", [ 0 0.5 1 1])\nb1 = uicontrol (gp, \"style\", \"radiobutton\", \"string\", \"Choice 1\", \"Position\", [ 10 150 100 50 ]);\nb2 = uicontrol (gp, \"style\", \"radiobutton\", \"string\", \"Choice 2\", \"Position\", [ 10 50 100 30 ]);\nb3 = uicontrol (f, \"style\", \"radiobutton\",\"string\", \"Not in the group\",\"Position\", [ 10 50 100 50 ]);\nPackages.\nOctave also has many packages available. Those packages are located at Octave-Forge https://, or https://. It is also possible for anyone to create and maintain packages.\nComparison with other similar software.\nAlternatives to GNU Octave under an open source license, other than the aforementioned MATLAB, include Scilab and FreeMat. Octave is more compatible with MATLAB than Scilab is, and FreeMat has not been updated since June 2013.\nAlso the Julia programming language and its plotting capabilities has similarities with GNU Octave.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48708", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48708", "title": "General Public License", "text": ""}
{"id": "48711", "revid": "50912557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48711", "title": "Oregon Trail", "text": "Historic migration route spanning Independence, MO\u2013Oregon City, OR\nThe Oregon Trail was a east\u2013west, large-wheeled wagon route and emigrant trail in North America that connected the Missouri River to valleys in Oregon Territory. The eastern part of the Oregon Trail crossed what is now the states of Kansas, Nebraska, and Wyoming. The western half crossed the current states of Idaho and Oregon.\nThe Oregon Trail was laid by fur traders and trappers from about 1811 to 1840 and was initially only passable on foot or horseback. By 1836, when the first migrant wagon train was organized in Independence, Missouri, a wagon trail had been cleared to Fort Hall, Idaho. Wagon trails were cleared increasingly farther west and eventually reached the Willamette Valley in Oregon, at which point what came to be called the Oregon Trail was complete. Further improvements in the form of bridges, cutoffs, ferries, and roads made the trip faster and safer. From starting points in Iowa, Missouri, or Nebraska Territory, the routes converged along the lower Platte River Valley near Fort Kearny, Nebraska Territory. They led to fertile farmlands west of the Rocky Mountains.\nThe Oregon Trail and its many offshoots were used by about 400,000 settlers, farmers, miners, ranchers, and business owners and their families to get to the area known as Oregon and its surroundings, with traffic especially thick from 1846 to 1869. The eastern half of the trail was also used by travelers on the California Trail from 1843, the Mormon Trail from 1847, and the Bozeman Trail from 1863, before turning off to their separate destinations. Use of the trail declined after the first transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, making the trip west substantially faster, cheaper, and safer. Since the mid-20th century, modern highways, such as Interstate 80 and Interstate 84, follow parts of the same course westward, and pass through towns originally established to serve those using the Oregon Trail.\nHistory.\nLewis and Clark Expedition.\nThe first land route across the present-day contiguous United States was mapped by the Lewis and Clark Expedition between 1804 and 1806, following these 1803 instructions from President Thomas Jefferson to Meriwether Lewis: \"The object of your mission is to explore the Missouri river, and such principal stream of it, as, by its course and communication with the waters of the Pacific Ocean, whether the Columbia, Oregon, Colorado and/or other river may offer the most direct and practicable water communication across this continent, for commerce.\" Although Lewis and William Clark found a path to the Pacific Ocean, it was neither direct nor practicable for prairie schooner wagons to pass through without considerable road work. The two passes they found going through the Rocky Mountains, Lemhi Pass, and Lolo Pass, turned out to be much too difficult.\nOn the return trip in 1806, they traveled from the Columbia River to the Snake River and the Clearwater River over the Lolo Pass again. They then traveled overland up the Blackfoot River and crossed the Continental Divide at Lewis and Clark Pass, as it would become known, and on to the head of the Missouri River. This was ultimately a shorter and faster route than the one they followed west. This route had the disadvantages of being much too rough for wagons and controlled by the Blackfoot tribes. \nEven though Lewis and Clark had only traveled a narrow portion of the upper Missouri River drainage and part of the Columbia River drainage, these were considered the two major rivers draining most of the Rocky Mountains, and the expedition confirmed that there was no \"easy\" route through the northern Rocky Mountains as Jefferson had hoped. Nonetheless, this famous expedition mapped both the eastern and western river valleys (Platte and Snake Rivers) that bookend the route of the Oregon Trail (and other emigrant trails) across the continental divide\u2014they just had not located the South Pass or some of the interconnecting valleys later used in the high country. They showed the way for the mountain men, who within a decade found a better way across, even if it was not an easy way.\nPacific Fur Company.\nIt was founded in 1810 by John Jacob Astor as a subsidiary of his American Fur Company (AFC), the Pacific Fur Company (PFC) operated in the Pacific Northwest in the North American fur trade. Two movements of PFC employees were planned by Astor: one sent to the Columbia River aboard the merchant ship \"Tonquin,\" the other dispatched overland under an expedition led by Wilson Price Hunt. Hunt and his party were to find possible supply routes and trapping territories for further fur trading posts. Upon arriving at the river in March 1811, the \"Tonquin\" crew began building what became Fort Astoria. The ship left supplies and men to continue work on the station and ventured north up the coast to Clayoquot Sound for a trading expedition. While anchored there, Jonathan Thorn insulted an elder Tla-o-qui-aht who was previously elected by the natives to negotiate a mutually satisfactory price for animal pelts. Soon after, the vessel was attacked and overwhelmed by the indigenous Clayoquot, killing many of the crew. Its Quinault interpreter survived and later told the PFC management at Fort Astoria of the destruction. The next day, the ship was blown up by surviving crew members.\nUnder Hunt, fearing attack by the Niitsitapi, the overland expedition veered south of Lewis and Clark's route into what is now Wyoming and in the process passed across Union Pass and into Jackson Hole, Wyoming. From there they went over the Teton Range via Teton Pass and then down to the Snake River into modern Idaho. They abandoned their horses at the Snake River, made dugout canoes, and attempted to use the river for transport. After a few days' travel, they soon discovered that steep canyons, waterfalls, and impassable rapids made travel by river impossible. Too far from their horses to retrieve them, they had to cache most of their goods and walk the rest of the way to the Columbia River where they made new boats and traveled to the newly established Fort Astoria. The expedition demonstrated that much of the route along the Snake River plain and across to the Columbia was passable by pack train or with minimal improvements, even wagons. This knowledge would be incorporated into the concatenated trail segments as the Oregon Trail took its early shape.\nPacific Fur Company partner Robert Stuart led a small group of men back east to report to Astor. The group planned to retrace the path followed by the overland expedition back up to the east following the Columbia and Snake Rivers. Fear of a Native American attack near Union Pass in Wyoming forced the group further south where they discovered South Pass, a wide and easy pass over the Continental Divide. The party continued east via the Sweetwater River, North Platte River (where they spent the winter of 1812\u201313), and Platte River to the Missouri River, finally arriving in St. Louis in the spring of 1813. The route they had used appeared to potentially be a practical wagon route, requiring minimal improvements, and Stuart's journals provided a meticulous account of most of the route. Because of the War of 1812 and the lack of U.S. fur trading posts in the Pacific Northwest, most of the route was unused for more than 10 years.\nNorth West Company and Hudson's Bay Company.\nIn August 1811, three months after Fort Astoria was established, David Thompson and his team of North West Company explorers came floating down the Columbia to Fort Astoria. He had just completed a journey through much of western Canada and most of the Columbia River drainage system. He was mapping the country for possible fur trading posts. Along the way, he camped at the confluence of the Columbia and Snake Rivers and posted a notice claiming the land for Britain and stating the intention of the North West Company to build a fort on the site. When the War of 1812 broke out, the managers at Fort Astoria were concerned the British navy would seize their forts and supplies, and in 1813 they sold out to the North West Company.\nBy 1821, intense competition between the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) and the North West Company reached the point of armed hostilities, and the British government pressured the two companies to merge. The newly reconfigured HBC had a near monopoly on trading (and most governing issues) in the Columbia District, or Oregon Country as it was referred to by the Americans, and also in Rupert's Land. That year the British parliament passed a statute applying the laws of Upper Canada to the district and giving the HBC power to enforce those laws.\nFrom 1813 to the early 1840s the British, through the NWC and HBC, had nearly complete control of the Pacific Northwest and the western half of the Oregon Trail. In theory, the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the War of 1812, restored possession of U.S. property in Oregon territory to the United States. \"Joint occupation\" of the region was formally established by the Anglo-American Convention of 1818. The British, through the HBC, tried to discourage any U.S. trappers, traders, and settlers from work or settlement in the Pacific Northwest.\nBy overland travel, American missionaries and early settlers (initially mostly ex-trappers) started showing up in Oregon in the late 1820s. Although officially the HBC discouraged settlement because it interfered with its lucrative fur trade, its manager at Fort Vancouver, John McLoughlin, gave substantial help, including employment, until they could get established. In the early 1840s thousands of American settlers arrived and soon greatly outnumbered the British settlers in Oregon. McLoughlin, despite working for the HBC, gave help in the form of loans, medical care, shelter, clothing, food, supplies and seed to U.S. emigrants. These new emigrants often arrived in Oregon tired, worn out, nearly penniless, with insufficient food or supplies, just as winter was coming on. McLoughlin would later be hailed as the Father of Oregon.\nThe York Factory Express, establishing another route to the Oregon territory, evolved from an earlier express brigade used by the North West Company between Fort Astoria and Fort William, Ontario on Lake Superior. By 1825 the HBC started using two brigades, each setting out from opposite ends of the express route\u2014one from Fort Vancouver on the Columbia River and the other from York Factory on Hudson Bay\u2014in spring and passing each other in the middle of the continent. This established a \"quick\"\u2014 about 100 days for one way\u2014 to transport personnel and transmit messages between Fort Vancouver and York Factory on Hudson Bay.\nThe HBC built a new much larger Fort Vancouver in 1825 about 90 miles upstream from Fort Astoria, on the north side of the Columbia River (they were hoping the Columbia would be the future Canada\u2013U.S. border). The fort quickly became the center of activity in the Pacific Northwest. Every year ships would come from London to the Pacific (via Cape Horn) to drop off supplies and trade goods in its trading posts in the Pacific Northwest and pick up the accumulated furs used to pay for these supplies. It was the nexus for the fur trade on the Pacific Coast; its influence reached from the Rocky Mountains to the Hawaiian Islands, and from Russian Alaska into Mexican-controlled California. At its pinnacle in about 1840, the manager of Fort Vancouver watched over 34 outposts, 24 ports, 6 ships, and about 600 employees.\nWhen American emigration over the Oregon Trail began in earnest in the early 1840s, for many settlers the fort became the last stop on the Oregon Trail where they could get supplies, aid, and help before starting their homesteads. Fort Vancouver was the main re-supply point for nearly all Oregon trail travelers until U.S. towns could be established. The HBC established Fort Colvile in 1825 on the Columbia River near Kettle Falls as a good site to collect furs and control the upper Columbia River fur trade. Fort Nisqually was built near the present town of DuPont, Washington, and was the first HBC fort on Puget Sound. Fort Victoria was erected in 1843 and became the headquarters of operations in British Columbia, eventually growing into modern-day Victoria, the capital city of British Columbia.\nBy 1840, the HBC had three forts: Fort Hall (purchased from Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth in 1837), Fort Boise and Fort Nez Perce on the western end of the Oregon Trail route as well as Fort Vancouver near its terminus in the Willamette Valley. With minor exceptions, they all gave substantial and often desperately needed aid to the early Oregon Trail pioneers.\nWhen the fur trade slowed in the 1840s because of fashion changes in men's hats, the value of the Pacific Northwest to the British was seriously diminished. Canada had few potential settlers who were willing to move more than to the Pacific Northwest, although several hundred ex-trappers, British and American, and their families did start settling in what became Oregon and Washington. In 1841, James Sinclair, on orders from HBC Governor Sir George Simpson, guided nearly 200 settlers from the Red River Colony (located at the junction of the Assiniboine River and Red River near present Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada) into the Oregon territory. This attempt at settlement failed when most of the families joined the settlers in the Willamette Valley, with their promise of free land and HBC-free government.\nIn 1846, the Oregon Treaty ending the Oregon boundary dispute was signed with Britain. The British lost much of the land they had so long controlled. The new Canada\u2013United States border was established at the 49th parallel to the Pacific Coast, then dipping south around Vancouver Island. The treaty granted the HBC navigation rights on the Columbia River for supplying their fur posts, clear titles to their trading post properties allowing them to be sold later if they wanted, and left the British with a good anchorage at Victoria. It gave the United States most of what it wanted, a \"reasonable\" boundary and a good anchorage on the West Coast in Puget Sound. While there were few United States settlers in the future state of Washington in 1846, the United States had already demonstrated it could induce thousands of settlers to go to the Oregon Territory, and it would be only a short time before they would vastly outnumber the few hundred HBC employees and retirees living in the region.\nGreat American Desert.\nReports from expeditions in 1806 by Lieutenant Zebulon Pike and in 1819 by Major Stephen Long described the Great Plains as \"unfit for human habitation\" and as \"The Great American Desert\". These descriptions were mainly based on the relative lack of timber and surface water. The images of sandy wastelands conjured up by terms like \"desert\" were tempered by the many reports of vast herds of millions of Plains Bison that somehow managed to live in this \"desert\". In the 1840s, the Great Plains appeared to be unattractive for settlement and were illegal for homesteading until well after 1846\u2014initially, it was set aside by the U.S. government for Native American settlements. The next available land for general settlement, Oregon, appeared to be free for the taking and had fertile lands, disease-free climate (yellow fever and malaria were then prevalent in much of the Missouri and Mississippi River drainage), extensive forests, big rivers, potential seaports, and only a few nominally British settlers.\nFur traders, trappers, and explorers.\nFur trappers, often working for fur traders, followed nearly all possible streams looking for beaver in the years (1812\u201340) when the fur trade was active. Fur traders included Manuel Lisa, Robert Stuart, William Henry Ashley, Jedediah Smith, William Sublette, Andrew Henry, Thomas Fitzpatrick, Kit Carson, Jim Bridger, Peter Skene Ogden, David Thompson, James Douglas, Donald Mackenzie, Alexander Ross, James Sinclair, and other mountain men. Besides describing and naming many of the rivers and mountains in the Intermountain West and Pacific Northwest, they often kept diaries of their travels and were available as guides and consultants when the trail started to become open for general travel. The fur trade business wound down to a very low level just as the Oregon trail traffic seriously began around 1840.\nIn the fall of 1823, Jedediah Smith and Thomas Fitzpatrick led their trapping crew south from the Yellowstone River to the Sweetwater River. They were looking for a safe location to spend the winter. Smith reasoned since the Sweetwater flowed east it must eventually run into the Missouri River. Trying to transport their extensive fur collection down the Sweetwater and North Platte Rivers, they found after a near-disastrous canoe crash that the rivers were too swift and rough for water passage. On July 4, 1824, they cached their furs under a dome of rock they named Independence Rock and started their long trek on foot to the Missouri River. Upon arriving back in a settled area they bought pack horses (on credit) and retrieved their furs. They had discovered the route that Robert Stuart had taken in 1813\u2014eleven years before. Thomas Fitzpatrick was often hired as a guide when the fur trade dwindled in 1840. Smith was killed by Comanche natives around 1831.\nUp to 3,000 mountain men were trappers and explorers, employed by various British and United States fur companies or working as free trappers, who roamed the North American Rocky Mountains from about 1810 to the early 1840s. They usually traveled in small groups for mutual support and protection. Trapping took place in the fall when the fur became prime. Mountain men primarily trapped beaver and sold the skins. A good beaver skin could bring up to $4 at a time when a man's wage was often $1 per day. Some were more interested in exploring the West. In 1825, the first significant American Rendezvous occurred on the Henry's Fork of the Green River. The trading supplies were brought in by a large party using pack trains originating on the Missouri River. These pack trains were then used to haul out the fur bales. They normally used the north side of the Platte River\u2014the same route used 20 years later by the Mormon Trail. For the next 15 years, the American rendezvous was an annual event moving to different locations, usually somewhere on the Green River in the future state of Wyoming. Each rendezvous, occurring during the slack summer period, allowed the fur traders to trade for and collect the furs from the trappers and their Native American allies without having the expense of building or maintaining a fort or wintering over in the cold Rockies. In only a few weeks at a rendezvous a year's worth of trading and celebrating would take place as the traders took their furs and remaining supplies back east for the winter and the trappers faced another fall and winter with new supplies. Trapper Jim Beckwourth described the scene as one of \"Mirth, songs, dancing, shouting, trading, running, jumping, singing, racing, target-shooting, yarns, frolic, with all sorts of extravagances that white men or Indians could invent.\" In 1830, William Sublette brought the first wagons carrying his trading goods up the Platte, North Platte, and Sweetwater rivers before crossing over South Pass to a fur trade rendezvous on the Green River near the future town of Big Piney, Wyoming. He had a crew that dug out the gullies and river crossings and cleared the brush where needed. This established that the eastern part of most of the Oregon Trail was passable by wagons. In the late 1830s, the HBC instituted a policy intended to destroy or weaken the American fur trade companies. The HBC's annual collection and re-supply Snake River Expedition was transformed into a trading enterprise. Beginning in 1834, it visited the American Rendezvous to undersell the American traders\u2014losing money but undercutting the American fur traders. By 1840, the fashion in Europe and Britain shifted away from the formerly very popular beaver felt hats and prices for furs rapidly declined and the trapping almost ceased.\nFur traders tried to use the Platte River, the main route of the eastern Oregon Trail, for transport but soon gave up in frustration as its many channels and islands combined with its muddy waters were too shallow, crooked, and unpredictable to use for water transport. The Platte proved to be unnavigable. The Platte River and North Platte River Valley, however, became an easy roadway for wagons, with its nearly flat plain sloping easily up and heading almost due west.\nSeveral U.S. government-sponsored explorers explored part of the Oregon Trail and wrote extensively about their explorations. Captain Benjamin Bonneville on his expedition of 1832 to 1834 explored much of the Oregon trail and brought wagons up the Platte, North Platte, Sweetwater route across South Pass to the Green River in Wyoming. He explored most of Idaho and the Oregon Trail to the Columbia. The account of his explorations in the West was published by Washington Irving in 1838. John C. Fr\u00e9mont of the U.S. Army's Corps of Topographical Engineers and his guide Kit Carson led three expeditions from 1842 to 1846 over parts of California and Oregon. His explorations were written up by him and his wife Jessie Benton Fr\u00e9mont and were widely published. The first detailed maps of California and Oregon were drawn by Fr\u00e9mont and his topographers and cartographers in about 1848.\nMissionaries.\nIn 1834, The Dalles Methodist Mission was founded by Reverend Jason Lee just east of Mount Hood on the Columbia River. In 1836, Henry H. Spalding and Marcus Whitman traveled west to establish the Whitman Mission near modern-day Walla Walla, Washington. The party included the wives of the two men, Narcissa Whitman and Eliza Hart Spalding, who became the first European-American women to cross the Rocky Mountains. En route, the party accompanied American fur traders going to the 1836 rendezvous on the Green River in Wyoming and then joined Hudson's Bay Company fur traders traveling west to Fort Nez Perce (also called Fort Walla Walla). The group was the first to travel in wagons to Fort Hall, where the wagons were abandoned at the urging of their guides. They used pack animals for the rest of the trip to Fort Walla Walla and then floated by boat to Fort Vancouver to get supplies before returning to start their missions. Other missionaries, mostly husband and wife teams using wagon and pack trains, established missions in the Willamette Valley, as well as various locations in the future states of Washington, Oregon, and Idaho.\nEarly emigrants.\nOn May 1, 1839, a group of eighteen men from Peoria, Illinois, set out with the intention of colonizing the Oregon country on behalf of the United States of America and driving out the HBC operating there. The men of the Peoria Party were among the first pioneers to traverse most of the Oregon Trail. They were initially led by Thomas J. Farnham and called themselves the Oregon Dragoons. They carried a large flag emblazoned with their motto \"Oregon Or The Grave\". Although the group split up near Bent's Fort on the South Platte and Farnham was deposed as leader, nine of their members eventually did reach Oregon.\nIn September 1840, Robert Newell, Joseph L. Meek, and their families reached Fort Walla Walla with three wagons that they had driven from Fort Hall. Their wagons were the first to reach the Columbia River over land, and they opened the final leg of the Oregon Trail to wagon traffic.\nIn 1841, the Bartleson-Bidwell Party was the first emigrant group credited with using the Oregon Trail to emigrate west. The group set out for California, but about half the party left the original group at Soda Springs, Idaho, and proceeded to the Willamette Valley in Oregon, leaving their wagons at Fort Hall.\nOn May 16, 1842, the second organized wagon train set out from Elm Grove, Missouri, with more than 100 pioneers. The party was led by Elijah White. The group broke up after passing Fort Hall with most of the single men hurrying ahead and the families following later.\nGreat Migration of 1843.\nIn what was dubbed \"The Great Migration of 1843\" or the \"Wagon Train of 1843\", an estimated 700 to 1,000 emigrants left for Oregon. They were led initially by John Gantt, a former U.S. Army captain and fur trader who was contracted to guide the train to Fort Hall for $1 per person. The winter before, Marcus Whitman had made a brutal midwinter trip from Oregon to St. Louis to appeal a decision by his mission backers to abandon several of the Oregon missions. He joined the wagon train at the Platte River for the return trip. When the pioneers were told at Fort Hall by agents from the Hudson's Bay Company that they should abandon their wagons there and use pack animals the rest of the way, Whitman disagreed and volunteered to lead the wagons to Oregon. He believed the wagon trains were large enough that they could build whatever road improvements they needed to make the trip with their wagons. The biggest obstacle they faced was in the Blue Mountains of Oregon, where they had to cut and clear a trail through heavy timber. The wagons were stopped at The Dalles, Oregon, by the lack of a road around Mount Hood. The wagons had to be disassembled and floated down the treacherous Columbia River and the animals herded over the rough Lolo trail to get by Mt. Hood. Nearly all of the settlers in the 1843 wagon trains arrived in the Willamette Valley by early October. A passable wagon trail now existed from the Missouri River to The Dalles. Jesse Applegate's account of the emigration, \"A Day with the Cow Column in 1843\", has been described as \"the best bit of literature left to us by any participant in the [Oregon] pioneer movement...\" and has been republished several times from 1868 to 1990.\nIn 1846, the Barlow Road was completed around Mount Hood, providing a rough but completely passable wagon trail from the Missouri River to the Willamette Valley, about .\nOregon Country.\nIn 1843, settlers of the Willamette Valley drafted the Organic Laws of Oregon organizing land claims within the Oregon Country. Married couples were granted at no cost (except for the requirement to work and improve the land) up to (a section or square mile), and unmarried settlers could claim . As the group was a provisional government with no authority, these claims were not valid under United States or British law, but they were eventually honored by the United States in the Donation Land Act of 1850. The Donation Land Act provided for married settlers to be granted and unmarried settlers . Following the expiration of the act in 1854 the land was no longer free but cost $1.25 per acre ($3.09/hectare) with a limit of \u2014the same as most other unimproved government land.\nWomen on the Overland Trail.\nConsensus interpretations, as found in John Faragher's book, \"Women and Men on the Overland Trail\" (1979), held that men's and women's power within marriage was uneven. This meant that women did not experience the trail as liberating, but instead only found harder work than they had handled back east, all the while upholding the virtues of the Culture of Domesticity. Some of the additional tasks women had on the wagon trail included collecting \"buffalo\nchips\" for fire fuel, unloading and loading up the wagons, driving teams of oxen, pouring\nbullets to help in Indian attacks, and striving to keep their men and children at\npeace. They were the backbones of life on the wagon trail and took up not only their\nregular duties but many duties of men as well. However, feminist scholarship, by historians such as Lillian Schlissel, Sandra Myres, and Glenda Riley, suggests men and women did not view the West and western migration in the same way. Whereas men might deem the dangers of the trial acceptable if there was a strong economic reward at the end, women viewed those dangers as threatening to the stability and survival of the family. Once they arrived at their new Western home, women's public role in building Western communities and participating in the Western economy gave them a greater authority than they had known back East. There was a \"female frontier\" that was distinct and different from that experienced by men.\nWomen's diaries kept during their travels or the letters they wrote home once they arrived at their destination support these contentions. Women wrote with sadness and concern about the numerous deaths along the trail. Anna Maria King wrote to her family in 1845 about her trip to the Luckiamute Valley Oregon and of the multiple deaths experienced by her traveling group:\nBut listen to the deaths: Sally Chambers, John King, and his wife, their little daughter Electa and their babe, a son 9 months old, and Dulancy C. Norton's sister are gone. Mr. A. Fuller lost his wife and daughter Tabitha. Eight of our two families have gone to their long home.\nSimilarly, emigrant Martha Gay Masterson, who traveled the trail with her family at the age of 13, mentioned the fascination she and other children felt for the graves and loose skulls they would find near their camps.\nAnna Maria King, like many other women, also advised family and friends back home of the realities of the trip and offered advice on how to prepare for the trip. Women also reacted and responded, often enthusiastically, to the landscape of the West. Betsey Bayley, in a letter to her sister, Lucy P. Griffith, described how travelers responded to the new environment they encountered:\nThe mountains looked like volcanoes and the appearance that one day there had been an awful thundering of volcanoes and a burning world. The valleys were all covered with a white crust and looked like salaratus. Some of the companies used it to raise their bread.\nWhile women experienced many deaths and hardships on the trail, the trail was also a place for women to take on roles they had previously not been allowed to take on back east. Women started to use their journals on the trails to express themselves as \"reporters, guides, poets, and historians.\" They would jot down botany and different species on the trail to help feed their family. Women used their resourcefulness and creativity on the trail.\nMormon emigration.\nFollowing persecution and mob action in Missouri, Illinois, and other states, and the assassination of their prophet Joseph Smith in 1844, Mormon leader Brigham Young led settlers in the Latter Day Saints (LDS) church west to the Salt Lake Valley in present-day Utah. In 1847 Young led a small, fast-moving group from their Winter Quarters encampments near Omaha, Nebraska, and their approximately 50 temporary settlements on the Missouri River in Iowa including Council Bluffs. About 2,200 LDS pioneers went that first year; they were charged with establishing farms, growing crops, building fences and herds, and establishing preliminary settlements to feed and support the many thousands of emigrants expected in the coming years. After ferrying across the Missouri River and establishing wagon trains near what became Omaha, the Mormons followed the northern bank of the Platte River in Nebraska to Fort Laramie in present-day Wyoming. They initially started in 1848 with trains of several thousand emigrants, which were rapidly split into smaller groups to be more easily accommodated at the limited springs and acceptable camping places on the trail. The much larger presence of women and children meant these wagon trains did not try to cover as much ground in a single day as Oregon and California-bound emigrants, typically taking about 100 days to cover the trip to Salt Lake City. (The Oregon and California emigrants averaged about per day.) In Wyoming, the Mormon emigrants followed the main Oregon/California/Mormon Trail through Wyoming to Fort Bridger, where they split from the main trail and followed (and improved) the rough path known as Hastings Cutoff, used by the ill-fated Donner Party in 1846.\nBetween 1847 and 1860, over 43,000 Mormon settlers and tens of thousands of travelers on the California Trail and Oregon Trail followed Young to Utah. After 1848, the travelers headed to California or Oregon resupplied at the Salt Lake Valley, and then went back over the Salt Lake Cutoff, rejoining the trail near the future Idaho\u2013Utah border at the City of Rocks in Idaho.\nAlong the Mormon Trail, the Mormon pioneers established several ferries and made trail improvements to help later travelers and earn much-needed money. One of the better-known ferries was the Mormon Ferry across the North Platte near the future site of Fort Caspar in Wyoming which operated between 1848 and 1852 and the Green River ferry near Fort Bridger which operated from 1847 to 1856. The ferries were free for Mormon settlers while all others were charged a toll ranging from $3 to $8.\nCalifornia gold rush.\nIn January 1848, James Marshall found gold in the Sierra Nevada portion of the American River, sparking the California gold rush. It is estimated that about two-thirds of the male population in Oregon went to California in 1848 to cash in on the opportunity. To get there, they helped build the Lassen Branch of the Applegate-Lassen Trail by cutting a wagon road through extensive forests. Many returned with significant gold which helped jump-start the Oregon economy. Over the next decade, gold seekers from the Midwestern United States and East Coast of the United States dramatically increased traffic on the Oregon and California Trails. The \"forty-niners\" often chose speed over safety and opted to use shortcuts such as the Sublette-Greenwood Cutoff in Wyoming which reduced travel time by almost seven days but spanned nearly of the desert without water, grass, or fuel for fires. 1849 was the first year of large scale cholera epidemics in the United States, and thousands are thought to have died along the trail on their way to California\u2014most buried in unmarked graves in Kansas and Nebraska. The adjusted 1850 U.S. census of California showed this rush was overwhelmingly male with about 112,000 males to 8,000 females (with about 5,500 women over age 15). Women were significantly underrepresented in the California gold rush, and sex ratios did not reach essential equality in California (and other western states) until about 1950. The relative scarcity of women gave them many opportunities to do many more things that were not normally considered women's work of this era. After 1849, the California gold rush continued for several years as the miners continued to find about $50,000,000 worth of gold per year at $21 per ounce. Once California was established as a prosperous state, many thousands more emigrated there each year for the opportunities.\nLater emigration and uses of the trail.\nThe trail was still in use during the Civil War, but traffic declined after 1855 when the Panama Railroad across the Isthmus of Panama was completed. Paddle wheel steamships and sailing ships, often heavily subsidized to carry the mail, provided rapid transport to and from the East Coast and New Orleans, Louisiana, to and from Panama to ports in California and Oregon.\nOver the years many ferries were established to help get across the many rivers on the path of the Oregon Trail. Multiple ferries were established on the Missouri River, Kansas River, Little Blue River, Elkhorn River, Loup River, Platte River, South Platte River, North Platte River, Laramie River, Green River, Bear River, two crossings of the Snake River, John Day River, Deschutes River, Columbia River, as well as many other smaller streams. During peak immigration periods several ferries on any given river often competed for pioneer dollars. These ferries significantly increased speed and safety for Oregon Trail travelers. They increased the cost of traveling the trail by roughly $30 per wagon but decreased the time of transit from about 160 to 170 days in 1843 to 120 to 140 days in 1860. Ferries also helped prevent death by drowning at river crossings.\nIn April 1859, an expedition of U.S. Corps of Topographical Engineers led by Captain James H. Simpson left Camp Floyd, Utah, to establish an army supply route across the Great Basin to the eastern slope of the Sierras. Upon return in early August, Simpson reported that he had surveyed the Central Overland Route from Camp Floyd to Genoa, Nevada. This route went through central Nevada (roughly where U.S. Route 50 goes today) and was about shorter than the \"standard\" Humboldt River California trail route.\nThe Army improved the trail for use by wagons and stagecoaches in 1859 and 1860. Starting in 1860, the American Civil War closed the heavily subsidized Butterfield Overland Mail stage Southern Route through the deserts of the American Southwest.\nIn 1860\u20131861, the Pony Express, employing riders traveling on horseback day and night with relay stations about every to supply fresh horses, was established from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California. The Pony Express built many of their eastern stations along the Oregon/California/Mormon/Bozeman Trails and many of their western stations along the very sparsely settled Central Overland Route across Utah and Nevada. The Pony Express delivered mail summer and winter in roughly 10 days from the midwest to California.\nIn 1861, John Butterfield, who since 1858 had been using the Butterfield Overland Mail, also switched to the Central Route to avoid traveling through hostile territories during the American Civil War. George Chorpenning immediately realized the value of this more direct route, and shifted his existing mail and passenger line along with their stations from the \"Northern Route\" (California Trail) along the Humboldt River. In the same year, the first transcontinental telegraph also laid its lines alongside the Central Overland Route. Several stage lines were set up carrying mail and passengers that traversed much of the route of the original Oregon Trail to Fort Bridger and from there over the Central Overland Route to California. By traveling day and night with many stations and changes of teams (and extensive mail subsidies), these stages could get passengers and mail from the Midwest to California in about 25 to 28 days. This combined stage and Pony Express stations along the Oregon Trail and Central Route across Utah and Nevada were joined by the first transcontinental telegraph stations and telegraph line, which followed much the same route in 1861 from Carson City, Nevada to Salt Lake City. The Pony Express folded in 1861 as they failed to receive an expected mail contract from the U.S. government and the telegraph filled the need for rapid east-west communication. This combination wagon/stagecoach/pony express/telegraph line route is labeled the \"Pony Express National Historic Trail\" on the National Trail Map. From Salt Lake City the telegraph line followed much of the Mormon/California/Oregon trails to Omaha, Nebraska.\nAfter the first transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, telegraph lines usually followed the railroad tracks as the required relay stations and telegraph lines were much easier to maintain alongside the tracks. Telegraph lines to unpopulated areas were largely abandoned.\nAs the years passed, the Oregon Trail became a heavily used corridor from the Missouri River to the Columbia River. Offshoots of the trail continued to grow as gold and silver discoveries, farming, lumbering, ranching, and business opportunities resulted in much more traffic to many areas. Traffic became two-directional as towns were established along the trail. By 1870, the population in the states served by the Oregon Trail and its offshoots increased by about 350,000 over their 1860 census levels. Except for most of the 180,000 population increase in California, most of these people living away from the coast traveled over parts of the Oregon Trail and its many extensions and cutoffs to get to their new residences.\nEven before the famous Texas cattle drives after the Civil War, the trail was being used to drive herds of thousands of cattle, horses, sheep, and goats from the Midwest to various towns and cities along the trails. According to studies by trail historian John Unruh the livestock may have been as plentiful or more plentiful than the immigrants in many years. In 1852, there were even records of a 1,500-turkey drive from Illinois to California. The main reason for this livestock traffic was the large cost discrepancy between livestock in the Midwest and at the end of the trail in California, Oregon, or Montana. They could often be bought in the Midwest for about a third to tenth of what they would fetch at the end of the trail. Large losses could occur and the drovers would still make significant profit. As the emigrant travel on the trail declined in later years and after livestock ranches were established at many places along the trail large herds of animals often were driven along part of the trail to get to and from markets.\nTrail decline.\nThe first transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, providing faster, safer, and usually cheaper travel east and west (the journey took seven days and cost as little as $65, or ). Some emigrants continued to use the trail well into the 1890s, and modern highways and railroads eventually paralleled large portions of the trail, including U.S. Highway 26, Interstate 84 in Oregon and Idaho and Interstate 80 in Nebraska. Contemporary interest in the overland trek has prompted the states and federal government to preserve landmarks on the trail including wagon ruts, buildings, and \"registers\" where emigrants carved their names. Throughout the 20th and 21st centuries, there have been several re-enactments of the trek with participants wearing period garments and traveling by wagon.\nRoutes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs the trail developed it became marked by many cutoffs and shortcuts from Missouri to Oregon. The basic route follows river valleys as grass and water were necessary.\nWhile the first few parties organized and departed from Elm Grove, the Oregon Trail's primary starting points were Independence, Missouri, or Westport, (which was annexed into modern day Kansas City), on the Missouri River. Later, several feeder trails led across Kansas, and other towns became notable starting points, including Weston, Fort Leavenworth, Atchison, St. Joseph, and Omaha.\nThe Oregon Trail's nominal termination point was Oregon City, at the time the proposed capital of the Oregon Territory. However, many settlers branched off or stopped short of this goal and settled at convenient or promising locations along the trail. Commerce with pioneers going further west helped establish these early settlements and launched local economies critical to their prosperity.\nAt dangerous or difficult river crossings, ferries or toll bridges were set up and bad places on the trail were either repaired or bypassed. Several toll roads were constructed. Gradually the trail became easier with the average trip (as recorded in numerous diaries) dropping from about 160 days in 1849 to 140 days 10 years later.\nMany other trails followed the Oregon Trail for much of its length, including the Mormon Trail from Illinois to Utah; the California Trail to the gold fields of California; and the Bozeman Trail to Montana. Because it was more a network of trails than a single trail, there were numerous variations with other trails eventually established on both sides of the Platte, North Platte, Snake, and Columbia rivers. With literally thousands of people and thousands of livestock traveling in a fairly small time slot, the travelers had to spread out to find clean water, wood, good campsites, and grass. The dust kicked up by the many travelers was a constant complaint, and where the terrain would allow it there may have been between 20 and 50 wagons traveling abreast.\nRemnants of the trail in Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming, Idaho, and Oregon have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and the entire trail is a designated National Historic Trail.\nMissouri.\nInitially, the main jumping-off point was the common head of the Santa Fe Trail and Oregon trail\u2014 Independence, and Kansas City. Travelers starting in Independence had to ferry across the Missouri River. After following the Santa Fe trail to near present-day Topeka, they ferried across the Kansas River to start the trek across Kansas and points west. Another busy \"jumping off point\" was St. Joseph\u2014established in 1843. In its early days, St. Joseph was a bustling outpost and rough frontier town, serving as one of the last supply points before heading over the Missouri River to the frontier. St. Joseph had good steamboat connections to St. Louis and other ports on the combined Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi River systems. During the busy season, there were several ferry boats and steamboats available to transport travelers to the Kansas shore where they started their travels westward. Before the Union Pacific Railroad was started in 1865, St. Joseph was the westernmost point in the United States accessible by rail. Other towns used as supply points in Missouri included Old Franklin, Arrow Rock, and Fort Osage.\nIowa.\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition stopped several times in the future state of Iowa on their 1805\u20131806 expedition to the west coast. Some settlers started drifting into Iowa in 1833. In 1846, the Mormons, expelled from Nauvoo, Illinois, traversed Iowa (on part of the Mormon Trail) and settled temporarily in significant numbers on the Missouri River in Iowa and the future state of Nebraska at their Winter Quarters near the future city of Omaha, Nebraska. The Mormons established about 50 temporary towns including the town of Kanesville, Iowa (renamed Council Bluffs in 1852), on the east bank of the Missouri River opposite the mouth of the Platte River. For travelers bringing their teams to the Platte River junction, Kanesville, and other towns became major jumping-off places and supply points. In 1847 the Mormons established three ferries across the Missouri River and others established even more ferries for the spring start on the trail. In the 1850 census, there were about 8,000 mostly Mormons tabulated in the large Pottawattamie County, Iowa District 21. (The original Pottawattamie County was subsequently made into five counties and parts of several more.) By 1854, most of the Mormon towns, farms, and villages were largely taken over by non-Mormons as they abandoned them or sold them for not much and continued their migration to Utah. After 1846, the towns of Council Bluffs, Iowa, Omaha (est. 1852), and other Missouri River towns became major supply points and jumping-off places for travelers on the Mormon, California, Oregon, and other trails west.\nKansas.\nStarting initially in Independence, Missouri, or Kansas City in Missouri, the initial trail follows the Santa Fe Trail into Kansas south of the Wakarusa River. After crossing Mount Oread at Lawrence, the trail crosses the Kansas River by ferry or boats near Topeka and crosses the Wakarusa and Black Vermillion rivers by ferries. West of Topeka, the route paralleled what is now U.S. Route 24 until west of St. Mary's. After the Black Vermillion River, the trail angles northwest to Nebraska paralleling the Little Blue River until reaching the south side of the Platte River. Destinations along the Oregon Trail in Kansas included St. Mary's Mission, Pottawatomie Indian Pay Station, Vieux's Vermilion Crossing, Alcove Springs and the Hollenberg Station which was built for and used concurrently in 1860 and 1861 by the Pony Express. Travel by wagon over the gently rolling Kansas countryside was usually unimpeded except where streams had cut steep banks. There a passage could be made with a lot of shovel work to cut down the banks or the travelers could find an already established crossing.\nNebraska.\nThose emigrants on the eastern side of the Missouri River in Missouri or Iowa used ferries and steamboats (fitted out for ferry duty) to cross into towns in Nebraska. Several towns in Nebraska were used as jumping-off places with Omaha eventually becoming a favorite after about 1855. Fort Kearny (est. 1848) is about from the Missouri River, and the trail and its many offshoots nearly all converged close to Fort Kearny as they followed the Platte River west. The army-maintained Fort was the first chance on the trail to buy emergency supplies, do repairs, get medical aid, or mail a letter. Those on the north side of the Platte could usually wade the shallow river if they needed to visit the fort.\nThe Platte River and the North Platte River in the future states of Nebraska and Wyoming typically had many channels and islands and were too shallow, crooked, muddy, and unpredictable for travel even by canoe. The Platte as it pursued its braided paths to the Missouri River was \"too thin to plow and too thick to drink\". While unusable for transportation, the Platte River and North Platte River valleys provided an easily passable wagon corridor going almost due west with access to water, grass, buffalo, and buffalo chips for fuel. The trails gradually got rougher as it progressed up the North Platte. There were trails on both sides of the muddy rivers. The Platte was about wide and deep. The water was silty and bad tasting but it could be used if no other water was available. Letting it sit in a bucket for an hour or so or stirring in a 1/4 cup of cornmeal allowed most of the silt to settle out.\nIn the spring in Nebraska and Wyoming travelers often encountered fierce wind, rain, and lightning storms. Until about 1870 travelers encountered hundreds of thousands of bison migrating through Nebraska on both sides of the Platte River, and most travelers killed several for fresh meat and to build up their supplies of dried jerky for the rest of the journey. The prairie grass in many places was several feet high with only the hat of a traveler on horseback showing as they passed through the prairie grass. In many years the Native Americans fired much of the dry grass on the prairie every fall so the only trees or bushes available for firewood were on islands in the Platte River. Travelers gathered and ignited dried cow dung to cook their meals. These burned fast in a breeze, and it could take two or more bushels of chips to get one meal prepared. Those traveling south of the Platte crossed the South Platte fork at one of about three ferries (in dry years it could be forded without a ferry) before continuing up the North Platte River Valley into present-day Wyoming heading to Fort Laramie. Before 1852 those on the north side of the Platte crossed the North Platte to the south side at Fort Laramie. After 1852 they used Child's Cutoff to stay on the north side to about the present-day town of Casper, Wyoming, where they crossed over to the south side.\nNotable landmarks in Nebraska include Courthouse and Jail Rocks, Chimney Rock, Scotts Bluff, and Ash Hollow with its steep descent down Windlass Hill over the South Platte.\nToday much of the Oregon Trail follows roughly along Interstate 80 from Wyoming to Grand Island, Nebraska. From there U.S. Highway 30 which follows the Platte River is a better approximate path for those traveling the north side of the Platte.\nCholera on the Platte River.\nBecause of the Platte's brackish water, the preferred camping spots were along one of the many freshwater streams draining into the Platte or the occasional freshwater spring found along the way. These preferred camping spots became sources of cholera in the epidemic years (1849\u20131855) as many thousands of people used the same camping spots with essentially no sewage facilities or adequate sewage treatment. One of the side effects of cholera is acute diarrhea, which helps contaminate even more water unless it is isolated and/or treated. The cause of cholera (ingesting the \"Vibrio cholerae\" bacterium from contaminated water) and the best treatment for cholera infections were unknown in this era. Thousands of travelers on the combined California, Oregon, and Mormon trails succumbed to cholera between 1849 and 1855. Most were buried in unmarked graves in Kansas, Nebraska, and Wyoming. Although also considered part of the Mormon Trail, the grave of Rebecca Winters is one of the few marked ones left. There are many cases cited involving people who were alive and healthy in the morning and dead by nightfall.\nMost outbreaks did not progress further west than Fort Laramie. It is believed that the swifter flowing rivers in Wyoming helped prevent the germs from spreading.\nColorado.\nA branch of the Oregon trail crossed the very northeast corner of Colorado if they followed the South Platte River to one of its last crossings. This branch of the trail passed through present-day Julesburg before entering Wyoming. Later settlers followed the Platte and South Platte Rivers into their settlements there (much of which became the state of Colorado).\nWyoming.\nAfter crossing the South Platte River the Oregon Trail follows the North Platte River out of Nebraska into Wyoming. Fort Laramie, at the confluence of the Laramie and North Platte rivers, was a major stopping point. Fort Laramie was a former fur trading outpost originally named Fort John that was purchased in 1848 by the U.S. Army to protect travelers on the trails. It was the last army outpost till travelers reached the coast.\nAfter crossing the South Platte the trail continues up the North Platte River, crossing many small swift-flowing creeks. As the North Platte veers to the south, the trail crosses the North Platte to the Sweetwater River Valley, which heads almost due west. Independence Rock is on the Sweetwater River. The Sweetwater would have to be crossed up to nine times before the trail crosses over the Continental Divide at South Pass, Wyoming. From South Pass the trail continues southwest crossing Big Sandy Creek\u2014 about wide and deep\u2014 before hitting the Green River. Three to five ferries were in use on the Green during peak travel periods. The deep, wide, swift, and treacherous Green River which eventually empties into the Colorado River, was usually at high water in July and August, and it was a dangerous crossing. After crossing the Green, the main trail continued approximately southwest until the Blacks Fork of the Green River and Fort Bridger. From Fort Bridger the Mormon Trail continued southwest following the upgraded Hastings Cutoff through the Wasatch Mountains. From Fort Bridger, the main trail, comprising several variants, veered northwest over the Bear River Divide and descended to the Bear River Valley. The trail turned north following the Bear River past the terminus of the Sublette-Greenwood Cutoff at Smiths Fork and on to the Thomas Fork Valley at the present Wyoming\u2013Idaho border.\nOver time, two major heavily used cutoffs were established in Wyoming. The Sublette-Greenwood Cutoff was established in 1844 and cut about off the main route. It leaves the main trail about west of South Pass and heads almost due west crossing Big Sandy Creek and then about of waterless, very dusty desert before reaching the Green River near the present town of La Barge. Ferries here transferred them across the Green River. From there the Sublette\u2013Greenwood Cutoff trail had to cross a mountain range to connect with the main trail near Cokeville in the Bear River Valley.\nThe Lander Road, formally the Fort Kearney, South Pass, and Honey Lake Wagon Road, was established and built by U.S. government contractors in 1858\u201359. It was about shorter than the main trail through Fort Bridger with good grass, water, firewood, and fishing but it was a much steeper and rougher route, crossing three mountain ranges. In 1859, 13,000 of the 19,000 Emigrants traveling to California and Oregon used the Lander Road. The traffic in later years is undocumented.\nThe Lander Road departs the main trail at Burnt Ranch near South Pass, crosses the Continental Divide north of South Pass, and reaches the Green River near the present town of Big Piney, Wyoming. From there the trail followed Big Piney Creek west before passing over the Thompson Pass in the Wyoming Range. It then crosses over the Smith Fork of the Bear River before ascending and crossing another pass on the Salt River Range of mountains and then descending into Star Valley. It exited the mountains near the present Smith Fork road about south of the town of Smoot. The road continued almost due north along the present-day Wyoming; Idaho western border through Star Valley. To avoid crossing the Salt River (which drains into the Snake River) which runs down Star Valley the Lander Road crossed the river when it was small and stayed west of the Salt River. After traveling down the Salt River Valley (Star Valley) about north the road turned almost due west near the present town of Auburn, and entered into the present state of Idaho along Stump Creek. In Idaho, it followed the Stump Creek valley northwest until it crossed the Caribou Range and proceeded past the south end of Grays Lake. The trail then proceeded almost due west to meet the main trail at Fort Hall; alternatively, a branch trail headed almost due south to meet the main trail near the present town of Soda Springs.\nNumerous landmarks are along the trail in Wyoming including Independence Rock, Ayres Natural Bridge, and Register Cliff.\nUtah.\nIn 1847, Brigham Young and the Mormon pioneers departed from the Oregon Trail at Fort Bridger in Wyoming and followed (and much improved) the rough trail originally recommended by Lansford Hastings to the Donner Party in 1846 through the Wasatch Mountains into Utah. After getting into Utah, they immediately started setting up irrigated farms and cities\u2014including Salt Lake City. In 1848, the Salt Lake Cutoff was established by Sam Hensley, and returning members of the Mormon Battalion providing a path north of the Great Salt Lake from Salt Lake City back to the California and Oregon trails. This cutoff rejoined the Oregon and California Trails near the City of Rocks near the Utah; Idaho border and could be used by both California and Oregon-bound travelers. Located about halfway on both the California and Oregon trails many thousands of later travelers used Salt Lake City and other Utah cities as an intermediate stop for selling or trading excess goods or tired livestock for fresh livestock, repairs, supplies, or fresh vegetables. The Mormons looked on these travelers as a welcome bonanza as setting up new communities from scratch required nearly everything the travelers could afford to part with. The overall distance to California or Oregon was very close to the same whether one \"detoured\" to Salt Lake City or not. For their use and to encourage California and Oregon-bound travelers the Mormons improved the Mormon Trail from Fort Bridger and the Salt Lake Cutoff trail. To raise much-needed money and facilitate travel on the Salt Lake Cutoff they set up several ferries across the Weber, Bear, and Malad Rivers, which were used mostly by travelers bound for Oregon or California.\nIdaho.\nThe main Oregon and California Trail went north from Fort Bridger to the Little Muddy Creek where it passed over the Bear River Mountains to the Bear River Valley, which it followed northwest into the Thomas Fork area, where the trail crossed over the present day Wyoming line into Idaho. In the Eastern Sheep Creek Hills in the Thomas Fork Valley, the emigrants encountered Big Hill, a detour caused by a then-impassable cut the Bear River made through the mountains, with a tough ascent often requiring doubling up of teams and a steep and dangerous descent. In 1852, Eliza Ann McAuley found the McAuley Cutoff, which bypassed much of the difficult climb and descent of Big Hill. About on they passed present-day Montpelier, Idaho, which is now the site of the National Oregon-California Trail Center. The trail follows the Bear River northwest to present-day Soda Springs, which attracted pioneers with hot carbonated water for laundry and chugging springs for fresh water. Just west of Soda Springs the Bear River turns southwest as it heads for the Great Salt Lake, and the main trail turns northwest to follow the Portneuf River valley to Fort Hall, Idaho. Fort Hall was a fur trading post located on the Snake River, established in 1832 by Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth and company and later sold in 1837 to the Hudson's Bay Company. At Fort Hall, travelers were given available aid and supplies as needed. Mosquitoes were constant pests, and travelers often mentioned that their animals were covered with blood from the bites. The route from Fort Bridger to Fort Hall is about , taking nine to twelve days.\nAt Soda Springs was one branch of Lander Road (established and built with government contractors in 1858), which had gone west from near South Pass, over the Salt River Mountains and down Star Valley before turning west near present-day Auburn, Wyoming, and entering Idaho. From there it proceeded northwest into Idaho up Stump Creek canyon for about . One branch turned almost 90 degrees and proceeded southwest to Soda Springs. Another branch headed almost due west past Gray's Lake to rejoin the main trail about west of Fort Hall.\nOn the main trail about west of Soda Springs Hudspeth's Cutoff (established in 1849 and used mostly by California trail users) took off from the main trail heading west, bypassing Fort Hall. It rejoined the California Trail at Cassia Creek near the City of Rocks. Hudspeth's Cutoff had five mountain ranges to cross and took about the same amount of time as the main route to Fort Hall, but many took it thinking it was shorter. Its main advantage was that it helped spread out the traffic during peak periods, increasing grass availability.\nWest of Fort Hall, the main trail traveled about on the south side of the Snake River southwest past American Falls, Massacre Rocks, Register Rock, and Coldwater Hill near present-day Pocatello, Idaho. Near the junction of the Raft River and Snake River, the California Trail diverged from the Oregon Trail. Travellers left the Snake River and followed the Raft River about southwest past present-day Almo. This trail then passed through the City of Rocks and over Granite Pass where it went southwest along Goose Creek, Little Goose Creek, and Rock Spring Creek. It went about through Thousand Springs Valley, West Brush Creek, and Willow Creek, before arriving at the Humboldt River in northeastern Nevada near present-day Wells. The California Trail proceeded west down the Humboldt before reaching and crossing the Sierra Nevada.\nThe Snake River's depth and fast water meant that there were few places to safely cross. Two of these fords were near Fort Hall, where travelers on the Oregon Trail North Side Alternate (established about 1852) and Goodale's Cutoff (established 1862) crossed the Snake to travel on the north side. Nathaniel Wyeth wrote in his diary that his party found a ford across the Snake River southwest of where he founded Fort Hall. Another possible crossing was a few miles upstream of Salmon Falls where some intrepid travelers floated their wagons and swam their stock across to join the north side trail. Some lost their wagons and teams over the falls. The trails on the north side joined the trail from Three Island Crossing about west of Glenns Ferry on the north side of the Snake River.\nGoodale's Cutoff, established in 1862 on the north side of the Snake River, formed a spur of the Oregon Trail. This cutoff had been used as a pack trail by Native Americans and fur traders, and emigrant wagons traversed parts of the eastern section as early as 1852. After crossing the Snake River the cutoff headed north from Fort Hall toward Big Southern Butte following the Lost River part of the way. It passed near the present-day town of Arco, Idaho, and wound through the northern part of what is now Craters of the Moon National Monument. From there it went southwest to Camas Prairie and ended at Old Fort Boise on the Boise River. This journey typically took two to three weeks and was noted for its rough lava terrain and extremely dry climate, which tended to dry the ward on the wagons, causing the iron rims to fall off the wheels. The loss of wheels caused many wagons to be abandoned along the route. It rejoined the main trail east of Boise. Goodale's Cutoff is visible at many points along U.S. Routes 20, 26, and 93 between Craters of the Moon National Monument and Carey.\nFrom the present site of Pocatello, the trail proceeded west on the south side of the Snake River for about . This route passed Cauldron Linn rapids, Shoshone Falls, two falls near the present city of Twin Falls, and Upper Salmon Falls on the Snake River. At Salmon Falls there were often a hundred or more Native Americans fishing who would trade for their salmon.\nThe trail continued west to Three Island Crossing (near present-day Glenns Ferry). Here most emigrants used the divisions of the river caused by three islands to cross the difficult and swift Snake River by ferry, or by driving or sometimes floating their wagons and swimming their teams across. Hidden holes in the river bottom could overturn the wagon or entangle the team, and several drownings occurred nearly every year before ferries were established.\nThe north side of the Snake had better water and grass than the south. The trail from Three Island Crossing to Old Fort Boise was about long. The next and final crossing of the Snake River was near Old Fort Boise, and could be done on bullboats while swimming the stock across. Others would chain a large string of wagons and teams together, hoping that the front teams, usually oxen, would get out of the water first and with good footing help pull the whole string of wagons and teams across. Often, Native American boys who could swim were hired to drive and ride the stock across the river. In present-day Idaho, Interstate 84 roughly follows the Oregon Trail from the Idaho-Oregon State border at the Snake River. Approximately east of Declo in present-day rural Cassia County, Interstate 84 meets the western terminus of the western section of Interstate 86. Interstate 86 heads east, then northeast to American Falls and Pocatello following the Oregon Trail, while Interstate 84 heads southeast to the State border with Utah. U.S. Route 30 roughly follows the path of the Oregon Trail from Pocatello to Montpelier.\nStarting in about 1848, the South Alternate of Oregon Trail (also called the Snake River Cutoff) was developed as a spur off the main trail. It bypassed the Three Island Crossing and continued traveling down the south side of the Snake River. It rejoined the trail near present-day Ontario, Oregon. It hugged the southern edge of the Snake River Canyon and was a much rougher trail with poorer water and grass, requiring occasional steep descents and ascents with the animals down into the Snake River Canyon to get water. Travelers on this route avoided two dangerous crossings of the Snake River. In present-day Idaho, the state highway ID-78 roughly follows the path of the South Alternate route of the Oregon Trail.\nIn 1869, the Central Pacific established Kelton, Utah as a railhead and the terminus of the western mail was moved from Salt Lake City. The Kelton Road became important as a communication and transportation road to the Boise Basin.\nBoise has 21 monuments in the shape of obelisks along its portion of the Oregon Trail.\nOregon.\nOnce across the Snake River ford near Old Fort Boise the weary travelers traveled across what would become the state of Oregon. The trail then went to the Malheur River and then past Farewell Bend on the Snake River, up the Burnt River canyon and northwest to the Grande Ronde Valley near present-day La Grande before coming to the Blue Mountains. In 1843 settlers cut a wagon road over these mountains making them passable for the first time to wagons. The trail went to the Whitman Mission near Fort Nez Perces in Washington until 1847 when the Whitmans were killed by Native Americans. At Fort Nez Perce some built rafts or hired boats and started down the Columbia; others continued west in their wagons until they reached The Dalles. After 1847 the trail bypassed the closed mission and headed almost due west to present-day Pendleton, Oregon, crossing the Umatilla River, John Day River, and Deschutes River before arriving at The Dalles. Interstate 84 in Oregon roughly follows the original Oregon Trail from Idaho to The Dalles.\nArriving at the Columbia at The Dalles and stopped by the Cascade Mountains and Mount Hood, some gave up their wagons or disassembled them and put them on boats or rafts for a trip down the Columbia River. Once they transited the Cascade's Columbia River Gorge with its multiple rapids and treacherous winds they would have to make the portage around the Cascade Rapids before coming out near the Willamette River where Oregon City was located. The pioneer's livestock could be driven around Mount Hood on the narrow, crooked, and rough Lolo Pass.\nSeveral Oregon Trail branches and route variations led to the Willamette Valley. The most popular was the Barlow Road, which was carved through the forest around Mount Hood from The Dalles in 1846 as a toll road at $5 per wagon and 10 cents per head of livestock. It was rough and steep with poor grass but still cheaper and safer than floating goods, wagons, and family down the dangerous Columbia River.\nIn Central Oregon, there was the Santiam Wagon Road (established 1861), which roughly parallels Oregon Highway 20 to the Willamette Valley. The Applegate Trail (established 1846), cutting off the California Trail from the Humboldt River in Nevada, crossed part of California before cutting north to the south end of the Willamette Valley. U.S. Route 99 and Interstate 5 through Oregon roughly follow the original Applegate Trail.\nTravel equipment.\nWagons and pack animals.\nThree types of draft and pack animals were used by Oregon Trail pioneers: oxen, mules, and horses.\nBy 1842, many emigrants favored oxen\u2014 castrated bulls (males) of the genus \"Bos\" (cattle), generally over four years old; as the best animal to pull wagons, because they were docile, generally healthy, and able to continue moving in difficult conditions such as mud and snow. Oxen could also survive on prairie grasses and sage, unlike horses, who had to be fed. Moreover, oxen were less expensive to purchase and maintain than horses. Oxen also could stand idle for long periods without suffering damage to the feet and legs. Oxen were trained by leading, the use of a whip or goad, and the use of oral commands (such as \"Gee\" (right), \"Haw\" (left), and \"Whoa\" (stop)). Two oxen were typically yoked together at the neck or head; the left ox was referred to as the \"near\" or \"nigh\" ox, and the right ox as the \"off\" ox. While no reins, bits, or halters were needed, the trainer had to be forceful. Oxen typically traveled at a steady pace up to two miles an hour.\nOne drawback of oxen was the difficulty of shoeing. Oxen hooves are cloven (split), and they had to be shod with two curved pieces of metal, one on each side of the hoof. While horses and mules allowed themselves to be shod relatively easily, the process was more difficult with oxen, who would lie down and tuck their feet under themselves. As a result, several men had to lift and hold an ox while he was being shod.\nMules were used by some emigrants. The competing merits of oxen and mules were hotly debated among emigrants. Some found oxen to be more durable. Others, by contrast, believed that mules were more durable, and mules may have had a lower attrition rate on the trail than oxen. Like oxen, mules could survive on prairie grasses. Mules were, however, notoriously ill-tempered. Mules also cost about three times as much as oxen, a deciding factor for many emigrants.\nThree types of wagons were pulled:\nFood.\nIn 1855, the typical cost of food for four people for six months was about $150 which would cost almost $5,000 today.\nFood and water were key concerns for migrants. Wagons typically carried at least one large water keg, and guidebooks available from the 1840s and later gave similar advice to migrants on what food to take. T. H. Jefferson, in his \"Brief Practice Advice\" guidebook for migrants, recommended that each adult take 200 pounds of flour: \"Take plenty of breadstuffs; this is the staff of life when everything else runs short.\"\nFood often took the form of crackers or hardtack; Southerners sometimes chose cornmeal or pinole rather than wheat flour. Emigrants typically ate rice and beans only at forts stopped at along the way, because boiling water was difficult on the trail, and fuel was not abundant. Lansford Hastings recommended that each emigrant take 200 pounds of flour, 150 pounds of \"bacon\" (a word which, at the time, referred broadly to all forms of salt pork), 20 pounds of sugar, and 10 pounds of salt. Chipped beef, rice, tea, dried beans, dried fruit, saleratus (for raising bread), vinegar, pickles, mustard, and tallow might also be taken. Joseph Ware's 1849 guide recommends that travelers take for each individual a barrel of flour or 180 pounds of ship's biscuit (i.e., hardtack), 150\u2013180 pounds of bacon, 60 pounds of beans or peas, 25 pounds of rice, 25 pounds of coffee, 40 pounds of sugar, a keg of lard, 30 or 40 pounds of dried fruit (peaches or apples), a keg of clear, rendered beef suet (to substitute for butter), as well as some vinegar, salt, and pepper. Many emigrant families also carried a small amount of tea and maple sugar.\nRandolph B. Marcy, an army officer who wrote an 1859 guide, advised taking less bacon than the earlier guides had recommended. He advised emigrants to drive cattle instead as a source of fresh beef. Marcy also instructed emigrants to store sides of bacon in canvas bags or in boxes surrounded by bran to protect against extreme heat, which could make bacon go rancid. Marcy instructed emigrants to put salt pork on the bottom of wagons to avoid exposure to extreme heat. Marcy also recommended the use of pemmican, as well as the storage of sugar in India rubber or gutta-percha sacks, to prevent it from becoming wet.\nCanning technology had just begun to be developed, and it gained in popularity through the period of westward expansion. Initially, only upper-class migrants typically used canned goods. There are references in sources to canned cheese, fruit, meat, oysters, and sardines. By the time Marcy wrote his 1859 guide, canned foods were increasingly available but remained expensive. Canning also added weight to a wagon. Rather than canned vegetables, Marcy suggested that travelers take dried vegetables, which had been used in the Crimean War and by the U.S. Army.\nSome pioneers took eggs and butter packed in barrels of flour, and some took dairy cows along the trail. Hunting provided another source of food along the trail; pioneers hunted American bison as well as pronghorn antelope, deer, bighorn sheep, and wildfowl. From rivers and lakes, emigrants also fished for catfish and trout. When emigrants faced starvation, they would sometimes slaughter their animals (horses, mules, and oxen). In desperate times, migrants would search for less-popular sources of food, including coyote, fox, jackrabbit, marmot, prairie dog, and rattlesnake (nicknamed \"bush fish\" in the later period).\nAt the time, scurvy was well-recognized, but there was a lack of clear understanding of how to prevent the disease. Nevertheless, pioneers' consumption of the wild berries (including chokeberry, gooseberry, and serviceberry) and currants that grew along the trail (particularly along the Platte River) helped make scurvy infrequent. Marcy's guide correctly suggested that the consumption of wild grapes, greens, and onions could help prevent the disease and that if vegetables were not available, citric acid could be drunk with sugar and water.\nMostly middle-class emigrant families prided themselves on preparing a good table. Although operating Dutch ovens and kneading dough was difficult on the trail, many baked good bread and even pies.\nFor fuel to heat food, travelers would collect cedar wood, cottonwood, or willow wood, when available, and sometimes dry prairie grass. More frequently, however, travelers relied on \"buffalo chips\"\u2014dried bison dung\u2014to fuel fires. Buffalo chips resembled rotten wood and would make clear and hot fires. Chips burned quickly, however, and it took up to three bushels of chips to heat a single meal. Collecting buffalo chips was a common task for children and was one chore that even very young children could carry out. As a result, \"memoirs written by those who were very young when they made the journey west invariably refer to this aspect of life on the trail.\"\nClothing, equipment, and supplies.\nTobacco was popular, both for personal use and for trading with natives and other pioneers. Each person brought at least two changes of clothes and multiple pairs of boots (two to three pairs often worn out on the trip). About 25 pounds of soap was recommended for a party of four, for bathing and washing clothes. A washboard and tub were usually brought for washing clothes. Wash days typically occur once or twice a month, or less, depending on the availability of good grass, water, and fuel.\nMost wagons carried tents for sleeping, though in good weather most would sleep outside. A thin fold-up mattress, blankets, pillows, canvas, or rubber gutta-percha ground covers were used for sleeping. Sometimes an unfolded feather bed mattress was brought for the wagon if there were pregnant women or very young children along. Storage boxes were ideally the same height, so they could be arranged to give a flat surface inside the wagon for a sleeping platform.\nThe wagons had no springs, and the ride along the trail was very rough. Despite modern depictions, hardly anyone rode in the wagons; it was too dusty, too rough, and too hard on the livestock.\nTravelers brought books, Bibles, trail guides, and writing quills, ink, and paper for writing letters or journaling (about one in 200 kept a diary).\nA belt and folding knives were carried by nearly all men and boys. Awls, scissors, pins, needles, and thread for mending were required. Spare leather was used for repairing shoes, harnesses, and other equipment. Some used goggles to keep dust out of the eyes.\nSaddles, bridles, hobbles, and ropes were needed if the party had a horse or riding mule, and many men did. Extra harnesses and spare wagon parts were often carried. Most carried steel shoes for horses, mules, or livestock. Tar was carried to help repair an ox's injured hoof.\nGoods, supplies, and equipment were often shared by fellow travelers. Items that were forgotten, broken, or worn out could be bought from a fellow traveler, post, or fort along the way. New iron shoes for horses, mules, and oxen were put on by blacksmiths found along the way. Equipment repairs and other goods could be procured from blacksmith shops established at some forts and some ferries. Emergency supplies, repairs, and livestock were often provided by residents in California, Oregon, and Utah for late travelers on the trail who were hurrying to beat the snow.\nNon-essential items were often abandoned to lighten the load or in case of emergency. Many travelers would salvage discarded items, picking up essentials or leaving behind their lower-quality items when a better one was found abandoned along the road. Some profited by collecting discarded items, hauling them back to jumping-off places, and reselling them. In the early years, Mormons sent scavenging parties back along the trail to salvage as much iron and other supplies as possible and haul it to Salt Lake City, where supplies of all kinds were needed. Others would use discarded furniture, wagons, and wheels as firewood. During the 1849 gold rush, Fort Laramie was known as \"Camp Sacrifice\" because of the large amounts of merchandise discarded nearby. Travelers had pushed along the relatively easy path to Fort Laramie with their luxury items but discarded them before the difficult mountain crossing ahead, and after discovering that many items could be purchased at the forts or located for free along the way. Some travelers carried their excess goods to Salt Lake City to be sold.\nProfessional tools used by blacksmiths, carpenters, and farmers were carried by nearly all. Axes, crowbars, hammers, hatchets, hoes, mallets, mattocks, picks, planes, saws, scythes, and shovels were used to clear or make a road through brush or trees, cut down the banks to cross a wash or steeply banked stream, build a raft or bridge, or repair the wagon. In general, as little road work as possible was done. Travel was often along the top of ridges to avoid the brush and washes common in many valleys.\nStatistics.\nOverall, some 268,000 pioneers used the Oregon Trail and its three primary offshoots, the Bozeman, California, and Mormon Trails, to reach the West Coast, 1840\u20131860. Another 48,000 headed to Utah. There is no estimate on how many used it to return East.\nEmigrants.\nSome of the trail statistics for the early years were recorded by the U.S. Army at Fort Laramie, Wyoming, from about 1849 to 1855. None of these original statistical records have been found\u2014the Army either lost them or destroyed them. Only some partial written copies of the Army records and notes recorded in several diaries have survived.\nEmigration to California spiked considerably with the 1849 gold rush. Following the discovery of gold, California remained the destination of choice for most emigrants on the trail up to 1860, with almost 200,000 people traveling there between 1849 and 1860.\nTravel diminished after 1860, as the Civil War caused considerable disruptions on the trail. Many of the people on the trail in 1861\u20131863 were fleeing the war and its attendant drafts in both the South and the North. Trail historian Merrill J. Mattes has estimated the number of emigrants for 1861\u20131867 given in the total column of the above table. But these estimates may well be low since they only amount to an extra 125,000 people, and the 1870 census shows that over 200,000 additional people (ignoring most of the population increase in California, which had excellent sea and rail connections across Panama by then) showed up in all the states served by the Bozeman, California, Mormon, and Oregon Trails and their offshoots.\nMormon emigration records after 1860 are reasonably accurate, as newspapers and other accounts in Salt Lake City give most of the names of emigrants arriving each year from 1847 to 1868. Gold and silver strikes in Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, and Oregon caused a considerable increase in people using the trails, often in directions different from the original trail users.\nThough the numbers are significant in the context of the times, far more people chose to remain at home in the 31 states. Between 1840 and 1860, the population of the United States rose by 14\u00a0 million, yet only about 300,000 decided to make the trip. Many were discouraged by the cost, effort, and danger of the trip. Western scout Kit Carson is thought to have said, \"The cowards never started and the weak died on the way\", though the general saying was written by Joaquin Miller, in reference to the California gold rush. According to several sources, 3 to 10\u00a0 percent of the emigrants are estimated to have perished on the way west.\nMany who went were between the ages of 12 and 24. Between 1860 and 1870, the U.S. population increased by seven million; about 350,000 of this increase was in the Western states.\nWestern census data.\nThese census numbers show a 363,000 population increase in the western states and territories between 1860 and 1870. Some of this increase is because of a high birth rate in the western states and territories, but most is from emigrants moving from the east to the west and new immigration from Europe. Much of the increase in California and Oregon was from emigration by ship, as there was fast and reasonably low-cost transportation via East and West Coast steamships and the Panama Railroad after 1855. The census numbers imply at least 200,000 emigrants (or more) used some variation of the California/Oregon/Mormon/Bozeman Trails to get to their new homes between 1860 and 1870.\nCosts.\nThe cost of traveling over the Oregon Trail and its extensions varied from nothing to a few hundred dollars per person. Women seldom went alone. The cheapest way was to hire one to help drive the wagons or herds, allowing one to make the trip for nearly nothing or even make a small profit. Those with capital could often buy livestock in the Midwest and drive the stock to California or Oregon for profit. About 60 to 80\u00a0 percent of the travelers were farmers and as such already owned a wagon, livestock team, and many of the necessary supplies. This lowered the cost of the trip to about $50 per person for food and other items. Families planned the trip for months and made much of the extra clothing and many other items needed. Individuals buying most of the needed items would end up spending between $150\u2013200 per person. As the trail matured, additional costs for ferries and toll roads were thought to have been about $30 per wagon.\nDeaths.\nThe route west was arduous and fraught with many dangers, but the number of deaths on the trail is not known with any precision; there are only widely varying estimates. Estimating is difficult because of the common practice of burying people in unmarked graves that were intentionally disguised to avoid being dug up by animals or natives. Graves were often put in the middle of a trail and then run over by the livestock to make them difficult to find. Disease was the main killer of trail travelers. Cholera killed up to 3 percent of all travelers in the epidemic years from 1849 to 1855.\nNative attacks increased significantly after 1860, when most of the army troops were withdrawn, and miners and ranchers began fanning out all over the country, often encroaching on Native American territory. Increased attacks along the Humboldt led to most travelers taking the Central Nevada Route. The Goodall cutoff, developed in Idaho in 1862, kept Oregon-bound travelers away from much of the native trouble nearer the Snake River. Other trails were developed that traveled further along the South Platte to avoid local Native American hot spots.\nOther common causes of death included hypothermia, drowning in river crossings, getting run over by wagons, and accidental gun deaths. Later, more family groups started traveling, and many more bridges and ferries were being put in, so fording a dangerous river became much less common and dangerous. Surprisingly few people were taught to swim in this era. Being run over was a major cause of death, despite the wagons' only averaging 2\u20133 miles per hour. \nThe wagons could not easily be stopped, and people, particularly children, were often trying to get on and off the wagons while they were moving\u2014not always successfully. Another hazard was a dress getting caught in the wheels and pulling the person under. Accidental shootings declined significantly after Fort Laramie, as people became more familiar with their weapons and often just left them in their wagons. Carrying around a ten-pound rifle all day soon became tedious and usually unnecessary, as the perceived threat of natives faded and hunting opportunities receded.\nA significant number of travelers were suffering from scurvy by the end of their trips. Their typical flour and salted pork/bacon diet had very little vitamin C in it. The diet in the mining camps was also typically low in fresh vegetables and fruit, which indirectly led to the early deaths of many of the inhabitants. Some believe that scurvy deaths may have rivaled cholera as a killer, with most deaths occurring after the victim reached California.\nMiscellaneous deaths included deaths by childbirth, falling trees, flash floods, homicides, kicks by animals, lightning strikes, snake bites, and stampedes. According to an evaluation by John Unruh, a 4 percent death rate or 16,000 out of 400,000 total pioneers on all trails may have died on the trail.\nReaching the Sierra Nevada before the start of the winter storms was critical for the successful completion of a trip. The most famous failure in that regard was that of the Donner Party, whose members struggled to traverse what is today called Donner Pass, in November 1846. When the last survivor was rescued in April 1847, 33 men, women, and children had died at Donner Lake; with some of the 48 survivors confessing to having resorted to cannibalism to survive.\nDisease.\nDisease was the biggest killer on the Oregon Trail. Cholera was responsible for taking many lives. As a fecal-oral disease, it commonly resulted from consuming food or water contaminated by the bacterium. Because a dead traveler would often be buried at the site of death, nearby streams could easily be contaminated by the dead body. Other common diseases along the trail included dysentery, an intestinal infection that causes diarrhea containing blood or mucus, and typhoid fever, another fecal-oral disease.\nAirborne diseases commonly affect travelers. One such disease was diphtheria, to which young children were particularly susceptible. It could spread quickly in close quarters, such as the parties that traveled the trail. Measles was also a difficulty, as it is highly contagious and can have an incubation period of ten days or longer. Diseases could spread particularly quickly because settlers had no place to quarantine the sick and because poor sanitation was typical along the route.\nOther trails west.\nThere were other possible migration paths for early settlers, miners, or travelers to California or Oregon besides the Oregon trail before the establishment of the transcontinental railroads.\nFrom 1821 to 1846, the Hudson's Bay Company twice annually used the York Factory Express overland trade route from Fort Vancouver to Hudson Bay and then on to London. James Sinclair led a large party of nearly 200 settlers from the Red River Colony in 1841. These northern routes were largely abandoned after Britain ceded its claim to the southern Columbia River basin by way of the Oregon Treaty of 1846.\nThe longest trip was the voyage of about on an uncomfortable sailing ship rounding the treacherous, cold, and dangerous Cape Horn between Antarctica and South America and then sailing on to California or Oregon. This trip typically took four to seven months (120 to 210 days) and cost about $350 to $500. The cost could be reduced to zero if you signed on as a crewman and worked as a common seaman. The hundreds of abandoned ships, whose crews had deserted in San Francisco Bay in 1849\u201350, showed many thousands chose to do this.\nOther routes involved taking a ship to Col\u00f3n, Panama (then called Aspinwall) and a strenuous, disease-ridden, five- to seven-day trip by canoe and mule over the Isthmus of Panama before catching a ship from Panama City, Panama to Oregon or California. This trip could be done from the East Coast theoretically in less than two months if all ship connections were made without waits and typically cost about $450/person. Catching a fatal disease was a distinct possibility as Ulysses S. Grant in 1852 learned when his unit of about 600 soldiers and some of their dependents traversed the Isthmus and lost about 120 men, women, and children. \nThis passage was considerably sped up and made safer in 1855 when the Panama Railroad was completed at terrible cost in money and life across the Isthmus. The once treacherous trip could be done in less than a day. The time and the cost for transit dropped as regular paddle wheel steamships and sailing ships went from ports on the east coast and New Orleans, Louisiana, to Col\u00f3n, Panama ($80\u2013100), across the Isthmus of Panama by railroad ($25) and by paddle wheel steamships and sailing ships to ports in California and Oregon ($100\u2013150).\nAnother route was established by Cornelius Vanderbilt across Nicaragua in 1849. The long San Juan River to the Atlantic Ocean helps drain the long Lake Nicaragua. From the western shore of Lake Nicaragua, it is only about to the Pacific Ocean. Vanderbilt decided to use paddle wheel steamships from the U.S. to the San Juan River, small paddle wheel steam launches on the San Juan River, boats across Lake Nicaragua, and a stagecoach to the Pacific where connections could be made with another ship headed to California, Oregon, etc. Vanderbilt, by undercutting fares to the Isthmus of Panama and stealing many of the Panama Railroad workers, managed to attract roughly 30% of the California-bound steamboat traffic. All his connections in Nicaragua were never completely worked out before the Panama Railroad's completion in 1855. Civil strife in Nicaragua and payment to Cornelius Vanderbilt of a \"non-compete\" payment (bribe) of $56,000 per year killed the whole project in 1855.\nAnother possible route consisted of taking a ship to Mexico traversing the country and then catching another ship out of Acapulco, Mexico to California, etc. This route was used by some adventurous travelers but was not too popular because of the difficulties of making connections and the often hostile population along the way.\nThe Gila Trail going along the Gila River in Arizona, across the Colorado River and then across the Sonora Desert in California was scouted by Stephen Kearny's troops and later by Captain Philip St. George Cooke's Mormon Battalion in 1846 who were the first to take a wagon the whole way. This route was used by many gold-hungry miners in 1849 and later suffered from the disadvantage that you had to find a way across the very wide and very dry Sonora Desert. It was used by many in 1849 and later as a winter crossing to California, despite its many disadvantages.\nFrom 1857 to 1861, the Butterfield Stage Line won the $600,000/yr. U.S. mail contract to deliver mail to San Francisco, California. As dictated by southern Congressional members, the route ran from St. Louis, Missouri through Arkansas, Oklahoma Indian Territory, Texas, New Mexico Territory, and across the Sonora Desert before ending in San Francisco, California. Employing over 800 at its peak, it used 250 Concord Stagecoaches seating 12 very crowded passengers in three rows. It used 1,800 heads of stock, horses, and mules and 139 relay stations to ensure the stages ran day and night. A one-way fare of $200 delivered a very thrashed and tired passenger into San Francisco in 25 to 28 days. After traveling the route, \"New York Herald\" reporter Waterman Ormsby said, \"I now know what Hell is like. I've just had 24 days of it.\"\nThe ultimate competitor arrived in 1869, the first transcontinental railroad, which cut travel time to about seven days at a low fare of about $60 (economy)\nLegacy.\nOne of the enduring legacies of the Oregon Trail is the expansion of the United States territory to the West Coast. Without the many thousands of United States settlers in Oregon and California, and thousands more on their way each year, it is highly unlikely that this would have occurred.\nArts, entertainment, and media.\nThe western expansion, and the Oregon Trail in particular, inspired numerous creative works about the settlers' experiences.\nCommemorative coin.\nThe Oregon Trail Memorial half dollar was coined to commemorate the route. Issued intermittently between 1926 and 1939, 202,928 were sold to the public. With 131,050 minted in 1926, that year's issue remains readily available for collectors.\nMusic.\nThe Oregon Trail has featured in various songs, especially in western music genres.\n\"The Oregon Trail\" is a song written by Peter DeRose and Billy Hill, recorded by singing cowboy artist Tex Ritter in 1935, and by Australian country musician Tex Morton in 1936.\nWoody Guthrie wrote and recorded a song entitled \"Oregon Trail\" while traveling in the region in 1941. It was the opening track in his \"Columbia River Collection\" album.\nGames.\nThe story of the Oregon Trail inspired the educational video game series \"The Oregon Trail\", which became widely popular in the 1980s and early 1990s.\nIn 2014, a musical named \"The Trail to Oregon!\", based on \"The Oregon Trail\" game, with music and lyrics by Jeff Blim and a book by Jeff Blim, Nick Lang and Matt Lang was performed in Chicago and later posted to YouTube by StarKid Productions.\nTelevision.\n\"The Oregon Trail\" was a television series that ran from September 22 to October 26, 1977, on NBC. The show stars Rod Taylor, Tony Becker, Darleen Carr, Charles Napier, and Ken Swofford. Although the show was canceled after six episodes, the remaining seven episodes were later aired on BBC 2 in the United Kingdom. The entire series was shown in the UK on BBC1, from November 1977 to January 1978. In April 2010, Timeless Media Group (TMG) released in the USA the entire show on six DVDs, running 750 minutes. The set includes 14 original episodes, including the feature-length pilot and the six episodes that did not air on NBC.\nThe episode of \"Teen Titans Go!\" titled \"Oregon Trail\" parodies expeditions that took place on the Oregon Trail, as well as the 1985 video game \"The Oregon Trail\".\nThe 2021 prequel to \"Yellowstone\" titled \"1883\" follows the Dutton family\u2019s journey on The Oregon Trail from Texas to Montana.\nFilm.\nThe 1930 Western film \"The Big Trail\" featured John Wayne in his first starring role as a fur trapper leading a large wagon train of settlers across the Oregon Trail.\nThe 1959 Western film \"The Oregon Trail\" featured Fred MacMurray as a disguised soldier who used the trail to head to the Pacific Northwest in case of war.\nThe 1967 film \"The Way West\", starring Kirk Douglas, Robert Mitchum, and Richard Widmark, was based on the novel of the same name by A. B. Guthrie, Jr. It follows a wagon train of settlers as they make their way from Missouri to Oregon in 1843.\nThe animated film \"Calamity, a Childhood of Martha Jane Cannary\" portrays the expedition of a dozen wagons to Oregon, part of which was the young Calamity Jane.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
