{"id": "52926", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52926", "title": "South East England", "text": "Region of England\nSouth East England is one of the nine official regions of England that are in the top level category for statistical purposes. It consists of the nine counties of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, East Sussex, Hampshire, the Isle of Wight, Kent, Oxfordshire, Surrey and West Sussex. South East England is the third-largest region of England, with a land area of , and is also the most populous with a total population of 9,642,942 in 2024. \nSouth East England contains eight legally chartered cities: Brighton and Hove, Canterbury, Chichester, Milton Keynes, Oxford, Portsmouth, Southampton and Winchester. Officially it does not include London, which is a separate region. The geographical term for \"South East England\" may differ from the official definition of the region, for example London, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and Essex are sometimes referred to as being in the south east of England. This article only considers the South East as being the official statistical region.\nIn medieval times, South East England included much of the Kingdom of Wessex, which was the precursor to the modern state of England. Winchester was the capital of England after unification of the various states, including the kingdoms of Kent, Sussex and Mercia. Winchester stopped being the administrative capital of England some time in the 13th century as its influence waned while the City of London dominated commerce. The last monarch to be crowned at Winchester was Richard II in 1377, although the last monarch to be crowned by the Bishop of Winchester was Queen Mary I in 1553.\nToday, the region's close proximity to London has led to South East England becoming a prosperous economic hub with the largest economy of any region in the UK, after London. The region is home to Gatwick Airport and Heathrow Airport (the UK's two busiest airports). The coastline along the English Channel provides numerous ferry crossings to mainland Europe. South East England is also known for its countryside, which includes two national parks: the New Forest and the South Downs, as well as the North Downs, the Chiltern Hills and part of the Cotswolds. The River Thames flows through the region and its basin is known as the Thames Valley. \nIt is also the location of a number of internationally known places of interest, such as HMS \"Victory\" in Portsmouth, Cliveden in Buckinghamshire, Thorpe Park and RHS Wisley in Surrey, Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire, Windsor Castle in Berkshire, Leeds Castle, the White Cliffs of Dover and Canterbury Cathedral in Kent, Brighton Palace Pier, and Hammerwood Park in East Sussex, and Wakehurst Place in West Sussex. The region has many universities; the University of Oxford is the oldest in the English-speaking world, and ranked among the best in the world.\nSouth East England is host to various sporting events, including the annual Henley Royal Regatta, Royal Ascot and The Derby, and sporting venues include Wentworth Golf Club and Brands Hatch. Some of the events of the 2012 Summer Olympics were held in the south east, including the rowing at Eton Dorney and part of the cycling road race in the Surrey Hills.\nHistory.\nThe Meonhill Vineyard, near Old Winchester Hill in east Hampshire on the South Downs south of West Meon on the A32, is an example of a site where the Romano-British grew Roman grapes.\nSecond World War.\nMuch of the Battle of Britain was fought in this region, especially in Kent. RAF Bomber Command was based at High Wycombe. RAF Medmenham at Danesfield House, west of Marlow in Buckinghamshire, was important for aerial reconnaissance. Operation Corona, based at RAF Kingsdown (at West Kingsdown next to Brands Hatch in Kent, between the A20 and M20), was implemented to confuse German night fighters with native German-speakers, and coordinated by the RAF Y service.\nBletchley Park in north Buckinghamshire was the principal Allied centre for codebreaking. The Colossus computer, arguably the world's first, began working on Lorentz codes on 5 February 1944, with Colossus 2 working from June 1944. The site was chosen, among other reasons, because it is at the junction of the Varsity Line (between Oxford and Cambridge) and the West Coast Main Line. The Harwell computer (Dekatron), now at the National Museum of Computing at Bletchley, was built in 1949 and is believed to be the oldest working digital computer in the world.\nScientific heritage.\nJohn Wallis of Kent introduced the symbol for infinity and the standard notation for powers of numbers in 1656. Thomas Bayes was an important statistician from Tunbridge Wells; his theorem (of probability theory) is used for spam filters and Google's search.\nSir David N. Payne at the University of Southampton's Optoelectronics Research Centre invented the erbium-doped fibre amplifier, a type of optical amplifier, in the mid-1980s, which became essential for the internet. Henry Moseley at Oxford in 1913 discovered his Moseley's law of X-ray spectra of chemical elements that enabled him to be the first to assign the correct atomic number to elements in periodic table; he did not receive any Nobel Prize as it is not awarded posthumously (he was killed in 1915 at Gallipoli with the Royal Engineers). Carbon fibre was invented in 1963 at the RAE in Farnborough by a team led by William Watt. The Apollo LCG space-suit cooling system originated mostly from work done at RAE Farnborough in the early 1960s.\nDonald Watts Davies invented packet switching in the late 1960s at the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington. Packet-switching was taken up by the Americans to form the ARPANET, the precursor to the Internet.\nSurrey's Alec Reeves invented pulse-code modulation (PCM) in 1937 (at ITT's research laboratories in Paris), the standard for digital audio recordings.\nSir John Herschel, son of the astronomer, from Kent, invented the term \"photography\" in 1839, meaning \"light writing\".\nand discovered the first photographic fixer, sodium thiosulphate, known as \"hypo\", also in 1839.\nGLEEP was Britain's first nuclear reactor, in August 1947 at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE) at Harwell, it would stay operational until 1990.\nWilliam Harvey of Folkestone, in Kent, discovered the circulation of blood. The Lilly Research Centre in Windlesham, Berkshire, part of Eli Lilly, developed Olanzapine in 1996 (for bipolar disorder, selling around $5bn worldwide annually). Beecham Research Laboratories at Brockham Park in 1959 discovered meticillin (or methicillin), the first semi-synthetic penicillin (beta-lactamase stable), deriving from their discovery in 1958 of 6-APA, the core constituent; the team, led by Prof George Rolinson, won the Mullard Award in 1971. Bipyridine compounds (Paraquat-Gramoxone and Diquat) were discovered for herbicide use in 1954 by William Boon at ICI's Plant Protection division at Jealott's Hill, being released onto the market in 1958. AZT/Retrovir (zidovudine) was first manufactured by Wellcome in 1987 in Kent; they also introduced Zovirax (aciclovir), and the naturally occurring digoxin, a cardiac glycoside. After a plane crashed near his house in Oxford in 1940, Sir Peter Medawar helped the injured pilot, and in the process discovered homograft rejection, leading to organ transplantation using azathioprine. Viagra (Sildenafil) was synthesized at Pfizer in Sandwich, Kent.\nIndustrial heritage.\nTransport and communications.\nSir Francis Pettit Smith of Kent invented the screw propeller.\nOn 3 May 1830 the world's first passenger train service, the Canterbury and Whitstable Railway (6 miles or 10\u00a0km) began. It was built by George Stephenson and hauled by the locomotive \"Invicta\". It introduced the world's first railway season ticket in 1834.\nMaidenhead Railway Bridge, known for its flat arch, was built in 1839 with 39-metre spans.\nThe Military Vehicles and Engineering Establishment, in Chertsey, developed Chobham armour.\nOn 12 April 1903, the world's first bus service was by Eastbourne Buses from Eastbourne railway station to Meads.\nThe world's first submarine telephone cable was laid between England and France in 1891 by HMTS Monarch, enabling London-Paris calls from April 1891. On 3 December 1992, Neil Papworth of Reading, an engineer from Sema Group Telecoms at Vodafone in Newbury, sent the world's first text message from his computer to an Orbitel 901 handset of Richard Jarvis, Vodafone's technical director.\nThe first public automatic telephone exchange in the UK was at Epsom telephone exchange from 18 May 1912. It was introduced as standard across the UK's 6,700 telephone exchanges in 1922, lasting for around 70 years; it could handle up to 500 lines. It used the Strowger design and was made by Automatic Telephone Manufacturing Company of Liverpool. The world's first automatic telephone exchange had opened in La Porte, Indiana in November 1892.\nUK-Belgium 5, laid in 1986 from Kent, was the world's first optical fibre submarine cable, and is 36 miles long.\nThrustSSC, the fastest car in the world in 1997, was built in Aldingbourne, West Sussex, by G-Force Engineering, designed by Ron Ayers, with further work done by the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency at Farnborough.\nThe BritNed 1000MW power-supply submarine cable from Isle of Grain to Rotterdam, was built in 2009. The HVDC Cross-Channel (2000MW) submarine cable was built in 1986. This is the world's highest-capacity submarine HVDC cable; it goes from France and lands near Folkestone, with the large transformer station (built by GEC) squeezed between the CTRL and the M20 in Aldington and Smeeth, made of eight 270 kV cables.\nOn 16 October 1908 the British Army Aeroplane No 1, flown by the American Samuel Franklin Cody, was the first aircraft flown in the UK, at Farnborough; on 14 May 1909 he flew it for more than a mile. On 13 August 1909, his wife was the first woman in the UK to fly in a plane, also at Farnborough.\nThe first human airborne ejection seat firing took place on 24 July 1946 over Chalgrove Airfield, Oxfordshire, in a Meteor, piloted by Bernard Lynch; the first dummy ejection had been 10 May 1945 over RAF Oakley in west Buckinghamshire (today near the M40); on 13 March 1962, the first in-flight rocket-powered ejection took place by Peter Howard, an RAF doctor based at Farnborough's Institute of Aviation Medicine in Meteor \"WA364\" at 250\u00a0ft over Chalgrove, with the rocket giving a maximum force of 16G. The Miles M.52, designed at Woodley Aerodrome in Berkshire by Miles Aircraft, was an advanced design of aircraft which had the innovation of the \"flying tail\" or \"all-moving tail\" also known as a stabilator; this would solve the problem of stability and aircraft control at supersonic speeds, and its design was taken wholesale into the American Bell X-1, the first supersonic aircraft.\nThe first Harrier aircraft \"XV738\" flew on 28 December 1967; this was the first aircraft of the RAF to have a head-up display avionics system. The first two-seat Harrier \"XW174\" flew on 24 April 1969, later crashing at Larkhill in June 1969. The British Aerospace Sea Harrier \"XZ450\" first flew on 20 August 1978; on 4 May 1982 this aircraft was hit by anti-aircraft fire at Goose Green, killing the pilot with 800 Naval Air Squadron from HMS \"Hermes\"; the aircraft had no radar warning receiver (RWR), due to testing the Sea Eagle, so could not detect the Skyguard radar had locked on to it. It was destroyed with the Oerlikon GDF (35mm) of GADA 601; it was the first Sea Harrier lost in the Falklands campaign.\nRoyston Instruments of Byfleet developed the world's first multi-channel flight data recorders in 1965.\nAlthough the Comet is generally accepted as the world's first production-run jet airliner, the first jet airliner ever built (individual) was a Nene-powered Vickers VC.1 Viking on 6 April 1948 from Wisley Airfield; the world's first turboprop airliner would fly from there on 16 July 1948 by Mutt Summers. In 1939 at Cowes (Northwood) John Godeck invented the plan position indicator method of radar display as most commonly known ever since; the site became Plessey Radar in 1965, and currently is run by BAE Systems. Sperry Gyroscope in Bracknell produced the guidance systems for Britain's 1960s space rockets.\nOther industries.\nThe Wealden iron industry in the Weald was the site of the first blast furnace in Britain in 1491, and produced much of Britain's cast iron until the 1770s.\nPortsmouth Block Mills were the site of the world's first metal machine tools, built for the manufacture of wooden pulleys, invented by Henry Maudslay, and the site of the world's first industrial assembly line in 1803.\nSouth Foreland Lighthouse on 8 December 1858 was the world's first lighthouse with electric light, with the first type of industrial electrical generator made by Frederick Hale Holmes, from work he had carried out with Floris Nollet of Belgium, and 36 permanent magnets. By 1880, of the ten lighthouses with electric light, five were in the UK. From the lighthouse in 1899, the first international radio broadcast to France was made. Z\u00e9nobe Gramme of Belgium made a much better design in 1870 with self-excitation of magnets, and the first modern dynamo. North Foreland Lighthouse was the UK's last-staffed lighthouse until 1998.\nPortland cement was developed in Northfleet, Kent, by William Aspdin, son of Joseph Aspdin. The development was to heat the ingredients to around 1450\u00a0\u00b0C, producing clinker. Previously, temperatures were taken to only 800\u00a0\u00b0C, which was not enough. The first ever cement kiln is still in Northfleet today in a cardboard factory. In the late 1800s, the rotary kiln made the process much more efficient. Concrete, effectively human-made stone, is the most widespread human-made material. 5% of all carbon emissions worldwide are from concrete production.\nGeorge Albert Smith developed the first colour film process, known as Kinemacolor, in 1906 at Southwick, West Sussex. George E. Davis from Slough, is the founding father of chemical engineering. Wiggins Teape, later ARJO Wiggins Fine Papers, had the largest paper research centre in Europe at Butlers Court in Beaconsfield; built in 1891 and vacated in 2009. Bentalls in Bracknell (now Fenwick since 2017) had the first point of sale terminal in Europe - the NCR 280 in 1973.\nThe National Fruit Collection is the largest collection of fruit trees in the world, at Brogdale, near Faversham in Kent. Scalextric was invented by Fred Francis in 1956, who founded Minimodels in Havant; initially the model cars had been clockwork; it was made from 1967 at Triang in Margate. The world's first Mars Bar was made in Slough in 1932; it was modelled on the Milky Way, popular at the time in the USA. Twix was introduced at Slough in 1967, with production moving to eastern France (Mars Chocolat France at Haguenau in Alsace) in 2005. The Ford GT40 was developed by Ford Advanced Vehicles at Slough in the mid-1960s.\nGeography.\nThe highest point is Walbury Hill in Berkshire at .\nBritain's tallest native tree, according to The Tree Register in April 2015, is a 144-ft beech at Devil's Dyke in Newtimber Woods in West Sussex.\nSettlements.\nCities and towns in the region include Aldershot, Ashford, Aylesbury, Basingstoke, Bracknell, Brighton and Hove, Canterbury, Chichester, Crawley, Eastbourne, Farnborough, Gosport, Guildford, Hastings, High Wycombe, Margate, Maidstone, Medway, Milton Keynes, Newport, Oxford, Portsmouth, Ramsgate, Reading, Slough, Southampton, Winchester, Woking and Worthing.\nHistorical boundaries.\nUntil 1999, there was a south east Standard Statistical Region, which also included the counties of Bedfordshire, Greater London, Essex and Hertfordshire. The former south east Civil Defence Region covered the same area as the current official region.\nAlternative definitions.\nIn unofficial usage, the South East can refer to a varying area \u2013 sometimes only to London, Kent, East Sussex, West Sussex, and Surrey; but sometimes to an area corresponding to the former Standard Statistical Region. The South East is also occasionally used as a synonym for the home counties.\nDemographics.\nThe population of the region at the 2011 census was 8,634,750 making it the most populous English region. The major conurbations of the region include South Hampshire (855,000), Brighton/Worthing/Littlehampton (474,000) and Reading (318,000). Settlements closer to London are part of the conurbation known as the Greater London Urban Area.\nThe South East has the highest percentage of people born outside of Britain other than London. According to the 2021 census, 78.8% of residents were White British, 7.1% Other White (inc. 0.8% Irish), 7.0% British Asian, 2.8% Mixed Race, 2.4% Black British, and 1.4% of other groups.\na There was no census in 1941.\nGovernance and politics.\nSouth East England is an official region for statistical and strategic planning purposes, but is not served by any directly elected regional government. From 1998 to 2010 local councils sent[] to the voluntary South East England Regional Assembly, based in Guildford. Delegates met six times a year and it was responsible for the South East England Development Agency, a project which oversaw investment projects in the region. It was abolished on 31 March 2009 and replaced with South East England Councils in Kingston upon Thames. The region is divided into several local council areas, most composed of two-tiered councils (the tiers are county councils and district councils) and unitary authorities:\nWestminster seats.\nThe South East of England is the most Conservative voting region of Britain in terms of both seats and votes. The area also has some seats where there is strong support for other parties, for example, Oxford, Slough and Southampton Test for Labour and Brighton Pavilion which is held by the Green Party. Out of 84 parliamentary seats, the Conservatives hold 72. In the 2017 general election, the Conservatives won 54.8% of votes, Labour 28.6%, Liberal Democrats 10.6%, Greens 3.1%, and UKIP 2.2%.\nEurostat NUTS.\nIn the Eurostat Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), South East England is a level-1 NUTS region, coded \"UKJ\", which is subdivided as follows:\nEducation.\nSchools.\nBuckinghamshire, Medway and Kent, and Slough have an almost completely selective education system \u2013 not just a few grammar schools as other English areas may have \u2013 with secondary modern schools as the alternative. Kent has 33 grammar schools, Buckinghamshire 13, Medway 6 and Slough 4. The other areas are comprehensive. The top thirty schools at A level are almost exclusively selective schools; one or two are sixth form colleges. However, the results for each county as a whole are not always directly related to the number of grammar schools, as Kent and Medway perform below average at A-level. The King's School, Canterbury claims to be oldest in England: 597 AD. Herschel Grammar School in Slough is the most oversubscribed school in England, with 14 people per place, Langley Grammar School in Slough is next with 13 per place, then Burnham Grammar School.\n508,000 in the region are at state secondary schools (the highest in England) with 101,000 in Kent (the highest in England for a county and completely selective) then 70,000 in Hampshire, 60,000 in Surrey, 45,000 in West Sussex, 36,000 in Oxfordshire, 35,000 in Buckinghamsire. The lowest is 6,000 at Bracknell Forest, then Reading with about 6,000. Of all regions, the South-East has the greatest percentage that attend a grammar school: 12%; the next highest is the South-West with 6%. The most-educated people (NQF level 4 or above) in the region live in Elmbridge (51%), then Waverley, and Epsom and Ewell; 33% of people are at this level for the South-East, only second to London at 40%.\nThe region has the highest number of sixth formers, outside of London, in England; the highest number is in Kent, the highest for England, then Buckinghamshire (also completely selective), then Surrey. For state school pupils, there is patchy STEM participation. Hampshire has the most passing STEM subjects in England and in the region, followed by Kent, Surrey and Buckinghamshire. For STEM subjects, Portsmouth is lowest by some distance (6 people passed A level Chemistry) and is almost the worst in England. Southampton also gets low STEM subject results. Bracknell Forest gets low STEM results, for its economic prosperity, but does not include private schools.\nFor languages, the best is Kent: the county achieves the most A-level language passes in England, although Hampshire is a close second. Both counties get more German A level passes than the whole of North East England. Buckinghamshire and Surrey have high language A-level passes. Hampshire gets the most A-level passes in England (27,500), again more than North-East England (25,000). Although Hampshire is the best at languages, Portsmouth gets the fewest language passes in the region, and some of the lowest in England, with four French A levels, and has only 500 A level passes in total; next lowest are Slough, Bracknell Forest, and Southampton.\nReading School, a grammar, is the state school that gets the highest percentage (23%) into Oxbridge in 2010, behind 10 independents, and is also the oldest existing state grammar school in England; above it in the region, of the independent schools, are Magdalen College School, Oxford (32%), Guildford High School (26%) and Wycombe Abbey (25%). The Kendrick School, also in Reading, gets the 4th highest state school acceptance percentage to Oxbridge (18%) and the second highest in England outside of two grammar schools in London. Of the 25 state schools in the top 100 schools getting to Oxbridge, 7 are from the region. Many people from the north of East Sussex go to Kent's grammars; some people on the London edge of Surrey attend grammars in Kingston upon Thames; and Buckingham's two grammars attract people from nearby Milton Keynes; Buckinghamshire's grammar schools get some of best admissions to Oxbridge in the UK. Surrey has twice as many acceptances into Oxbridge as the whole of Wales; acceptances to Oxbridge are concentrated in 10 counties in the South-East.\n1% of those at school in the South-East gained no GCSE passes in 2010; Portsmouth was most with 2.5%, and Windsor and Maidenhead had the lowest with 0.2%. For school free school meals, the region has the lowest percentage in England with 7.2%; the highest percentage is Southampton with 17%, and the lowest is Wokingham with 3.5% (the second lowest in England after Rutland); Buckinghamshire is 4.3%, then Bracknell Forest and Surrey are 4.9%. For truancy, the highest is South Bucks at 7.0, then Canterbury 7.0, Portsmouth 6.9, Thanet 6.9, Southampton 6.4, and Rushmoor 6.1. The lowest truancy percentages are for Tandridge 2.5, Windsor &amp; Maidenhead 2.5, and Slough 2.5.\nAt GCSE, the area in the South East (and England) with the highest results is consistently Buckinghamshire. Berkshire is split into unitary authorities, and Wokingham, Windsor and Slough have the next best GCSE results. All of Berkshire's unitary authorities have results above the England average, with West Berkshire considerably above average. Schools in Surrey and Hampshire also have consistently good GCSE results, and they are above average in Oxfordshire, West Sussex, Kent, Medway, and East Sussex. There are a small number of districts where results are significantly below average including the unitary authorities of Portsmouth (one of the lowest LEAs in the country), the Isle of Wight, Southampton, Brighton, and the districts of Oxford in Oxfordshire, Adur in West Sussex and Hastings in East Sussex.\nThere are forty-nine FE colleges in the region. The two main FE colleges are Northbrook College in Sussex and Basingstoke College of Technology in Hampshire. Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshore share an LSC (which fund FE colleges), and Sussex has a combined LSC. The region's LSC office was in Reading, looking after five areas.\nUniversities.\nThe best known university in the region is the University of Oxford, famous for its academic achievements, and also for its ornate colleges and its rowing crews on the Thames. It was ranked the fourth best university in the world by the Times Higher Education Supplement in 2013.\nOther universities include:\nBy total HEFCE funding, the biggest university is the Open University, followed by Oxford University. The Open and Oxford each receive around three times as much funding as any other university in the region, and Oxford receives the largest research grant in England (as of 2009). The University of Southampton gets the third largest amount of funding, with the next largest research grant, one of the largest in England. Other universities with a large research grant are Reading, Sussex and Surrey. Oxford gets twice as much total income (around \u00a3700\u00a0million) as the next largest, Southampton. Surrey and Reading get the next largest total income.\nOxford and Southampton have the largest numbers of students, followed by Brighton. Of total students in the region, around 45% are from the region and 35% from other regions. Of full-time first degree students in the region, over 35% are from the region, 15% are from London, and 10% each are from the East of England and the South-West; in total, around 70% are from the south of England. Very few are from the North-East or Scotland. Around 35% of the region's native students stay in the region, with 15% going to London and over 10% going to the South-West. In general, for other regions of the UK, the South-East's students are more prepared to study in other regions than those regions' students are prepared to study in the South-East. Once they graduate, over 50% stay in the South-East, with 25% going to London, around 5% going to the East of England, and around 10% going to the South-West; around 90% stay in the south of England.\nEconomy.\nOverall, the South East of England is a very prosperous area with the second largest regional economy in the UK (after London), valued at \u00a3177\u00a0billion in 2006. GDP per capita in 2007 was estimated at \u00a322,624, compared with a UK average of \u00a319,956, making South East England the second richest region per capita, behind London. However prosperity varies significantly across the region and despite its image of wealth there are large pockets of deprivation. GDP per capita in Berkshire and Milton Keynes is more than twice that of East Sussex and the Isle of Wight.\nThe region's Manufacturing Advisory Service is on the A30 in Hook, north Hampshire The UKTI service for the region is on Victory Park in Whiteley, off junction 9 of the M27, opposite the \"Solent Hotel\".\nThe South East Coast Ambulance Service has three headquarters, one each for Kent, Surrey and Sussex. These are on the B2163 at Coxheath (for Kent), on the A217 at Banstead (for Surrey), and on the A277 in Lewes (for Sussex). The South Central Ambulance Service is headquartered on the B4100 next to Bicester Town railway station, with offices at Otterbourne, Hampshire and Wokingham. The charity-funded air ambulances are Kent Air Ambulance at Marden, Kent; Hampshire &amp; Isle of Wight Air Ambulance at Thruxton, Hampshire; Surrey and Sussex Air Ambulance at Dunsfold Aerodrome, Surrey; and the Thames Valley Air Ambulance at RAF Benson.\nMany high technology companies are located near the M3 in Surrey and the M4 in Berkshire. Sun Microsystems had their UK base in Blackwater near Camberley until 2009. Microsoft and Oracle have their UK headquarters next door to each other in Reading (Wokingham borough), as do the Yell Group and Logica (near junction 11 of the M4). The Gatwick Diamond is also a hub for hi-tech industry, centred at Gatwick Airport with Epsom to the north and Burgess Hill to the south. The largest company, by turnover, in the South East is Vodafone, followed by Ineos.\nTransport.\nThe main road transport routes are along the M1 through Buckinghamshire; the M40 through Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire; the M4 through Berkshire and Buckinghamshire; the M2 motorway/A2 and M20 through Kent; the M23 through Surrey and West Sussex; the M3 through Surrey and Hampshire. All these routes connect to the M25, which runs near to and occasionally through the region's border with Greater London.\nThe A34 provides a north\u2013south road link through Oxfordshire, Berkshire and Hampshire. The east\u2013west corridor through the south of the region is provided by the A27 and the M27.\nThe main intercontinental airport is Gatwick Airport, with regional airports at Kent International Airport (Ramsgate), Shoreham Airport and Southampton Airport. Heathrow Airport is in Greater London but also serves (and is serviced by) the South East region.\nThe Great Western Main Line passes through Berkshire, Oxfordshire and southern Buckinghamshire. The South Eastern Main Line and High Speed 1 pass through Kent; the latter connects to the Channel Tunnel. The Brighton Main Line passes through Surrey and West Sussex. The North Downs Line runs from Berkshire then through Surrey to connect with Sussex and Kent. The West Coast Main Line passes through northern Buckinghamshire. The Chiltern Main Line is a major commuter line between Birmingham and London passing through central Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire. The Port of Dover and the port at Folkestone have many ferry services to France and though none currently run to Belgium.\nAs part of the transport planning system the Regional Assembly is under statutory requirement to produce a Regional Transport Strategy (RTS) to provide long term planning for transport in the region. This involves region wide transport schemes such as those carried out by the Highways Agency and Network Rail. Within the region the local transport authorities carry out transport planning through the use of a Local Transport Plan (LTP) which outlines their strategies, policies and implementation programme.\nThe most recent LTP is that for the period 2006\u201311. In the South East region the following transport authorities have published their LTP online: \nBracknell Forest U.A., Brighton &amp; Hove U.A., Buckinghamshire, East Sussex, Hampshire, Isle of Wight, Kent, Medway U.A., Milton Keynes U.A., Oxfordshire, Portsmouth U.A., Reading U.A., Slough U.A., Southampton U.A., Surrey, Windsor and Maidenhead U.A., Wokingham U.A. and West Sussex.\nEconomic activity by county.\nBerkshire.\nCompanies in Berkshire essentially follow the M4 corridor. In Theale are Nvidia UK (components for smartphones), The Range, Bathstore, and Plumb Center. SPP Pumps (owned by Kirloskar Group) is at the Arlington Business Park; on the same estate PepsiCo is next to the GWML railway. Porsche Cars Great Britain is in Calcot, Tilehurst, west of Reading near Theale Interchange. Harley-Davidson UK is in Pangbourne. Vodafone, and High and Mighty are based in Newbury; Bayer UK (Aspirin, Rennie and Alka-Seltzer) is to the west; National Instruments UK is to the east off the A4 on the Newbury Business Park, and Quantel was off the A4 and is now Snell (former Snell &amp; Wilcox, previously in Lower Earley), an important video technology company, near Aricent UK.\nThe Atomic Weapons Establishment is in Aldermaston on the Hampshire boundary. The Motor Insurance Repair Research Centre and Xtrac Limited are at Thatcham. The Royal School of Military Survey is in Hermitage. East of the A34, north of the M4, at Compton since 1992 is the UK HQ of Baxter Healthcare, part of a global company which is working on a vaccine for H1N1, and next door is the Institute for Animal Health, which also researches H1N1.\nRetriever Sports, on the Mill Street Ind Est near Slough railway station, is the world's largest manufacturer of darts equipment. Mars Limited has a large chocolate factory, run under the name of Effem Holdings Ltd, also in Slough on the enormous Slough Trading Estate which makes 3m Mars bars a day; nearby is Johnson Controls UK (car seats), and ICI Paints, Polyfilla, and Dulux. Horlicks is made by GSK there. Oki UK (desktop printers) are based next to Mars. Honda UK, Citro\u00ebn UK, Fiat UK, Douwe Egberts UK (and its owner Sara Lee UK), BlackBerry UK, Black &amp; Decker Europe, Amazon UK, Ingres UK, Telef\u00f3nica O2 Europe UK and Reckitt Benckiser are also in Slough.\nToyota Material Handling UK (fork lifts) is next door to Slough Heat and Power station. Lonza UK makes biopharmaceuticals (monoclonal antibodies) on the A4. Honda Motor Europe is at the Langley Roundabout (A4/B470) of the M4 at Brands Hill, part of Colnbrook with Poyle, and near the Queen Mother Reservoir; on the opposite side of the M4 in Langley (Slough borough) is Royal Mail's Heathrow Worldwide Distribution Centre, and next door is Pentax Ricoh Imaging UK, next to Langley's leisure centre.\nHovis, Ben &amp; Jerry's (Unilever), FM Global UK (insurance), and Morgan Crucible, are in Windsor; Nintendo UK is next to the Royal Mews Riding School. Centrica is in Dedworth, next to Windsor Racecourse. Groupe SEB UK (owner of Krups, Moulinex, Rowenta, and Tefal) is next to Windsor &amp; Eton Riverside railway station and near the castle (previously next to Langley railway station until 2012). CA Technologies UK is at Ditton Park in Datchet, home of the former Radio Research Station until 1979, which discovered the ionosphere in the 1920s. Ledco, near B3020/A329 junction in Sunninghill and Ascot, is the UK distributor of LED Lenser torches, made by Zweibr\u00fcder Optoelectronics. Hitachi, Corel UK, NSK Europe (off the A308 to the north), Weight Watchers UK (next to Desborough School) and the Rank Group (leisure) are in Maidenhead.\nFurther east on the A404(M) is McGraw-Hill UK in Cox Green; other the side of the A404(M) at the Cox Green Interchange (9A), GSK makes Sensodyne, Corsodyl, Aquafresh, and Macleans; Volvo Cars UK are at Scandinavia House (in Marlow from 1986 to 2012) next to GSK; Nortel UK left in 2009. Sanofi Pasteur MSD UK (vaccines) is based next to the Maidenhead council offices. Initial Washrooms Solutions is next to the railway station and on the other side of A308 is Hutchison 3G UK; on the other side of the railway is the Rank Group at the A308 roundabout, in Braywick. Adobe Systems have their European HQ on the A4, south of the B4447 roundabout, next to a Sainsbury's. Hanson UK is based at the A4/A308 roundabout; Hitachi Europe (with Maxell Europe) is off the A4094 on the northern outskirts towards Cookham at Whitebrook Park, with DS Smith, at the former Formica Research Centre. Avery Dennison UK are based to the north off the A308 at Furze Platt.\nAbbott Laboratories UK (pharmaceuticals) are based on the Vanwall Business Park; nearby is Costain, Pfizer Consumer Healthcare UK (Centrum multivitamins); Toys \"R\" Us UK and Mattel UK are opposite each other, with Compuware UK. McNeil Products (Benylin, Benadryl, Daktarin, Sudafed and Calpol) is at Foundation Park, next to the Great Western Main Line, in Cox Green, south of Maidenhead, with other Johnson &amp; Johnson (beauty) brands, and Lexmark UK. Bisham Abbey, on the Thames, is a site of one of the National Sports Centres, at the A404/A308 Bisham Roundabout, to the west of Maidenhead. GEO Group UK (prisoner custody) is off the A4130 in Hurley, on the western edge of the district, with Hospira UK, owned by Pfizer.\nBG Group, Prudential plc (the country's biggest life insurer with 7m customers), the Rural Payments Agency, and Guide Dogs for the Blind are in Reading. Primark UK, near Reading Civic Centre, was started by Arthur Ryan in Ireland; it arrived in the UK in 1973 and has bought many former sites of C&amp;A and Littlewoods. North of the railway line is TP-Link UK (routers). Off the A33 towards the Three Mile Cross Interchange (M4) in south Reading is the Green Park Business Park, home of Symantec UK (previously in Whitley), many Cisco offices and Thames Water and to the south is the former Berkshire Brewery (closed in April 2010 by Heineken UK) and Verizon UK.\nBorland UK, Interserve and Mabey Group, the bridge manufacturer, are in Twyford. Bang &amp; Olufsen UK is in Winnersh. Rockwell Collins UK (avionics, flight control systems), is next to Jacobs Engineering UK, at the end of the A3290 near the A4 Sutton Seeds Roundabout, at Suttons Business Park in Earley; on the opposite side of the railway is Thames Valley Park, with Oracle next to ING Direct UK in Earley and Microsoft UK in Woodley; The University of Reading's Reading Scientific Services (RSSL) in Earley is Cadbury's main research centre.\nFoster Wheeler UK is in Shinfield in the old headquarters of Berkshire County Council, next to the M4; next door is the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts on the site of the former Met Office College. Auto Trader Group is in nearby Earley. The Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME) are based at Arborfield Garrison, partly in Barkham, also home of the School of Electronic and Aeronautical Engineering. Pelco UK is at the Mulberry Business Park in south-west Wokingham. Christie Digital Systems (EMEA office) is in the centre. Off the B3430 in Wokingham Without, McNeil have a laboratory, south of district.\nSyngenta UK and Wincor Nixdorf UK (ATMs) are in Bracknell. Boehringer Ingelheim UK is off the A3095 in west Bracknell in Easthampstead; nearby to the north is Waitrose; to the east along the A3095 is Panasonic UK; next door to the south is IHS UK (owner of Jane's Information Group) and HHI Europe (construction equipment); further along the A3095 is BMW (GB); BMW sold their first model in the UK in 1966, the 2002, and sold 230,000 cars in the UK, a record amount. In 2017, German car imports to the UK were worth \u20ac20.8 billion. To the south on the Southern Ind Est is Daler-Rowney (known for its acrylic paint; Rowney was the first supplier in Europe in 1963.\nOn the other side of the A329, towards the B3408, is Cable &amp; Wireless (the former overseas equivalent of BT); to the west on the Amen Corner Business Park in Farley Wood next to the A329 and the railway, is Dell UK; next door is HP UK (in Winnersh from the 1970s to 1990s) to the west; 3M UK is to the north-east, next to Bracknell Bees ice-hockey stadium. Novell UK is on the A329, north of the A322 roundabout at Arlington Square (former Sperry Gyroscope), and next door is Honeywell UK on the A329 at the Skimped Hill Roundabout near the Odeon cinema. Avis Europe (with Budget UK) is further north at the A322/A3095 Met Office Roundabout near Bracknell and Wokingham College; Imation UK is next door on the roundabout; south of the roundabout is Netgear UK next to the A3095. To the north, Syngenta have their main worldwide (pesticide) research centre at Jealott's Hill, formerly owned by ICI. The Transport Research Laboratory and Broadmoor Hospital are in Crowthorne near the Wokingham boundary.\nBuckinghamshire.\nHigh Wycombe is known historically for its furniture industry, and has the Association of Master Upholsterers &amp; Soft Furnishers. Hyundai UK and Tetra Pak UK are at Wycombe Marsh on the A40, and Dreams, the UK base of Ariston (now owned by Indesit), Wilkinson Sword, Merisant UK, and Staples are based in High Wycombe; Cofely (energy services) and Rank Hovis are off the M40 Handy Cross Interchange, with The Perfume Shop, the food technology centre of Premier Foods, and Instron Europe (tension testing machines), off the A4010. To the north of the town centre is Sennheiser UK (audio equipment). RAF High Wycombe (Air Command) is at Bradenham on Grim's Ditch (Chilterns) off the A4010. To the west of the town, United Biscuits have their group technical centre on Sands Ind Estate, off the A4010, near the rugby ground of London Wasps. Swedish Match UK (all their matches are made in Sweden) are in Totteridge. Johnson &amp; Johnson UK have their base at Booker next to the M40 near Handy Cross, with Janssen-Cilag UK (Imodium); Taylor Wimpey is off the A4010, with Focusrite, a big industry player in consoles for sound recording, with Novation Digital Music Systems MIDI controllers and keyboards.\nPilot Pen UK is on the Wessex Road Industrial Estate in Wooburn and Bourne End; Psion Teklogix UK is in the middle of Bourne End, east of Marlow, on the A4155 (Symbian, found on most smartphones until 2010, was developed from Psion's EPOC); nearby are Kawasaki UK and Nuance Communications UK. In Wooburn Green, to the east off the A4094 is Menarini UK Takeda UK (both pharmaceuticals). Wyeth UK (pharmaceuticals) is in Burnham, next to the M4 Huntercombe Spur junction. Sacl\u00e0 Italia UK (pesto) is in Beaconsfield; Gr\u00fcnenthal UK (pharmaceuticals) is off the Stokenchurch Interchange of the M40.\nThe UK base of Robert Bosch is in Denham. Martin-Baker is in Higher Denham, and InterContinental Hotels Group is in Denham Green (formerly in Windsor) at Broadwater Park on the A412. On the edge of Uxbridge, but on the Buckinghamshire side of Shire Ditch in (New) Denham is Amgen UK (biotechnology), Bristol-Myers Squibb UK (pharmaceuticals), and Mondel\u0113z International UK (former Kraft); on the other side of the A4020 in the south of Denham next to River Colne, on the Great London boundary, is Medirest, Eurest, at the HQ of Compass Group UK. Pioneer UK is in Stoke Poges on the former site of the Fulmer Research Institute; Hitachi Data Systems EMEA is at Sefton Park (a former Glaxo research centre) on the B416, now home of Urenco Group (international uranium enrichment).\nDX Group (couriers), are next to Muller Martini UK (binding), and Cummins have a design plant at Rideway Trading Est next to the M25 at Iver; Pinewood Studios is in Iver Heath; it takes its name as it is next to the adjacent pine trees in the 530 acres of Black Park. Avid Technology UK (industry-standard Pro Tools audio and Sibelius notation software) is also based at Pinewood. Timberland Europe is at Wexham Springs, in Wexham west of Pinewood Studios in the same place is Servier Laboratories UK and Sun Chemical Europe (the world's largest producer of printing inks). STMicroelectronics UK (French-Italian, based in Geneva), is based next to Trend Micro UK (Japanese) on Globeside Park at Marlow, next to the A404 and nearby are Expansys and Whistl (former TNT Post UK, part of PostNL), both north of Marlow railway station; Techtronic Industries UK (Ryobi power tools) is on the same estate. Dun &amp; Bradstreet UK (credit references) is on the A404 bypass at the A4155 Westhorpe Interchange. GE Healthcare has its world HQ in Little Chalfont. Uniq plc (bought by Greencore in November 2011) was in Chalfont St Peter, next to the A413 and River Misbourne, off the B416 Kingsway Roundabout, next to Citrix UK; Doro UK (Swedish mobile phones) are off the A413. Bahlsen UK is in Gerrards Cross off the B416.\nNT CADCAM in Haddenham is the UK distributor of the industry-standard SolidWorks CAD software package; Schwartz UK (spices) and McCormick UK, the parent company of Camp Coffee, is near Haddenham and Thame Parkway railway station off the A418 between Thame and Aylesbury. Acco UK (stationery), who own Rexel (stationery) and GBC (pouch laminators), are on the A418 in Aylesbury, opposite Aylesbury College; Askeys have made ice cream cones since 1965 next to the A4157 and Grand Union Canal. Demag Hamilton (owned by Sumitomo) who make plastic injection-moulding machines, is based on the Triangle Business Park on the A413 next to the railway in Stoke Mandeville. At Long Crendon is Terex Demag UK (cranes), and Unic UK (mini cranes). Arla opened its huge Aylesbury dairy in Aylesbury in 2014, on the A41 Aston Clinton bypass. Arla Aylesbury is a fresh milk processing facility with 34 acres; its plastic bottles are made on-site by Alpla.\nMilton Keynes is home to many national companies such as Santander UK operations. The Home Retail Group (Argos and Homebase), Filtrona, Ingram Micro UK and BP Oil UK (retail) are in Central Milton Keynes, as is the Network Rail headquarters at . Rightmove is in Winterhill. Nearby, on the other side of A5, Loughton is the home of the National House Building Council (NHBC), the National Energy Foundation, and the former Atmosphere Bars and Clubs west of the A5, near Central MK; Leica Geosystems (owned by Hexagon AB, surveying equipment), on the same estate, is opposite the NHBC, and the Parcelforce HQ is nearby; to the south of Loughton is Korg UK (keyboards) and Vox (originally from Kent, makers of amplifiers), just north of the National Bowl, off Watling Street; to the west of Loughton at the Crownhill Ind Est in Shenley Church End, SMC Pneumatics have their European Technical Centre. The National Badminton Centre is in Loughon Lodge.\nEast of the A5, Luminar Leisure is headquartered in Rooksley (Bradwell CP). In the north-west, the European HQ of WD-40 and Rockwell Automation UK (former Allen-Bradley) are in Kiln Farm, Bradwell Abbey; near Sysmex UK (healthcare electronics) and Volkswagen Group's National Learning Centre. To the north, NEFF UK, Gaggenau UK, and BSH Home Appliances are in Wolverton and Greenleys; opposite is Mars Horsecare UK; Electrolux have their distribution centre next to the WCML and Wolverton station.\nTo the east, near the M1 and the A422 in Great Linford, Chrysler UK (Jeep and Dodge), Scania UK (part of VW), Rohan (clothing), Makita UK (power tools) and Mercedes-Benz UK (including Smart Cars) are in Tongwell; VAG UK (VW and Audi) is opposite in Blakelands on the north side of the A422 opposite Tongwell Lake. DRS mark exam papers by electronic data capture at Linford Wood, south of the A422 and Stantonbury, near Leica Microsystems; Mitsubishi Pencil Company UK (uni-ball) is off the A422 at the B4034 Redbridge Roundabout; H. Bronnley &amp; Co. (soap) is on the site of a factory used to build the GEC-Marconi AI.24 Foxhunter radar in the 1980s.\nIn the south-east of Milton Keynes, The Open University is in Walton Hall, in Walton; BT Development &amp; Training (management) is based at Kents Hill, next to the OU, after it moved from Bletchley Park in 1993; south of the OU is Walton Manor, home of MSD Animal Health (former Intervet, and previously a Hoechst laboratory). Red Bull Racing is off the A4146 in Tilbrook, south of the OU; nearby is Jungheinrich UK (forklifts) in Walton near Bow Brickhill railway station, and Yamaha Music Europe; north of Tilbrook on the A4146 is Walker Greenbank (upmarket furnishings). Fisher &amp; Paykel UK (fridges) are in Kingston, Milton Keynes Village. Nearby is Duravit UK (bathroom plumbing); in Kingston off the A421 are Alpla UK (plastics), and Koyo UK (JTEKT). Just east of the A421, near Wavendon and M1 Junction 13, John Lewis, River Island and Amazon have large logistics warehouses in the Magna Park distribution centre.\nIn the south-west of Milton-Keynes, Chemetall, a chemical company, is in Denbigh West, Bletchley, near Marshall Amplification, near Denbigh Roundabout (B4034); Yokohama UK (tyres) is at Mount Farm (Bletchley and Fenny Stratford) north of Denbigh West, next to the A5 (Fenny Stratford bypass); to the east of Mount Farm, Kemble and Co. were Britain's last piano manufacturers, until the factory closed in 2009. Holophane Europe make floodlighting on the Mount Farm Ind Est, east of A4146/A5 Caldecotte Interchange; on the west of Mount Farm, on the B4034, Basell Polyolefins UK (part of the Dutch LyondellBasell) make polypropylene compounds. Domino's Pizza Group (arrived in the UK in 1985) is in West Ashland near the A5/A421 junction. Suzuki GB is on the A421 near B4034 roundabout at Tattenhoe in Shenley Brook End on the south-western edge.\nElsewhere in the borough, Welcome Break is at the M1 service station in Newport Pagnell, where Aston Martin had a factory until 2007 (The existing site is now home to the Aston Martin Works, which focuses on heritage sales, service, spares and restoration operations). The town is also home to a customer centre of car retailer Cazoo, located just off the A509/A422 junction at Tickford Roundabout. FCO Services and HMGCC is based at Hanslope Park, in a rural area north of Central Milton Keynes.\nHampshire.\nThe Army have a large garrison in Aldershot, with Sandhurst being nearby. Elica also make extractor hoods in Aldershot, and the European HQ of the Computer Sciences Corporation consulting firm is based at the A323/A325 roundabout. Rentokil Initial have their head office and pest control division next to Blackwater railway station, north of the A30, towards Camberley. Farnborough has many international aerospace companies as well as Sofa Workshop. Nokia UK, which had also been a R&amp;D base for Nokia Siemens Networks on the A327, left in 2012; further along the A327 is Autodesk UK.\nDKB Household UK (Zyliss) is off the A327 in North Farnborough; at the A325/A327 roundabout is Parametric Technology Corporation UK (known for its industry-standard PTC Creo Elements/Pro (Pro/ENGINEER) CAD/CAM software) with Red Hat UK. Thomson Local directory is on the A325 next to Farnborough railway station, next to the Catholic National Library; opposite is the design centre for Qualcomm UK (W-CDMA UMTS mobile technology) with Hogg Robinson Group UK (its worldwide headquarters are in Basingstoke). BAE Systems with CORDA is south of the airfield at the Farnborough Aerospace Centre, off the A325/A3011 Queen's Roundabout. Sun Microsystems had their UK headquarters at Guillemont Park (former Guillemont Barracks until 1997) north of the M3 Minley Interchange at Blackwater and Hawley, until 2009.\nThe Ford Southampton plant of Ford, near Southampton Airport and Stoneham Interchange (A335) of the M27, closed in July with production of the Transit moving to the Ford Otosan plant in G\u00f6lc\u00fck, Kocaeli (Turkey). Skandia Insurance have their UK base there. Carnival Corporation &amp; plc, the world's largest cruise ship operator, has one of its two headquarters at Carnival House. The Maritime and Coastguard Agency is in the town centre near the A3057. Swatch UK (and Omega UK) are based near Millbrook Flyover (A33).\nB&amp;Q and Draper Tools are based in Chandler's Ford. Prysmian Cables &amp; Systems, who make high-tension electric cables (for offshore windfarms), communication cables and fire-resistant cable, are off the B3037 in Eastleigh, next to a rail servicing plant and the River Itchen. Bacardi-Martini and London Camera Exchange are in Winchester and north-west, Arqiva (broadcasting infrastructure, at the former technical division of the IBA) are based in Crawley, Hampshire. The Adjutant General's Corps HQ (former Royal Army Pay Corps) is at Worthy Down Camp off the A34 north of Winchester at Kings Worthy, since 2012 the home of the Defence School of Personnel Administration. To the north-west, the Leckford Estate, with Longstock Park, next door provides much of the milk, mushrooms, fruit, honey and free-range chicken for Waitrose; John Spedan Lewis, founder of John Lewis, lived there until his death in 1963.\nGarmin Europe is in Hounsdown just west of Southampton. Esso has its main UK refinery at Fawley (the largest refinery, by production, in the UK); north of Fawley is Polimeri Europa UK (former International Synthetic Rubber, now owned by Eni) off the A326, which makes elastomers. Ineos, the third largest chemicals company in the world, is in Lyndhurst in the New Forest (A35). Roke Manor Research (founded by Plessey in 1956, and owned since 2010 by Chemring) at Roke Manor at Romsey Extra developed the Hawk-Eye system in 2001. The Ordnance Survey have a new headquarters (previously further east in Southampton before 2011) at Nursling and Rownhams, off the M271 Nursling Interchange. On the A337 in Mudeford in the east of Christchurch is a large BAE Systems radar site (the former Signals Research and Development Establishment).\nBest Buy Europe is in Hedge End; SPI Lasers make fibre lasers for optical fibres; Glen Dimplex have an HQ north of the A334. Chemring Group, Boskalis Westminster (dredging) and the National Air Traffic Services (NATS) are in Fareham (Swanwick) near Zurich Insurance UK. At Locks Heath off the A27 further south at Kite's Croft Business Park is Est\u00e9e Lauder UK and the scrapped South East Regional Control Centre (FiReControl). On the opposite side of the A27 on Funtley Ind Est is Eaton Aerospace, who have their Fuel &amp; Motion Control Systems Division (aerial refuelling, making fuel valves for aircraft), which is the former Abbey Works site of Plessey Dynamics (Mechanical Systems) and Plessey Aerospace.\nRaymarine Marine Electronics (owned by FLIR Systems) off the A27 (near Est\u00e9e Lauder) at Titchfield is the world's leading leisure marine electronics company. T\u00dcV S\u00dcD UK (product certification) are next to Gemalto UK, who make chip and PIN cards, at Segensworth between the railway and the M27; further along is CooperVision, who make contact lenses, and next door is Turbomeca UK (part of Safran). GE Aviation, on a site which was formerly Folland Aircraft then BAe Aerostructures, has a factory at Hamble-le-Rice which makes composites for airframes and racing cars, using products such as Bismaleimide resin. Crewsaver (owned by Survitec), Covidien UK (owned by VNUS), and Wickham Laboratories are off the A32 at Fleetlands, (north of Gosport), south of Fareham, and north of DM Gosport, which handles the Navy's armaments including Sea Skua, Sea Wolf, the Eurosam Aster, Sea Dart (surface-to-air), and GEC-Marconi Sting Ray (torpedo).\nKenwood, owned by De'Longhi since 2001, have a factory at West Leigh, Havant; next-door, Sumika Polymer Compounds (owned by Sumitomo Chemical), and Pfizer (former Wyeth Biotech before 2009) have plants on New Lane Ind Est next to the railway. Lockheed Martin U.K. is at the Langstone Technology Park off the A3023, near the A27, at Brockhampton, near to Apollo Fire Detectors, Jobsite (owned by ), and Pains Wessex (a leading manufacturer of maritime distress flares); SSE plc have their main southern HQ on the Southmoor Lane Ind Est next door. Paradigm Secure Communications (Airbus Defence and Space) control the UK's Ariane-launched Skynet military satellites from former the RAF Oakhanger off the A325 west of Bordon.\nSouthwick House, off the B2177 in Southwick and Widley, is the home of the Defence School of Policing and Guarding and the Regimental Headquarters of the Royal Military Police. VT Group is based in Hedge End, with VT Education &amp; Skills and VT Flagship based in North Harbour, Portsmouth. Near the A2030/A27 Farlington Roundabout in east Portsmouth, Airbus Defence and Space (former Astrium before 2014, and earlier Marconi Space and Defence Systems) at Anchorage Park near Hilsea railway station, make payloads for the Galileo navigation system, at its Broad Oak Works, with SELEX Elsag and BAE Systems on the former Portsmouth Airport; GKN Aerospace (former FPT Industries) situated at the former make aviation self-sealing fuel tanks; Atmosphere Control International (former Wellman Defence before 2012, and part of TPG Engineering) in Portsmouth make the air purifiers for the British and French nuclear submarines. PALL Europe (fluid filtration) is based on the Harbourgate Business Park, on the opposite side of the M27 from Port Solent. Much of the Royal Navy is based at HMNB Portsmouth with BAE Systems Surface Ships; Navy Command Headquarters is at Whale Island, next to the M275. IBM is headquartered in Cosham, North Portsmouth, with large laboratories in Hursley House.\nLenovo UK and Serco are at Bartley Wood Business Park, off the B3349 (M3 Hook Interchange), with Virgin Media (13,600 staff in the UK, with 1,200 at the head office); next door is First Drinks, a whisky distributor owned by William Grant &amp; Sons, Trimble Navigation UK (GPS systems) and HP Enterprise Services Defence &amp; Security UK (former EDS Defence). The Police Staff College, Bramshill, the Police's main training centre, is nearby to the north; the European Police College (CEPOL, run by Europol) was at Bramshill until 2014 when it moved to Budapest. Festo GB (industrial automation, based at Esslingen am Neckar) is next to the M3 on Ancells Business Park, next to Rohde &amp; Schwarz UK (electronic testing). Vertu, division of Nokia makes luxury phones at Church Crookham. CV-Library is in Fleet; Conair Group (BaByliss hair dryers) are at the nearby Waterfront Business Park.\nThe AA, Scott Wilson, Genus plc, and Winterthur Life are based in Basingstoke. The pharmaceuticals group Eli Lilly UK, with Elanco UK (animal health), is in Norfolk House in Houndmills east of the North Hampshire Hospital, the main home for Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust; also in Houndmills are Fyffes UK (next to the railway), and GAME Group, with Gamestation (formerly in York), which it bought in 2007; Palgrave Macmillan, a leading worldwide trade publisher with the Pharmaceutical Press, is south of A339 and hospital. Thales Missile Electronics (former Thorn EMI) is in central Basingstoke near the A3010/A339 junction, which makes parts for the Brimstone missile. Alberto-Culver UK and Shire Pharmaceuticals Group plc left the Hampshire International Business Park near Chineham in 2011 and 2017 respectively.\nOn the Chineham Business Park is the Gas Safe Register (predecessor CORGI was also in Basingstoke), and Hama UK (photography equipment); Peek Traffic, south of Shire, is one of two companies in the UK that make traffic signals. Motorola UK, next-door to Meggitt Sensing Systems, and De La Rue are on the Viables industrial estate next to the M3 and Cranbourne; BD UK (former CareFusion UK before 2014) makes \"Alaris\" infusion pumps, medical ventilators and automated dispensing cabinets. De La Rue have a main banknote printing works at Overton Mill in Overton, to the west towards the A34, and a holographics factory on the Daneshill industrial estate, in the west of the town; De Dietrich UK (kitchen appliances) are near a plant of Thermo Fisher Scientific UK, and Boeing Defence UK. Mars Drinks (Flavia Beverage Systems and Klix) is north of the railway, south of Daneshill.\nGale Cengage UK are in the east of Andover, off the A3093 on Walworth Industrial Estate; further south are Twinings (who also own Ovaltine) and to east of the estate is Stannah Lifts (owned by SSI Schaefer), next to Petty Wood, owner of the Epicure food brand, with Le Creuset UK (cookware); Euronics UK is further west. The Army Air Corps trains at Middle Wallop Flying Station, off the A343. Britten-Norman (B-N Group) make turboprop aeroplanes on the Isle of Wight. The Danish Vestas (former NEG Micon before 2004) closed the UK's only wind turbine factory on the Isle of Wight in 2010, and Vestas Technology have a research site in Northwood; Stainless Games developed Carmageddon. GKN Aerospace at East Cowes make engine nacelles, with its Composites Research Centre, in the former main plant of Saunders-Roe. Ratsey and Lapthorn make sails at Cowes.\nKent.\nBAE Systems Electronics, Intelligence &amp; Support, next to Rochester Airport, manufacture helmet mounted displays and head-up displays; it was GEC Avionics, previously Marconi Avionics and Elliott Flight Automation, and Kent's biggest employer in the 1980s; the display technology originated from acquiring Cintel in 1963; the site was a Shorts factory in the war, and built many Short Sunderlands. The Royal Engineers and the Royal School of Military Engineering are based in Chatham at Brompton Barracks. London Thamesport is on the Isle of Grain. Mets\u00e4 Board UK (paper) is off the A289 near Medway Tunnel, and next to the Universities at Medway, Chatham. Sleepeezee (owned by the Simmons Bedding Company) is at Conquest Ind Est in Strood on the A228 next to the River Medway. Bose UK are on the Gillingham Business Park, off the A278 near the A2 Bowaters Roundabout; on other side of A278 is Delphi Diesel Systems.\nBovis Homes is near Gravesend and in Northfleet on the B2175, Kimberly-Clark (formerly Bowater-Scott until 1996) makes Andrex toilet rolls. Caterham Cars manufacturers of British sports cars including the Caterham 7 have their manufacturing facilities in Dartford. Laing O'Rourke is off the A206 in Stone, east of the Dartford Tunnel on Crossways Business Park, where Mazda UK are; in the same building is Forest Laboratories UK (bought by Actavis in 2014), who make Veno's (cough mixture, the brand was bought from Beechams-GSK in 2011), Sudocrem, Otomize (Dexamethasone) and Bisodol (indigestion), made in Dartford; Crosswater (taps and showers) is in Stone, further along the A206 near the Thames Europort.\nBluewater in Greenhithe is the third-largest shopping centre in the UK; it was built on the former Blue Circle Swanscombe Cement Works, which closed in 1990. South East Water is in Snodland. H+H UK (aerated concrete) is based at the A25/A227 roundabout at Ightham, south of Wrotham; to the east is Geographers' A-Z Map Company off the A227 near the railway station, near the M26. Aylesford Newsprint (owned by Svenska Cellulosa Aktiebolaget and Mondi Group), between the M20 and River Medway, makes newsprint and is Europe's largest recycler of paper.\nRolex since 2010 has had its European headquarters (it moved from Bexley) at Kings Hill near West Malling on the A228; Kimberly-Clark have their UK HQ there, on the former RAF West Malling wartime airfield, near FLIR Systems UK (thermal imaging); opposite is the Charities Aid Foundation and to the east is Voyages-sncf.com (former Rail Europe before 2013, who operate InterRail) near the Tonbridge and Malling council offices. Readers in Teston, to the south on the A26, are the UK's leading manufacturer of cricket balls. DS Smith Paper (former Bowater-Scott), Britain's largest paper manufacturer is at Kemsley, north of Sittingbourne, off the A249/B2005 Grovehurst Road Junction. Shepherd Neame Brewery in Faversham is Britain's oldest brewer. Brake Bros is on the Eureka Business Park, off the A251 north of M20 junction 9 in Boughton Aluph; nearby is Coty Rimmel UK (perfumes) and Houchin (owned by ITW), who make ground power units for airport aprons.\nFurther south along the M20, Givaudan UK (flavourings, former Quest International, and previously Proprietary Perfume and Flavours, or PPF International) has a 10-acre large plant in Kennington; next-door is Premier Foods (former RHM before 2007, and opened as Batchelors in 1957) on the A2070 next to the River Great Stour and the railway, east of the M20; the 16-acre site makes Paxo stuffing, Savoury Rice, Pasta n Sauce, Bisto, Cup-a-Soup (introduced in 1972), Vesta curries (launched by Batchelors in 1961), and claims to be the largest dry food manufacturing site in Europe; it now makes Bird's Custard and Angel Delight. Chartham Papers (owned by Arjo Wiggins) is the UK's only manufacturer of tracing paper at Chartham. Kent grows three-quarters of the UK's Bramley apples.\nCummins Power Generation is in Acol, near Manston Airport on the A299, and Pfizer, the largest pharmaceutical company in the world and manufacturer of Anadin, had its European R&amp;D site in Sandwich until 2012, next to the River Stour and A256. Hornby, with Airfix and Humbrol, is on the A254 on Westwood Ind Est on the southern edge of Margate; the site started out as Tri-ang Railways in 1954, becoming Hornby in 1972 when the parent company collapsed, and the last model train sets were made there in 1999; these are now made by a company owned by Kader. Delfinware (owned by WPP plc) makes dish drainers off the A259 on the Pennypot Ind Estate in Hythe. Megger make electrical test equipment in Dover on the A20; nearby P&amp;O Ferries is on the A20 below the Dover Western Heights. Saga plc, founded in 1959, has a large headquarters in Sandgate, next to Folkestone School for Girls, at the A259/B2963 junction.\nAxa Personal pension scheme is in Tunbridge Wells, and Lamberts Healthcare (part of Merck), based at High Brooms, are a leading manufacturer of vitamin supplements. J.H. Dewhurst (founded in 1919) was last based in Tunbridge Wells, until it closed in 2006 (it had in the early 1990s over 1,100 stores nationwide and was Britain's largest butcher). Panini UK are on the A264 in the west of Tunbridge Wells. Rotosound on the A22 near Sevenoaks railway station makes guitar strings. Salter Housewares (weighing equipment) is in the east of Tonbridge at the A26/B2017 roundabout in Tudeley, Capel; Adrian Scripps produce apples off the B2017 near the A228 east of Tonbridge.\nOxfordshire.\nOxford University Press, Blackwell UK, Electrocomponents and Amey plc are in Oxford as is the BMW plant that builds the Mini. BMW assemble the MINI at Cowley; in the south of Oxford is Unipart and TI Automotive UK. South of Oxford in Littlemore, off the A4074 at the Oxford Science Park is Nominet UK (UK domain names). SAE Institute has its world HQ on Littlemore Park off the A4074. Grafton Merchanting GB (Buildbase, and Hirebase) are on Oxford Business Park in Cowley, with Electrocomponents next to Publishing Technology, Blackwell UK and Harley Davidson UK; to the south on the side of the B480 is Oxfam GB at Oxfam House, BT iNet, and TI Automotive; further north along the B480 at the B4495 junction is Macmillan Education, a leading worldwide publisher of school textbooks, with Genzyme UK (owned since 2011 by Sanofi).\nAscari are in Banbury. Kenco coffee is made at Kraft Foods Banbury owned by Mondel\u0113z International (former Kraft before October 2010) with Caf\u00e9 HAG and Carte Noir off A422/A423 roundabout opposite a Tesco; the site was built to make Bird's Custard in 1964, by General Foods who were bought by Kraft in 1990, and claims to be the biggest coffee-production site in Europe; Nestle make much of their coffee in South Derbyshire. On other side of A422 to Kraft is a manufacturing site of Dematic UK, with Terex MHPS (former Demag Cranes), and Kannegiesser UK (industrial clothes washers). On north-east side of Banbury is the large site of Norbar Torque, who are a main international manufacturer of torque wrenchs. Next door is a large factory of Barry Callebaut UK, a Swiss manufacturer of cocoa (for Nestle and Cadbury), on the Wildmere Road Ind Est, north of the A422 near the M40 junction 11. Prodrive are on the north of the estate, and iSOFT are on the east near the M40. Further north was a main site of Alcan Extrusions (former British Aluminium, bought by Alcan in 1982), which closed in 2008.\nYaskawa UK (Motoman robotic welding equipment) is on the Wildmere Ind Est, off the A422 near junction 11; K\u00e4rcher UK (pressure washers) are nearby off the A423. Marussia F1 are in the east of Banbury. Hook Norton Brewery is to the south-west. Travelodge UK is at the A418/B4445 roundabout in Thame next to CPM Group (the UK's largest field marketing company), with Lucy Electric (switchgear) in the east of Thame off the B4012, with the UK site of UMC (branded televisions from Slovakia). Kubota UK, the tractor manufacturer, on the B4445, is the UK market leader of ride-on (diesel) lawn mowers; Kidde Products UK (fire protection) is off the B4012. Renault F1 is in Enstone; off B4030 at Enstone Airfield Complex, Airbus Helicopters UK (Eurocopter before 2014) is at London Oxford Airport. Agilent Technologies (former Magnex Scientific) make superconducting magnets for NMR applications on the A44 next to the railway at Yarnton. Solid State Logic (mixing consoles) is at Begbroke on the A44, which has the Begbroke Science Park.\nThe Joint European Torus is developing fusion power at Culham on a former airfield. Also on the Culham Science Centre at Clifton Hampden is the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, and the re-usable Skylon spacecraft is being developed by Reaction Engines Limited; ABSL Space Products Culham (owned by EnerSys) made batteries for Philae. The Rutherford Appleton Laboratory and Diamond Light Source (built by the Wellcome Trust) are on the Harwell Science and Innovation Campus in Chilton and East Hendred. Harwell has an office of Telespazio VEGA UK (satellites) and the UK's base of the European Space Agency (ESA), with the European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications and the UK's Satellite Applications Catapult; Rutherford Appleton also has the Central Laser Facility, the UK's site of research into inertial confinement fusion power from the HiPER project. The science cluster is known as Science Vale UK.\nIn Rotherfield Peppard, near Sonning Common, is the Johnson Matthey Technology Centre, which research fuel cells (with platinum supplied by Anglo American Platinum, the world's largest producer). Stuart Turner (pumps) is at Henley-on-Thames, with Ella's Kitchen. Countax UK, off the A329 at Great Haseley (nearer to Great Milton), manufactures Britain's best-selling garden tractors, and distributes ECHO (Japanese) power tools; to the south off the B480, Martin-Baker test ejector seats at Martin Baker Aerospace Chalgrove. Castrol Technology Centre is towards the Thames. South of RAF Benson off the A4074 at Howbery Park, Crowmarsh is HR Wallingford (former Hydraulics Research Station) and further south along the Thames is CAB International (agricultural research).\nRM Education, Kaspersky Lab UK, Achilles (supply chain risk management, international HQ), Routledge (publisher), Chroma Therapeutics, and Smeg UK are at Milton Park. The former Esso Research Centre at Milton Hill is now the headquarters of Infineum, a division of Esso and Shell which researches oil additives. Rowse Honey is in Wallingford. All parachute training for the RAF and Army takes place at RAF Brize Norton; the RAF 's refuelling force (10 Sqn and 101 Sqn) operate the Voyager, the RAF's largest aircraft, a converted Airbus A330 which carries 111 tonnes of fuel; they also operate the twice-weekly air-bridge to RAF Mount Pleasant; Brize Norton has 24 C-130 Hercules, 8 C-17 Globemasters (99 Sqn), 8 Voyagers (the replacement for the VC-10), and one A400M Atlas (the future replacement for the Hercules). The Blue Cross animal charity are further north on the B4020.\nSiemens Magnet Technology (former Oxford Magnet Technology), the main provider of superconducting magnets (30% of the world's market) for MRI scanners, is in Eynsham; in Witney is Wychwood Brewery (owned by Marstons) which makes Hobgoblin, and brews Brakspear Brewery (formerly of Henley until 2002). Oxford Products, off the B4047 west of Witney, make cycle and motorcycle safety products, with Abbott Diabetes Care and Corndell Furniture at Windrush Park. JSP are market leaders in industrial head protection, based next to the River Windrush at Worsham in Asthall west of Witney.\nWilliams Grand Prix Engineering is based at Grove on the A338 north of Wantage. Towards Wiltshire, the Defence Academy of the United Kingdom is in Shrivenham, with the Defence School of Languages (previously at Wilton Park north of the M40 Beaconsfield Interchange), and the Joint Services Command and Staff College is in Watchfield.\nSurrey.\nAllianz Insurance has its UK headquarters in Guildford as do Ericsson, Colgate-Palmolive, Constellation Brands, Electronic Arts (formerly in Chertsey before 2008), Sanofi, the CTC, Surrey Satellite Technology, Avaya and Philips. Alexander Dennis is off the A320 at Worplesdon on the north of Guildford on the Slyfield Industrial Estate, towards Jacobs Well. Lionhead Studios and BAE Systems Digital Intelligence are near the Royal Surrey County Hospital. BOC are also in Guildford. UCL's Mullard Space Science Laboratory is high in the Surrey Hills.\nM\u00f6venpick Ice Cream is off the A248 at St Martha, to the east of Guildford; Vivid Imaginations, in Artington to the south, own the UK rights to Crayola. The former company, now owned by the Linde Group, was based in Windlesham. British Car Auctions is on the A325 in Farnham. Motor company McLaren and McLaren Automotive are based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking as are the UK base of Yum Restaurants (owner of KFC), SABMiller, BIW Technologies, SPSS, and Capgemini. ISS is next to the railway on the Sheerwater Ind Est. In the south of Woodham, next to the Basingstoke Canal, is Playtex, and to the east is Fernox (water treatment, owned by Alent) Towards Woking along the railway is Pirbright (home of the Pirbright Institute), where Merial Animal Health also make vaccines. Tupperware is in Knaphill.\nFriends Life have an office in the north of Dorking in the former HQ of Friends Provident and Kuoni Travel are on the former Deepdene estate. Kimberly-Clark is in the north of Reigate; Esure and Sheilas' Wheels is on the A25 south of Reigate College; Canon is to the south in Woodhatch. SGN is in Horley. Bristow Helicopters is at Redhill and the food research centre Campden-BRI is at Nutfield. Cubic is on the Perrywood Business Park south of Redhill, next door is Rapiscan Systems.\nIn the area straddling the M25, the huge Compass Group is based in Chertsey as is Samsung, Siemon, Crest Nicholson, Kone, IWG, and Britax. Papa John's Pizza is off the A320 near the M25; Ubisoft is on the B375. Juniper Networks is off the B3121), Pandrol and Royal Caribbean Group are in Addlestone; at Hamm Moor (in the east of Addlestone) on the A317 and Weybridge Business Park is Thales Group and the UK corporate headquarters of Toshiba, who have another base in Camberley; further west along the A317 is Aviator Park, on the B3121, a former main research site of Plessey Radar, later GEC Marconi.\nNear Weybridge are the UK headquarters of Sony with SSP Group (situated in Byfleet) and Procter &amp; Gamble (next door to each other on The Heights Business Park near the former Brooklands racing circuit) with Kia and Petroleum Geo-Services, and Gallaher Group to the north, next to the Brooklands Museum; to the east is Verint Systems on the B374. In Weybridge are the local newspaper group Newsquest, Yamaha; BAE Systems Regional Aircraft is on the Brooklands Ind Park off the A318 (since 2001 it has no longer manufactured). On Sprint Ind Est in Byfleet, west of Weybridge, off the A318, AIM Altitude (former Henshalls) make cabin galleys for airliners. The Central Veterinary Laboratory, which is run by the Veterinary Laboratories Agency, with the Animal and Plant Health Agency, is in New Haw to the west on the other side of the M25. Mouchel is in West Byfleet.\nAir Products is in Walton-on-Thames. Atkins, the civil engineering company, and are in Epsom; Sartorius is to the north off the B284 next to the railway; Toyota (towards Banstead) is on the A240 at the B284 junction at Great Burgh, Tattenham Corner, at the site of the former R&amp;D HQ of SmithKline Beecham (Beecham Pharmaceuticals) from 1979 until the mid-1990s before their research centre moved to Harlow; Toyota arrived in the UK in 1965 with its Corona, and have made 3m cars in the UK. Legal &amp; General have their largest office near Kingswood railway station. Dairy Crest is in Esher. Ian Allan Publishing is at Hersham. SHL Group (former Saville &amp; Holdsworth) is just to the north-east at Thames Ditton. Samaritans is in Ewell. Ann Summers is in Whyteleafe near Caterham. Caterham Cars sales and marketing offices are in Caterham. Swiftcover (owned by Axa) is on the A307 in the west of Cobham; further to west on the A245 is Berkeley Group Holdings, and Europa Technologies (digital mapping data) is on the A245 opposite Waitrose; Cargill Europe is on the eastern edge. Pfizer is at Walton Oaks (the former R&amp;D HQ of Beecham Pharmaceuticals until 1979) next to the B2032 bridge over the M25 at Walton-on-the-Hill.\nBAM Nuttall (opposite Camberley Theatre) and Krispy Kreme (south of the M3 near junction 4 on Albany Park) are in Camberley; Alfa Laval is on the Yorktown Ind Est, in York Town off the A331 near Stihl with a technical centre of Toshiba on the other side of the A331; to the south on Watchmoor Park off the A331 are Adaptec and Fluor and Zodiac Aerospace. Further south in Frimley Green, home to the Lakeside Leisure Complex, between the B3411 and the railway is SC Johnson and its \"Glade\" air freshener factory. Opposite Albany Park over the A331 is Frimley Business Park, with Advanced Micro Devices, off M3 junction 4 next to the A331; nearby is Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK (Sandoz) and Alcon. Further along the A325 towards Frimley at the B311 roundabout is Siemens (the former site of Marconi Command &amp; Control Systems, then BAE Systems Insyte). Frimley has Amer Sports (the world's largest sporting equipment manufacturer) on the B3411 Lyon Way Ind Estate, with VMware. Zoggs is in Lightwater, near the M3 Bagshot Interchange.\nExxonMobil (Esso), part of the largest oil company in the world, is in the east of Leatherhead, next to the M25 towards Ashtead at ExxonMobil House, off the A24. In the town the Wates Group nearby, Unilever Bestfoods (in Crawley before 2008), and to the south is Robert Dyas; Puma is east of Unilever near the M25 and A243. Harsco is off the B2430. On the B2122 in Fetcham, to the west of Leatherhead, is the UK division of Carrier, the world leaders (and originators) of air conditioning. Rowlett Rutland in Bookham is Britain's only manufacturer of (commercial-size) toasters, next to Bookham railway station and Photo-Me International. Leatherhead Food International moved to Epsom in the mid-2010s.\nAlthough BP has its international headquarters in central London, most of its UK division (chemicals and energy) with Air BP (aviation fuel) is headquartered at Sunbury-on-Thames, and the UK's third largest company by stock market value; nearby is Kingston Technology Europe (the world's second largest producer of flash memory), just inside the Surrey boundary; ADT is at the end of the M3 in Sunbury, and Chubb is on the other side of the roundabout, and M3. Enterprise Rent-a-Car is near Thorpe, near to Cemex and Thorpe Park (situated on a series of former gravel pits). Shepperton Studios is next to Littleton.\nDel Monte Foods is in Staines-upon-Thames on the side of the A30 and Dalkia is on the A308; British Gas is on the A308 in Pooley Green nearby to the west, with Salesforce at Lotus Park, next to Dow Chemical. Kerry Foods are based on the B388, east of the M25, in the south end of Pooley Green at Thorpe Lea. Cisco Videoscape, on the A308 in Birch Green.\nSussex.\nThe RSPCA is on the A24 in Southwater, south of Horsham. Campina UK is in Horsham. Dunkin' Donuts UK on the B2237 in the south of Horsham centre at the Prewett's Mill Roundabout in the same building as Beam Global UK (Bourbon whisky), and its subsidiary Thomas Lowndes &amp; Co (formerly owned by Allied Domecq, and the UK's leading supplier of culinary alcohol). RSA Insurance Group (former Royal and Sun Alliance, and the UK's largest commercial insurer) has its main office in Horsham.\nThe Caravan Club is in East Grinstead, with Rentokil Specialist Hygiene, and Initial Medical Services. Roche Diagnostics UK headquarters and CAE Inc. UK are in the Victoria Business Park off the A273 in the west of Burgess Hill near Tesco; further to east is the HQ of Filofax, and Heidenhain GB, who make linear encoders for CNC machines.\nSouthern Water is on the A2032 in Durrington, Worthing; Durrington Bridge House on the Barrington Road Ind Estate, next to Durrington-on-Sea railway station, in Goring-by-Sea has HMRC's national office for its Voluntary Arrangement Service (former Enforcement &amp; Insolvency Service, for IVAs) and members voluntary liquidation, company administrations, and voluntary arrangements. GSK in east Worthing is the former Beecham Pharmaceuticals, on the western edge of Sompting, which makes antibiotics such as Augmentin; to the south of GSK on the same estate is Electronic Temperature Instruments, a worldwide manufacturer of thermometers, and the UK's largest manufacturer of digital thermometers. B &amp; W is an important loudspeaker company in the north of Worthing at the A2032/A24 junction in West Tarring. Eurotherm make temperature controllers.\nVirgin Atlantic is off the A23, with Paslode UK (nail guns) next-door, on the Manor Royal Ind Estate in the north of Crawley, as is Edwards (former BOC Edwards), an international engineering company that makes vacuum pumps, with another plant on the A259 in Kingston by Sea, Shoreham. Also on Manor Royal are the headquarters of Spirent, G4S, Doosan Babcock Energy, Pilz UK and TUI Travel PLC with TUI Airline Management (the fifth largest European air carrier). Air Miles (now called Avios since November 2011) is on Fleming Way Roundabout of the A23 north of Crawley in the former headquarters of British Caledonian, at County Oak retail park, and to the west is the British Dualit brand of catering electrical equipment (iconic toasters).\nNestl\u00e9 UK is moving its headquarters from City Place Gatwick to Manor Royal Business District in Crawley from September 2023. To the south, on the east of Manor Royal, is Monier Redland (roof tiles) and ARINC UK (avionics), and a large site of Thales, with its civilian aircraft simulation TTS division (former Redifon) now owned since 2012 by L-3 Communications); much of Thales in Crawley is the former Mullard, who made radars, and Thomson Racal Defence Electronics (and Thorn EMI); Thales in Crawley make much of the Royal Navy's electronic (mission) systems. UK Power Networks (electrical operator for region) is south of Manor Royal in Three Bridges; SEEBOARD was based on the A23 in Broadfield. Invensys have many sites in Crawley. WesternGeco (geophysical services) is at the end of the Gatwick Interchange M23 spur.\nColas Ltd (road engineering) is in Worth, east of Crawley. The former ICI Agrochemicals research department was at the Fernhurst Research Station (later part of Zeneca) at Fernhurst. Wiley UK (reference books) is in Chichester (off the A286) next door to Shippam's Foods. Rolls-Royce Motor Cars make vehicles at Westhampnett off the A27. Vie at Home is at Tangmere; Philips Respironics UK is at Tangmere airfield. Hayes UK make plumbing supplies on the Huffwood Trading Est on the other side of the railway.\nMTU UK (diesel engine generators, owned by Rolls-Royce Power Systems) are on the Birches Ind Est at the A22/A264 junction in Felbridge; nearby are Thermo Fisher Scientific UK and Jencons UK (owned by VWR International). Cats Protection is at the National Cat Centre on the A275 in Danehill in the Ashdown Forest. The Body Shop is at the A259/B2187 Body Shop Roundabout in Toddington, Littlehampton. Palmer and Harvey is in Hove and Hosiden Besson, near Aldrington railway station, makes telephone equipment; a Legal &amp; General main office is on the A2023 next to Hove Park. C Dugard (CNC machines) is at the A2023/A270 junction. American Express UK is in Brighton. EDO MBM near Moulsecoomb railway station makes electrical equipment for the Brimstone missile. Elektromotive is at Falmer (electric vehicle charging).\nJones Bootmaker head office is based in Eastbourne; Alfa Laval UK have a manufacturing plant at Birch Road Ind Est, off the A2290 near the A259 roundabout. Ricardo plc, the engineering consultancy, is on the A27 next to Shoreham Airport and River Adur. Merrydown cider was formerly made in Horam until 2004, when it was bought by SHS Group of Belfast. P\u00e1ramo Directional Clothing and Nikwax are on the B2099 in Durgates, in Wadhurst, East Sussex, towards the Kent boundary. Notifier UK (fire alarms, owned by Honeywell) is in South Malling in Lewes, also the HQ of Morley-IAS UK, who make fire alarm control panels.\nCulture.\nThe culture of South East England has been influenced a number of factors: by its part of contributing to the \"idealised English identity\", due to the region's historic idyllic rural landscape;&lt;ref name=\"conv-N/S\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; its serving for Greater London as commuting hinterland, and, in recent times, the concentration of the UK's creative industry across the South East as well as London.\nLiterature, TV Puppetry &amp; Animation, Cinema, Music and Cuisine.\nAshdown Forest in East Sussex was the inspiration for the Hundred Acre Wood in the Winnie-the-Pooh stories by A.A. Milne who also lived in the nearby village of Hartfield and visited the forest with his son Christopher Robin. Alice Liddell, also known as Alice Hargreaves, the inspiration for Alice in Lewis Carroll's \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", spent the majority of her childhood living in Oxford, and in her later years lived in and around Lyndhurst, Hampshire after her marriage to Reginald Hargreaves. She is buried in the graveyard of St Michael and All Angels Church in the town. Roger Hargreaves lived in Lower Sunbury on the River Thames on the next to Richmond upon Thames borough boundary, and wrote his \"Mr. Men\" books. Mary Tourtel from Canterbury created \"Rupert Bear\". Frank Hampson, of \"Dan Dare\", drew all his pictures when he lived in the east of Epsom, off the A2022. Buckinghamshire's E. L. James author of the erotic romance \"Fifty Shades Trilogy\" has the UK record for the fastest-selling paperback of all time.\n\"Trumpton\" (1967) was based on Plumpton, East Sussex, with other titles in the series based on nearby villages; \"Trumpton\" was actually shot by Gordon Murray's company in Crouch End, London. Gerry Anderson's AP Films filmed \"Thunderbirds\" on the Slough Trading Estate near to the site's cooling towers, being first broadcast in 1965. The Native American woman Pocahontas is buried at St George's Church, Gravesend in Kent and was the inspiration for the popular Disney animated film of the same name.\nThe first multiplex cinema in the UK was in Milton Keynes, in the mid-1980s.\nElgar wrote his Cello Concerto at Fittleworth, West Sussex, in 1919. Isaac Watts, a hymn writer from Southampton, wrote \"When I Survey the Wondrous Cross\" and \"O God, Our Help in Ages Past\". John Goss, who wrote the hymn tune for \"Praise, My Soul, the King of Heaven\", came from Fareham. At Chalfont St Giles, Milton finished \"Paradise Lost\". Olney in Buckinghamshire is known for the \"Olney Hymns\" - \"Amazing Grace\", and for Henry Gauntlett, the composer of the tune of \"Once in Royal David's City\". The Christian non-profit music festival \"Big Church Day Out\" takes place annually on the last Saturday and Sunday of May at Wiston House, Wiston in West Sussex.\nPimm's was invented by James Pimm of Kent in the 1820s. Banoffee pie was invented in 1972 in Jevington in East Sussex. Maria Ann Smith from Sussex emigrated to Australia and created the Granny Smith apple. Horticulturist Richard Cox lived in Colnbrook, where he bred his Cox's Orange Pippin, a popular apple. Elizabeth David, a cookery writer who revolutionised the nation's home cooking in the 1950s, came from Sussex.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nThe BBC operate \"South Today\" (BBC South) out of Havelock Road, Southampton and \"South East Today\" (BBC South East) in Tunbridge Wells, Kent. \"ITV News Meridian\" (ITV Meridian) which has sub-regions for the South and South East based in Whiteley, near Fareham.\nNewspapers.\nThe region is served by Southern Daily Echo (Southampton), Portsmouth News, Hampshire Chronicle Oxford Times, Oxford Journal, Oxford Mail, Argus (Brighton), Reading Evening Post, the KM Group titles (Kent), Surrey Advertiser, Reading Chronicle, Medway News, KOS Media titles (Kent), Basingstoke Gazette (Basingstoke). and the Milton Keynes Citizen.\nSport.\nBadminton England is at Milton Keynes. The Royal Yachting Association (RYA) is headquartered at Hamble in Hampshire. The World Squash Federation is headquartered in Hastings. England Hockey is headquartered at Bisham Abbey on the south side of the Thames. The first World Transplant Games were held in Portsmouth in 1978.\nThe All England Jumping Course at Hickstead (Royal International Horse Show) is held (usually) at the A2300 Hickstead Interchange on the side of the A23, west of Burgess Hill, next to the River Adur in Hurstpierpoint and Sayers Common. There are many horse-racing stables on the Lambourn Downs. The Epsom Derby is held in early June. In the mid 18th century, the Hambledon Cricket Club, in south-east Hampshire, was the focal point of modern cricket. It was here where a number of innovations were made to the game until the formation of Marylebone Cricket Club and the opening of Lord's Cricket Ground in 1787.\nThe BDO World Darts Championship are held in early January at Lakeside Leisure Complex.\nWentworth Golf Club in Surrey is the home of the BMW PGA Championship.\nCharles William Miller, who went to school in Southampton, was responsible for taking football to Brazil. He had a Scottish father and a Brazilian mother; around the same time, Alexander Watson Hutton, a Scottish teacher, had taken football to Argentina; Dresden English Football Club, founded by British workers, would bring football to Germany.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52927", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52927", "title": "Now Wait for Last Year", "text": "1966 novel by Philip K. Dick\nNow Wait for Last Year is a 1966 science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick. It is set in 2055, when Earth is caught between two galactic powers in an interstellar conflict. Dr. Eric Sweetscent and his wife Kathy get addicted to a powerful drug that appears to cause time travel. The doctor's patient is the world leader, UN Secretary General. Of the twenty-eight novels Dick published in the 1960s and 1970s, this novel is one of the five chosen to represent this period of his career in The Library of America series, Volume Two.\nPlot summary.\nSet during a war between the 'Starmen (inhabitants of the planet Lilistar) and six-limbed insectoid creatures called the reegs, \"Now Wait for Last Year\" is the story of Eric Sweetscent, an organ-transplant doctor who gets wrapped up in Earth-Lilistar politics.\nAt the onset of the story, Sweetscent is the personal org-trans surgeon for Virgil Ackerman, the president of Tijuana Fur &amp; Dye. Using an extraterrestrial amoeba which can imitate the cell-structure of anything it touches, TF&amp;D had been the largest manufacturer of synthetic furs on the planet. But like all major corporations on Earth, TF&amp;D has been requisitioned to produce for the war effort.\nAckerman invites Sweetscent to \"Wash-35\", a recreation of his boyhood native Washington DC in a simulated 1935 and his vacation getaway on Mars, where he announces an ulterior motive in the retreat. Waiting for them when they arrive is a guest\u2014Gino Molinari, the elected leader of Earth. Known as \"the Mole\", he is rumored to have the enigmatic ability to come back from the dead, and he has requested the services of Sweetscent. Ackerman gladly passes Sweetscent on to Molinari.\nMeanwhile, Sweetscent's wife, Kathy, tries JJ-180, a new hallucinogenic drug which proves to be highly toxic and addictive. The effects of JJ-180 are not clear at first, however, only hours off of it, Kathy finds herself unable to function and violently craving JJ-180 again. She is visited by 'Starmen who claim the reegs invented JJ-180 as a chemical weapon against the 'Starmen and Terrans, also stating that there is no known cure for the drug's addiction and 'That's why we put you on it'. Kathy is now a slave to JJ-180.\nThe 'Starmen inform Kathy of her husband's new position with Molinari and suspect the latter's possible defection to the reegs. Kathy is promised more JJ-180 if she agrees to spy on her husband for Lilistar. Threatened with deportation, Kathy capitulates and agrees to their terms. Eventually, she takes a second dose of the drug as her ability to function becomes nearly impossible due to the effects of the withdrawal. Jumping into a taxi-cab, both she and the cab are plunged back in time to the 1930s. As the effects of the drug wear off, they slowly make their way back to the present time, uncertain as to whether the past they visited was their own or an alternate one.\nAn increasingly paranoid Kathy sets off to visit her husband.\nUnder his new employer Eric Sweetscent is let in on certain State secrets: Molinari seems to have a psychosomatic condition that mirrors any illness or disease of anyone in his vicinity. The effects of this condition appear to be real, yet the Mole pulls through every time, always returning from the brink of death.\nMolinari, like everyone else, has realized that in siding with the 'Starmen Earth has doomed itself to the wrong side of a losing war. However, there does not seem to be any safe way of defecting to the reegs, and Molinari fears that his deteriorating health will not instill confidence in the Terrans should the 'Starmen retaliate, as they are certain to do. Sweetscent is shown footage of a healthier, younger Molinari in uniform and is led to believe that an android look-alike of the President has been created for public appearances, a notion that does not account for the fact that there is at least one other Molinari on the premises, a bullet-ridden corpse that is being preserved for use in the event of certain possible future developments.\nKathy arrives to inform her husband of her addiction, and in an effort to motivate him to find a cure she slips a pill of JJ-180 into his drink. Without enough time to be furious, Eric slips a year into the future of an alternate world where his colleagues inform him that he disappeared the day Kathy came to visit. Sweetscent also witnesses that in the new timeline Earth has sided with the reegs and Lilistar has lost the war.\nUpon returning to the present of his own timeline, Sweetscent is eager to present this information to Molinari, who reveals that he too has been taking JJ-180, and that the effect is different for each user. Certain users are sent to the past, while others are sent to the future. Each trip is in an alternate universe, and therefore no one can effectively change their own past or future. However, aside from minor details, events in all observed universes seem to be moving in the same direction, and therefore, information obtained from one alternate world's future will most likely be applicable to another.\nIn Molinari's case he slips sideways in time under the drug's influence and is able to pull alternate versions of his present self into his own timeline and then keep them there.\nHaving learned the secret to Molinari's alter-aliases as well as confirming the feasibility of an alliance with the reegs, Eric takes a larger dose of JJ-180 which propels him further into the future. While there, he obtains a cure for JJ-180's addiction, an item of wide accessibility in the future, as well as obtaining more information about the possible future of the war in his own timeline. He also gathers information as to the effects of JJ-180 on the brain as he is increasingly worried about Kathy's mental condition. Taking a fraction of a pill so as to not immediately return to his own time, Eric again ends up one year in his own future where the 'Starmen have occupied Earth after learning of the Terrans' defection to the reegs. He is arrested by a 'Star patrol but saved by his future self, who informs him that Ackerman and the rest of the crew at TF&amp;D have taken a stand against Lilistar, using Ackerman's getaway on Mars as their hideout.\nNow knowing the general future history of the next few years, Eric returns to his own time where his wife's mental condition is deteriorating every day. He resolves to check her into a clinic and is sent into deep reflection about the nature of their relationship. Feeling that he would be justified, he attempts to arrange an affair with a younger girl at Molinari's recommendation. However, he backs out of it and begins to slip into a deep depression while reflecting on his life. He goes to Mexico to purchase poison with which to commit suicide. Deciding against it at the last second, Eric watches as the 'Starmen begin their invasion of Earth.\nDeciding that he is destined to join Ackerman's resistance against the 'Starmen, Eric enters an automated cab bound for TF&amp;D, asking it what it would do if its wife suffered from brain-damage without possibility of recovery (which Eric had confirmed by contacting his future self). After pointing out that robots do not marry, the cab hypothetically concludes that it would stay with her. Life, argues the cab, is made up of a series of circumstances, different for each person. To leave one's wife would be to say that he requires a uniquely easier set of circumstances than what has been provided. That reasoning, to the cab, was an irrational way of thinking.\nEric agrees and decides to stay with his wife despite the challenges presented by her condition, and in the closing paragraph is commended by the cab for being a 'good man'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52932", "revid": "1302838986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52932", "title": "Washington County", "text": "Washington County is the name of 30 counties and one parish in the United States of America, all named after George Washington, revolutionary war general and first President of the United States. It is the most common county name in the United States. The following 32 states and one district have or had a Washington County:\nExtant counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52934", "revid": "44738164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52934", "title": "Greene County", "text": "Greene County may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "52935", "revid": "39153957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52935", "title": "Clay County", "text": "Clay County is the name of 18 counties in the United States. Most are named for Henry Clay, U.S. Senator and statesman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "52936", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52936", "title": "Steuben County", "text": "Steuben County is the name of two counties in the United States of America:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "52937", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52937", "title": "Suffolk County", "text": "Suffolk County may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "52938", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52938", "title": "Sullivan County", "text": "Sullivan County is the name of six counties in the United States of America:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "52939", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52939", "title": "Richmond County", "text": "Richmond County may refer to places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnited States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "52940", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52940", "title": "Marcus Manilius", "text": "Ancient Roman astrologer\nMarcus Manilius (fl.\u20091st century AD) originally hailing from Syria, was a Roman poet, astrologer, and author of a poem in five books called \"Astronomica\".\nThe \"Astronomica\".\nThe author of \"Astronomica\" is neither quoted nor mentioned by any ancient writer. Even his name is uncertain, but it was probably Marcus Manilius; in the earlier books the author is anonymous, the later give Manilius, Manlius, Mallius. The poem itself implies that the writer lived under Augustus or Tiberius, and that he was a citizen of and resident in Rome, suggesting that Manilius wrote the work during the 20s CE. According to the early 18th-century classicist Richard Bentley, he was an Asiatic Greek; according to the 19th-century classicist Fridericus Jacob, an African. His work is one of great learning; he had studied his subject in the best writers, and generally represents the most advanced views of the ancients on astronomy (or rather astrology).\nManilius frequently imitates Lucretius. Although his diction presents some peculiarities, the style is metrically correct, and he could write neat and witty hexameters.\nThe astrological systems of houses, linking human affairs with the circuit of the zodiac, have evolved over the centuries, but they make their first appearance in \"Astronomica\". The earliest datable surviving horoscope that uses houses in its interpretation is slightly earlier, c.\u200920\u00a0BCE. Claudius Ptolemy (100\u2013170 CE) almost completely ignored houses (\"templa\" as Manilius calls them) in his astrological text, \"Tetrabiblos\".\nA. E. Housman edition.\nThe work is also known for being the subject of the most salient of A. E. Housman's scholarly endeavours; his annotated edition he considered his magnum opus, and when the fifth and final volume was published in 1930, 27 years after the first, he remarked he would now \"do nothing forever and ever.\" He nonetheless also thought that it was an obscure pursuit; to an American correspondent he wrote, \"I do not send you a copy, as it would shock you very much; it is so dull that few professed scholars can read it, probably not one in the whole United States.\" It remains a source of bafflement to many that Housman should have elected to abandon (as they thought) a poet like Propertius in favour of Manilius. For example, the critic Edmund Wilson pondered the countless hours Housman devoted to Manilius and concluded, \"Certainly it is the spectacle of a mind of remarkable penetration and vigor, of uncommon sensibility and intensity, condemning itself to duties which prevent it from rising to its full height.\" This is, however, to misunderstand the technical task of editing a classical text. In the same vein, Harry Eyres interpreted it as \"what you could see as an act of self-punishment\" that so many years were devoted to \"a minor Roman versifier whose long didactic poem on astrology must rank as one of the most obscure in the entire annals of poetry\".\nHonors.\nAn impact crater on the Moon is named after him: Manilius is located in the Mare Vaporum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52942", "revid": "50581640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52942", "title": "The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane", "text": "1976 film by Nicolas Gessner\nThe Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane is a 1976 hybrid genre film directed by Nicolas Gessner and starring Jodie Foster, Martin Sheen, Alexis Smith, Mort Shuman, and Scott Jacoby. It was a co-production of Canada and France and written by Laird Koenig, based on his 1974 novel of the same title. The film follows 13-year-old Rynn Jacobs (Foster), a child whose absent poet father and secretive behaviours prod the suspicions of her conservative small-town neighbours. \nThe adaptation, originally intended as a play, was filmed in Quebec on a small budget. The production later became the subject of controversy over reports that Foster had conflicts with producers over the filming and inclusion of a nude scene, but a 21-year-old body double (Foster's sister) was used. After a screening at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival, a court challenge was launched regarding distribution, and a general release followed in 1977.\nInitially released to mixed reviews, with some critics finding the murder mystery plot weak but Jodie Foster's performance more meritorious, the film won two Saturn Awards, including Best Horror Film and Best Actress for Foster. It subsequently attained cult status, with later critics positively reviewing the screenplay. Writers and academics have interpreted it as a statement on children's rights and variously placed it in the thriller, horror, mystery or other genres.\nPlot.\nOn Halloween night, in a seaside town, Rynn Jacobs celebrates her thirteenth birthday alone. She and her father, Lester Jacobs, a poet, have recently moved to the village from England. Frank Hallet, adult son of their landlady Cora Hallet, visits unexpectedly and, finding her alone, makes sexual advances toward Rynn.\nThe following day, Cora Hallet comes to the house, first obtrusively poking around the garden, then coming inside and aggressively probing Rynn with pointed questions about herself and her father. Rynn says he is in New York with his publisher and taunts the landlady about her son's intentions. The situation becomes more tense when Mrs. Hallet insists on retrieving jelly glasses she left in the cellar. Rynn makes it obvious she is unwilling to let her landlady go down into the cellar, and Mrs. Hallet finally leaves. She returns later and opens the cellar trapdoor over Rynn's objections. Upset by what she sees there, Mrs. Hallet attempts to flee, but in her haste she knocks down the support. The cellar door falls on her head, killing her.\nAttempting to remove evidence of Mrs. Hallet's visit, Rynn goes outside to drive her car away but cannot start it. This attracts the attention of Mario, a teenager passing by. Mario is the nephew of Officer Miglioriti, a village policeman who previously had given Rynn a ride home from town. Mario drives the car back to town, and Rynn rewards him with a dinner she prepares at her house.\nLater, Officer Miglioriti stops by and tells them Frank Hallet has reported his mother missing. The officer asks to see Rynn's father, but Mario covers for Rynn by saying her father has gone to bed. Later that night, Frank Hallet makes a surprise visit. Suspicious, and looking for answers about the whereabouts of his mother and Rynn's father, Frank tries to scare Rynn into talking, cruelly killing her pet hamster. Mario chases Frank away.\nRynn now trusts Mario and confesses her actual situation. Rynn's terminally ill father and abusive mother divorced long ago. To protect Rynn from being returned to her mother's custody after his death, her father moved them to America and made arrangements to allow Rynn to live alone, then committed suicide in the ocean when the tides would carry his body out to sea. Her father also left Rynn a jar of potassium cyanide, telling her that it was a sedative to calm her mother if she ever came for her. Rynn coolly recounts how she put the powder in her mother's tea and watched her die.\nTrust between Rynn and Mario blossoms into romance. On a cold, rainy day, they bury the bodies behind Rynn's house, but Mario catches cold. Suspicious of Rynn's continued evasions regarding her father's absence, Officer Miglioriti returns to the house one night and demands to see her father. Mario disguises himself as an old man and introduces himself to Miglioriti as Rynn's father. After Miglioriti leaves, Rynn and Mario go upstairs, where they undress and get in bed together.\nAs winter sets in, Mario is hospitalized after his cold causes pneumonia. Rynn visits an unconscious Mario in the hospital making her feel lonely. That night, as Rynn is going to bed, she is shocked to find Frank emerging from the cellar. Frank thinks he knows what happened to Rynn's parents and his mother, and attempts to blackmail Rynn. He offers to protect Rynn's secrets in exchange for her sexual favours. Rynn, seemingly defeated and resigned to Frank's demands, agrees to have tea with him. Rynn puts some of the cyanide in her own cup and then takes the tea and almond cookies into the living room. Suspicious, Frank switches his cup with hers. Rynn watches intently as Frank succumbs to the poison.\nThemes.\nFelicia Feaster, writing for Turner Classic Movies, found an \"unusual theme\" in the film, which she interpreted as being one of independence for children. Professor James R. Kincaid read the film as a call for children's rights. T.S. Kord wrote the film argued that a child with money and a home does not need a parent if he or she does not believe it is necessary. The adults who attempt to intrude in Rynn's affairs are a threat, including her mother, her landlord, and the molester.\nWriter Anthony Synnott placed \"The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane\" in a trend of sexualizing children in film, calling Rynn the \"murdering nymphet\" and comparing her to Foster's character Iris in \"Taxi Driver\" (1976). Anthony Cortese also referred to Foster as giving an \"encore performance\" of \"Taxi Driver\", calling Rynn \"a 13-year-old imp of maturing sexuality\". Scholar Andrew Scahill described it as fitting a cinematic narrative of children in rebellion, one in which the child appears seemly, as with \"The Innocents\" (1961), \"The Omen\" (1976), and others.\nThe genre has been debated, with Feaster arguing it was more psychological thriller than horror. Jim Cullen summed the film up as \"a strange hybrid\" of genres, being a horror, thriller, and feminist film. Kord listed it among dramas about \"Eerie, malevolent or criminal children\", distinct from depictions of children in the supernatural horror genre. Martin Sheen said it was a horror film in some ways, but \"not overt\", with mystery and suspense elements. However, director Nicolas Gessner denied it was horror, characterizing it as \"a teenage love story\".\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nNovelist Laird Koenig adapted his book for the screen. Originally, the script was intended as a play, but this idea was abandoned due to the belief that a young actress would not be available to play Rynn for an extended period. Gessner read the book, only to find rights were optioned to Sam Spiegel, but the project was derailed due to creative differences, allowing Gessner to secure them.\nThe film followed tax incentives for cinema offered by the government of Canada, beginning in 1974, stimulating a \"Hollywood North\". It was a co-production of Canada and France, with Zev Braun producing as head of Zev Braun Productions, based in Los Angeles, alongside L.C.L. Industries in Montreal and Filmedis-Filmel in Paris. Canadian producer Denis H\u00e9roux, who during the decade specialized in popular cinema with financiers from outside the country, also worked on the project. It was shot on a small budget. Financiers disliked how in the novel, Rynn murdered Mrs. Hallet with poisonous gas, causing the scene to be rewritten so the death is accidental.\nCasting.\nDirector Martin Scorsese was editing \"Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore\", and Gessner's look at his work led him to discover Jodie Foster. With the guidance of her mother Brandy, Jodie took the role of Rynn, and turned 13 while the film was being shot. \nSheen said he was contacted by Gessner personally about playing Frank Hallet, which Sheen accepted because he found the part intriguing and because he believed Foster had a promising career. Gessner claimed Sheen was initially more interested in playing Mario, but Gessner persuaded Sheen that he was too old for that part. Gessner noted that casting Alexis Smith, who was born in Canada, also helped secure Canadian tax incentives.\nFilming.\n\"The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane\" was filmed in Montreal, Knowlton, Quebec and Maine (specifically, Ogunquit, Maine). Sheen described the set as relaxed and as encouraging creativity, and said Foster also built a friendship with his daughter Ren\u00e9e Estevez during shooting.\nA producer's desire for \"sex and violence\" led to a nude scene depicting Rynn being added to the film. Foster strongly objected, later recalling, \"I walked off the set\". As a result, her older sister Connie acted as the nude double. Her mother had suggested Connie, who was 21 at the time. Following the release of \"Taxi Driver\", the industry shared stories of Foster having conflicts during the production of \"The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane\". However, Gessner claimed Foster only regretted the scene after it was shot, and her request that it be deleted was denied by the Canadian producers.\nThe crew built a false trapdoor for Mrs. Hallet's death scene, but Gessner acknowledged Smith was nervous about the effect. For the scene where Frank Hallet kills the hamster Gordon, Sheen handled a dead and frozen rodent, and attempted to make it seem like it was still alive. Sound effects of squealing were added. The dead hamster was obtained from a hospital which carried out animal research, and the live hamster portraying Gordon in other scenes was given to the costume designer after production.\nMusic.\nMort Shuman, who played Officer Miglioriti, was a musician in real life, so the crew intended that Shuman would also write the film score. However, Shuman's arranger Christian Gaubert wrote the bulk of the music, giving him the credit of composer, while Shuman was listed as the music supervisor.\nGessner wanted to use the music of Polish composer and pianist Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, finding his music a good match with the dialogue. He said Chopin's music was intended to symbolize hope and absolution, along with sadness.\nRelease.\nAfter a screening at the Cannes Film Festival in May 1976, Astral Bellevue Path\u00e9 Limited sold distribution rights to \"The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane\", allowing it to make $750,000 worldwide by June. The film was shown in Paris with a French dub on 26 January and in Toronto on 28 January 1977. According to \"Variety\", Beachfront Properties secured a temporary restraining order which gave it ownership of the film per a contract from September 1976. This order forbade any new sales but did not change the American International Pictures release in April 1977. The film had trial screenings in Albuquerque and Peoria, Illinois, on 18 March 1977. It opened in Los Angeles on 11 May and in New York City on 10 August 1977, with a PG rating.\nOn its initial release, the film poster depicted \"The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane\" as a horror film, with an image of a building evoking the 1960 film \"Psycho\" and the subtitle \"She was only a little girl. She lived in a great big house...all alone. Where is her mother? Where is her father? Where are all the people who went to visit her? What is her unspeakable secret? Everyone who knows is dead.\"\nA VHS release of the film removed the nudity, but it was re-added to the DVD. StudioCanal published a DVD in Region 2 on 20 October 2008. Kino Lorber released the film on Blu-ray in Region A on 10 May 2016. Hulu and Amazon Prime also made the film available to their customers in November 2016.\nReception.\nOverall critical reception.\nThe film has a 93% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 15 reviews.Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 53 out of 100, based on nine critics, indicating . Foster's biographer Louis Chunovic referred to the film as \"much maligned\" in his 1995 biography on the star.\nContemporary American reviews.\nJanet Maslin for \"The New York Times\" wrote this was Foster's most natural portrayal of a child and that Sheen was frightening, and found the romance to be the greatest strength. In \"The Washington Post\", Gary Arnold called the film engaging, but claimed the murder plot is \"too glib, too immorally contrived, to be satisfying.\"\nKathleen Carroll gave the film a two-star rating out of four, and, in her review of it for the \"New York Daily News\", stated that \"Jodie Foster plays Rynn with her usual aplomb, but it seems a dreadful waste of her talent. What makes the movie even more reprehensible is that it shows her stripping off her blouse and casually getting into bed with a 17-year-old boy. As such, the movie appears to condone teenage sex, and, for that reason, parents should use great discretion in allowing young people to see it in spite of the mild PG rating.\"\nCharles Champlin of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"the exact movie equivalent of one of those slim, swift novels that are read on rainy Sundays or late at night or on vacation, for their pleasurable unimportance.\" \"Variety\"'s review stated that the story was unbelievable, and that the romance was one of the few positive aspects.\n\"Time\"'s Christopher Porterfield felt the film failed to address the most interesting mysteries, and that doing so, combined with Foster's acting, would have made the film memorable. Judith Crist's review in the \"New York Post\" judged it to be \"a better-than-average thriller\".\nContemporary Canadian reviews.\nClyde Gilmour of \"The Toronto Star\" said that \"Jodie Foster alone emerges from this wishy-washy production with her renown intact. She handles her complex role with the cool adult professionalism that is her trademark. But the character itself is thinly developed in the script and remains an enigma at the obligatory freeze-frame fadeout.\" Martin Malina of the \"Montreal Star\" wrote that \"this odd little adolescent love story-cum-murder mystery depends very heavily for its effectiveness on the playing of its principal character, and Miss Foster doesn't disappoint.\"\nJulie Maskoulis of \"The Gazette\" wrote that \"without her unbelievable cool and calm self-sufficiency as the unusual adolescent of the story, the film would not be nearly as penetrating. It is hard to say how much of Foster's stunning performance can be credited to director Nicolas Gessner, who brilliantly manipulates a build-up of suspense by insinuation and suggestion using Laird Koenig's screenplay (based on his novel). He spares us visually gruesome de tails, thus making the impact of their retelling, within the film much more forceful.\"\nFrank Daley of the \"Ottawa Journal\" called the film \"very slight\" but said it \"might do business in the U.S. on the strength of Foster's name.\" Noel Taylor of the \"Ottawa Citizen\" called the film \"a modest thriller with conventionally scarey moments\", adding that \"director Nicholas Gessner builds his tension gently and is decently wary of sensationalism.\"\nRetrospective reviews.\nFelicia Feaster of Turner Classic Movies remarked that \"The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane\" became a cult film, noting Danny Peary profiled it in his \"Guide for the Film Fanatic\". Peary also listed it in his book \"Cult Horror Movies\".\nIn 1992, James Monaco gave the film three and a half stars, assessing it as disturbing and complimenting the performances and writing. In their \"DVD and Video Guide 2005\", Mick Martin and Marsha Porter awarded it three and a half stars, commenting it was \"remarkably subdued\".\nAuthor David Greven praised Foster for a performance \"achingly\" suggesting \"adolescent anomie\". In his \"2015 Movie Guide\", Leonard Maltin gave the film three stars, declaring it as a \"Complex, unique mystery\".\nAccolades.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Category!! scope=\"col\" |Nominee(s)\n! scope=\"col\" | Result!! scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\" | Ref.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52944", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52944", "title": "South West England", "text": "Region of England\nSouth West England, or the South West of England, is one of the nine official regions of England in the United Kingdom. Additionally, it is one of four regions that altogether make up Southern England. South West England consists of the counties of Cornwall (including the Isles of Scilly), Dorset, Devon, Bristol, Gloucestershire, Somerset and Wiltshire. Cities and large towns in the region include Bath, Bristol, Bournemouth, Cheltenham, Exeter, Gloucester, Plymouth and Swindon. It is geographically the largest of the nine regions of England with a land area of , but the third-least populous, with an estimated 5,889,695 residents in 2024. \nThe region includes the West Country and much of the ancient kingdom of Wessex. It includes two entire national parks, Dartmoor and Exmoor (a small part of the New Forest is also within the region); and four World Heritage Sites: Stonehenge, the Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape, the Jurassic Coast and the City of Bath. The northern part of Gloucestershire, near Chipping Campden, is as close to the Scottish border as it is to the tip of Cornwall. The region has by far the longest coastline of any English region.\nFollowing the abolition of the South West Regional Assembly in 2008 and Government Office in 2011, South West Councils provide local government coordination in the region. Bristol, South Gloucestershire, and Bath and North East Somerset are part of the West of England Combined Authority.\nThe region is known for its rich folklore, including the legend of King Arthur and Glastonbury Tor, as well as its traditions and customs. Cornwall has its own language, Cornish, and is regarded as a Celtic nation. The South West is known for Cheddar cheese, which originated in the Somerset village of Cheddar; Devon cream teas, crabs, Cornish pasties, and cider. It is home to the Eden Project, Aardman Animations, the Glastonbury Festival, the Bristol International Balloon Fiesta, trip hop music and Cornwall's surfing beaches. The region has also been home to some of Britain's most renowned writers, including Daphne du Maurier and Agatha Christie, both of whom set many of their works here, and the South West is also the location of Thomas Hardy's Wessex, the setting for many of his best-known novels.\nGeography.\nGeology and landscape.\nMost of the region is located on the South West Peninsula, between the English Channel and Bristol Channel. It has the longest coastline of all the English regions, totalling over . Much of the coast is now protected from further substantial development because of its environmental importance, which contributes to the region's attractiveness to tourists and residents.\nGeologically the region is divided into the largely igneous and metamorphic west and sedimentary east, the dividing line slightly to the west of the River Exe. Cornwall and West Devon's landscape is of rocky coastline and high moorland, notably at Bodmin Moor and Dartmoor. These are due to the granite and slate that underlie the area. The highest point of the region is High Willhays, at , on Dartmoor. In North Devon the slates of the west and limestones of the east meet at Exmoor National Park. The variety of rocks of similar ages seen has led to the county's name being given to that of the Devonian period.\nThe east of the region is characterised by wide, flat clay vales, and chalk and limestone downland. The vales, with good irrigation, are home to the region's dairy agriculture. The Blackmore Vale was Thomas Hardy's \"Vale of the Little Dairies\"; another, the Somerset Levels was created by reclaiming wetlands. The Southern England Chalk Formation extends into the region, creating a series of high, sparsely populated and archaeologically rich downs, most famously Salisbury Plain, but also Cranborne Chase, the Dorset Downs and the Purbeck Hills. These downs are the principal area of arable agriculture in the region. Limestone is also found in the region, at the Cotswolds, Quantock Hills and Mendip Hills, where they support sheep farming. All of the principal rock types can be seen on the Jurassic Coast of Dorset and East Devon, where they document the entire Mesozoic era from west to east.\nClimate.\nThe climate of South West England is classed as oceanic (\"Cfb\") according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The oceanic climate typically experiences cool winters with warmer summers and precipitation all year round, with more experienced in winter. Annual rainfall is about and up to on higher ground. Summer maxima averages range from to and winter minimum averages range from to across the south-west. It is the second windiest area of the United Kingdom, the majority of winds coming from the south-west and north-east. Government organisations predict the region to rise in temperature and become the hottest region in the United Kingdom.\nInland areas of low altitude experience the least amount of precipitation. They experience the highest summer maxima temperatures, but winter minima are colder than the coast. Snowfalls are more frequent in comparison to the coast, but less so in comparison to higher ground. It experiences the lowest wind speeds and sunshine total in between that of the coast and the moors. The climate of inland areas is more noticeable the further north-east into the region.\nIn comparison to inland areas, the coast experiences high minimum temperatures, especially in winter, and it experiences slightly lower maximum temperatures during the summer. Rainfall is the lowest at the coast and snowfall is rarer than the rest of the region. Coastal areas are the windiest parts of the peninsula and they receive the most sunshine. The general coastal climate is more typical the further south-west into the region.\nAreas of moorland inland such as: Bodmin Moor, Dartmoor and Exmoor experience lower temperatures and more precipitation than the rest of the southwest (approximately twice as much rainfall as lowland areas), because of their high altitude. Both of these factors also cause it to experience the highest levels of snowfall and the lowest levels of sunshine. Exposed areas of the moors are windier than lowlands and can be almost as windy as the coast.\nRegional identity.\nThe boundaries of the South West region are based upon those devised by central government in the 1930s for civil defence administration and subsequently used for various statistical analyses. The region is also similar to that used in the 17th-century Rule of the Major-Generals under Cromwell. (For further information, see Historical and alternative regions of England). By the 1960s, the South West region (including Dorset, which for some previous purposes had been included in a Southern region), was widely recognised for government administration and statistics. The boundaries were carried forward into the 1990s when regional administrations were formally established as Government Office Regions. A regional assembly and regional development agency were created in 1999, then abolished in 2008 and 2012 respectively.\nIt has been argued that the official South West region does not possess a cultural and historic unity or identity of itself, which has led to criticism of it as an \"artificial\" construct. The large area of the region, stretching as it does from the Isles of Scilly to Gloucestershire, encompasses diverse areas which have little more in common with each other than they do with other areas of England. The region has several TV stations and newspapers based in different areas, and no single acknowledged regional \"capital\". Many people in the region have some level of a \"South West\" or \"West Country\" regional identity, although this may not necessarily correspond to an identification with the official government-defined region. It is common for people in the region to identify at a national level (whether English, British, Cornish or a county, city or town level). Identifying as being from 'the Westcountry', amorphous though it is, tends to be more predominant further into the peninsula where the status of being from the region is less equivocal.\nIn particular, Cornwall's inclusion in the region is disputed by Cornish nationalists. The cross-party Cornish Constitutional Convention and Cornish nationalist party Mebyon Kernow have campaigned for a Cornish Assembly ever since the idea of regional devolution was put forward.\nSettlements.\nThe South West region is largely rural, with small towns and villages; a higher proportion of people live in such areas than in any other English region. There are two major regional cities in terms of population, which are Bristol and Plymouth (although Bristol is larger by some consideration), and two major conurbations which are the South East Dorset Conurbation (Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole) and the Bristol Metropolitan Conurbation (which includes the City of Bristol and areas of South Gloucestershire).\nCities and Towns with specific tourist and cultural sites of interest include Bath, Bristol, Salisbury, Plymouth, Exeter, Cheltenham, Gloucester and Weston-super-Mare, as well as the county of Cornwall on a widespread scale.\nThe region is home to eleven universities: University of Bath, University of Exeter, University of Bristol, Bournemouth University, Falmouth University (Cornwall), University of Plymouth, University of the West of England, University of Gloucestershire (Gloucester and Cheltenham), Arts University Bournemouth, Bath Spa University, Plymouth Marjon University, and Royal Agricultural University (Cirencester).\nThe largest cities and towns in order of population are:\nThe largest conurbations are:\nThe population of the South West in 2009 was about five million.\nTransport.\nThe region lies on several main line railways. The Great Western Main Line runs from London Paddington to Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth, and Penzance in the far west of Cornwall. The South West Main Line runs from London Waterloo and Southampton to Bournemouth, Poole and Weymouth in Dorset. The West of England Main Line runs from London Waterloo to Exeter via south Wiltshire, north Dorset and south Somerset. The Wessex Main Line runs from Bristol to Salisbury and on to Southampton. The Heart of Wessex Line runs from Bristol in the north of the region to Weymouth on the south Dorset coast via Westbury, Castle Cary and Yeovil, with most services starting at Gloucester.\nThe vast majority of trains in the region are operated by CrossCountry, Great Western Railway (GWR) and South Western Railway (SWR). GWR is the key operator for all counties in the region except Dorset where SWR is the key operator.\nCrossCountry operates services to Manchester Piccadilly, Glasgow and Aberdeen. Dorset is currently the only county in the region where there are electric trains, though the Great Western Main Line and the South Wales Main Line in Wiltshire, Somerset, Greater Bristol and Gloucestershire is being electrified. \nSWR operate services to and from London Waterloo and serves every county in the region except Gloucestershire and Cornwall. GWR serves all counties in the region and operate to various destinations, some of which run to South Wales and the West Midlands, though almost all intercity trains operated by GWR run through the region.\nTransport for Wales also operates services between Maesteg and Cheltenham Spa. West Midlands Railway operated a parliamentary train between Birmingham New Street and Gloucester via Worcester Shrub Hill, which was withdrawn in 2019 (there was once a regular service on the route, but this was withdrawn in 2009).\nIt has been proposed that the former London &amp; South Western Railway Exeter to Plymouth railway be reopened to connect Cornwall and Plymouth as an alternative to the route via the Dawlish seawall that is susceptible to closure in bad weather.\nLocal bus services are primarily operated by FirstGroup, Go-Ahead Group and Stagecoach subsidiaries as well as independent operators. Megabus and National Express operate long-distance services from South West England to all parts of the United Kingdom.\nThree major roads enter the region from the east. The M4 motorway from London to South Wales via Bristol is the busiest. The A303 cuts through the centre of the region from Salisbury to Honiton, where it merges with the A30 to continue past Exeter to the west of Cornwall. The A31, an extension of the M27, serves Poole and Bournemouth and the Dorset coast. The M5 runs from the West Midlands through Gloucestershire, Bristol and Somerset to Exeter. The A38 serves as a western extension to Plymouth. There are three other smaller motorways in the region, all in the Bristol area.\nPassenger airports in the region include Bristol, Exeter, Newquay and Bournemouth.\nWithin the region the local transport authorities carry out transport planning through the use of a Local Transport Plan (LTP) which outlines their strategies, policies and implementation programme. The most recent LTP is that for the period 2006\u201311. In the South West region the following transport authorities have published their LTP online: Bournemouth U.A., Cornwall U.A., Devon, Dorset, Gloucestershire, Plymouth U.A., Somerset, Swindon U. A., Torbay U. A. and Wiltshire unitary authority. The transport authorities of Bath and North East Somerset U. A., Bristol U. A., North Somerset U. A. and South Gloucestershire U. A. publish a single Joint Local Transport Plan as part of the West of England Partnership.\nHistory.\nPre-Roman.\nThere is evidence from flint artefacts in a quarry at Westbury-sub-Mendip that an ancestor of modern man, possibly Homo heidelbergensis, was present in the future Somerset from around 500,000 years ago. There is some evidence of human occupation of southern England before the last ice age, such as at Kents Cavern in Devon, but largely in the south east. The British mainland was connected to the continent during the ice age and humans may have repeatedly migrated into and out of the region as the climate fluctuated. There is evidence of human habitation in the caves at Cheddar Gorge 11,000\u201310,000 years BC, during a partial thaw in the ice age. The earliest scientifically dated cemetery in Great Britain was found at Aveline's Hole in the Mendip Hills. The human bone fragments it contained, from about 21 different individuals, are thought to be roughly between 10,200 and 10,400 years old. During this time the tundra gave way to birch forests and grassland and evidence for human settlement appears at Salisbury Plain, Wiltshire and Hengistbury Head, Dorset.\nAt the end of the last Ice Age the Bristol Channel was dry land, but subsequently the sea level rose, resulting in major coastal changes. The Somerset Levels were flooded, but the dry points such as Glastonbury and Brent Knoll are known to have been occupied by Mesolithic hunters. The landscape at this time was tundra. Britain's oldest complete skeleton, Cheddar Man, lived at Cheddar Gorge around 7150 BC (in the Upper Palaeolithic or Old Stone Age), shortly after the end of the ice age; however, it is unclear whether the region was continuously inhabited during the previous 4000 years, or if humans returned to the gorge after a final cold spell. A Palaeolithic flint tool found in West Sedgemoor is the earliest indication of human presence on the Somerset Levels. During the 7th millennium BC the sea level rose and flooded the valleys, so the Mesolithic people occupied seasonal camps on the higher ground, indicated by scatters of flints. The Neolithic people continued to exploit the reed swamps for their natural resources and started to construct wooden trackways. These included the Post Track and the Sweet Track. The Sweet Track, dating from the 39th century BC, is thought to be the world's oldest timber trackway and was once thought to be the world's oldest engineered roadway. The Levels were also the location of the Glastonbury Lake Village as well as two lake villages at Meare. Stonehenge, Avebury and Stanton Drew are perhaps the most famous Neolithic sites in the UK.\nThe region was heavily populated during the Neolithic, Bronze Age and Iron Age periods. Many monuments, barrows and trackways exist. Coin evidence shows that the region was split between the Durotriges, Dobunni and Dumnonii. The Iron Age tribe in Dorset were the Durotriges, \"water dwellers\", whose main settlement is represented by Maiden Castle. Ptolemy stated that Bath was in the territory of the Belgae, but this may be a mistake. The Celtic gods were worshipped at the temple of Sulis at Bath and possibly the temple on Brean Down. Iron Age sites on the Quantock Hills include major hill forts at Dowsborough and Ruborough, as well as smaller earthwork enclosures, such as Trendle Ring, Elworthy Barrows and Plainsfield Camp.\nAt the time of the Roman invasion, the inhabitants of the entire area spoke a Brythonic Celtic language. Its descendant languages are still spoken to a greater or lesser extent in Cornwall, Wales, and Brittany.\nRoman period.\nDuring the Roman era, the east of the region, particularly the Cotswolds and eastern Somerset, was heavily Romanised but Devon and Cornwall were much less so, though Exeter was a regional capital. There are villas, farms and temples dating from the period, including the remains at Bath.\nThe area of Somerset was part of the Roman Empire from AD 47 to about AD 409. The empire disintegrated gradually, and elements of Romanitas lingered on for perhaps a century. In AD 47, Somerset was invaded from the south-east by the Second Legion \"Augusta\", under the future emperor Vespasian. The hillforts of the Durotriges at Ham Hill and Cadbury Castle were captured. Ham Hill probably had a temporary Roman occupation. The massacre at Cadbury Castle seems to have been associated with the later Boudiccan Revolt of AD 60\u201361.\nThe Roman invasion, and possibly the preceding period of involvement in the internal affairs of the south of England, was inspired in part by the lead mines of the Mendip Hills, which also offered the potential for the extraction of silver. Forts were set up at Bath and Ilchester. The lead and silver mines at Charterhouse in the Mendip Hills were run by the military. The Romans established a defensive boundary along the new military road known the Fosse Way (from the Latin \"fossa\" meaning \"ditch\"). The Fosse Way ran through Bath, Shepton Mallet, Ilchester and south-west towards Axminster. The road from Dorchester ran through Yeovil to meet the Fosse Way at Ilchester. Salt was produced on the Somerset Levels near Highbridge and quarrying took place near Bath, named after the Roman baths.\nExcavations carried out before the flooding of Chew Valley Lake also uncovered Roman remains, indicating agricultural and industrial activity from the second half of the 1st century until the 3rd century AD. The finds included a moderately large villa at Chew Park, where wooden writing tablets (the first in the UK) with ink writing were found. There is also evidence from the Pagans Hill Roman Temple at Chew Stoke. In October 2001 the West Bagborough Hoard of 4th-century Roman silver was discovered in West Bagborough. The 681 coins included two denarii from the early 2nd century and 8 miliarensia and 671 siliquae all dating from AD 337 to 367. The majority were struck in the reigns of emperors Constantius II and Julian and derive from a range of mints including Arles and Lyon in France, Trier in Germany, and Rome. In April 2010, the Frome Hoard, one of the largest ever hoards of Roman coins discovered in Britain, was found by a metal detectorist. The hoard of 52,500 coins dated from the 3rd century AD and was found buried in a field near Frome, in a jar below the surface. The coins were excavated by archaeologists from the Portable Antiquities Scheme.\nBritish kingdoms and the arrival of the Saxons.\nAfter the Romans left at the start of the 5th century AD, the region split into several Brittonic kingdoms, including Dumnonia, centred around the old tribal territory of the Dumnonii. The upper Thames area soon came under Anglo-Saxon control but the remainder of the region was in British control until the 6th century. Bokerley Dyke, a large defensive ditch on Cranborne Chase dated to 367, delayed the Saxon conquest of Dorset, with the Romano-British remaining in Dorset for 200 years after the withdrawal of the Roman legions. The Western Wandsdyke earthwork was probably built during the 5th or 6th century. This area became the border between the Romano-British Celts and the West Saxons following the Battle of Deorham in 577.\nThe Anglo-Saxons then gained control of the Cotswold area; but most of Somerset, Dorset and Devon (as well as Cornwall) remained in British hands until the late 7th century. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", the Saxon Cenwalh achieved a breakthrough against the British Celtic tribes, with victories at Bradford-on-Avon (in the \"Avon Gap\" in the Wansdyke) in 652, and further south at the Battle of Peonnum (at Penselwood) in 658, followed by an advance west through the Polden Hills to the River Parrett. The Saxon advance from the east seems to have been halted by battles between the British and Saxons, for example at the siege of Badon Mons Badonicus (which may have been in the Bath district, perhaps at Solsbury Hill), or Bathampton Down. The Battle of Bedwyn was fought in 675 between Escuin, a West Saxon nobleman who had seized the throne of Queen Saxburga, and King Wulfhere of Mercia. The earliest fortification of Taunton started for King Ine of Wessex and \u00c6thelburg, in or about the year 710. However, according to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" this was destroyed 12 years later. Alfred the Great refortified Exeter as a defensive burh, followed by new erections at Lydford, Halwell and Pilton, although these fortifications were small compared to burhs further east, suggesting that they were protection for the elite only.\n9th century and the arrival of the Danes.\nThe English defeated a combined Cornish and Danish force at Hingston Down (near Gunnislake) in 838. Edward the Elder built similarly at Barnstaple and Totnes. But sporadic Viking incursions continued until the Norman Conquest, including the disastrous defeat of the Devonians at the Battle of Pinhoe. In 876 King Alfred the Great trapped a Danish fleet at Arne and then drove it out; 120 ships were wrecked at Studland. Although King Alfred had lands in Cornwall, it continued to have a British king. It is generally considered that Cornwall came fully under the dominion of the English Crown in the time of Athelstan's rule, i.e. 924\u2013939. In the absence of any specific documentation to record this event, supporters of Cornwall's English status presume that it then became part of England. However, in 944, within a mere five years of Athelstan's death, King Edmund issued a charter styling himself \"King of the English \"and ruler of this province of the Britons\"\". Thus we can see that then the \"province\" was a territorial possession, which has long claimed a special relationship to the English Crown.\nCorfe Castle in 978 saw the murder of King Edward the Martyr, whose body was taken first to Wareham and then to Shaftesbury. Somerset played an important part in stopping the spread of the Danes in the 9th century. Viking raids took place for instance in 987 and 997 at Watchet and the Battle of Cynwit.\nKing Alfred was driven to seek refuge from the Danes at Athelney before defeating them in 878 at the Battle of Ethandun, usually considered to be near Edington, Wiltshire, but possibly the village of Edington in Somerset. Alfred established a series of forts and lookout posts linked by a military road, or Herepath, to allow his army to cover Viking movements at sea. The Herepath has a characteristic form which is familiar on the Quantocks: a regulation 20\u00a0m wide track between avenues of trees growing from hedge laying embankments. A peace treaty with the Danes was signed at Wedmore and the Danish king Guthrum the Old was baptised at Aller. \"Burhs\" (fortified places) had been set up by 919, such as Lyng. The Alfred Jewel, an object about long, made of filigree gold, cloisonn\u00e9-enamelled and with a rock crystal covering, was found in 1693 at Petherton Park, North Petherton. This is believed to have been owned by King Alfred. Monasteries and minster churches were set up all over Somerset, with daughter churches of the minsters in manors. There was a royal palace at Cheddar, which was used at times in the 10th century to host the Witenagemot.\n11th century.\nIn the late pre-Norman period, the east coast of modern-day England came under the growing sway of the Norsemen. Eventually England came to be ruled by Norse monarchs, and the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms fell one by one, Wessex being conquered in 1013 by King Sweyn Forkbeard. Sweyn's realms included Denmark and Norway, and parts of England such as Mercia (an Anglian kingdom roughly coinciding with the English Midlands), much of which, along with northern England, fell under the Danelaw. Sweyn ruled Wessex, along with his other realms, from 1013 onwards, followed by his son Canute the Great. But Cornwall was \"not\" part of his realm of Wessex. A map by the American historian called \"The Dominions of Canute\" (pictured just above) shows that Cornwall, like Wales and Scotland, was part neither of Sweyn Forkbeard's nor of Canute's Danish empire. Neither Sweyn Forkbeard nor Canute conquered or controlled Scotland, Wales or Cornwall; but these areas were \"client nations\": subject to payment of a yearly tribute or \"danegeld\" to Sweyn and later Canute, all three areas retained their autonomy from the Danes. Ultimately, the Danes lost control of Wessex in 1042 on the death of both of Canute's sons. Edward the Confessor retook Wessex for the Saxons. In 1016 Edmund Ironside was crowned king at Glastonbury.\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the Norman Conquest the region was controlled by various Norman as well as Breton lords and later by local gentry, a few of whom appear to have been descended from pre-Conquest families. In 1140, during the civil war of King Stephen's reign, the castles of Plympton and Exeter were held against the king by Baldwin de Redvers and this gave rise to the defensive castles at Corfe Castle, Powerstock, Wareham and Shaftesbury. The period saw the growth of towns such as Truro, Totnes, Okehampton and Plympton in the west of the region, but these were small compared with the established wealth of ancient cathedral cities in the east of the region such as Exeter, Bath and Wells. Wealth grew from sheep farming in the east of the region: church controlled estates such as Glastonbury Abbey and Wells became among the richest in England, while tin and silver mining was important in Devon and Cornwall; Stannary Parliaments with semi-autonomous powers were established. Farming prospered until it was severely hit by the Black Death which arrived in Dorset in 1348 and quickly spread through Somerset, causing widespread death, with mortality rates perhaps as high as 50% in places. The resulting labour shortage led to changes in feudal practices. Crafts and industries also flourished; the Somerset woollen industry was then one of the largest in England. Coal mining in the Mendips was an important source of wealth while quarrying also took place.\nMany parish churches were rebuilt in this period. Between 1107 and 1129 William Giffard, the Chancellor of King Henry I, converted the bishop's hall in Taunton into Taunton Castle. It passed to the king in 1233 and in 1245 repairs were ordered to its motte and towers. During the 11th-century Second Barons' War against Henry III, Bridgwater was held by the barons against the King. During the Middle Ages sheep farming for the wool trade came to dominate the economy of Exmoor. The wool was spun into thread on isolated farms and collected by merchants to be woven, fulled, dyed and finished in thriving towns such as Dunster. The land started to be enclosed and from the 17th century onwards larger estates developed, leading to establishment of areas of large regular shaped fields. During this period a royal forest and hunting ground was established, administered by the Warden. The royal forest was sold off in 1818.\nWhere conditions were suitable, coastal villages and ports had an economy based on fishing. The larger ports such as Fowey contributed vessels to the naval enterprises of the King and were subject to attack from the French in return. Bridgwater was part of the Port of Bristol until the Port of Bridgwater was created in 1348, covering of the Somerset coast line, from the Devon border to the mouth of the River Axe. Historically, the main port on the river was at Bridgwater; the river being bridged at this point, with the first bridge being constructed in 1200. Quays were built in 1424; with another quay, the \"Langport slip\", being built in 1488 upstream of the Town Bridge. In Bristol the port began to develop in the 11th century. By the 12th century Bristol was an important port, handling much of England's trade with Ireland. During this period Bristol also became a centre of shipbuilding and manufacturing. Bristol was the starting point for many important voyages, notably John Cabot's 1497 voyage of exploration to North America. By the 14th century Bristol was one of England's three largest medieval towns after London, along with York and Norwich, with perhaps 15,000\u201320,000 inhabitants on the eve of the Black Death of 1348\u201349.\nThe plague resulted in a prolonged pause in the growth of Bristol's population, with numbers remaining at 10,000\u201312,000 through most of the 15th and 16th centuries.\nDuring the Wars of the Roses, there were frequent skirmishes between the Lancastrian Thomas Courtenay, Earl of Devon and Yorkist William, Lord Bonville. In 1470, Edward IV pursued Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick and George, Duke of Clarence as far as Exeter after the Battle of Lose-coat Field. The organisation of the region remained based on the shires and Church estates, which were largely unchanged throughout the period. Some of the most important nobles in the South West included the Courtenays Earl of Devon, William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville, and Humphrey Stafford, earl of Devon whose wider influence stretched from Cornwall to Wiltshire. After 1485, the Earl of Devon, Henry VII's chamberlain, Giles Daubeney, 1st Baron Daubeney and Robert Willoughby, 1st Baron Willoughby de Broke were also influential. In 1497, early in Henry VII's reign, the royal pretender Perkin Warbeck, besieged Exeter. The Cornish Rebellion of 1497 led by An Gof and Thomas Flamank ended in a march to Blackheath in London where the Cornish forces were massacred.\n16th century.\nGreat disturbances throughout both Cornwall and Devon followed the introduction of Edward VI's Book of Common Prayer. The day after Whit Sunday 1549, a priest at Sampford Courtenay was persuaded to read the old mass. This insubordination spread swiftly into serious revolt. The Cornish quickly joined the men of Devon in the Prayer Book Rebellion and Exeter was besieged until relieved by Lord Russell. The Cornish had a particular motivation for opposing the new English language prayer book, as there were still many monoglot Cornish speakers in West Cornwall. The Cornish language declined rapidly afterwards and the Dissolution of the Monasteries resulted in the eventual loss of the Cornish language as a primary language. By the end of the 18th century it was no longer a first language.\nThe Council of the West was a short-lived administrative body established by Henry VIII for the government of the western counties of England. It was analogous in form to the Council of the North. The council was established in March 1539, with Lord Russell as its Lord President. Members included Thomas Derby, Sir Piers Edgcumbe, Sir Richard Pollard and John Rowe. However, the fall of Thomas Cromwell, the chief political supporter of government by Councils, and the tranquillity of the western counties made it largely superfluous. It last sat in summer 1540, although it was never formally abolished.\n17th century.\nThe Bristol Channel floods of 1607 are believed to have affected large parts of the Somerset Levels, with flooding up to above sea level. In 1625, a House of Correction was established in Shepton Mallet, and when it closed HMP Shepton Mallet was England's oldest prison still in use.\nDuring the English Civil War, Somerset was largely Parliamentarian, although Dunster was a Royalist stronghold. The county saw important battles between the Royalists and the Parliamentarians, notably at Lansdowne in 1643 and Langport in 1645. Bristol was occupied by Royalist military, after they overran Royal Fort, the last Parliamentarian stronghold in the city. Taunton Castle had fallen into ruin by 1600 but it was repaired during the Civil War. The castle changed hands several times during 1642\u201345 along with the town. During the Siege of Taunton it was defended by Robert Blake, from July 1644 to July 1645. After the war, in 1662, the keep was demolished and only the base remains. This war resulted in castles being slighted (destroyed to prevent their re-use).\nIn 1685, the Duke of Monmouth led the Monmouth Rebellion in which a force partly raised in Somerset fought against James II. The rebels landed at Lyme Regis and travelled north hoping to capture Bristol and Bath, Puritan soldiers damaged the west front of Wells Cathedral, tore lead from the roof to make bullets, broke the windows, smashed the organ and the furnishings, and for a time stabled their horses in the nave. They were defeated in the Battle of Sedgemoor at Westonzoyland, the last battle fought on English soil. The Bloody Assizes which followed saw the losers being sentenced to death or transportation. At the time of the Glorious Revolution, King James II gathered his main forces, altogether about 19,000 men, at Salisbury, James himself arriving there on 19 November 1688. The first blood was shed at the Wincanton Skirmish in Somerset. In Salisbury, James heard that some of his officers, such as Edward Hyde, had deserted, and he broke out in a nose-bleed which he took as a bad omen. His commander in chief, the Earl of Feversham, advised retreat on 23 November, and the next day John Churchill deserted to William. On 26 November, James's daughter Princess Anne did the same, and James returned to London the same day, never again to be at the head of a serious military force in England.\nModern history.\nSince 1650, the City of Plymouth has grown to become the largest city in Devon, mainly due to the naval base at Devonport. Her Majesty's Naval Base (HMNB) Devonport is one of three operating bases in the United Kingdom for the Royal Navy. HMNB Devonport is now the largest naval base in Western Europe. The large Portland Harbour, built at the end of the 19th century and protected by Nothe Fort and the Verne Citadel, was for many years, including during the wars, another of the largest Royal Navy bases.\nThe 19th century saw improvements to roads in the region with the introduction of turnpikes and the building of canals and railways. The usefulness of the canals was short-lived, though they have now been restored for recreation. Chard claims to be the birthplace of powered flight, in 1848 when the Victorian aeronautical pioneer John Stringfellow first demonstrated that engine-powered flight was possible through his work on the Aerial Steam Carriage. North Petherton was the first town in England (and one of the few ever) to be lit by acetylene gas lighting.\nAround the 1860s, at the height of the iron and steel era, a pier and a deep-water dock were built, at Portishead to accommodate the large ships that had difficulty in reaching Bristol Harbour. The Portishead power stations were coal-fed power stations built next to the dock. Industrial activities ceased in the dock with the closure of the power stations. The Port of Bristol Authority finally closed the dock in 1992, and it has now been developed into a marina and residential area.\nDuring the First World War many soldiers from the South West were killed, and war memorials were put up in most of the towns and villages; only a few villages escaped casualties. There were also casualties\u00a0\u2013 though much fewer\u00a0\u2013 during the Second World War, who were added to the memorials. Several areas were bases for troops preparing for the 1944 D-Day landings. Exercise Tiger, or Operation Tiger, was the code names for a full-scale rehearsal in 1944 for the D-Day invasion of Normandy. The British Government evacuated approximately 3,000 local residents in the area of Slapton, now South Hams District of Devon. Some of them had never left their villages before. Bristol's city centre suffered severe damage from Luftwaffe bombing during the Bristol Blitz of World War II. The Royal Ordnance Factory ROF Bridgwater was constructed early in World War II for the Ministry of Supply. The Taunton Stop Line was set up to resist a potential German invasion, and the remains of its pill boxes can still be seen, as well as others along the coast.\nExmoor was one of the first British National Parks, designated in 1954, under the 1949 National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act. and is named after its main river. It was expanded in 1991 and in 1993 Exmoor was designated as an Environmentally Sensitive Area. The Quantock Hills were designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) in 1956, the first such designation in England under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949. The Mendip Hills followed with AONB designation in 1972.\nWorld War II.\nMuch of the Battle of the Beams was carried out at the Telecommunications Research Establishment at Worth Matravers in Dorset; the H2S radar was developed by Sir Bernard Lovell of Bristol. The Gloster Meteor at Newquay Air Museum is the oldest flying jet aircraft in the world. Long Ashton Research Station in Somerset invented Ribena (for population health in World War II) and improved cider.\nScientific heritage.\nWilliam Herschel, previously a clarinet player, of Bath discovered infrared radiation on 11 February 1800, and the planet Uranus in March 1781; he had made important improvements to the reflecting telescope by increasing the mirror diameter. Herschel then built a 20-ft reflecting telescope and invented the star count, working out that the Milky Way is a disc, which he called a \"grindstone\", and that it is a galaxy. Sir Arthur C. Clarke of Minehead invented the idea of artificial satellites; he sent a letter to Harry Wexler who then developed the first weather satellite TIROS-1. Sir Arthur Eddington of Weston-super-Mare was the first to realise that nuclear fusion powered the Sun; at the 1920 British Association meeting he said that the Sun converted hydrogen into helium, although the mechanism was not known until 1933. James Bradley was an important astronomer from Gloucestershire, who discovered the aberration of light.\nJan Ingenhousz, the Dutch biologist, discovered photosynthesis in 1779 at Bowood House in Wiltshire; on 1 August 1774, Joseph Priestley discovered oxygen there too. A fossil of the oldest ancestor of the Tyrannosaurus was found in Gloucestershire; Mary Anning was a famous fossil collector from Lyme Regis. Edward Jenner, pioneer of vaccination, was from Gloucestershire.\nIndustrial heritage.\nSir Benjamin Baker from Cheltenham jointly-designed the 1890 Forth Bridge. William Murdoch in 1792 lit his house in Redruth with gas, the first in Britain. Plasticine was invented 1897 in Bath by William Harbutt. Thomas Young of Somerset is known for his double-slit experiment in optics, and in solid mechanics for his famous Young's modulus. Henry Fox Talbot, inventor of a negative-positive process in 1841, from Wiltshire made the first photograph in August 1835; Nic\u00e9phore Ni\u00e9pce of France can claim the first photo in 1826; William Friese-Greene of Bristol is thought to be the \"father of cinematography\" after inventing his \"chronophotographic camera\" in 1889.\nHinkley Point A nuclear power station was a Magnox power station constructed between 1957 and 1962 and operating until ceasing generation in 2000. Hinkley Point B is an Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor (AGR) which was designed to generate 1250\u00a0MW of electricity (MWe). Construction of Hinkley Point B started in 1967. In September 2008 it was announced, by \u00c9lectricit\u00e9 de France (EDF), that a third, twin-unit European Pressurised Reactor (EPR) power station known as Hinkley Point C is planned, to replace Hinkley Point B which was due for closure in 2016, now extended until 2022.\nIn 1989 the Berkeley nuclear power station was the first in the UK to be decommissioned. The steam-generating heavy water reactor was developed at Winfrith in Dorset.\nTed Codd, inventor of databases and SQL, was from Poole. Campden BRI at Ebrington in north-east Gloucestershire was an important research centre for canned food; J. S. Fry &amp; Sons of Bristol made world's first chocolate bar in 1847.\nThe first carpets were made in Britain in 1741 at Wilton, Wiltshire. In 1698, Thomas Savery of Devon developed an early steam engine; Thomas Newcomen from Dartmouth made another early steam engine in 1710. Edward Butler, a farmer from Devon born in Bickington in 1862, invented the petrol engine.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2021 census, the population of the South West region was 5,701,186 \nIt has long been one of the fastest-growing regions in England and its 2021 population had increased by 7.8% since 2011 (when it was 5,288,935), and by 15.7% over the 2001 figure (4,928,434).\nAt the 2021 census, the proportion of white people in the region decreased from 95.4% to 93.1%, while the proportion of black and Asian residents increased significantly. At that time, 87.8% of the region's residents were classed as White British, which was higher than the England average of 73.5%.\nThe region had the oldest median age in England; in the 2011 census, West Somerset had the UK's oldest average age\u00a0\u2013 almost 48. The region had the second-highest proportion (23%) of rural population in the UK, after Northern Ireland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHousing.\n35% of people in the region own their homes outright, with no debt, the highest in the UK. The Cotswold district had the biggest house price increases in the region, and the second-biggest in the UK outside of London and the South-East, in a March 2015 survey. Weymouth and Portland has the highest council tax in England. West Somerset has the lowest average full-time pay at \u00a3287; West Somerset is also the district where poor children do much worse than wealthier children at school, with some of the worst differences in the UK, according to Ambition School Leadership.\nTeenage pregnancy.\nFor top-tier authorities, Torbay has the highest teenage pregnancy rate in the region, with Exeter the highest rate for council districts. For top-tier authorities, North Somerset (closely followed by Bath &amp; NE Somerset) has the lowest rate, with Cotswold having the lowest rate for council districts.\nHealth.\nThe population in the region with the highest obesity level is Sedgemoor in Somerset, with 73.4%, the fifth in the UK. North Dorset has the lowest proportion of cancer deaths in England \u2013 97 per 100,000 (the England average is 142 per 100,000), down from 162 ten years earlier.\nIn the 2011 census, East Dorset had the highest rate of marriage in the UK; East Dorset also has the third-highest life expectancy for men in the UK at 82.7.\nCrime.\nFor England and Wales in 2015, Wiltshire has the fourth-lowest crime rate, and Devon and Cornwall has the fifth-lowest.\nDeprivation.\nAs measured by the English Indices of Deprivation 2007, the region shows similarities with Southern England in having more Lower Layer Super Output Areas in the 20% least multiple deprived districts than the 20% most deprived. The relative amount of deprivation is similar to the East Midlands, except the South West has many fewer deprived areas. According to the LSOA data in 2007, the most deprived districts (before Cornwall became a unitary authority) were, in descending order: Bristol (64th in England), Torbay (71st), Plymouth (77th), Kerrier (86th), Restormel (89th), North Cornwall (96th), and West Somerset (106th). At county level, the deprived areas are City of Bristol (49th in England), Torbay (55th), Plymouth (58th), and Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly (69th).\nThe least deprived council districts are, in descending order: East Dorset, North Wiltshire, South Gloucestershire, Cotswold, Kennet, Stroud, Tewkesbury, West Wiltshire, Salisbury, and Bath and North East Somerset. At county level, the least deprived areas, in descending order, are South Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Bath and North East Somerset, Dorset, Gloucestershire, Poole, North Somerset, and Somerset. For smaller areas, the least-deprived in the region are E01015563 (139th in England) \u2013 Shaw and Nine Elms ward, in north Swindon; E01014791 (163rd in England) \u2013 Portishead East ward, in North Somerset off the A369 in Portishead and North Weston; E01020377 (184th in England) \u2013 Colehill East ward, in East Dorset, east of Wimborne Minster.\nIn March 2011, the region had the second-lowest unemployment claimant count in England, second to South East England, with 2.7%. Inside the region, Torbay has the highest rate with 4.5%, followed by Bristol and Plymouth with 3.8%. East Dorset has the lowest rate with 1.4%.\nLanguage.\nThe Cornish language evolved from the Southwestern dialect of the Brittonic language spoken during the Iron Age and Roman period. The area controlled by the Britons was progressively reduced by the expansion of Wessex after the 6th century, and in 936 Athelstan set the east bank of the Tamar as the boundary between Anglo-Saxon Wessex and Celtic Cornwall. The Cornish language continued to flourish during the Middle Ages but declined thereafter, and the last speaker of traditional Cornish died in the 19th century. Geographical names derived from the British language are widespread in South West England, and include several examples of the River Avon, from \"abon\u0101\" = \"river\" (cf. Welsh \"afon\"), and the words \"tor\" and \"combe\".\nUntil the 19th century, the West Country and its dialects of the English language were largely protected from outside influences, due to its relative geographical isolation. The West Country dialects derive not from a corrupted form of modern English, but from the Southwestern dialects of Middle English, which themselves derived from the dialects of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex. Late West Saxon, which formed the earliest English language standard, from the time of King Alfred until the late 11th century, is the form in which the majority of Anglo-Saxon texts are preserved. Thomas Spencer Baynes claimed in 1856 that, due to its position at the heart of the Kingdom of Wessex, the relics of Anglo-Saxon accent, idiom and vocabulary were best preserved in the Somerset dialect. There is some influence from the Welsh and Cornish languages, depending on the specific location.\nWest Country dialects are commonly represented as \"Mummerset\", a kind of catchall southern rural accent invented for broadcasting.\nEconomy and industry.\nThe most economically productive areas within the region are Bristol, the M4 corridor and south east Dorset, which are the areas with the best links to London. Bristol alone accounts for a quarter of the region's economy, with the surrounding areas of Gloucestershire, Somerset and Wiltshire accounting for a further quarter.\nBristol's economy has been built on maritime trade, including the import of tobacco and the slave trade. Since the early 20th century, however, aeronautics have taken over as the basis of Bristol's economy, with companies including Airbus UK, Rolls-Royce (military division) and BAE Systems (former Bristol Aeroplane Company then BAC) manufacturing in Filton. Defence Equipment &amp; Support is at MoD Abbey Wood. More recently defence, telecommunications, information technology and electronics have been important industries in Bristol, Swindon and elsewhere. The Driver &amp; Vehicle Standards Agency, the Soil Association, Clerical Medical, and Bristol Water are in Bristol; Indesit makes tumble dryers in Yate; HP and Infineon Technologies UK are at Stoke Gifford. Knorr-Bremse UK make air brakes in Emersons Green. The South West Observatory's Economy Module provides a detailed analysis of the region's economy.\nThe region's Gross value added (GVA) breaks down as 69.9% service industry, 28.1% production industry and 2.0% agriculture. This is a slightly higher proportion in production, and lower proportion in services, than the UK average. Agriculture, though in decline, is important in many parts of the region. Dairy farming is especially important in Dorset and Devon, and the region has 1.76\u00a0million cattle, second to only one other UK region, and of grassland, more than any other region. Only 5.6% of the region's agriculture is arable.\nTourism is important in the region, and in 2003 the tourist sector contributed \u00a34,928\u00a0million to the region's economy.\nIn 2001 the GVA of the hotel industry was \u00a32,200\u00a0million, and the region had 13,800 hotels with 250,000 bed spaces.\nThere are large differences in prosperity between the eastern parts of the region and the west. While Bristol is the second most affluent large city in England after London, parts of Cornwall have among the lowest average incomes in Northern Europe.\nThe region's Manufacturing Advisory Service is on the A38 north of Gloucester at Twigworth, and the UK Trade &amp; Investment office is at the Leigh Court Business Centre in Abbots Leigh, North Somerset.\nCornwall.\nMajor companies in Cornwall include Imerys who are major producers of kaolin. Rodda's make clotted cream near Scorrier, off the A30 east of Redruth. Fugro Seacore in Mongleath near Falmouth are leading offshore drilling contractors; Pendennis makes luxury yachts at Falmouth Docks. Kensa Heat Pumps are west of Truro. Cornish Country Larder, owned by Arla, make cheese (Cornish Brie) at Trevarrian on the B3276 in Mawgan-in-Pydar, north of Newquay Airport (former RAF St Mawgan).\nAllen &amp; Heath make mixing consoles in Penryn. Fourth Element (wet suits) are on the A3083 at Cury, south of RNAS Culdrose and Helston. A.P. Valves make diving equipment in Helston off the B3297 on Water-Ma-Trout Ind Estate, next to Helston Community College; Spiral Construction is the UK's leading manufacturer of spiral staircases.\nGul (clothing) (watersports clothing) are on Callywith Gate Ind Est in Cooksland Bodmin at the \nwestern end of the A38, on the north end of the Bodmin bypass; C-Skins (wetsuits) are on the Walker Lines Ind Est, south of Bodmin on the B3268; Fitzgerald Lighting are west of the Carminow Cross junction. GCHQ Bude is an important radar station in Morwenstow. On the other side of the river from Devonport is HMS Raleigh, off the A374 at Torpoint, home of the Royal Navy Submarine School (moved from HMS Dolphin in Gosport in 1999) and its Submarine Command Course; it provides all the training for the Royal Naval Reserve (RNR).\nCornwall has become reliant on tourism, more so than the other counties of the South West. In 2010 Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly had the lowest GVA per head of any county or unitary authority in England. It contributes only 7.4% of the region's economy and has received EU Convergence funding (formerly Objective One funding) since 2000. Over four million people visit the county each year. The reasons for Cornwall's poor economic performance are complex and apparently persistent, but causes include its remoteness and poor transport links, the decline of its traditional industries, such as mining, agriculture and fishing, the low-wealth generating capacity of tourism, relocation of higher skilled jobs to other parts of the South West, and lack of a concerted economic strategy (although use of European Regional Development Fund and European Social Fund monies have been deployed in an attempt at restructuring).\nDevon.\nThe Met Office is in Exeter, as are Pennon Group, the water company, Pedigree Dolls &amp; Toys (Sindy doll), and Thrifty Car Rental UK, which is at Ashton Business Centre in St Thomas on the A377 opposite the Exeter Retail Park. The airline Flybe was based at Exeter Airport until 2019; Plymouth City Airport closed in 2011. Chatham Marine clothing and footwear is off the B3123 on the Marsh Barton Trading Estate, near Alphington. Eclipse Internet and EDF Energy are in the same building south-east of the Met Office next to the M5; Stovax Group, who make wood and gas-burning stoves, are further south on Sowton Ind Est next to Alcoa Howmet UK, who make vacuum alloy airfoil castings for industrial gas turbines. DEFRA have a main site for Devon at Winslade Park, to the east at Clyst St Mary; nearby to the south on the A376 is the HQ of Devon &amp; Somerset Fire &amp; Rescue Service. Dormakaba UK, at Tiverton, are a world-leader in turnstiles, revolving doors and locks; Heathcoat Fabrics make the \"DecelAir\" fabric for parachutes. Taw Valley cheese is made by Arla Foods UK (former Milk Link) at North Tawton off the A3124, also the HQ of Gregory Distribution.\nXYZ Machine Tools is off the A38 close to the M5 bridge in Burlescombe near the Somerset boundary. The Donkey Sanctuary is in Sidmouth. Axminster Carpets makes carpets for every Wetherspoons pub.\nAppledore Shipbuilders are based at Appledore, Torridge, Devon, three miles north of Bideford, who built sections of the Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers. Parker Hannifin have their instrumentation division next to the Taw Bridge (A361) at Pottington in Barnstaple; CQC makes personal equipment and Osprey body armour; off the A361 towards Barnstaple, is a chipboard (Conti and Caberboard) plant of Norbord. Next to Royal Marines Base Chivenor, Perrigo makes Germolene and own-label OTC medicines at the Wrafton Laboratories in Heanton Punchardon on the A361. Actavis UK (former Cox Pharmaceuticals, part of Hoechst AG), off the A361 east of Barnstaple, make levothyroxine and other thyroid hormones. Dartington Crystal in Torrington makes Royal Brierley. Pall Europe make filtration products in Ilfracombe.\nAll Ambrosia (former Unilever) products are made at the Ambrosia Creamery in Lifton, off the A30 on the River Lyd. Parkham Farms make Westcountry Farmhouse Cheddar at Woolfardisworthy, Torridge. SC Group (Supacat) at Dunkeswell Aerodrome, north of Honiton, make protective vehicles for the Army, notably the Jackal; these vehicles are also made in Plymouth by Babcock International formerly Devonport Management Limited (DML); Oceanic Worldwide UK makes scuba diving gear. Quested make high-end loudspeakers on Heathpark Ind Est, west of Honiton, next to the railway.\nCentrax make industrial gas turbines in Newton Abbot; to the north-west, on the A38 at the A382 junction at Heathfield in Bovey Tracey, British Ceramic Tile have the largest ceramic tile plant in Europe. Suttons Seeds is in Paignton; AVX, off the A3022, was a worldwide site for tantalum capacitors, until the company moved production to the Czech Republic in 2009. Britannia Royal Naval College is at Dartmouth.\nHMNB Devonport (HMS Drake, the largest naval base in western Europe) is in Plymouth. Toshiba had a large presence in Ernesettle, in the north of Plymouth, which was the second-largest employer after the Royal Navy, until they moved production of televisions to Kobierzyce in Poland in 2009; it made its last television at the site on 27 August 2009; Vispring (beds) is next to Kawasaki Precision Machinery. Snowbee make fishing tackle. The headquarters of the UK Commando Force is at Stonehouse Barracks. The Range (home and leisure) is on the B3432 in Estover east of Plymouth Airport; opposite is Fine Tubes and further east Barden make ball-bearings for the aerospace industry; on the furthest east of the industrial estate is Wrigley Company UK; its \"Extra\" brand is the second best-selling confectionery in the UK after \"Dairy Milk\".\nX-Fab UK (semiconductor fabrication plant, former Plessey Semiconductors) is next to the A386 Bickleigh Cross roundabout; nearby BD have a large plant making medical vacutainers (for blood samples) on Belliver Way Ind Est in the north of Plymouth; south of BD off the B3373 in Southway is Silicon Sensing Systems (who make vibrating structure gyroscopes and are owned by UTC Aerospace Systems, previously BAE Systems, and BAe Dynamics, who had made nose cones for aircraft including Concorde), and Schneider Electric UK (Drayton Controls, market-leading thermostatic radiator valves for central heating, previously owned by Invensys Controls UK).\nHemerdon Mine, east of Plymouth, has one of the largest deposits of tungsten in the world. Wills Marine make motor inflatable boats off the A379 in Kingsbridge.\nDorset.\nNew Look is in Weymouth; it is Britain's second-biggest value clothing retailer, with over 800 stores in 21 countries. Wytch Farm (BP) is the UK's largest onshore oil field. Meggitt is a leading aerospace and defence contractor, based west of Bournemouth Airport, with Hobbycraft, at a former BAC works in Hurn, close to West Parley. The Royal Armoured Corps is based at Bovington Camp, and next door is the Bovington Tank Museum; the Army has three armoured regiments (Royal Dragoon Guards, Royal Tank Regiment and King's Royal Hussars) and 227 FV4034 70-tonne Challenger 2 tanks; Germany has around 1,000 tanks and Russia has 3,300. Westwind Air Bearings (owned by Novanta) is off the A352 at Wareham St Martin, west of Poole, near Holton Heath railway station, with Mathmos (lighting), founded by Edward Craven Walker who invented the lava lamp.\nTata Consultancy Services (former Unisys Insurance Services before 2010) is in Bournemouth. Imagine Publishing, a magazine publisher, with The Mortgage Works (owned by Nationwide Building Society), is at the A35/A347 Richmond Hill Roundabout; Organix is in the centre; McCarthy &amp; Stone, who make much of Britain's retirement housing, is on the B3066. LV= (insurance) is at Frizzell House at Westbourne at the County Gates Gyratory A35/A338 roundabout. JPMorgan Chase have their large Chaseside site at the A3060/A338 junction opposite the Royal Bournemouth Hospital, RIAS (insurance) and Teachers Assurance, towards Holdenhurst.\nMerlin Entertainments (who own Sea Life Centres, and are the world's second largest theme park operator after Disney) is in Poole with a former division, Aquarium Technology, at the end of the A350 near the Twin Sails bridge. Ryvita is made in Parkstone on the B3061. Fitness First, the largest privately owned health club group in the world, originated in Bournemouth and is now globally headquartered south of Fleet's Corner. Siemens Traffic Controls make most of the UK's traffic lights west near Fleet's Corner; the main traffic light in the UK is the Siemens Helios (the other make is the Peek Elite). North of Fleets Lane, south of the Wessex Gate Retail Park, is Parvalux, on the A3049 on the West Howe Ind Estate in Wallisdown, which makes geared DC electric motors and gearboxes; further south is Faerch Plast (former Sealed Air, which makes trays for food) then Fitness First, and Aeronautical &amp; General Instruments; further north is Lush, the cosmetics company, with Hamworthy W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4 (Finnish), and Hamworthy Combustion (owned by Koch Industries), at the A349/A3049 junction in Fleetsbridge, is an international engineering consultancy.\nSunseeker International is a main motor yacht manufacturer; it made the boat in the opening sequence of \"The World Is Not Enough\". The Special Boat Service is based at RM Poole, home of the Navy's amphibious warfare section, off the B3068 at Hamworthy in the west of Poole. Tangerine Confectionery (former Parrs) made gums and jellies on the Redlands Trading Estate off the A3040 near Branksome railway station to the east. Aish Technologies makes console (display) systems for the Royal Navy off B3068 in Alderney.\nCobham plc, in Wimborne Minster towards Leigh, is a world-leader in air-to-air refuelling, developed by Alan Cobham at RAF Tarrant Rushton, and aircraft antennas. Durable UK (office products) is in Wimborne; Caterpillar's Wimborne Marine Power Centre make Perkins Sabre marine diesel generators on Ferndown Ind Est off the A31; to the south is the paint manufacturer Farrow &amp; Ball in Hampreston and Stapehill, in Ferndown. Manitou UK, owner of the American Gehl Company and from Nanterre in France, is based at Verwood on the Ebblake Ind Est off the B3081 near the Hampshire boundary. Sigma-Aldrich UK (pharmaceuticals) are off the B3092 on Brickfield Business Park in Gillingham, next to the River Stour and railway. Cygnus Instruments, on the B3144 in Dorchester, is the leading manufacturer of ultrasonic thickness gauges, developing the technique in the early 1980s. Edwards Sports Products of Bridport, owned by Broxap of Staffordshire, make football goals for the Premier League, and tennis nets and posts for Wimbledon.\nGloucestershire.\nIn Cheltenham are Endsleigh Insurance in Shurdington, Kohler Mira Ltd (showers), Superdry (clothing), Collins Geo (maps), and Chelsea Building Society are on the A435 to the south-east. North of Cheltenham at Bishop's Cleeve, south of the village on the A435, is GE Aviation Systems UK on the large Cleeve Business Park; this which was the former 300-acre site of the Cheltenham Division of Smiths Industries that made flight control systems and flight deck displays; further up the A435 is a main site of Zurich Assurance UK. Weird Fish (clothing) is near Spirax-Sarco Engineering plc (pumps) off the A4019 in Kingsditch in Swindon Village, north of Cheltenham; on the other side of the A4019, Douglas Equipment, next to All Saints' Academy, Cheltenham, makes towing tractors for aircraft. Gulf Oil UK was headquartered on B4075 in Prestbury (near the racecourse) until 1997, when Shell UK bought its petrol stations; the former headquarters became a student hall of the University of Gloucestershire.\nComputer security firm Symantec have a site in Gloucester, the base of Ecclesiastical Insurance. Dowty Rotol (who make propellers) and Bond Aviation Group (helicopter leasing) are next to Gloucestershire Airport at Staverton; Helimedia is the UK distributor of the L-3 Wescam, the Canadian thermal imaging system found with many UK police air support units and air ambulances. The Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester bank was Barnwood (north Gloucester), next to Unilever's manufacturing site for Wall's ice cream at the A417/A38 roundabout next to the railway; on other side of the railway in Elmbridge is Lanes Health who make Olbas Oil and Kalms; to the south, EDF Energy (former British Energy) have their nuclear energy engineering centre with Horizon Nuclear Power. Between the former C&amp;G and EDF at Barnwood, Barclays' data centre services all of its ATMs in the south of England.\nMoog Controls UK, on the Ashchurch Ind Estate by Ashchurch for Tewkesbury near junction 9 (A46) of the M5, make servo valves for the aerospace industry (flight control systems or AFCS), in Northway; also on the estate is Steinhoff UK, who own Sleepmasters and Bensons for Beds. Floortex (floor coverings) is on Tewkesbury Business Park, west of the M5 south of Duraflex. Near the M5 Ashchurch Interchange off the A438, RR Donnelley GDS print Barclaycard statements. The Colt Car Company UK (who distribute Mitsubishi Motors) are in Cirencester, and Corin Group make artificial joints on the A429 near the Royal Agricultural University.\nThe Stroud &amp; Swindon Building Society and Ecotricity are in Stroud near Stroud station. WSP Textiles (a former division of Milliken) on the A46 towards Rodborough in the south of Stroud make felt for billiard tables (Strachan cloth), and for tennis balls for three Grand Slam tournaments (Playne's tennis ball cloth). Dairy Crest makes Frijj milkshake at its large dairy at Severnside on the Stroudwater Business Park at Stonehouse next to the M5, within walking distance of Stonehouse station; nearby ReedHycalog (owned by National Oilwell Varco) make industrial drill bits off the A419 on the Oldends Ind Est, near ABB UK, who make flow meters; Delphi Diesel Systems UK, on the business park, make electronic unit injectors; Renishaw plc have large machining centre on north of the business park; SKF (Swedish) make ball bearings (Aeroengine &amp; High Precision Bearings Division, for Rolls-Royce) to the south of the estate (former Ransome Hoffmann Pollard), then NSK until 2002); the company has another site at Clevedon in Somerset.\nBeverage Brands is based at Hucclecote on the Gloucester Business Park off B4641 east of the M5 Brockworth Interchange, with Horizon Nuclear Power, and next to NHS Gloucestershire); in the same building is MessageLabs (Symantec), and a main office of Ageas UK (insurance). Further south in Brockworth is Direct Wines (Laithwaites); to the east is a G-TEKT (former Takao Europe) automotive metal pressings and sub-assemblies factory and a large Invista textiles factory (former ICI Fibres, then Dupont from 1992, which makes nylon fibres);\nthe site is built on the former Gloster Aircraft factory, which closed around 1960. Renishaw plc is in Wotton-under-Edge, previously being in Nailsworth. Lister Petter, off the A4135 in Dursley, make diesel engine generator sets; Lister Shearing is the only British manufacturer of clipping and shearing (animals) equipment. The Fire Service College is in Moreton-in-Marsh near Moreton-in-Marsh station. Northcot Brick is at Blockley, in the north-east, next to the railway; Per Una is based near Draycott.\nMabey Group, off the A48 at Lydney make wind turbine towers; on the other side of the A48, Federal-Mogul have a foundry making camshafts. Suntory (Japanese) makes Lucozade (from 1957) and Ribena (from 1947) at the Royal Forest Factory off the B4228 in Coleford in the Forest of Dean; William Horlick, originator of another well-known former GSK product, was born in the Forest of Dean in 1846.\nSomerset.\nScrewfix is in Yeovil, and Clarks shoes with K-Swiss Europe are in Street, although most of its shoes are made in the Far East. Shepton Mallet is home of Blackthorn Cider and the Gaymer Cider Company. Dairy Crest packs Cathedral City cheese in Frome. The Glastonbury Festival at Pilton (nearer to Shepton Mallet than Glastonbury), off the A361, is the UK's biggest music festival.\nThe Royal Marines have a large base for 40 Commando west of Taunton, with their training centre at Lympstone Commando in Devon, on the Avocet Line with its own station of Lympstone and the A376 and River Exe. Attentional in Taunton deliver audience figures for BARB. DS Smith's Wansbrough Paper Mill at Watchet on the coast is the UK's largest manufacturer of coreboard. Fletcher Boats make speedboats in Langport. TePe UK (Swedish) supply toothbrushes.\nThales Defence closed its radar site (former EMI Electronics) near Wookey Hole, in St Cuthbert Out. Thales Underwater Systems (former Plessey Marine) is at Abbas and Templecombe, Somerset, off the A357 towards Dorset in the Blackmore Vale, east of Yeovil. Commando Helicopter Force at Yeovilton operates Merlins and Wildcats (the upgraded version of the Lynx). Mulberry is based at Chilcompton on the B3139, north of Shepton Mallet, in the Mendips. Cox &amp; Cox furnishings, is north of Frome in Berkley, Somerset off the A361. Fox Brothers make cloth in Wellington, and Relyon (part of Steinhoff International) make beds.\nItalian defence contractor Leonardo makes helicopters at Yeovil, formerly the home of Westland Helicopters, building the AgustaWestland AW159 Wildcat. To the east of Yeovil, in Houndstone, Garador make garage doors (part of H\u00f6rmann Group of Amshausen, Europe's largest mechanical door manufacturer). Yeo Valley Organic is in Blagdon. Numatic International Limited makes vacuum cleaners in Chard, and Brecknell Willis, a railway engineering company on the A30, makes pantographs; ActionAid UK is in the Chard Business Centre, off the A358 in the north of Chard, near a centrifugal oil filter plant of Mann+Hummel. Dairy Crest made brandy butter south of the town in Tatworth and Forton, near the meeting point of Dorset, Somerset and Devon. Ministry of Cake, owned by Greencore since December 2007 on the A3065 in Staplegrove in the west of Taunton, is the leading provider of frozen desserts to the UK foodservice industry. The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office is in Taunton. Pilgrims Choice cheddar is made by Adams Foods (former North Downs Dairy) at Wincanton. Ariel Motor Company in Crewkerne, make the Ariel Atom.\nRefresco Gerber in the north of Bridgwater, between the A38 and the River Parrett, make SunnyD, Libby's, Innocent Drinks, Del Monte, Just Juice and Ocean Spray.\nNext to the Royal Portbury Dock, off junction 19 of the M5 on the A369 is Lafarge Plasterboard. Thatchers Cider is in Sandford, North Somerset on the A368, two miles east of the M5. Towards Bristol Airport, Claverham make actuation equipment for the aerospace sector in Yatton in North Somerset, off the A370, and is part of Hamilton Sundstrand, derived from the electrical systems part of Fairey Aviation.\nWessex Water, Future plc, Buro Happold and Rotork are in Bath. Cadbury used to make \"Curly Wurly\", \"Double Decker\" and \"Crunchie\" at the Somerdale Factory, Keynsham until Kraft closed the plant in March 2011 and moved production to Skarbimierz, Opole Voivodeship in Poland.\nWiltshire.\nNationwide Building Society, Research Councils UK and five research councils, Intel Europe, and the British Computer Society are in Swindon, as are the main offices of Historic England and the National Trust, both housed in the former Great Western Railway's Swindon Works. Allied Dunbar was headquartered in the centre of Swindon until 1998, when bought by Zurich Financial Services. In Stratton St Margaret, BMW press metal for the Mini at the former Pressed Steel Company, there is a major Honda manufacturing plant (in South Marston) where the Jazz, Civic and CR-V are manufactured at Britain's second-largest car manufacturing plant; nearby are Zimmer UK (medical devices) and Yuasa UK (automotive batteries).\nThe headquarters of WHSmith, with Smiths News, is near the School Library Association, west of the MINI works in Upper Stratton. Valero Energy UK, who bought Texaco from Chevron in 2011, are in Eldene, in the former head office of St Ivel; Patheon UK (pharmaceuticals, on the former site of Roussel Uclaf) are on the B4006 in Covingham, north of Valero, in the east of Swindon. BG Automotive, on the Cheney Manor industrial estate, make gaskets on the B4006 in Rodbourne; Dynamatic UK are in a former Plessey factory. Burmah Oil was headquartered in the south of Swindon; Burmah bought Castrol in 1966 (owned by BP from 2000). Stanley Security (former Amano Blick) is on the Techno trading estate, north of the town centre.\nNear the M4 Spittleborough Roundabout, close to Freshbrook, are Synergy Health and RWE npower; also on the Windmill Hill Business park are Arval (vehicle leasing and fuel cards), and Allstar (fuel card); also nearby are Cartus Europe, Catalent Pharma Solutions UK and MAN Truck &amp; Bus UK (with Neoplan and ERF); further east is WRc (the former Water Research Centre). Nearby on Lydiard Fields in Lydiard Tregoze is Johnson Matthey Fuel Cells, which in 2002 was the world's first production site of membrane electrode assemblies, and next door is Neptune, who make furniture and kitchens; also BuildStore have their National Self Build &amp; Renovation Centre. Sauer-Danfoss UK provide hydraulics off the A419 in Dorcan, and nearby is TE Connectivity UK (former Tyco Electronics and Raychem). The British &amp; Foreign Bible Society is on the Delta Business Park in Westlea, near Intergraph UK (geospatial software, owned by Hexagon AB) on the other side of Westmead industrial estate, with Metric Group, the only UK manufacturer of parking meters. Triumph International UK is in Blunsdon St Andrew.\nDyson is in Malmesbury, north of the M4. Cotswold Outdoor (recommended supplier to the DofE Award and the Scout Association) is based at the Cotswold Airport near the Gloucestershire boundary, south of Cirencester.\nTrowbridge has Apetito UK, Wiltshire Farm Foods, Danone UK and their subsidiary Numico. Cereal Partners make Shredded Wheat and Shreddies at Staverton, near Trowbridge. In Devizes is the Wadworth Brewery. Salisbury Cathedral in Salisbury attracts many tourists. Rockhopper Exploration is in the town and Naim Audio make hi-fi equipment. Nearby, Dstl is at Porton Down. Knorr-Bremse Rail Systems UK (formerly Westinghouse) make railway air brakes in Bowerhill just south of Melksham and nearby are the headquarters of Avon Rubber and Herman Miller UK, a maker of office furniture. Chippenham has the HQ of Wincanton plc, the large logistics company, Invensys Rail Group (formerly Westinghouse Rail Systems) who make rail signalling equipment, and the software company SCISYS.\nIn the centre of the county are many military establishments, notably MoD Boscombe Down, the training sites on Salisbury Plain and at MoD Lyneham, and the army bases around Tidworth, Larkhill (home of the Royal School of Artillery) and Warminster (HQ of the Infantry).\nSubdivisions.\nThe region covers much of the historical area of Wessex (omitting only Hampshire and Berkshire), and all of the Celtic Kingdom of Dumnonia which comprised Cornwall, Devon, and parts of Somerset and Dorset. In terms of local government, it was divided after 1974 into Avon, Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Gloucestershire, Somerset, and Wiltshire. Avon has since been abolished, and several mainly urban areas have become unitary authorities.\nLocal government.\nThe official region consists of the following geographic counties and local government areas:\nEurostat NUTS.\nIn the Eurostat Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), South West England is a level-1 NUTS region, coded \"UKK\", which is subdivided as follows:\nSouth West Regional Assembly.\nAlthough referendums had been planned on whether elected assemblies should be set up in some of the regions, none was planned in the South West. The South West Regional Assembly (SWRA) was the regional assembly for the South West region, established in 1999. It was based in Exeter and Taunton. The SWRA was a partnership of councillors from all local authorities in the region and representatives of various sectors with a role in the region's economic, social and environmental well-being. There was much opposition to the formation of the SWRA with critics saying it was an unelected unrepresentative and unaccountable \"quango\". The Regional Assembly was wound up in May 2009, and its functions taken on by the Strategic Leaders' Board (SLB) of South West Councils.\nPolitics.\nAs of the 2024 United Kingdom general election, The South West contains 58 seats in the House of Commons. Labour hold 24 seats, The Liberal Democrats hold 22 seats, The Conservatives hold 11 seats and The Greens hold 1 seat.\nEducation.\nSecondary education.\nThe South West has a below average rate of attainment in GCSE (and equivalent) examinations, with the lowest regional performance in England from 2009 to 2012. In 2012, South Hams had the highest percentage of pupils achieving 5 or more GCSEs at grade A*-C at 86%, whilst Purbeck had the lowest at 70%.\nThe region has an above average rate of attainment in A-Level (and equivalent) examinations, having outperformed the West Midlands, East Midlands, North East and London in 2012.\nFurther education.\nThere are around 29 further education colleges in the region.\nHigher education.\nThere are twelve universities in the region:\nThere are also four higher education colleges. The region has the lowest number of people registered on higher education courses at FE colleges.\nThe University of Bristol receives the most total funding, according to Higher Education Funding Council for England figures for the 2006/2007 academic year, and the largest research grant\u2014twice as big as any other in the region. Bath has the next largest research grant, closely followed by Exeter. UWE and Plymouth get small research grants, but no other universities in the region receive much of a research grant. The University of Plymouth has the largest teaching grant.\nOf the region's students (postgraduate and undergraduate), 50% are from the region, and around 40% from other regions. For full-time first degree students, 35% come from the region, around 22% are from South East England, and 8% are from London. Including the East of England, around 70% are from Southern England. 10% are from the Midlands, and 5% from Northern England. The main access for students from the north is the Cross Country Route. Around 33% of native South West students stay in the region, with 18% going to the South East (around 60% stay in the south of England). Around 14% go to Wales, but very few go to the East of England. Access by road or rail to the East of England region is not straightforward, with around the same amount of travel as to Scotland. Many more native South West students are prepared to go to the north of England, than northern students are prepared to study in the South West. Once graduated, around 50% stay in the region, with 15% each going to London or the South East (around 80% find work in the south of England). Very few go elsewhere (especially the north of England); around 4% go to the West Midlands or Wales.\nLocal media.\nTelevision.\nParts of Wiltshire and Dorset, including the Salisbury, Bournemouth, Poole, Dorchester and Weymouth areas, receive BBC South and ITV Meridian from Southampton.\nRadio.\nBBC Local Radio services in the region include Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Bristol, Wiltshire, and Gloucestershire, along with BBC Radio Solent's partial opt-out service for Dorset.\nCommercial radio stations include:\nNational radio is transmitted from North Hessary Tor (west Devon) and Wenvoe (west of Cardiff).\nNewspapers.\nRegional newspapers include the Bath Chronicle, Bristol Post, Western Daily Press, the Dorset Echo, the Exeter Express and Echo, Western Morning News, the North Devon Journal, Cornish Guardian, The West Briton (Truro), The Cornishman, Wiltshire Times (Trowbridge), Gazette and Herald (North &amp; West Wiltshire), Gloucestershire Echo, Gloucester Citizen, Plymouth Herald, Torquay Herald Express, Swindon Advertiser and the Salisbury Journal.\nSport.\nRugby.\nIn rugby union, the region has four Premiership Rugby teams: Bath Rugby, Bristol Bears, Exeter Chiefs and Gloucester Rugby.\nIn rugby league, the region has one club, Cornwall RLFC, playing in RFL League 1.\nFootball.\nAs of the 2025\u201326 season, Bournemouth competes in Premier League, Bristol City competes in EFL Championship, Plymouth Argyle and Exeter City compete in EFL League One, Swindon Town, Bristol Rovers and Cheltenham Town compete in EFL League Two, Forest Green Rovers and Truro City compete in National League and Torquay United competes in National League South.\nOther teams play in the South divisions of the Southern League, at levels 7 and 8 of the league system. At levels 9 and 10, the Western League covers the whole region except the most eastern parts, while the Hellenic League extends into Gloucestershire and north Wiltshire, and the Wessex League has teams from east Dorset and south Wiltshire. Also at level 10, the South West Peninsula League has teams from Cornwall and Devon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52945", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52945", "title": "Plymouth (disambiguation)", "text": "Plymouth is a city in Devon, England.\nPlymouth may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52946", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52946", "title": "Christopher Wren", "text": "English architect (1632\u20131723)\nSir Christopher Wren (; 30 October 1632 [O.S. 20 October] \u2013 8 March 1723 [O.S. 25 February]) was an English architect, astronomer, mathematician and physicist who is one of the most highly acclaimed architects in the history of England. Known for his work in the English Baroque style, he was accorded responsibility for rebuilding 52 churches in the City of London after the Great Fire in 1666, including what is regarded as his masterpiece, St Paul's Cathedral, on Ludgate Hill, completed in 1710.\nThe principal creative responsibility for a number of the churches is now more commonly attributed to others in his office, especially Nicholas Hawksmoor. Other notable buildings by Wren include the Royal Hospital Chelsea, the Old Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and the south front of Hampton Court Palace. Educated in Latin and Aristotelian physics at the University of Oxford, Wren was a founder of the Royal Society and served as its president from 1680 to 1682. His scientific work was highly regarded by Isaac Newton and Blaise Pascal.\nLife and works.\nWren was born in East Knoyle in Wiltshire, the only surviving son of Christopher Wren the Elder and Mary Cox, the only child of the Wiltshire squire Robert Cox from Fonthill Bishop. Christopher Sr. was, at that time, the rector of East Knoyle and, later, Dean of Windsor. It was while they were living at East Knoyle that all their children were born; Mary, Catherine and Susan were all born by 1628, but then several children who were born died within a few weeks of their birth. Christopher was born in 1632. Then, two years later, another daughter named Elizabeth was born. Mary must have died shortly after the birth of Elizabeth, although there does not appear to be any surviving record of the date. Through Mary Cox, however, the family became well off financially for, as the only heir, she had inherited her father's estate.\nAs a child Wren \"seem'd consumptive\". Although a sickly child, he would survive into robust old age. He was first taught at home by a private tutor and his father. After his father's royal appointment as Dean of Windsor in March 1635, his family spent part of each year there, but little is known about Wren's life at Windsor. He spent his first eight years at East Knoyle and was educated by the Rev. William Shepherd, a local clergyman.\nLittle is known of Wren's schooling thereafter, during dangerous times when his father's Royal associations would have required the family to keep a very low profile from the ruling Parliamentary authorities. It was a tough time in his life, but one which would go on to have a significant impact upon his later works. The story that he was at Westminster School between 1641 and 1646 is substantiated only by \"Parentalia\", the biography compiled by his son, a fourth Christopher, which places him there \"for some short time\" before going up to Oxford (in 1650); however, it is entirely consistent with headmaster Doctor Busby's well-documented practice of educating the sons of impoverished Royalists and Puritans alike, irrespective of current politics or his own position.\nSome of Wren's youthful exercises preserved or recorded (though few are datable) showed that he received a thorough grounding in Latin and also learned to draw. According to \"Parentalia\", he was \"initiated\" in the principles of mathematics by William Holder, who married Wren's elder sister Susan (or Susanna) in 1643. His drawing was put to academic use in providing many of the anatomical drawings for the anatomy textbook of the brain, \"Cerebri Anatome\" (1664), published by Thomas Willis, who coined the term \"neurology\". During this time period, Wren became interested in the design and construction of mechanical instruments. It was probably through Holder that Wren met Sir Charles Scarburgh whom Wren assisted in his anatomical studies.\nAnother sister Anne Brunsell, married a clergyman and is buried in Stretham.\nOn 25 June 1650, Wren entered Wadham College, Oxford, where he studied Latin and the works of Aristotle. It is anachronistic to imagine that he received scientific training in the modern sense. However, Wren became closely associated with John Wilkins, the Warden of Wadham. The Wilkins circle was a group whose activities led to the formation of the Royal Society, comprising a number of distinguished mathematicians, creative workers and experimental philosophers. This connection probably influenced Wren's studies of science and mathematics at Oxford. He graduated B.A. in 1651, and two years later received M.A.\n1653\u20131664.\nAfter receiving his M.A. in 1653, Wren was elected a fellow of All Souls' College in the same year and began an active period of research and experiment in Oxford. Among these were a number of physiological experiments on dogs, including one now recognized as the first injection of fluids into the bloodstream of a live animal under laboratory conditions. At Oxford he became part of the group around John Wilkins, he was key to the correspondence network known as the Invisible College, Within the arms of All Souls, the arms of Wren's friend Robert Boyle appear in the colonnade of the Great Quadrangle, opposite the arms of the Hill family of Shropshire, close by a sundial designed by Boyle's friend Wren.\nHis days as a fellow of All Souls ended when Wren was appointed Professor of Astronomy at Gresham College, London, in 1657. He was there provided with a set of rooms and a stipend and required to give weekly lectures in both Latin and English. Wren took up this new work with enthusiasm. He continued to meet the men with whom he had frequent discussions in Oxford. They attended his London lectures and in 1660, initiated formal weekly meetings. It was from these meetings that the Royal Society, England's premier scientific body, was to develop. He undoubtedly played a major role in the early life of what would become the Royal Society; his great breadth of expertise in so many different subjects helped in the exchange of ideas between the various scientists. In fact, the report on one of these meetings reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Memorandum November 28, 1660. These persons following according to the usual custom of most of them, met together at Gresham College to hear Mr Wren's lecture, viz. The Lord Brouncker, Mr Boyle, Mr Bruce, Sir Robert Moray, Sir Paule Neile, Dr Wilkins, Dr Goddard, Dr Petty, Mr Ball, Mr Rooke, Mr Wren, Mr Hill. And after the lecture was ended they did according to the usual manner, withdraw for mutual converse.\nIn 1662, they proposed a society \"for the promotion of Physico-Mathematicall Experimental Learning\". This body received its Royal Charter from Charles II and \"The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge\" was formed. In addition to being a founder member of the Society, Wren was president of the Royal Society from 1680 to 1682.\nIn 1661, Wren was elected Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, and in 1669 he was appointed Surveyor of Works to Charles II. From 1661 until 1668 Wren's life was based in Oxford, although his attendance at meetings of the Royal Society meant that he had to make periodic trips to London.\nThe main sources for Wren's scientific achievements are the records of the Royal Society. His scientific works ranged from astronomy, optics, the problem of finding longitude at sea, cosmology, mechanics, microscopy, surveying, medicine and meteorology. He observed, measured, dissected, built models and employed, invented and improved a variety of instruments.\n1665\u20131723.\nIt was probably around this time that Christopher Wren was drawn into redesigning a battered St Paul's Cathedral. Making a trip to Paris in 1665, Wren studied architecture, which had reached a climax of creativity, and perused the drawings of Bernini, the great Italian sculptor and architect, who himself was visiting Paris at the time. Returning from Paris, he made his first design for St Paul's. A week later, however, the Great Fire destroyed two-thirds of the city. Wren submitted his plans for rebuilding the city to King Charles II, although they were never adopted. With his appointment as King's Surveyor of Works in 1669, he had a presence in the general process of rebuilding the city, but was not directly involved with the rebuilding of houses or companies' halls. Instead, Wren was personally responsible for the rebuilding of 51 churches; however, it is not necessarily true to say that each of them represented his own fully developed design.\nWren was knighted on 14 November 1673. This honour was bestowed on him after his resignation from the Savilian chair in Oxford, by which time he had already begun to make his mark as an architect, both in services to the Crown and in playing an important part in rebuilding London after the Great Fire.\nAdditionally, he was sufficiently active in public affairs to be returned as Member of Parliament on four occasions. Wren first stood for Parliament in a by-election in 1667 for the Cambridge University constituency, losing by six votes to Sir Charles Wheler. He was unsuccessful again in a by-election for the Oxford University constituency in 1674, losing to Thomas Thynne. At his third attempt Wren was successful, and he sat for Plympton Erle during the Loyal Parliament of 1685 to 1687. Wren was returned for New Windsor on 11 January 1689 in the general election, but his election was declared void on 14 May 1689. He was elected again for New Windsor on 6 March 1690, but this election was declared void on 17 May 1690. Over a decade later he was elected unopposed for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis at the November 1701 general election. He retired at the general election the following year.\nMarriage to Faith Coghill Wren.\nWren's career was well established by 1669, and it may have been his appointment as Surveyor of the King's Works early that year that persuaded him that he could finally afford to marry. In 1669, the 37-year-old Wren married his childhood neighbour, the 33-year-old Faith Coghill, daughter of Sir John Coghill of Bletchingdon. Little is known of Faith, but a love letter from Wren survives, which reads, in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have sent your Watch at last &amp; envy the felicity of it, that it should be soe near your side &amp; soe often enjoy your Eye.\u00a0... .but have a care for it, for I have put such a spell into it; that every Beating of the Balance will tell you 'tis the Pulse of my Heart, which labors as much to serve you and more trewly than the Watch; for the Watch I beleeve will sometimes lie, and sometimes be idle &amp; unwilling\u00a0... but as for me you may be confident I shall never\u00a0...\nThis brief marriage produced two children: Gilbert, born October 1672, who suffered from convulsions and died at about 18 months old, and Christopher, born February 1675. The younger Christopher was trained by his father to be an architect. It was this Christopher that supervised the topping out ceremony of St Paul's in 1710 and wrote the famous \"Parentalia, or, Memoirs of the family of the Wrens\". Faith Wren died of smallpox on 3 September 1675. She was buried in the chancel of St Martin-in-the-Fields beside the infant Gilbert. A few days later Wren's mother-in-law, Lady Coghill, arrived to take the infant Christopher back with her to Oxfordshire to raise.\nMarriage to Jane Fitzwilliam.\nIn 1677, 17 months after the death of his first wife, Wren remarried, this time to Jane Fitzwilliam, daughter of William FitzWilliam, 2nd Baron FitzWilliam, and his wife Jane Perry, the daughter of a prosperous London merchant.\nShe was a mystery to Wren's friends and companions. Robert Hooke, who often saw Wren two or three times every week, had, as he recorded in his diary, never even heard of her, and was not to meet her till six weeks after the marriage. As with the first marriage, this too produced two children: a daughter Jane (1677\u20131702); and a son William, \"Poor Billy\" born June 1679, who was reportedly handicapped in some way and it is also known that he never married.\nLike the first, this second marriage was also brief. Jane Wren is believed to have died of tuberculosis in September 1680 although this cannot be confirmed. She was buried alongside Faith and Gilbert in the chancel of St Martin-in-the-Fields. Wren was never to marry again; he lived to be over 90 years old and of those years was married only twice.\nBletchingdon was the home of Wren's brother-in-law William Holder, who was rector of the local church. Holder had been a Fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford. An intellectual of considerable ability, he is said to have been the figure who introduced Wren to arithmetic and geometry.\nWren's later life was not without criticisms and attacks on his competence and his taste. In 1712, the \"Letter Concerning Design\" of Anthony Ashley Cooper, third Earl of Shaftesbury, circulated in manuscript. Proposing a new British style of architecture, Shaftesbury censured Wren's cathedral, his taste and his long-standing control of royal works. Although Wren was appointed to the Fifty New Churches Commission in 1711, he was left only with nominal charge of a board of works when the surveyorship started in 1715. On 26 April 1718, on the pretext of failing powers, he was dismissed in favour of William Benson.\nIn 1713, he bought the manor of Wroxall, Warwickshire, from the Burgoyne family, to which his son Christopher retired in 1716 after losing his post as Clerk of Works. Several of Wren's descendants would be buried there in the Church of St Leonard.\nDeath.\nThe Wren family estate was at The Old Court House in the area of Hampton Court. He had been given a lease on the property by Queen Anne in lieu of salary arrears for building St Paul's. For convenience Wren also leased a house on St James's Street in London. According to a 19th-century legend, he would often go to London to pay unofficial visits to St Paul's, to check on the progress of \"my greatest work\". On one of these trips to London, at the age of ninety, he caught a cold and on 25 February 1723 a servant who tried to awaken Wren from his nap found that he had died in his sleep.\nWren was laid to rest on 5 March 1723. His body was placed in the southeast corner of the crypt of St Paul's. There is a memorial to him in the crypt at St Paul's Cathedral. beside those of his daughter Jane, his sister Susan Holder, and her husband William. The plain stone plaque was written by Wren's eldest son and heir, Christopher Wren the Younger The inscription, which is also inscribed in a circle of black marble on the main floor beneath the centre of the dome, reads:\nwhich translates from Latin as:\nHis obituary was published in the \"Post Boy\" No. 5244 London 2 March 1723:\nSir Christopher Wren who died on Monday last in the 91st year of his age, was the only son of Dr. Chr. Wren, Dean of Windsor &amp; Wolverhampton, Registar of the Garter, younger brother of Dr. Mathew (sic) Wren Ld Bp of Ely, a branch of the ancient family of Wrens of Binchester in the Bishoprick [\"sic\"] of Durham\n1653. Elected from Wadham into fellowship of All Souls\n1657. Professor of Astronomy Gresham College London\n1660. Savilian Professor. Oxford\nAfter 1666. Surveyor General for Rebuilding the Cathedral Church of St.Paul and the Parochial Churches &amp; all other Public Buildings which he lived to finish\n1669. Surveyor General till April 26. 1718\n1680. President of the Royal Society\n1698. Surveyor General &amp; Sub Commissioner for Repairs to Westminster Abbey by Act of Parliament, continued till death.\nHis body is to be deposited in the Great Vault under the Dome of the Cathedral of St. Paul.\n\"The Curious and Entire Libraries of Sir Christopher Wren\", and of his son, were auctioned by Langford and Cock at Mr Cock's in Covent Garden on 24\u201327 October 1748.\nScientific career.\nOne of Wren's friends, Robert Hooke, scientist and architect and a fellow Westminster Schoolboy, said of him \"Since the time of Archimedes there scarce ever met in one man in so great perfection such a mechanical hand and so philosophical mind.\"\nWhen a fellow of All Souls, Wren constructed a transparent beehive for scientific observation; he began observing the Moon, which was to lead to the invention of micrometers for the telescope. According to Parentalia (pp.\u00a0210\u2013211), his solid model of the Moon attracted the attention of the King who commanded Wren to perfect it and present it to him. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He contrived an artificial Eye, truly and dioptrically made (as large as a Tennis-Ball) representing the Picture as Nature makes it: The Cornea, and Crystalline were Glass, the other Humours, Water.\u2014\u200a \nHe experimented on terrestrial magnetism and had taken part in medical experiments while at Wadham College, performing the first successful injection of a substance into the bloodstream (of a dog). In Gresham College, he did experiments involving determining longitude through magnetic variation and through lunar observation to help with navigation, and helped construct a telescope with Sir Paul Neile. Wren also studied and improved the microscope and telescope at this time. He had also been making observations of the planet Saturn from around 1652 with the aim of explaining its appearance. His hypothesis was written up in \"De corpore saturni\" but before the work was published, Huygens presented his theory of the rings of Saturn. Immediately Wren recognised this as a better hypothesis than his own and \"De corpore saturni\" was never published. In addition, he constructed an exquisitely detailed lunar model and presented it to the king. In 1658, he found the length of an arc of the cycloid using an exhaustion proof based on dissections to reduce the problem to summing segments of chords of a circle which are in geometric progression.\nA year into Wren's appointment as a Savilian Professor in Oxford, the Royal Society was created and Wren became an active member. As Savilian Professor, Wren studied mechanics thoroughly, especially elastic collisions and pendulum motions. He also directed his far-ranging intelligence to the study of meteorology: in 1662, he invented the tipping bucket rain gauge and, in 1663, designed a \"weather-clock\" that would record temperature, humidity, rainfall and barometric pressure. A working weather clock based on Wren's design was completed by Robert Hooke in 1679.\nIn addition, Wren experimented on muscle functionality, hypothesizing that the swelling and shrinking of muscles might proceed from a fermentative motion arising from the mixture of two heterogeneous fluids. Although this is incorrect, it was at least founded upon observation and may mark a new outlook on medicine: specialisation.\nAnother topic to which Wren contributed was optics. He published a description of an engine to create perspective drawings and he discussed the grinding of conical lenses and mirrors. Out of this work came another of Wren's important mathematical results, namely that the hyperboloid of revolution is a ruled surface. These results were published in 1669. In subsequent years, Wren continued with his work with the Royal Society, although after the 1680s his scientific interests seem to have waned: no doubt his architectural and official duties absorbed more time.\nIt was a problem posed by Wren that serves as an ultimate source to the conception of Newton's \"Principia Mathematica Philosophiae Naturalis\". Robert Hooke had theorised that planets, moving in vacuo, describe orbits around the Sun because of a rectilinear inertial motion by the tangent and an accelerated motion towards the Sun. Wren's challenge to Halley and Hooke, for the reward of a book worth thirty shillings, was to provide, within the context of Hooke's hypothesis, a mathematical theory linking Kepler's laws with a specific force law. Halley took the problem to Newton for advice, prompting the latter to write a nine-page answer, \"De motu corporum in gyrum\", which was later to be expanded into the \"Principia\".\nMentioned above are only a few of Wren's scientific works. He also studied other areas, ranging from agriculture, ballistics, water and freezing, light and refraction, to name only a few. Thomas Birch's \"History of the Royal Society\" (1756\u201357) is one of the most important sources of our knowledge not only of the origins of the Society, but also the day-to-day running of the Society. It is in these records that most of Wren's known scientific works are recorded.\nArchitectural career.\nWren was a prominent man of science at the height of the Scientific Revolution. The Scientific Revolution seemed to promise a merger of the science of mechanics and the art of building. In Galileo Galilei's \"Two New Sciences\" the first science is not dynamics, for which the book is now better known, but rather the strength of materials, which Galileo had recognized 30 years earlier as a \"science that is very necessary in making machines and buildings of all kinds.\" In 1624 Henry Wotton, the British ambassador to Venice, published a book on architecture in which he analyzed in a rudimentary way the structure of a stone arch. Moreover, in the 17th century, it was people who would now be called scientists who were awarded the commissions to design and build monumental structures. In Turin, Guarino Guarini, a mathematician, devised the plans for such celebrated buildings as the Royal Church of Saint Lawrence, the Chapel of the Holy Shroud and the Palazzo Carignano. In Paris, Claude Perrault, a physician and an anatomist, designed the fa\u00e7ade of the Louvre and the observatory of the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise. In London, it was Wren and Hooke who collaborated as chief architect and city surveyor after the city was devastated by the Great Fire of 1666.\nIn 1661, just months after taking his post at Oxford, Wren was invited by Charles II to oversee the construction of new harbour defences at Tangier\u2014then-newly under British control. Wren ultimately excused himself from the King's offer. Letters dated to the end of 1661 note that in addition to the Tangier project, Charles II had also sought Wren for consultation regarding repairs to Old St Paul's Cathedral, the reconstruction of which would ultimately be the architect's magnum opus. Speaking of Wren's vocational transition from academic to architect-engineer, biographer Adrian Tinniswood writes \"the use of mathematicians in military fortification was not unusual... Perhaps Wren also had experience of the business of fortification, more than we know.\"\nEarly architectural work.\nWren's first known foray into architecture came after his uncle, Matthew Wren, Bishop of Ely, offered to finance a new chapel for Pembroke College, Cambridge. Matthew commissioned his nephew for the design, finding the architecturally inexperienced Christopher to be both ideologically sympathetic and stylistically deferential. Wren produced his design in the Winter of 1662 or 1663 and the chapel was completed in 1665.\nWren's second, similarly collegiate work followed soon after, when he was commissioned to design Oxford's \"New Theatre\", financed by Gilbert Sheldon. His design for the structure was met with lukewarm to negative reception, with even Wren's defenders admitting the young architect to have not yet been \"capable of handling a large architectural composition with assurance\". Adrian Tinniswood credits the building's flaws to \"Sheldon's refusal to pay for an elaborate exterior, Wren's inability to find an adequate external expression for a building which was wholly conditioned by the functionality of its interior space and, ...his refusal to bend the knee to classical authority in the way that our experience of eighteenth-century architecture has conditioned us to believe is right.\" Prior to the theatre's 1669 completion, Wren had received further commissions for the Garden Quadrangle at Trinity College, Oxford, and the chapel of Emmanuel College, Cambridge.\nWren left for Paris in July 1665 on his first and only trip abroad. In France, the architect encountered an architectural milieu more closely linked to the ideals of the Italian Renaissance. Wren also met Gian Lorenzo Bernini, who was \"widely acknowledged by contemporaries as the greatest artist of the century\". Though Bernini's concrete influence on Wren's designs was transmitted via published plans and engravings, the encounter surely impacted the budding architect and his vocational trajectory.\nSt Paul's Cathedral.\nSt Paul's Cathedral in London has always been the highlight of Wren's reputation. His association with it spans his whole architectural career, including the 36 years between the start of the new building and the declaration by parliament of its completion in 1711. Letters document Wren's involvement in St Paul as early as 1661, when he was consulted by Charles II regarding repairs to the medieval structure. In the spring of 1666, he made his first design for a dome for St Paul's. It was accepted in principle on 27 August 1666. One week later, however, the Great Fire of London reduced two-thirds of the City to a smoking desert and old St Paul's to ruin. Wren was most likely at Oxford at the time, but the news, so fantastically relevant to his future, drew him at once to London. Between 5 and 11 September, he ascertained the precise area of devastation, worked out a plan for rebuilding the City and submitted it to Charles II. Others also submitted plans. However, no new plan proceeded any further than the paper on which it was drawn. A Rebuilding of London Act which provided rebuilding of some essential buildings was passed in 1666. In 1669, the King's Surveyor of Works died and Wren was promptly installed.\nIt was not until 1670 that the pace of rebuilding started accelerating. A second rebuilding act was passed that year, raising the tax on coal and thus providing a source of funds for rebuilding of churches destroyed within the City of London. Wren presented his initial \"First Model\" for St Paul's. This plan was accepted, and demolition of the old cathedral began. By 1672, however, this design seemed too modest, and Wren met his critics by producing a design of spectacular grandeur. This modified design, called \"Great Model\", was accepted by the King and the construction started in November 1673. However, this design failed to satisfy the chapter and clerical opinion generally; moreover, it had an economic drawback. Wren was confined to a \"cathedral form\" desired by the clergy. In 1674 he produced the rather meagre Classical-Gothic compromise known as the Warrant Design. However, this design, called so from the royal warrant of 14 May 1675 attached to the drawings, is not the design upon which work had begun a few weeks before.\nThe cathedral that Wren started to build bears only a slight resemblance to the Warrant Design. In 1697, the first service was held in the cathedral when Wren was 65. There was still, however, no dome. Finally, in 1711 the cathedral was declared complete, and Wren was paid the half of his salary that, in the hope of accelerating progress, Parliament had withheld for 14 years since 1697. The cathedral had been built for 36 years under his direction, and the only disappointment he had about his masterpiece was the dome: against his wishes, the commission engaged Thornhill to paint the inner dome in false perspective and finally authorised a balustrade around the roof line. This diluted the hard edge Wren had intended for his cathedral, and elicited the apt parthian comment that \"ladies think nothing well without an edging\".\nLater career.\nDuring the 1670s, Christopher Wren received significant secular commissions. Among many of his notable designs at this time, the monument (1671\u201376) commemorating the Great Fire also involved Robert Hooke, but Wren was in control of the final design, the Royal Observatory (1675\u201376), and the Wren Library at Trinity College, Cambridge (1676\u201384) were the most important ones.\nIn 1682, Wren advised that the original statues of the King's Beasts on St George's Chapel, Windsor be removed. The pinnacles were left bare until 1925, when replica statues were installed.\nBy historical accident, all Wren's large-scale secular commissions dated from after the 1680s. At the age of 50 his personal development, as was that of English architecture, was ready for monumental but humane architecture, in which the scales of individual parts relate both to the whole and to the people who used them. The first large project Wren designed, the Chelsea Hospital (1682\u201392), does not entirely satisfy the eye in this respect, but met its brief with distinction and such success that even in the 21st century it fulfils its original function. The reconstruction of the stateroom at Windsor Castle was notable for the integration of architecture, sculpture and painting. This commission was in the hand of Hugh May, who died in February 1684, before the construction finished; Wren assumed his post and finalised the works.\nBetween 1683 and 1685 he was much occupied in designing the King's House, Winchester, where Charles II had hoped to spend his declining years, but which was never completed. When Wren promised that it would be complete within a year the King, who was conscious of his mortality, replied that \" a year is a great time in my life\".After the death of Charles II in 1685, Wren's attention was directed mainly to Whitehall (1685\u201387). The new king, James II, required a new chapel and also ordered a new gallery, council chamber and a riverside apartment for the Queen. Later, when James II was removed from the throne, Wren took on architectural projects such as Kensington Palace (1689\u201396) and Hampton Court (1689\u20131700).\nThe erection of the present Windsor Guildhall was begun in 1687, under the direction of Sir Thomas Fitz (or Fiddes) but there is a story that on his death in 1689, the task was taken over by Wren. It was completed at a cost of \u00a32687 \u2013 1s \u2013 6d. The new building was supported around its perimeter by stone columns, providing a covered area beneath as a venue for corn markets.\nThe story is widely told that the borough Council demanded that Wren should insert additional columns within the covered area, in order to support the weight of the heavy building above; Wren, however, was adamant that these were not necessary. Eventually, the council insisted and, in due course, the extra supporting columns were built, but Wren made them slightly short, so that they do not quite touch the ceiling, hence proving his claim that they were not necessary. However, there is little evidence that Wren was ever involved in the design or construction of the Guildhall. It is now believed that the story grew out of Wren's connections with Windsor and that his son, also called Christopher Wren, who served as a Member of Parliament for Windsor, commissioned the statue of Prince George of Denmark in 1713 on the south end of the building and his name was engraved underneath. The pillars were probably moved into the corn market from the east side of the building when an extension was added in 1829. The gaps at the top of the pillars are now filled with tiles smaller than the capitals.\nWren did not pursue his work on architectural design as actively as he had before the 1690s, although he still played important roles in a number of royal commissions. In 1696 he was appointed Surveyor of Greenwich Naval Hospital, and in 1698 he was appointed Surveyor of Westminster Abbey. He resigned from the former role in 1716 but held the latter until his death, approving with a wavering signature Burlington's revisions of Wren's own earlier designs for the great Archway of Westminster School.\nFreemasonry.\nSince at least the 18th century, the Lodge of Antiquity No. 2, one of the four founding Masonic Lodges of the Premier Grand Lodge of England in 1717, has claimed Christopher Wren to have been its Master at the \"Goose and Gridiron\" at St. Paul's churchyard. Whilst he was rebuilding the cathedral he is said to have been \"adopted\" on 18 May 1691 (that is, accepted as a sort of honorary member or patron, rather than an operative). Their 18th-century maul with its 1827 inscription claiming that it was used by Wren for the foundation stone of St. Paul's, belonging to the Lodge and on display in the Library and Museum of Freemasonry in London, corroborates the story. James Anderson made the claims in his widely circulated \"Constitutions\" while many of Wren's friends were still alive, but he made many highly creative claims as to the history or legends of Freemasonry. There is also a clear possibility of confusion between the operative workmen's lodges which might naturally have welcomed the boss, and the \"speculative\" or gentlemen's lodges which became highly fashionable just after Wren's death. By the standards of his time, a gentleman like Wren would not generally join an artisan body; however the workmen of St Paul's cathedral would naturally have sought the patronage or \"interest\" of their employer, and within Wren's lifetime there was a predominantly gentlemen's Lodge at the \"Rummer and Grapes\", a mile upriver at Westminster (where Wren had been to School).\nIn 1788, the Lodge of Antiquity thought they were buying a portrait of Wren which now dominates Lodge Room 10, in the same building as the Museum; but it is now identified with William Talman, not Wren. Nevertheless, this recorded event and many old records attest to the fact that Antiquity thought that Wren had been its Master, at a time when it still held its minute books for the relevant years (which were lost by Preston at some date after 1778).\nThe evidence of whether Wren was a speculative freemason is the subject of the Prestonian Lecture of 2011, which concludes on the evidence of two obituaries and Aubrey's memoirs, with supporting materials, that he did indeed attend the closed meeting in 1691, probably of the Lodge of Antiquity, but that there is nothing to suggest that he was ever a Grand Officer as claimed by Anderson.\nAchievement and legacy.\nChristopher Wren appeared on the reverse of the first British \u00a350 banknote (Series D) issued in modern times. The notes were printed between 1981 and 1994, and were in circulation until 1996.\nIn 1997, UNESCO inscribed Wren's Greenwich Hospital on the World Heritage list, citing the complex's \"outstanding architectural and artistic achievements\".\nHe was also credited as a set designer for one episode of the show \"Question Time\" on 21 February 2013 because the episode was filmed in St. Paul's Cathedral.\nSee also.\nWren appears, or is mentioned in several Restoration-era novels or movies.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52947", "revid": "50965881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52947", "title": "Hampton Court Palace", "text": "Historic royal palace in Greater London\nHampton Court Palace is a Grade I listed royal palace in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames, southwest and upstream of central London on the River Thames.\nThe building of the palace began in 1514 for Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, Archbishop of York and the chief minister of Henry VIII. In 1529, as Wolsey fell from favour, the cardinal gave the palace to the king to try to save his own life, which he knew was now in grave danger due to Henry VIII's deepening frustration and anger. The palace became one of Henry's most favoured residences; soon after acquiring it, he enlarged it to accommodate his sizeable retinue of courtiers. \nIn the early 1690s, William III's massive rebuilding and expansion work, which was intended to rival the Palace of Versailles, destroyed much of the Tudor palace. His work ceased in 1694, leaving the palace in two distinct contrasting architectural styles, domestic Tudor and Baroque. While the palace's styles are an accident of fate, a unity exists due to the use of pink bricks and a symmetrical, if vague, balancing of successive low wings. George II was the last monarch to reside in the palace.\nThe palace is a major tourist attraction open to the public. The structure and grounds are cared for by an independent charity, Historic Royal Palaces, which receives no funding from the Government or the Crown. The palace displays many works of art from the Royal Collection. Apart from the palace itself and its gardens, other points of interest for visitors include the celebrated maze, the historic royal tennis court (see below), and a huge grape vine, the world's largest as of 2005[ [update]]. The palace's Home Park is the site of the annual Hampton Court Palace Festival and Hampton Court Garden Festival.\nHistory.\nMedieval.\nWhat would become Hampton Court Palace was originally a property of the Order of St John of Jerusalem. It was leased first to John Wode in the mid-15th century, and then to the statesman Sir Giles Daubeney in 1494. Daubeney expanded the previous structures, and built the Great Kitchens that still survive today (although much altered). After Daubeney's death in 1508, his 14 year-old heir, Henry Daubeney, had to wait until 1514 to inherit his father's possessions. A month later, he relinquished his lease, and the Order of St John of Jerusalem re-leased Hampton Court to Thomas Wolsey.\nTudor times.\nThomas Wolsey, Archbishop of York, chief minister to and a favourite of Henry VIII, took over the site of Hampton Court Palace in 1514. Over the following seven years, Wolsey spent lavishly (200,000 crowns) to build the finest palace in England at Hampton Court. Today, little of Wolsey's building work remains unchanged. The first courtyard, the Base Court, (\"B on plan\"), was his creation, as was the second, inner gatehouse (\"C\") which leads to the Clock Court (\"D\") (Wolsey's seal remains visible over the entrance arch of the clock tower) which contained his private rooms (\"O on plan\"). The Base Court contained forty-four lodgings reserved for guests, while the second court (today, Clock Court) contained the very best rooms\u00a0\u2013 the state apartments\u00a0\u2013 reserved for the king and his family. Henry VIII stayed in the state apartments as Wolsey's guest immediately after their completion in 1525.\nIn building his palace, Wolsey was attempting to create a Renaissance cardinal's palace of a rectilinear symmetrical plan with grand apartments on a raised piano nobile, all rendered with classical detailing. The historian Jonathan Foyle has suggested that it is likely that Wolsey had been inspired by Paolo Cortese's \"De Cardinalatu\", a manual for cardinals that included advice on palatial architecture, published in 1510. The architectural historian Sir John Summerson asserts that the palace shows \"the essence of Wolsey\u00a0\u2013 the plain English churchman who nevertheless made his sovereign the arbiter of Europe and who built and furnished Hampton Court to show foreign embassies that Henry VIII's chief minister knew how to live as graciously as any cardinal in Rome.\" Whatever the concepts were, the architecture is an excellent and rare example of a thirty-year era when English architecture was in a harmonious transition from domestic Tudor, strongly influenced by perpendicular Gothic, to the Italian Renaissance classical style. Perpendicular Gothic owed nothing historically to the Renaissance style, yet harmonised well with it. This blending of styles was realised by a small group of Italian craftsmen working at the English court in the second and third decades of the sixteenth century. They specialised in the adding of Renaissance ornament to otherwise straightforward Tudor buildings. It was one of these, Giovanni da Maiano, who was responsible for the set of eight relief busts of Roman emperors which were set in the Tudor brickwork.\nHenry VIII and his courtiers visited Wolsey at Hampton Court in masque costume in January 1527, disguised as shepherds to play mumchance and dance. Wolsey was only to enjoy his palace for a few years. In 1529, knowing that his enemies and the King were engineering his downfall, he passed the palace to the King as a gift. Wolsey died in 1530.\nWithin six months of coming into ownership, the King began his own rebuilding and expansion. Henry VIII's court consisted of over one thousand people. While the King owned over sixty houses and palaces, few of these were large enough to hold the assembled court, and thus one of the first of the King's building works (in order to transform Hampton Court to a principal residence) was to build the vast kitchens. These were quadrupled in size in 1529, enabling the King to provide bouche of court (free food and drink) for his entire court. The architecture of King Henry's new palace followed the design precedent set by Wolsey: perpendicular Gothic-inspired Tudor with restrained Renaissance ornament. This hybrid architecture was to remain almost unchanged for nearly a century, until Inigo Jones introduced strong classical influences from Italy to the London palaces of the first Stuart kings.\nBetween 1532 and 1535 Henry added the Great Hall (the last medieval great hall built for the English monarchy) and the Royal Tennis Court. The Great Hall has a carved hammerbeam roof. During Tudor times, this was the most important room of the palace: here, the King would dine in state seated at a table upon a raised dais. The hall took five years to complete; so impatient was the King for completion that the masons were compelled to work throughout the night by candlelight.\nThe gatehouse to the second, inner court was adorned in 1540 with the Hampton Court astronomical clock, an early example of a pre-Copernican astronomical clock. Still functioning, the clock shows the time of day, the phases of the moon, the month, the quarter of the year, the date, the sun and star sign, and high water at London Bridge. This last item was of great importance to those visiting this Thames-side palace from London, as the preferred method of transport at the time was by barge, and at low water London Bridge created dangerous rapids. This gatehouse is also known today as Anne Boleyn's gate, after Henry's second wife. Work was still under way on Anne Boleyn's apartments above the gate when Boleyn was beheaded.\nDuring the Tudor period, the palace was the scene of many historic events. In 1537, the King's much desired male heir, the future Edward VI, was born at the palace, and the child's mother, Jane Seymour, died there two weeks later. Four years afterwards, whilst attending Mass in the palace's chapel, the King was informed of the adultery of his fifth wife, Catherine Howard. She was then confined to her room for a few days before being sent to Syon House and then on to the Tower of London. Legend claims she briefly escaped her guards and ran through the Haunted Gallery to beg Henry for her life but she was recaptured.\nKing Henry died in January 1547 and was succeeded by his son Edward VI, and then by both his daughters in turn. It was to Hampton Court that Queen Mary I (Henry's elder daughter) retreated with King Philip to spend her honeymoon, after their wedding at Winchester. Mary chose Hampton Court as the place for the birth of her first child, which turned out to be the first of two phantom pregnancies. Mary had initially wanted to give birth at Windsor Castle as it was a more secure location, and she was still fearful of rebellion. But Hampton Court was considerably larger and could accommodate the entire court and more besides. Mary stayed at the palace awaiting the birth of the \"child\" for over five months, and only left because of the uninhabitable state of the palace due to the court being kept in the one location for so long. Her court departed for the much smaller Oatlands Palace. Mary was succeeded by her half-sister, Elizabeth I, and it was Elizabeth who had the eastern (privy) kitchen built; today, this is the palace's public tea room.\nStuarts and early Hanoverians.\nOn the death of Elizabeth I in 1603, the Tudor period came to an end. The Queen was succeeded by her first cousin-once-removed, James I of the House of Stuart, an event known as the Union of the Crowns.\nTwo entertainments for the Stuart court were staged in the Great Hall in January 1604, \"The Masque of Indian and China Knights\" and \"The Vision of the Twelve Goddesses\". On 6 January, Scottish courtiers performed a sword dance for Anne of Denmark. Their dance was compared to a Spanish \"matachin\". Later in 1604, the palace was the site of King James' meeting with representatives of the English Puritans, known as the Hampton Court Conference; while an agreement with the Puritans was not reached, the meeting led to James's commissioning of the King James Version of the Bible.\nKing James was succeeded in 1625 by his son, the ill-fated Charles I. Hampton Court was to become both his palace and his prison. It was also the setting for his honeymoon with his fifteen-year-old bride, Henrietta Maria in 1625. Following King Charles' execution in 1649, the palace became the property of the Commonwealth presided over by Oliver Cromwell. Unlike some other former royal properties, the palace escaped relatively unscathed. While the government auctioned much of the contents, the building was ignored.\nAfter the Restoration, King Charles II and his successor James II visited Hampton Court but largely preferred to reside elsewhere. By current French court standards, Hampton Court now appeared old-fashioned. It was in 1689, shortly after Louis XIV's court had moved permanently to Versailles, that the palace's antiquated state was addressed. England had joint monarchs, William III and Mary II. Within months of their accession, they embarked on a massive rebuilding project at Hampton Court. The intention was to demolish the Tudor palace a section at a time while replacing it with a huge modern palace in the Baroque style retaining only Henry VIII's Great Hall.\nThe country's most eminent architect, Sir Christopher Wren, was called upon to draw the plans, while the master of works was to be William Talman. The plan was for a vast palace constructed around two courtyards at right angles to each other. Wren's design for a domed palace bore resemblances to the work of Jules Hardouin-Mansart and Louis Le Vau, both architects employed by Louis XIV at Versailles. It has been suggested, though, that the plans were abandoned because the resemblance to Versailles was too subtle and not strong enough; at this time, it was impossible for any sovereign to visualise a palace that did not emulate Versailles' repetitive Baroque form. However, the resemblances are there: while the fa\u00e7ades are not so long as those of Versailles, they have similar, seemingly unstoppable repetitive rhythms beneath a long flat skyline. The monotony is even repeated as the fa\u00e7ade turns the corner from the east to the south fronts. However, Hampton Court, unlike Versailles, is given an extra dimension by the contrast between the pink brick and the pale Portland stone quoins, frames and banding. Further diversion is added by the circular and decorated windows of the second-floor mezzanine. This theme is repeated in the inner Fountain Court, but the rhythm is faster and the windows, unpedimented on the outer fa\u00e7ades, are given pointed pediments in the courtyard; this has led the courtyard to be described as \"Startling, as of simultaneous exposure to a great many eyes with raised eyebrows.\"\nDuring this work, half the Tudor palace was replaced and Henry VIII's staterooms and private apartments were both lost; the new wings around the Fountain Court contained new state apartments and private rooms, one set for the King and one for the Queen. Each suite of state rooms was accessed by a state staircase. The royal suites were of completely equal value in order to reflect William and Mary's unique status as joint sovereigns. The King's Apartments face south over the Privy Garden, the Queen's east over the Fountain Garden. The suites are linked by a gallery running the length of the east fa\u00e7ade, another reference to Versailles, where the King and Queen's apartments are linked by the Hall of Mirrors. However, at Hampton Court, the linking gallery is of more modest proportions and decoration. The King's staircase was decorated with frescos by Antonio Verrio and delicate ironwork by Jean Tijou. Other artists commissioned to decorate the rooms included Grinling Gibbons, Sir James Thornhill and Jacques Rousseau; furnishings were designed by Daniel Marot.\nAfter the death of Queen Mary, King William lost interest in the renovations, and work ceased. However, it was in Hampton Court Park in 1702 that he fell from his horse, later dying from his injuries at Kensington Palace. He was succeeded by his sister-in-law Queen Anne who continued the decoration and completion of the state apartments. On Queen Anne's death in 1714 the House of Stuart's rule came to an end.\nQueen Anne's successor was George I; he and his son George II were the last monarchs to reside at Hampton Court. Under George I six rooms were completed in 1717 to the design of John Vanbrugh. Under George II and his wife, Caroline of Ansbach, further refurbishment took place, with the architect William Kent employed to design new furnishings and d\u00e9cor including the Queen's Staircase, (1733) and the Cumberland Suite (1737) for the Duke of Cumberland. Today, the Queen's Private Apartments are open to the public.\nLater use.\nSince the reign of King George II, no monarch has resided at Hampton Court. In fact, George III, from the moment of his accession, never set foot in the palace: he associated the state apartments with a humiliating scene when his grandfather, George II, had once struck him following an innocent remark. He did however have the Great Vine planted there in 1763 and had the top two storeys of the Great Gatehouse removed in 1773.\nFrom the 1760s, the palace was used to house grace and favour residents. Many of the palace rooms were adapted to be rent-free apartments, with vacant ones allocated by the Lord Chamberlain to applicants to reward past services rendered to the Crown. From 1862 to his death in 1867, the scientist and pioneer of electricity Michael Faraday lived here. From the 1960s the number of new residents declined, with the last admitted in the 1980s. However existing residents could continue to live there. In 2005 three remained, with none by 2017.\nIn 1796, the Great Hall was restored and in 1838, during the reign of Queen Victoria, the restoration was completed and the palace opened to the public. The heavy-handed restoration plan at this time reduced the Great Gatehouse (\"A\"), the palace's principal entrance, by two storeys and removed the lead cupolas adorning its four towers. Once opened, the palace soon became a major tourist attraction and, by 1881, over ten million visits had been recorded. Visitors arrived both by boat from London and via Hampton Court railway station, opened in February 1849.\nOn 2 September 1952, the palace was given statutory protection by being Grade I listed. Other buildings and structures within the grounds are separately Grade I listed, including the early 16th-century tilt yard tower (the only surviving example of the five original towers); Christopher Wren's Lion gate built for Anne and George I; and the Tudor and 17th-century perimeter walls.\nIn 1986, the palace was damaged by a major fire, which spread to the King's Apartments. The fire claimed the life of Lady Daphne Gale, widow of General Sir Richard Gale, who resided in a grace and favour apartment. She was in the habit of taking a lighted candle to her bedroom at night, which is thought to have started the fire. The Hampton Court fire led to a new programme of restoration work which was completed in 1990. The Royal School of Needlework moved to premises within the palace from Princes Gate in Kensington 1987, and the palace also houses the headquarters of Historic Royal Palaces, a charitable foundation.\n21st century.\nThe location was used for a performance of \"The Six Wives of Henry VIII\" by rock keyboardist Rick Wakeman in 2009.\nThe palace was the venue for the Road Cycling Time Trial of the 2012 Summer Olympics and temporary structures for the event, including a set of thrones for time trialists in the medal positions, were installed in the grounds.\nIn 2015, Hampton Court celebrated the 500th anniversary of the groundbreaking of construction of the palace. The celebrations included daily dramatised historical scenes. The palace's construction began on 12 February 1515.\nOn 9 February the following year, Vincent Nichols, the Catholic archbishop of Westminster, celebrated vespers in the Chapel Royal. This was the first Catholic service held at the palace for 450 years, and the first since the Elizabethan Religious Settlement established Protestantism as the national denomination.\nContents.\nThe palace houses many works of art and furnishings from the Royal Collection, mainly dating from the two principal periods of the palace's construction, the early Tudor (Renaissance) and the late Stuart to the early Georgian period. In September 2015, the Royal Collection recorded 542 works (only those with images) as being located at Hampton Court, mostly paintings and furniture, but also ceramics and sculpture. The full current list can be obtained from their website. The single most important work is Andrea Mantegna's \"Triumphs of Caesar\" housed in the Lower Orangery. The palace once housed the Raphael Cartoons, now kept at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Their former home, the Cartoon Gallery on the south side of the Fountain Court, was designed by Christopher Wren; copies painted in the 1690s by a minor artist, Henry Cooke, are now displayed in their place. Also on display are important collections of ceramics, including numerous pieces of blue and white porcelain collected by Queen Mary II, both Chinese imports and Delftware.\nMuch of the original furniture dates from the late 17th and early 18th centuries, including tables by Jean Pelletier, \"India back\" walnut chairs by Thomas Roberts and clocks and a barometer by Thomas Tompion. Several state beds are still in their original positions, as is the Throne Canopy in the King's Privy Chamber. This room contains a crystal chandelier of c.\u20091700, possibly the first such in the country.\nThe King's Guard Chamber contains a large quantity of arms: muskets, pistols, swords, daggers, powder horns and pieces of armour arranged on the walls in decorative patterns. Bills exist for payment to a John Harris, dated 1699, for an arrangement believed to be that still seen today.\nIn addition, Hampton Court holds the majority of the Royal Ceremonial Dress Collection, with a smaller amount being held at Kensington Palace, where it is displayed. The collection of over 10,000 items includes clothing, sketches, letters, prints, photographs, diaries and scrapbooks. The dress collection has designated status from Arts Council England.\nThe Chapel.\nThe timber and plaster ceiling of the chapel is considered the \"most important and magnificent in Britain\", but is all that remains of the Tudor decoration, after redecoration supervised by Sir Christopher Wren. The altar is framed by a massive but plain oak reredos with garlands carved by Grinling Gibbons during the reign of Queen Anne. Opposite the altar, at first-floor level, is the royal pew where the royal family would attend services apart from the general congregation seated below.\nThe clergy, musicians and other ecclesiastical officers employed by the monarch at Hampton Court, as in other English royal premises, are known collectively as the Chapel Royal; properly used the term does not refer to a building.\nGrounds.\nThe grounds as they appear today were laid out in grand style in the late 17th century. There are no authentic remains of Henry VIII's gardens, merely a small knot garden, planted in 1924, which hints at the gardens' 16th-century appearance. Today, the dominating feature of the grounds is the great landscaping scheme constructed for Sir Christopher Wren's intended new palace. From a water-bounded semicircular parterre, the length of the east front, three avenues radiate in a crow's foot pattern. The central avenue, containing not a walk or a drive, but the great canal known as the Long Water, was excavated during the reign of Charles II, in 1662. The design, radical at the time, is another immediately recognizable influence from Versailles and was indeed laid out by pupils of Andr\u00e9 Le N\u00f4tre, Louis XIV's landscape gardener.\nOn the south side of the palace is the Privy Garden bounded by semi-circular wrought iron gates by Jean Tijou. This garden, originally William III's private garden, was replanted in 1992 in period style with manicured hollies and yews along a geometric system of paths.\nOn a raised site overlooking the Thames is a small pavilion, the Banqueting House. This was built c.\u20091700, for informal meals and entertainments in the gardens rather than for the larger state dinners which would have taken place inside the palace itself. A nearby conservatory houses the \"Great Vine\", planted in 1769; by 1968 it had a trunk thick and has a length of . It still produces an annual crop of grapes.\nThe palace included apartments for the use of favoured royal friends. One such apartment is described as being in \"The Pavilion and situated on the Home Park\" of Hampton Court Palace. This privilege was first extended about 1817 by Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, to his friend, Lieutenant General James Moore, and his new bride, Cecilia Watson. George IV continued this arrangement following the death of Prince Edward on 23 January 1820. Queen Victoria continued the arrangement for the widow of General Moore, following his death on 24 April 1838. This particular apartment was used for 21 years or more and spanned three different sponsors.\nA well-known curiosity of the palace's grounds is Hampton Court Maze; planted in the 1690s by George London and Henry Wise for William III. It was originally planted with hornbeam; it has been repaired latterly using many different types of hedge. There is a 3D simulation of the maze, see the external links section.\nInspired by narrow views of a Tudor garden that can be seen through doorways in a painting, \"The Family of Henry VIII\", hanging in the palace's Haunted Gallery, a new garden in the style of Henry VIII's 16th-century Privy Gardens, has been designed to celebrate the anniversary of that King's accession to the throne. Sited on the former Chapel Court Garden, it has been planted with flowers and herbs from the 16th century and is completed by gilded heraldic beasts and bold green and white painted fences. The garden's architect was Todd Longstaffe-Gowan.\nThe formal gardens and park are Grade I listed on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens.\nKing's Beasts.\nThere are ten statues of heraldic animals, called the King's Beasts, that stand on the bridge over the moat leading to the great gatehouse. Unlike the Queen's Beasts in Kew Gardens, these statues represent the ancestry of King Henry VIII and his third wife Jane Seymour. The animals are: the lion of England, the Seymour lion, the royal dragon, the black bull of Clarence, the yale of Beaufort, the white lion of Mortimer, the White Greyhound of Richmond, the Tudor dragon, the Seymour panther, and the Seymour unicorn. The set of Queen's Beasts at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II replaced the three Seymour items and one of the dragons by the gryphon of Edward III, the horse of Hanover, the falcon of the Plantagenets, and the unicorn of Scotland.\nIn 2009 to celebrate the 500th anniversary of the accession to the throne of King Henry VIII, a new \"Tudor Garden\" was created in Chapel Court, Hampton Court, designed by Todd Longstaffe-Gowan. To decorate the garden eight small wooden King's Beasts were carved and painted in bright colours, each sitting atop a 6-foot-high painted wooden column. The heraldic beasts, carved by Ben Harms and Ray Gonzalez of G&amp;H Studios, include the golden lion of England, the white greyhound of Richmond, the red dragon of Wales, and the white hart of Richard II, all carved from English oak. The historically correct colours were researched by Patrick Baty, paint/colour consultant at Hampton Court. The beasts are of a different design to those on the bridge, based on period drawings in the College of Arms.\nCultural appearances and influence.\nFlorham, United States.\nInspired by Wren's work at Hampton Court, the American Vanderbilt family modelled their estate known as Florham, in Madison, New Jersey, US, after it. Florham was commissioned by Florence Adele Vanderbilt Twombly and Hamilton McKown Twombly from McKim, Mead &amp; White. It was built in 1893.\nFilm location.\nThe palace has been used as a location for filming film and television shows, including \"The Private Life of Henry VIII\", \"Three Men In A Boat\", \"A Man For All Seasons\", \"Vanity Fair\", \"Little Dorrit\", \"John Adams\" (2008), \"The Young Victoria\", ', ', \"The Theory of Everything\", \"Cinderella,\" \"Mamma Mia: Here We Go Again!\", \"The Favourite\", \"Belgravia\", \"The Great,\" and \"Bridgerton\". Some scenes of the spin-off series, \"\", were also filmed at the palace, as was the King's staircase in \"The Sandman\" and \"Renegade Nell.\nPoetry.\nLydia Sigourney's poem \"Hampton Court\" records a visit to the palace with the bridal party following a wedding in March, 1841. It was published in her \"Pleasant Memories of Pleasant Lands\" in 1842.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52948", "revid": "49433774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52948", "title": "Berry", "text": "In the culinary sense, small edible fruit\nA berry is a small, pulpy, and often edible fruit. Typically, berries are juicy, rounded, brightly colored, sweet, sour or tart, and do not have a stone or pit although many pips or seeds may be present.\u200d Common examples of berries in the culinary sense are strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, blackberries, white currants, blackcurrants, and redcurrants.\u200d In Britain, soft fruit is a horticultural term for such fruits.\u200d\nThe common usage of the term \"berry\" is different from the scientific or botanical definition of a berry, which refers to a fleshy fruit produced from the ovary of a single flower where the outer layer of the ovary wall develops into an edible fleshy portion(pericarp). The botanical definition includes many fruits that are not commonly known or referred to as berries,\u200d such as grapes, tomatoes, cucumbers, eggplants, bananas, and chili peppers. Fruits commonly considered berries but excluded by the botanical definition include strawberries, raspberries, and blackberries, which are aggregate fruits, and mulberries, which are multiple fruits. Watermelons and pumpkins are giant berries that fall into the category \"pepos\". A plant bearing berries is said to be or .\nBerries are eaten worldwide and often used in jams, preserves, cakes, or pies. Some berries are commercially important. The berry industry varies from country to country as do types of berries cultivated or growing in the wild. Some berries such as raspberries and strawberries have been bred for hundreds of years and are distinct from their wild counterparts, while other berries, such as lingonberries and cloudberries, grow almost exclusively in the wild.\nWhile many berries are edible, some are poisonous to humans, such as those of deadly nightshade and pokeweed. Others, such as the white mulberry, red mulberry,\u200d and elderberry,\u200d are poisonous when unripe, but are edible when ripe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nBerries have been valuable as a food source for humans since before the start of agriculture, and remain a food source for other primates. They were a seasonal staple for early hunter-gatherers for thousands of years, and wild berry gathering remains a popular activity in Europe and North America today. In time, humans learned to store berries so that they could be used in the winter. They may be made into fruit preserves, and among Native Americans, mixed with meat and fats as pemmican.\u200d\nBerries also began to be cultivated in Europe and other countries. Some species of blackberries and raspberries of the genus \"Rubus\" have been cultivated since the 17thcentury, while smooth-skinned blueberries and cranberries of the genus \"Vaccinium\" have been cultivated in the United States for over a century.\u200d In Japan, between the 10th and 18thcenturies, the terms and (kanji: ; katakana: ) referred to many berry crops. The most widely cultivated berry of modern times is the strawberry, which is produced globally at twice the amount of all other berry crops combined.\u200d\nThe strawberry was mentioned by ancient Romans, who thought it had medicinal properties,\u200d but it was then not a staple of agriculture.\u200d Woodland strawberries began to be grown in French gardens in the 14thcentury. The musk strawberry(\"F. moschata\"), also known as the hautbois strawberry, began to be grown in European gardens in the late 16thcentury. Later, the Virginia strawberry was grown in Europe and the United States.\u200d The most commonly consumed strawberry, the garden strawberry(\"F. ananassa\"), is an accidental hybrid of the Virginia strawberry and a Chilean variety \"Fragaria chiloensis\". It was first noted by a French gardener around the mid 18thcentury that, when \"F. moschata\" and \"F. virginiana\" were planted in between rows of \"F. chiloensis\", the Chilean strawberry would bear abundant and unusually large fruits. Soon after, began to study the breeding of strawberries and made several discoveries crucial to the science of plant breeding, such as the sexual reproduction of strawberry.\u200d Later, in the early 1800s, English breeders of strawberry made varieties of \"F. ananassa\" which were important in strawberry breeding in Europe,\u200d and hundreds of cultivars have since been produced through the breeding of strawberries.\u200d\nEtymology.\nThe Old English word ('berry, grape') comes from Proto-Germanic, variously reconstructed as , , (source also of Old Norse, Middle Dutch, German, 'berry', Old Saxon, Gothic, 'grape'), which is of unknown origin. This and \"apple\" are the only fruit names in modern English which are descended from \"native\" Germanic words.\u200d\nBotanical definition.\nIn botanical terminology, a berry is a simple fruit with seeds and pulp produced from the ovary of a single flower. It is fleshy throughout, except for the seeds. It does not have a special \"line of weakness\" along which it splits to release the seeds when ripe (i.e. it is indehiscent).\u200d A berry may develop from an ovary with one or more carpels (the female reproductive structures of a flower). The seeds are usually embedded in the fleshy interior of the ovary, but there are some non-fleshy examples such as peppers, with air rather than pulp around their seeds. The differences between the everyday and botanical uses of \"berry\" result in three categories: those fruits that are berries under both definitions; those fruits that are botanical berries but not commonly known as berries; and those parts of plants commonly known as berries that are not botanical berries, and may not even be fruits.\nBerries under both definitions include blueberries, cranberries, lingonberries, and the fruits of many other members of the heather family, as well as gooseberries, goji berries and elderberries. The fruits of some \"currants\" (\"Ribes\" species), such as blackcurrants, red currants and white currants, are botanical berries, and are treated as horticultural berries (or as soft fruit in the UK), even though their most commonly used names do not include the word \"berry\".\nBotanical berries not commonly known as berries include bananas,\u200d tomatoes,\u200d grapes, eggplants (aubergines), persimmons, watermelons, and pumpkins.\nThere are several different kinds of fruits which are commonly called berries, but are not botanical berries. Blackberries, raspberries, and strawberries are kinds of aggregate fruit;\u200d they contain seeds from different ovaries of a single flower. In aggregate fruits like blackberries, the individual \"fruitlets\" making up the fruit can be clearly seen. The fruits of blackthorn may be called \"sloe berries\",\u200d but botanically are small stone fruits or drupes, like plums or apricots.\nJunipers and yews are commonly said to have berries, but these plants do not produce botanical fruits at all: they are gymnosperms, specifically conifers, not angiosperms (flowering plants). Their \"berries\" are highly-modified seed-bearing cones. In juniper berries, used to flavour gin, the cone scales, which are hard and woody in most conifers, are instead soft and fleshy when ripe. The bright red berries of yews consist of a fleshy outgrowth(aril) almost enclosing the poisonous seed. The resemblance of these plant structures to botanical berries provides a striking example of convergent evolution in different plant clades.\nCultivation.\nStrawberries have been grown in gardens in Europe since the 14thcentury.\u200d Blueberries were domesticated starting in 1911, with the first commercial crop in 1916.\u200d Huckleberries of all varieties are not fully domesticated, but domestication was attempted from 1994 to 2010 for the economically significant western huckleberry.\u200d Many other varieties of \"Vaccinium\" are likewise not domesticated, with some being of commercial importance.\nAgricultural methods.\nLike most other food crops, berries are commercially grown, with both conventional pest management and integrated pest management(IPM) practices. Organically certified berries are becoming more widely available.\u200d:5\nMany soft fruit berries require a period of temperatures between for breaking dormancy. In general, strawberries require 200\u2013300hours, blueberries 650\u2013850hours, blackberries 700hours, raspberries 800\u20131700hours, currants and gooseberries 800\u20131500hours, and cranberries 2000hours.\u200d However, too low a temperature will kill the crops: blueberries do not tolerate temperatures below , raspberries, depending on variety, may tolerate as low as , and blackberries are injured below .\u200d Spring frosts are, however, much more damaging to berry crops than low winter temperatures. Sites with moderate slopes(), facing north or east in the Northern Hemisphere, near large bodies of water, which regulate spring temperature, are considered ideal in preventing spring frost injury to the new leaves and flowers.\u200d All berry crops have shallow root systems.\u200d Many US land-grant university extension offices suggest that strawberries should not be planted more than five years on the same site, due to the danger of black root rot (though many other illnesses go by the same name), which in the past has been controlled in major commercial production by annual methyl bromide fumigation but which is largely prohibited now.\u200d Besides the number of years in production, soil compaction, the frequency of fumigation, and herbicide usages increase the appearance of black root rot in strawberries.\u200d Raspberries, blackberries, strawberries, and many other berries are susceptible to verticillium wilt. Blueberries and cranberries grow poorly if the clay or silt content of the soil is more than 20%, while most other berries tolerate a wide range of soil types.\u200d For most berry crops, the ideal soil is well drained sandy loam, with a pH of 6.2\u20136.8 and a moderate to high organic content; however, blueberries have an ideal pH of 4.2\u20134.8 and can be grown on muck soils, while blueberries and cranberries prefer poorer soils with lower cation exchange, lower calcium, and lower levels of phosphorus.\u200d\nGrowing most berries organically requires the use of proper crop rotation, the right mix of cover crops, and the cultivation of the correct beneficial microorganisms in the soil.\u200d As blueberries and cranberries thrive in soils that are not hospitable to most other plants, and conventional fertilizers are toxic to them, the primary concern when growing them organically is bird management.\u200d\nPostharvest small fruit berries are generally stored at relative humidity and .\u200d Cranberries, however, are frost sensitive, and should be stored at .\u200d Blueberries are the only berries that respond to ethylene, but flavor does not improve after harvest, so they require the same treatment as other berries. Removal of ethylene may reduce disease and spoilage in all berries.\u200d Precooling within one to two hours post-harvest to storage temperature, generally, via forced air cooling increases the storage life of berries by about a third.\u200d Under optimum storage conditions, raspberries and blackberries last for two to five days, strawberries 7\u201310days, blueberries two to four weeks, and cranberries two to four months.\u200d Berries can be shipped under high carbon dioxide or modified atmosphere of carbon dioxide for high carbon dioxide or carbon dioxide and oxygen for a modified atmosphere container to increase shelf life and prevent grey mold rot.\u200d\nBreeding.\nSeveral discoveries in the science of breeding berries were made in the 18thcentury by in his work on strawberries.\u200d In the traditional technique of plant breeding, berries with specific desirable characteristics were chosen and allowed to sexually reproduce with other berries, and offspring with improved traits could then be selected and used for further crossing. Plants may be hybridized with different species within the same genus; hybridization between different genus may also be possible, but more difficult. Breeding may seek to increase the size and yield of the fruit, improve the flavor and quality of its nutrient content, such as antioxidants, expand the harvest season, and produce cultivars with resistance to diseases, tolerance of hot or cold conditions, and other desirable traits.\u200d Advancements in molecular biology and genetic engineering allow for a more efficient and better targeted approach in the selection for a desirable genotype, via marker-assisted selection, for example.\u200d Genetic modification techniques can also be used for breeding berries.\u200d\nHorticultural soft fruit berries.\nSome fruit not commonly referred to as berries and not always botanically berries are included by US land-grant university extension offices in their guides for berry cultivation, or in guides for identifying local wild edible and non-edible berries. Examples include beach plums,\u200d American persimmons, pawpaws, Pacific crabapples, and prickly pears.\u200d\nCommercial production.\nIn the year 2005, there were of land worldwide cultivating berries, with produced.\u200d:4\nEconomics.\nIn certain regions, berrypicking can be a large part of the economy, and it is becoming increasingly common for western European countries such as Sweden and Finland to import cheap labor from Thailand or Bulgaria to do berry picking.\u200d This practice has come under scrutiny in the past years because of the low wages and poor living standard for the \"berry-pickers\", as well as the lack of worker safety.\u200d\nIn the late 2010s in the US, reduced migration from Mexico and Central America and increased minimum wage standards have made finding \"stoop-work\" labourers to pick the strawberry crop difficult and costly.\u200d\nPhytochemicals and color.\nOnce ripened, berries have a contrasting color to their background (often of green leaves), making them visible and attractive to frugivorous animals and birds.\u200d This assists the wide dispersal of the plants' seeds.\u200d\nBerry colors are due to natural phytochemicals, including plant pigments, such as anthocyanins, together with other flavonoids localized mainly in berry skins, seeds and leaves.\u200d Although berry pigments have antioxidant properties \"in vitro\",\u200d there is no physiological evidence established to date that berry pigments have actual antioxidant or any other functions within the human body.\u200d Consequently, it is not permitted to claim that foods containing polyphenols have antioxidant health value on product labels in the United States or Europe.\u200d\nCulinary significance.\nUse in baked goods.\nBerries are commonly used in pies or tarts, such as blueberry pie, blackberry pie, and strawberry pie.\nBerries are often used in baking, such as blueberry muffins, blackberry muffins, berry cobblers, berry crisps, berry cakes, berry buckles, berry crumb cakes, berry tea cakes, and berry cookies.\u200d Berries are commonly incorporated whole into the batter for baking, and care is often taken so as to not burst the berries. Frozen or dried berries may be preferable for some baked berry products.\u200d Fresh berries are also often incorporated into baked berry desserts, sometimes with cream, either as a filling to the dessert or as a topping.\u200d\nBeverages.\nBerries are often added to water and/or juiced, as in cranberry juice, which accounts for 95% of cranberry crop usage,\u200d blueberry juice, raspberry juice, goji berry juice, acai juice, aronia berry juice, and strawberry juice.\u200d Wine is the principal alcoholic beverage made from berries(grapes). Fruit wines are commonly made out of other berries. In most cases, sugars must be added to the berry juices in the process of chaptalization to increase the alcohol content of the wine.\u200d Examples of fruit wines made from berries include: elderberry wine, strawberry wine, blueberry wine, blackberry wine, redcurrant wine, huckleberry wine, goji wine and cranberry wine.\u200d Berries are used in some styles of beer, particularly framboise (made with raspberry) and other fruit lambics.\nDried.\nCurrants, raisins and sultanas are examples of dried grape berries, and many other commercially important berries are available in dried form.\nFruit preserves.\nBerries are perishable fruits with a short shelf life, and are often preserved by drying, freezing, pickling or making fruit preserves. Berries such as blackberry, blueberry, boysenberry, lingonberry, loganberry,\u200d raspberry, and strawberry are often used in jams and jellies. In the United States, Native Americans were \"the first to make preserves from blueberries\".\u200d\nOther usages.\nChefs have created quick pickled soft fruit, such as blackberries,\u200d strawberries,\u200d and blueberries.\u200d Strawberries can be battered and quickly fried in a deep fryer.\u200d Sauces made from berries, such as cranberry sauce, can be frozen until hard, battered, and deep fried.\u200d Cranberry sauce is a traditional food item for Thanksgiving, and similar sauces can be made from many other berries such as blueberries, raspberries, blackberries, and huckleberries.\u200d\nIn culture.\nDye.\nBerries have been used in some cultures for dyeing. Many berries contain juices that can easily stain, affording use as a natural dye. For example, blackberries are useful for making dyes, especially when ripe berries can easily release juice to produce a colorfast effect.\u200d \"Rubus\" berries, such as blackberry, raspberry, black raspberry, dewberry, loganberry, and thimbleberry all produce dye colors. These were once used by Native Americans.\u200d In Hawaii, the native Hawaiian raspberry called was used to dye tapa cloth with lavender and pink hues, whereas berries from the dianella lily were used for blue coloration, and berries from the black nightshade were used to produce green coloration.\u200d\nResearch.\nBerry consumption is under preliminary research for the potential to improve nutrition and affect chronic diseases.\u200d A 2016 meta-analysis found that berry consumption can significantly lower body mass index, low density lipoprotein (LDL) and systolic blood pressure.\u200d\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52949", "revid": "37068836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52949", "title": "Israelites", "text": "Hebrew ethno-religious group in Canaan during the Iron Age\nThe Israelites, also known as the Children of Israel, were an ancient Semitic-speaking people who emerged in Canaan during the Iron Age. They were a Hebrew people that spoke an archaic Hebrew language commonly called Biblical Hebrew through association with the Hebrew Bible. In biblical myth, the population was divided into the Twelve Tribes of Israel. The group went on to form the Iron Age kingdoms of Israel and Judah.\nModern scholarship describes the Israelites as emerging from indigenous Canaanite populations and other peoples of the ancient Near East. The Israelite religion revolved around Yahweh, who was an ancient Semitic god with less significance in the broader Canaanite religion. Around 720 BCE, the Kingdom of Israel was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire, triggering the Assyrian captivity; and around 586 BCE, the Kingdom of Judah was conquered by the Neo-Babylonian Empire, triggering the Babylonian captivity. While most of Israel's population was irreversibly dispossessed as a result of Assyrian resettlement policy, Judah's population was rehabilitated by the Achaemenid Empire following the fall of Babylon in 539 BCE.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Israelites were the descendants of Jacob (later known as Israel), who was a son of Isaac and thereby a grandson of Abraham. Due to a severe drought in Canaan, Jacob and his twelve sons migrated to Egypt, where each son became the progenitor and namesake of an Israelite tribe. These tribes came to constitute a distinct nation, which was enslaved by \"the Pharaoh\" before being led out of Egypt by the Hebrew prophet Moses, whose successor Joshua oversaw the Israelite conquest of Canaan. After taking control of Canaan, they established a kritarchy and eventually founded the United Monarchy, which split into independent Israel in the north and independent Judah in the south. Scholars generally consider the Hebrew Bible's narrative to be part of the Israelites' national myth, but believe that there is a \"historical core\" to some of the events in it. The historicity of the United Monarchy is widely disputed. In the context of Hebrew scripture, Canaan is also variously described as the Promised Land, the Land of Israel, Zion, or the Holy Land.\nHistorically, Jews and Samaritans have been two closely related ethno-religious groups descended from the Israelites; Jews trace their ancestry to the tribes that inhabited the Kingdom of Judah, namely Judah, Benjamin, and partially Levi, while Samaritans trace their ancestry to the tribes that inhabited the Kingdom of Israel and remained after the Assyrian captivity, namely Ephraim, Manasseh, and partially Levi. Furthermore, Judaism and Samaritanism are fundamentally rooted in Israelite religious and cultural traditions. There are several other groups claiming affiliation with the Israelites, but most of them have unproven lineage and are not recognized as either Jewish or Samaritan.\nEtymology.\nThe first reference to \"Israel\" in non-biblical sources is found in the Merneptah Stele in c.\u20091209 BCE. The inscription is very brief and says: \"Israel is laid waste and his seed is not\". The inscription refers to a people, not an individual or nation state, who inhabit central Palestine or the highlands of Samaria. Some Egyptologists suggest that \"Israel\" appeared in earlier topographical reliefs, dating to the Eighteenth Dynasty or Nineteenth Dynasty (i.e. reign of Ramesses II) , but this reading remains controversial.\nIn the Hebrew Bible, \"Israel\" first appears in , where an angel renames Jacob to Israel after Jacob fought with him. According to the folk etymology given in the text, Israel is derived from \"yisra\", \"to prevail over\" or \"to struggle with\", and \"El\", a Canaanite-Mesopotamian creator god that is tenuously identified with Yahweh. However, modern scholarship interprets \"El\" as the subject, \"El rules/struggles\", from \"sarar\" () 'to rule' (cognate with \"sar\" () 'ruler', Akkadian \"\u0161arru\" 'ruler, king'), which is likely cognate with the similar root \"sara\" () \"fought, strove, contended\". Dr. Tzemah Yoreh clarifies that Israel is a combination of 'to strive with' (\u05e9.\u05e8.\u05d4) and 'God' (\u05d0\u05dc) and that Jacob's name alternates between Jacob and Israel in the biblical narrative, even after his renaming, due to the authors having different opinions about Jacob's moral character.\nBiblical timeline.\nGenesis of the Israelite people.\nBiblically, the Israelites referred to the direct descendants of Israel, a view that was reinforced by Second Temple Judaism. They referred to themselves as the \"sons of Israel\".\"\", gentiles (i.e. resident aliens) could fully assimilate into the Israelite community.\nSome scholars interpret \"sons of Israel\" as citizens of the Israelite community, especially after Israel's biological family transitioned from a clan to a society (). In fact, there is evidence of gentiles (i.e. resident aliens) assimilating into the Israelite community.\nWhilst the Israelites called themselves the \"sons of Jacob\", some scholars interpret this as citizens of the Israelite community, especially after Israel's biological family transitioned from a clan to a society (). Contemporary ethnicities in the ancient Near East similarly named themselves this way. Likewise, tribal membership in Israel was likely based on one's self-declared allegiance or residency within an assigned tribal territory ().\nAlternatively, the Israelites were a religious group that adhered to Yahwism and that their ethnic identity was based on 'covenantal circumcision' rather than ancestry ().\nThe Israelites trace their ancestors to Jacob, who in turn descended from Abraham. Abraham was formerly a native of Ur Ka\u015bdim (), whose location is hotly contested. Some scholars argue that it is located in lower Mesopotamia whilst others locate it further north in upper Mesopotamia, around northern Syria or southeastern Turkey.\nTheologians suggest that Canaan always belonged to the Israelites but was initially usurped by the descendants of Canaan, resulting in their conquest by Israel as divine punishment. Israelite presence in Canaan was also established before Joshua's conquests according to a few biblical traditions.\nThe history of the Israelite people can be divided into these categories, according to the Hebrew Bible:\n The Israelites were named after their ancestor, Jacob/Israel, who was the grandson of Abraham. They were organized into 12 tribes: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph (or Tribe of Ephraim and Tribe of Manasseh) and Benjamin. Originally, they went to Egypt after a famine in Canaan but were enslaved by the Egyptians. They escaped and organized themselves as a kritarchy, where they followed laws given by Moses. Afterwards, the Israelites conquered Canaan and fought with several neighbours until they established a monarchic state.\n* This period is covered by Genesis 12 to 1 Samuel 8.\n As a monarchic state, the Israelite tribes were united by the leadership of Saul, David and Solomon. The reigns of Saul and David were marked by military victories and Israel's transition to a mini-empire with vassal states. Solomon's reign was relatively more peaceful and oversaw the construction of the First Temple, with the help of Phoenician allies. This Temple was where the Ark of the Covenant was stored; its former location was the City of David.\n* This period is covered by 1 Samuel 8 to 1 Kings 11 or alternatively, 1 Chronicles 10 to 2 Chronicles 9.\n The monarchic state was divided into two states, Israel and Judah, due to civil and religious disputes. Eventually, Israel and Judah met their demise after the Assyrian and Babylonian invasions respectively. According to the Biblical prophets, these invasions were divine judgements for religious apostasy and corrupt leadership.\n* This period is covered by 1 Kings 12 to 2 Kings 25 or alternatively, 2 Chronicles 10 to 2 Chronicles 36. The Book of Jonah narrates the prophet Jonah going to the Neo-Assyrian Empire to deliver a divine message.\n After the Babylonians invaded Judah, they deported most of its citizens to Babylon, where they lived as \"exiles\". Cyrus the Great conquered Babylon and established the First Persian Empire in 539\u00a0BCE. One year later, according to traditional dating, Cyrus permitted the Judahites to return to their homeland. This homeland was re-named as the Province of Yehud, which eventually became a satrapy of Eber-Nari.\n* This period is covered by the entirety of the Book of Daniel.\n In 537\u2013520\u00a0BCE, Zerubbabel became Yehud's governor and started work on the Second Temple, which was stopped. In 520\u2013516\u00a0BCE, Haggai and Zechariah goaded the Judahites to resume work on the Temple. Upon completion, Joshua became its high priest. In 458\u2013433\u00a0BCE, Ezra and Nehemiah led another group of Judahites to Yehud, with Artaxerxes's permission. Nehemiah rebuilt the temple after some unspecified disaster and removed foreign influence from the Judahite community. That said, some Judahites elected to stay in Persia, where they almost faced annihilation.\n* This period is covered by the entirety of the Book of Ezra, Book of Nehemiah, the Book of Esther, the Book of Haggai, the Book of Zechariah, and the Book of Malachi.\nHistorical timeline.\nEmergence of the Israelite culture.\nEfforts to confirm the biblical ethnogenesis of Israel through archaeology have largely been abandoned as unproductive. Many scholars see the traditional narratives as national myths with little historical value, but some posit that a small group of exiled Egyptians contributed to the Exodus narrative. William G. Dever cautiously identifies this group with the Tribe of Joseph, while Richard Elliott Friedman identifies it with the Tribe of Levi. Josephus quoting Manetho identifies them with the Hyksos. Other scholars believe that the Exodus narrative was a \"collective memory\" of several events from the Bronze Age.\nIn addition, it is unlikely that the Israelites overtook the southern Levant by force, according to archaeological evidence. Instead, they branched out of indigenous Canaanite peoples that long inhabited the region, which included Syria, ancient Israel, and the Transjordan region. Their culture was monolatristic, with a primary focus on Yahweh (or El) worship, but after the Babylonian exile, it became monotheistic, with partial influence from Zoroastrianism. The latter decisively separated the Israelites from other Canaanites. The Israelites used the Canaanite script and communicated in a Canaanite language known as Biblical Hebrew. The language's modern descendant is today the only surviving dialect of the Canaanite languages. Genetic studies show that contemporary ethnicities in the Levant were, like Israel, distinguished by their unique cultures, due to their descent from a common ancestral stock.\nSeveral theories exist for the origins of historical Israelites. Some believe they descend from raiding groups, itinerant nomads such as Habiru and Shasu or impoverished Canaanites, who were forced to leave wealthy urban areas and live in the highlands. Gary Rendsburg argues that some archaic biblical traditions and other circumstantial evidence point to the Israelites emerging from the Shasu and other seminomadic peoples from the desert regions south of the Levant, later settling in the highlands of Canaan. The prevailing academic opinion is that the Israelites were a mixture of peoples predominately indigenous to Canaan, with additional input from an Egyptian matrix of peoples, which most likely inspired the Exodus narrative. Israel's demographics were similar to the demographics of Ammon, Edom, Moab and Phoenicia.\nBesides their focus on Yahweh worship, Israelite cultural markers were defined by body, food, and time, including male circumcision, avoidance of pork consumption and marking time based on the Exodus, the reigns of Israelite kings, and Sabbath observance. The first two markers were observed by neighbouring west Semites besides the Philistines, who were of Mycenaean Greek origin. As a result, intermarriage with other Semites was common. But what distinguished Israelite circumcision from non-Israelite circumcision was its emphasis on 'correct' timing. Israelite circumcision also served as a mnemonic sign for the circumcised, where their 'unnatural' erect circumcised penis would remind them to behave differently in sexual matters. Yom-Tov Lipmann-Muhlhausen suggests that Israelite identity was based on faith and adherence to sex-appropriate commandments. For men, it was circumcision. For women, it was ritual sacrifice after childbirth ().\nGenealogy was another ethnic marker. While it was likely that Israelite identity was not exclusively based on blood descent, the Israelites used genealogy to engage in narcissism of small differences but also, self-criticism since their ancestors included morally questionable characters such as Jacob. Both these traits represented the \"complexities of the Jewish soul\".\nNames were significant in Israelite culture and indicated one's destiny and inherent character. Thus, a name change indicated a 'divine transformation' in one's 'destines, characters and natures'. These beliefs aligned with the Near Eastern cultural milieu, where names were 'intimately bound up with the very essence of being and inextricably intertwined with personality'.\nIn terms of appearance, rabbis described the Biblical Jews as being \"midway between black and white\" and having the \"color of the boxwood tree\". Assuming Yurco's debated claim that the Israelites are depicted in reliefs from Merneptah's temple at Karnak is correct, the early Israelites may have wore the same attire and hairstyles as non-Israelite Canaanites. Dissenting from this, Anson Rainey argued that the Israelites in the reliefs looked more similar to the Shasu. Based on biblical literature, it is implied that the Israelites distinguished themselves from peoples like the Babylonians and Egyptians by not having long beards and chin tufts. However, these fashion practices were upper class customs.\nEarly highland settlements in Canaan.\nIn the 12th century BCE, many Israelite settlements appeared in the central hill country of Canaan, which was formerly an open terrain. These settlements lacked evidence of pork consumption, compared to Philistine settlements, had four-room houses and lived by an egalitarian ethos, which was exemplified by the absence of elaborate tombs, governor's mansions, certain houses being bigger than others etc. They followed a mixed economy, which prioritized self-sufficiency, cultivation of crops, animal husbandry and small-scale craft production. New technologies such as terraced farming, silos for grain storage and cisterns for rainwater collection were simultaneously introduced.\nThese settlements were built by inhabitants of the \"general Southland\" (i.e. modern Sinai and the southern parts of Israel and Jordan), who abandoned their pastoral-nomadic ways. Canaanites who lived outside the central hill country were tenuously identified as Danites, Asherites, Zebulunites, Issacharites, Naphtalites and Gadites. These inhabitants do not have a significant history of migration besides the Danites, who allegedly originate from the Sea Peoples, particularly the Dan(an)u. Nonetheless, they intermingled with the former nomads, due to socioeconomic and military factors. Their interest in Yahwism and its concern for the underprivileged was another factor. Possible allusions to this historical reality in the Hebrew Bible include the aforementioned tribes, except for Issachar and Zebulun, descending from Bilhah and Zilpah, who were viewed as \"secondary additions\" to Israel.\nEl worship was central to early Israelite culture but currently, the number of El worshippers in Israel is unknown. It is more likely that different Israelite locales held different views about El and had 'small-scale' sacred spaces.\nHimbaza et al. (2012) states that Israelite households were typically ill-equipped to handle conflicts between family members, which may explain the harsh sexual taboos enforced against acts like incest, homosexuality, polygamy etc. in . While the death penalty was legislated for these 'secret crimes', they functioned as a warning, where offenders would confess out of fear and make appropriate reparations.\nUnited Monarchy?\nThe historicity of the United Monarchy is heavily debated among archaeologists and biblical scholars: biblical maximalists and centrists (Kenneth Kitchen, William G. Dever, Amihai Mazar, Baruch Halpern and others) argue that the biblical account is more or less accurate, while biblical minimalists (Israel Finkelstein, Ze'ev Herzog, Thomas L. Thompson and others) argue that Israel and Judah never split from a singular state. The debate has not been resolved, but recent archaeological discoveries by Eilat Mazar and Yosef Garfinkel show some support for the existence of the United Monarchy.\nFrom 850 BCE onwards, a series of inscriptions mention the \"House of David\". They came from Israel's neighbours.\nKingdoms of Israel and Judah.\nCompared to the United Monarchy, the historicity of the Kingdom of Israel and Judah is widely accepted by historians and archaeologists. Their destruction by the Assyrians and Babylonians respectively is also confirmed by archaeological evidence and extrabiblical sources.\nChristian Frevel argues that Yahwism was rooted in the culture of the Kingdom of Israel, who introduced it to the Kingdom of Judah via Ahab's expansions and sociopolitical cooperation, which was prompted by Hazael's conquests. Frevel has also argued that Judah was a 'vassal-like' state to Israel, under the Omrides. This theory has been rejected by other scholars, who argue that the archaeological evidence seems to indicate that Judah was an independent socio-political entity for most of the 9th century BCE.\nAvraham Faust argues that there was continued adherence to the 'ethos of egalitarianism and simplicity' in the Iron Age II (10th-6th century BCE). For example, there is minimal evidence of temples and complex tomb burials, despite Israel and Judah being more densely populated than the Late Bronze Age. Four-room houses remained the norm. In addition, royal inscriptions were scarce, along with imported and decorated pottery. According to William G. Dever, Israelite identity in the 9th-8th centuries BCE can be identified through a combination of archaeological and cultural traits that distinguish them from their neighbours. These traits include being born and living within the territorial borders of Israel or Judah, speaking Hebrew, living in specific house types, using locally produced pottery, and following particular burial practices. Israelites were also part of a rural, kin-based society, and adhered to Yahwism, though not necessarily in a monotheistic way. Their material culture was simple but distinct, and their societal organization was centered around family and inheritance. These traits, while shared with some neighbouring peoples, were uniquely Israelite in their specific combination.\nWars with Assyria and Babylonia.\nThe Kingdom of Israel was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire around 720 BCE. The records of Sargon II of Assyria indicate that he deported part of the population to Assyria. Some Israelites migrated to the southern kingdom of Judah, while those that remained in Samaria, concentrated mainly around Mount Gerizim, developed a new ethnic identity as Samaritans. Foreign groups were also settled by the Assyrians in the territories of the conquered kingdom. Research indicates that only a portion of the surviving Israelite population intermarried with Mesopotamians settlers. In their native Samaritan Hebrew, the Samaritans identify as \"Israel\", \"B'nai Israel\" or \"Shamerim/Shomerim\" (i.e. \"Guardians/Keepers/Watchers\"). Despite this, belief in the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel emerged because of the heavy assimilation faced by Samarian deportees.\nTowards the end of the same century, the Neo-Babylonian Empire emerged victorious over the Assyrians, leading to Judah's subjugation as a vassal state. In the early 6th century BC, a series of revolts in Judah prompted the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II to lay siege to and destroy Jerusalem along with the First Temple, marking the kingdom's demise. Subsequently, a segment of the Judahite populace was exiled to Babylon in several waves. Judeans were progenitors of the Jewish people, who practised Second Temple Judaism during the Second Temple period.\nPersian period.\nWith the fall of Babylon to the rising Achaemenid Persian Empire, king Cyrus the Great issued a proclamation known as the Edict of Cyrus, encouraging the exiles to return to their homeland after the Persians raised it as an autonomous Jewish-governed province named Yehud. Under the Persians (c.\u2009539\u2013332 BCE), the returned Jewish population restored the city and rebuilt the Temple in Jerusalem. The Cyrus Cylinder is controversially cited as evidence for Cyrus allowing the Judeans to return. The returnees showed a \"heightened sense\" of their ethnic identity and shunned exogamy, which was treated as a \"permissive reality\" in Babylon. Circumcision was no longer a significant ethnic marker, with increased emphasis on genealogical descent or faith in Yahweh. Jason A. Staples argues that the majority of contemporary Jews, regardless of theology, wished for the reunion of northern Israelites and southern Jews.\nHellenistic period.\nIn 332 BCE, the Achaemenid Empire fell to Alexander the Great, and the region was later incorporated into the Ptolemaic Kingdom (c.\u2009301\u2013200 BCE) and the Seleucid Empire (c.\u2009200\u2013167 BCE). The Maccabean Revolt against Seleucid rule ushered in a period of nominal independence for the Jewish people under the Hasmonean dynasty (140\u201337 BCE). Initially operating semi-autonomously within the Seleucid sphere, the Hasmoneans gradually asserted full independence through military conquest and diplomacy, establishing themselves as the final sovereign Jewish rulers before a prolonged hiatus in Jewish sovereignty in the region. Some scholars argue that Jews also engaged in active missionary efforts in the Greco-Roman world, which led to conversions. Several scholars, such as Scot McKnight and Martin Goodman, reject this view while holding that conversions occasionally occurred. A similar diaspora existed for Samaritans but their existence is poorly documented.\nRoman period.\nIn 63 BCE, the Roman Republic conquered the kingdom. In 37 BCE, the Romans appointed Herod the Great as king of a vassal Judea. In 6 CE, Judea was fully incorporated into the Roman Empire as the province of Judaea. During this period, the main areas of Jewish settlement in the Land of Israel were Judea, Galilee and Perea, while the Samaritans had their demographic center in Samaria. Growing dissatisfaction with Roman rule and civil disturbances eventually led to the First Jewish\u2013Roman War (66\u201373 CE), resulting in the destruction of Jerusalem and its Temple, which ended the Second Temple period. This event marked a cataclysmic moment in Jewish history, prompting a reconfiguration of Jewish identity and practice to ensure continuity. The cessation of Temple worship and disappearance of Temple-based sects facilitated the rise of Rabbinic Judaism, which stemmed from the Pharisaic school of Second Temple Judaism, emphasizing communal synagogue worship and Torah study, eventually becoming the predominant expression of Judaism. Concurrently, Christianity began to diverge from Judaism, evolving into a predominantly Gentile religion. Decades later, the Bar Kokhba revolt (132\u2013135 CE) further diminished the Jewish presence in Judea, leading to a geographical shift of Jewish life to Galilee and Babylonia, with smaller communities scattered across the Mediterranean.\nGenetic studies and descendants.\nAs of 2024, only one study has directly examined ancient Israelite genetic material. The analysis examined First Temple-era skeletal remains excavated in Abu Ghosh, and showed one male individual belonging to the J2 Y-DNA haplogroup, a set of closely related DNA sequences thought to have originated in the Caucasus or Eastern Anatolia, as well as the T1a and H87 mitochondrial DNA haplogroups, the former of which has also been detected among Canaanites, and the latter in Basques, Tunisian Arabs, and Iraqis, suggesting a Mediterranean, Near Eastern, or perhaps Arabian origin.\nA 2004 study (by Shen et al.) comparing Samaritans to several Jewish populations (including Ashkenazi Jews, Iraqi Jews, Libyan Jews, Moroccan Jews, and Yemenite Jews) found that \"the principal components analysis suggested a common ancestry of Samaritan and Jewish patrilineages. Most of the former may be traced back to a common ancestor in what is today identified as the paternally inherited Israelite high priesthood (Cohanim), with a common ancestor projected to the time of the Assyrian conquest of the kingdom of Israel.\"\nA 2020 study (by Agranat-Tamr et al.) stated that there was genetic continuity between the Bronze Age and Iron Age southern Levantines, which included the Israelites and Judahites. They could be \"modeled as a mixture of local earlier Neolithic populations and populations from the northeastern part of the Near East (e.g. Zagros Mountains, Caucasians/Armenians and possibly, Hurrians)\". Reasons for the continuity include resilience from the Bronze Age collapse, which was mostly true for inland cities such as Tel Megiddo and Tel Abel Beth Maacah. Elsewhere, European-related and East African-related components were added to the population, from a north-south and south-north gradient respectively. Late Neolithic and Bronze Age Europeans and Somalis were used as representatives.\nModern Levantine groups with Israelite ancestry.\nSamaritans and ethnic Jews have historically been regarded as being descended from the Israelites. With regard to the Jewish diaspora, it is held that each Jewish community originates from exiled Israelite settlement in various parts of the world, particularly as a result of the Jewish\u2013Roman wars. It is also argued that some Palestinian people are similarly descended from those Israelites who were not exiled from the region and who consequently converted to Christianity under the Byzantine Empire and then to Islam following the Arab conquest of the Levant, save for those who remained identified as Palestinian Jews.\nNon-Levantine groups claiming Israelite ancestry.\nLargely owing to the spread of Christianity and Islam globally, several groups of people outside of the Levant have claimed Israelite ancestry on an ethnic or racial basis, while some Christian groups have claimed spiritual continuity of the Israelite identity on the basis of their religion. These various non-Levantine groups include Mandaeans, Pashtuns, British Israelists, Black Hebrew Israelites, Igbos, Mormons, and evangelical Christians who subscribe to covenant theology. The phenomenon became especially prevalent after the founding of the State of Israel in 1948, as the country's Law of Return grants citizenship to qualified Jews and to non-Jews who are either married to a Jew or provide sufficient evidence of having Jewish ancestry.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52950", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52950", "title": "Superstrings", "text": ""}
{"id": "52952", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52952", "title": "Adrenoleukodystrophy", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAdrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a disease linked to the X chromosome. It is a result of fatty acid buildup caused by failure of peroxisomal fatty acid beta oxidation which results in the accumulation of very long chain fatty acids in tissues throughout the body. The most severely affected tissues are the myelin in the central nervous system, the adrenal cortex, and the Leydig cells in the testes. The long chain fatty acid buildup causes damage to the myelin sheath of the neurons of the brain, resulting in seizures and hyperactivity. Other symptoms include problems in speaking, listening, and understanding verbal instructions. \nClinically, ALD presents as a heterogeneous disorder, showing several distinct phenotypes, and no clear pattern of genotype\u2013phenotype correlation. As an X-linked disorder, ALD presents more frequently and severely in males; however, approximately 80% of heterozygote females show some symptoms later in life. Approximately one third of male ALD patients will present with the childhood cerebral form of the disease, which is the most severe form. It is characterized by normal development in early childhood, followed by rapid degeneration to a vegetative state. The other forms of ALD vary in timing of onset and in clinical severity, ranging from adrenal insufficiency alone to progressive paraparesis in early adulthood.\nALD is caused by mutations in \"ABCD1\", a gene located on the X chromosome that codes for ALD, a peroxisomal membrane transporter protein. The exact mechanism of the pathogenesis of the various forms of ALD is not known. Biochemically, individuals with ALD show very high levels of unbranched, saturated, very long chain fatty acids, particularly cerotic acid (26:0). The level of cerotic acid in plasma does not correlate with clinical presentation. Treatment options for ALD are limited. For the childhood cerebral form, stem cell transplant and gene therapy are options if the disease is detected early in the clinical course. Adrenal insufficiency in ALD patients can be successfully treated. ALD is the most common peroxisomal inborn error of metabolism, with a minimum estimated incidence of 1:42,000 for hemizygotes and 1:16,800 for hemizygotes and heterozygotes, though the incidence is likely to increase with improved newborn screening. It does not have a significantly higher incidence in any specific ethnic group.\nSigns and symptoms.\nALD can present in different ways. The different presentations are complicated by the pattern of X-linked recessive inheritance. There have been seven phenotypes described in males with \"ABCD1\" mutations and five in females. Initial symptoms in boys affected with the childhood cerebral form of ALD include emotional instability, hyperactivity and disruptive behavior at school. Older patients affected with the cerebral form will present with similar symptoms. Untreated, cerebral ALD is characterized by progressive demyelination leading to a vegetative state and death. Adult males with an adrenomyeloneuropathy presentation typically present initially with muscle stiffness, paraparesis and sexual dysfunction. All patients with clinically recognized ALD phenotypes are at risk for adrenal insufficiency. There is no reliable way to predict which form of the disease an affected individual will develop, with multiple phenotypes being demonstrated within families. Onset of adrenal insufficiency is often the first symptom, appearing as early as two years of age.\nGenetics.\nALD is caused by mutations in \"ABCD1\", located at Xq28 and demonstrates X-linked recessive inheritance. The gene \"ABCD1\" encodes a peroxisomal membrane transporter which is responsible for transporting very long chain fatty acid substrate into the peroxisomes for degradation. Mutations in this gene that interfere with this process cause this syndrome.\nMales with an \"ABCD1\" mutation are hemizygous, as they only have a single X chromosome. Female carriers will typically avoid the most severe manifestations of the disease, but often become symptomatic later in life. Although the detection of an \"ABCD1\" mutation identifies an individual who is affected with a form of ALD, there is no genotype\u2013phenotype correlation. Within a family, there will often be several different phenotypes, despite the presence of the same causative mutation. In one case, a family with six affected members displayed five different phenotypes. There are no common mutations that cause ALD, most are private or familial. Almost 600 different mutations have been identified, approximately half are missense mutations, one quarter are frameshifts, with in-frame deletions and splicing defects making up the remainder. The incidence of new mutations in ALD (those occurring spontaneously, rather than being inherited from a carrier parent) is estimated at 4.1%, with the possibility that these are due to germline mosaicism.\nPathogenesis.\nThe exact cause for the varied collection of symptoms found in the different ALD phenotypes is not clear. The white matter of the brain, the Leydig cells of the testes and the adrenal cortex are the most severely affected systems. The excess VLCFA can be detected in almost all tissues of the body, despite the localization of symptoms. The lack of Coenzyme A does not permit the disintegration of the VLCFA, accumulating the same in the white matter, adrenal glands, and the testes more specifically in the Leydig cells not allowing the proper function of these organs. Successful treatment of the demyelination process that affects the brain with either stem cell transplant or gene therapy does not immediately normalize the VLCFA levels in body tissues. The levels of VLCFA can be normalized by treatment with Lorenzo's oil, but this does not alter the progression of the disease. It is unclear whether the accumulation of VLCFA is associated with the pathogenesis of the disease in a specific way, or if it is a biochemical phenotype, useful for identification. Several studies link inflammation from viral infection or head trauma to development or worsening of symptoms.\nDiagnosis.\nThe clinical presentation of ALD can vary greatly, making diagnosis difficult. With the variety of phenotypes, clinical suspicion of ALD can result from a variety of different presentations. Symptoms vary based on the disease phenotype, and even within families or between twins. When ALD is suspected based on clinical symptoms, the initial testing usually includes plasma very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) determination using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The concentration of unsaturated VLCFA, particularly 26 carbon chains is significantly elevated in males with ALD, even prior to the development of other symptoms. Confirmation of ALD after positive plasma VLCFA determination usually involves molecular genetic analysis of \"ABCD1\". In females, where plasma VLCFA measurement is not always conclusive (some female carriers will have normal VLCFA in plasma), molecular analysis is preferred, particularly in cases where the mutation in the family is known. Although the clinical phenotype is highly variable among affected males, the elevations of VLCFA are present in all males with an \"ABCD1\" mutation.\nBecause the characteristic elevations associated with ALD are present at birth, well before any symptoms are apparent, there have been methods developed in the interests of including it in newborn screening programs. One of the difficulties with ALD as a disease included in universal newborn screening is the difficulty in predicting the eventual phenotype that an individual will express. The accepted treatment for affected boys presenting with the cerebral childhood form of the disease is a bone marrow transplant, a procedure which carries significant risks. However, because most affected males will demonstrate adrenal insufficiency, early discovery and treatment of this symptom could potentially prevent complications and allow these patients to be monitored for other treatment in the future, depending on the progression of their disease.\nThe Loes score is a rating of the severity of abnormalities in the brain found on MRI. It ranges from 0 to 34, based on a point system derived from the location and extent of disease and the presence of atrophy in the brain, either localized to specific points or generally throughout the brain. A Loes score of 0.5 or less is classified as normal, while a Loes score of 14 or greater is considered severe. It was developed by neuroradiologist Daniel J. Loes MD and is an important tool in assessing disease progression and the effectiveness of therapy.\nTreatments.\nDietary therapy.\nInitial attempts at dietary therapy in ALD involved restricting the intake of very-long chain fatty acids (VLCFA). Dietary intake is not the only source for VLCFA in the body, as they are also synthesized endogenously. This dietary restriction did not impact the levels of VLCFA in plasma and other body tissues. After the realization that endogenous synthesis was an important contribution to VLCFA in the body, efforts at dietary therapy shifted to inhibiting these synthetic pathways in the body. The parents of Lorenzo Odone, a boy with ALD, spearheaded efforts to develop a dietary treatment to slow the progression of the disease. They developed a mixture of unsaturated fatty acids (glycerol trioleate and glyceryl trierucate in a 4:1 ratio), known as Lorenzo's oil that inhibits elongation of saturated fatty acids in the body. Supplementation with Lorenzo's oil has been found to normalize the VLCFA concentrations in the body, although its effectiveness at treating the cerebral manifestations of the disease is still controversial and unproven. Trials with Lorenzo's oil have shown that it does not stop the neurological degradation in symptomatic patients, nor does it improve adrenal function, but asymptomatic patients, and speculatively AMN variants without cerebral involvement, as well as female carriers may benefit from early intake of oleic and erucic acids in addition to VLCFA restriction.\nAdrenomix\u00ae:\nIn 2009, a second-generation mixture was created, adding to the glycerol trioleate (GTO) and trierucate glycerol (GTE), conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) a group of linoleic acid isomers capable of overcoming the blood-brain barrier. CLA, through the activation of peroxisome beta oxidation, increases the catabolism of pro-inflammatory molecules and ROS, acting as an anti-inflammatory and antioxidant. The use of CLA was initially considered in relation to the ability to inhibit fatty acid synthase together with a hypolipidic diet. A group of Italian researchers of the Bambino Ges\u00f9 Pediatric Hospital in Rome showed that the administration of Adrenomix (GTO, GTE and CLA), in addition to decreasing levels of VLCFA throughout the body, reduces neuro inflammation and improves somatosensory evoked potential, found unchanged or worsened with only administration of GTO and GTE.\nhttps://:\nIn 2016, based on studies developed in recent years in the field of adrenoleukodystrophy and adrenomyelouropathy, a mixture was developed that adds to GTO, GTE and CLA, a mixture of\npowerful antioxidants at high dosages containing alpha lipoic acid (ALA), reduced L- glutathione and Vitamin E (\u03b1- tocopherol). Researchers at the IDIBELL- Hospital Duran i Reynals in Barcelona have shown that the early administration of a cocktail of powerful antioxidants, able to overcome the blood-brain barrier and thus carry out its activity at the CNS level, prevents the oxidative stress typical of the disease, intervenes on the initial axonal dysfunctions and therefore on locomotor damage. This new mixture, unlike what happened with the administration of GTO and GTE alone, poorly accumulated at the level of the nervous system, enhances the anti-inflammatory activity and reduces the levels of VLCFA in the CNS by combining synergistically the activity of its components. In particular, CLA, in addition to overcoming the blood-brain barrier and regulating at the CNS level the metabolism of VLCFA is able to influence the catabolism of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids and lipid peroxidation products. In this sense, the anti-inflammatory activity of ALA, reduced L-glutathione and Vitamin E is enhanced at the level of the whole body, and not only at the peripheral level as was the case in the past.\nTransplant.\nWhile dietary therapy has been shown to be effective to normalize the very-long chain fatty acid concentrations in the plasma of individuals with ALD, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants is the only treatment that can stop demyelination that is the hallmark of the cerebral forms of the disease. In order to be effective, the transplant must be done at an early stage of the disease; if the demyelination has progressed, transplant can worsen the outcome, and increase the rate of decline. While transplants have been shown to be effective at halting the demyelination process in those presenting with the childhood cerebral form of ALD, follow-up of these patients has shown that it does not improve adrenal function.\nGene therapy.\nFor patients where an appropriate match for a transplant cannot be found, there have been investigations into the use of gene therapy. Appropriate vectors are selected and modified to express wild type \"ABCD1\", which is then transplanted into the patients using a similar procedure as for a bone marrow or stem cell transplant. Gene therapy has only been tried on a small number of patients, mainly in France. These patients were only considered for gene therapy after there was no HLA match for a traditional transplant. In two reported cases, the gene therapy was successful, with a resolution of the demyelination process up to two years after the procedure. Although the gene therapy was successful in resolving the neurological symptoms, plasma VLCFA levels remained elevated.\nElivaldogene autotemcel is pending authorization by the European Commission as of May 2021[ [update]]. While this treatment is effective with 90% of patients being free of major functional disabilities after treatment, it costs $3.0 million per treatment and it comes with several adverse effects including mucositis and alopecia. There are also reports of hematologic cancer development in patients receiving this gene therapy, including myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia.\nDrugs.\nThe anti-diabetic medication pioglitazone was shown in a mouse model of ALD to be effective at treating the metabolic effects of ALD, including metabolic failure and increased oxidative stress. Pioglitazone was also shown to prevent axonal degeneration and increase mitochondria levels, as well as stop the progression of locomotor decline in ALD model mice. Subsequently, the drug leriglitazone has been developed by Minoryx Therapeutics as a more brain penetrant metabolite of pioglitazone. Currently, leriglitazone is in phase 2/3 clinical trials for adult and childhood cALD in the USA and the EU, and has completed a clinical trial for AMN.\nAdrenal insufficiency.\nTreatment of the adrenal insufficiency that can accompany any of the common male phenotypes of ALD does not resolve any of the neurological symptoms. Hormone replacement is standard for ALD patients demonstrating adrenal insufficiency. Adrenal insufficiency does not resolve with successful transplant; most patients still require hormone replacement.\nEpidemiology.\nALD has not been shown to have an increased incidence in any specific country or ethnic group. In the United States, the incidence of affected males is estimated at 1:21,000. Overall incidence of hemizygous males and carrier females is estimated at 1:16,800. The reported incidence in France is estimated at 1:22,000.\nAsymptomology.\nThere are documented asymptomatic males who present no ALD symptoms well into their 60s and 70s. It's not understood how they can have an ABCD1 gene variant and possess elevated VLCFAs and not exhibit either Cerebral ALD, Adrenal Insufficiency, or Adrenomyeloneuropathy symptoms. Daughters of asymptomatic males become obligate carriers, who may themselves be asymptomatic and who can pass the variant onto their children, which then silently perpetuates ALD. Sons of asymptomatic males only receive their father's Y chromosome and therefore can't inherit ALD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52953", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52953", "title": "X-linked", "text": ""}
{"id": "52954", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52954", "title": "Hypermodernism", "text": "Hypermodernism may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52957", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52957", "title": "Bell's palsy", "text": "Facial paralysis\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nBell's palsy is a type of facial paralysis that results in a temporary inability to control the facial muscles on the affected side of the face. In most cases, the weakness is temporary and significantly improves over weeks. Symptoms can vary from mild to severe. They may include muscle twitching, weakness, or total loss of the ability to move one or, in rare cases, both sides of the face. Other symptoms include drooping of the eyebrow, a change in taste, and pain around the ear. Typically symptoms come on over 48 hours. Bell's palsy can trigger an increased sensitivity to sound known as hyperacusis.\nThe cause of Bell's palsy is unknown and it can occur at any age. Risk factors include diabetes, a recent upper respiratory tract infection, and pregnancy. It results from a dysfunction of cranial nerve VII (the facial nerve). Many believe that this is due to a viral infection that results in swelling. Diagnosis is based on a person's appearance and ruling out other possible causes. Other conditions that can cause facial weakness include brain tumor, stroke, Ramsay Hunt syndrome type 2, myasthenia gravis, and Lyme disease.\nThe condition normally gets better by itself, with most achieving normal or near-normal function. Corticosteroids have been found to improve outcomes, while antiviral medications may be of a small additional benefit. The eye should be protected from drying up with the use of eye drops or an eyepatch. Surgery is generally not recommended. Often signs of improvement begin within 14 days, with complete recovery within six months. A few may not recover completely or have a recurrence of symptoms.\nBell's palsy is the most common cause of one-sided facial nerve paralysis (70%). It occurs in 1 to 4 per 10,000 people per year. About 1.5% of people are affected at some point in their lives. It most commonly occurs in people between ages 15 and 60. Males and females are affected equally. It is named after Scottish surgeon Charles Bell (1774\u20131842), who first described the connection of the facial nerve to the condition.\nAlthough defined as a mononeuritis (involving only one nerve), people diagnosed with Bell's palsy may have \"myriad neurological symptoms\", including \"facial tingling, moderate or severe headache/neck pain, memory problems, balance problems, ipsilateral limb paresthesias, ipsilateral limb weakness, and a sense of clumsiness\" that are \"unexplained by facial nerve dysfunction\".\nSigns and symptoms.\nBell's palsy is characterized by a one-sided facial droop that comes on within 72 hours. In rare cases (&lt;1%), it can occur on both sides resulting in total facial paralysis.\nThe facial nerve controls many functions, such as blinking and closing the eyes, smiling, frowning, lacrimation, salivation, flaring nostrils and raising eyebrows. It also carries taste sensations from the anterior two thirds of the tongue, through the chorda tympani nerve (a branch of the facial nerve). Because of this, people with Bell's palsy may present with loss of taste sensation in the anterior two thirds of the tongue on the affected side.\nThe facial nerve innervates the stapedius muscle of the middle ear (through the tympanic branch), which reflexively dampens the conduction of loud sounds. Thus, Bell's Palsy may cause normal sounds to be perceived as very loud (hyperacusis), and dysacusis is possible but hardly ever clinically evident.\nCause.\nThe cause of Bell's palsy is unknown. Risk factors include diabetes, a recent upper respiratory tract infection, and pregnancy.\nSome viruses are thought to establish a persistent (or latent) infection without symptoms, e.g., the varicella zoster virus and the Epstein\u2013Barr virus, both of the herpes family. Reactivation of an existing (dormant) viral infection has been suggested as a cause of acute Bell's palsy. As the facial nerve swells and becomes inflamed in reaction to the infection, it causes pressure within the Fallopian canal, resulting in the restriction of blood and oxygen to the nerve cells. Other viral and bacterial infections that have been linked to the development of Bell's palsy include HIV and Lyme disease. This new activation could be triggered by trauma, environmental factors, and metabolic or emotional disorders.\nFamilial inheritance has been found in 4\u201314% of cases. There may also be an association with migraines.\nIn December 2020, the U.S. FDA recommended that recipients of the Pfizer and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines should be monitored for symptoms of Bell's palsy after several cases were reported among clinical trial participants, though the data were not sufficient to determine a causal link.\nGenetics.\nA meta-analysis of genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified the first unequivocal association with Bell's palsy.\nPathophysiology.\nBell's palsy is the result of a malfunction of the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII), which controls the muscles of the face. Facial palsy is typified by an inability to move the muscles of facial expression. The paralysis is of the infranuclear/lower motor neuron type.\nIt is thought that as a result of inflammation of the facial nerve, pressure is produced on the nerve where it exits the skull within its bony canal (the stylomastoid foramen), blocking the transmission of neural signals or damaging the nerve. Patients with facial palsy for which an underlying cause can be found are not considered to have Bell's palsy \"per se\". Possible causes of facial paralysis include tumor, meningitis, stroke, diabetes mellitus, head trauma and inflammatory diseases of the cranial nerves (sarcoidosis, brucellosis, etc.). In these conditions, the neurologic findings are rarely restricted to the facial nerve. Babies can be born with facial palsy. In a few cases, bilateral facial palsy has been associated with acute HIV infection.\nIn some research, the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) has been identified in a majority of cases diagnosed as Bell's palsy through endoneurial fluid sampling. Other research, however, identified, out of a total of 176 cases diagnosed as Bell's palsy, HSV-1 in 31 cases (18%) and herpes zoster in 45 cases (26%).\nIn addition, HSV-1 infection is associated with demyelination of nerves. This nerve damage mechanism is different from the above-mentioned\u2014that edema, swelling, and compression of the nerve in the narrow bone canal are responsible for nerve damage. Demyelination may not even be directly caused by the virus but by an unknown immune response.\nDiagnosis.\nBell's palsy is a diagnosis of exclusion, meaning it is diagnosed by the elimination of other reasonable possibilities. By definition, no specific cause can be determined. There are no routine lab or imaging tests required to make the diagnosis. The degree of nerve damage can be assessed using the House-Brackmann score.\nOne study found that 45% of patients are not referred to a specialist, which suggests that Bell's palsy is considered by physicians to be a straightforward diagnosis that is easy to manage.\nOther conditions that can cause similar symptoms include herpes zoster, Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, stroke, and brain tumors.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nOnce the facial paralysis sets in, many people may mistake it as a symptom of a stroke; however, there are a few subtle differences. A stroke will usually cause a few additional symptoms, such as numbness or weakness in the arms and legs. And unlike Bell's palsy, a stroke will usually let patients control the upper part of their faces. A person with a stroke will usually have some wrinkling on their forehead.\nIn areas where Lyme disease is common, it accounts for about 25% of cases of facial palsy. In the U.S., Lyme is most common in the New England and Mid-Atlantic states and parts of Wisconsin and Minnesota. The first sign of about 80% of Lyme infections, typically one or two weeks after a tick bite, is usually an expanding rash that may be accompanied by headaches, body aches, fatigue, or fever. In up to 10\u201315% of Lyme infections, facial palsy appears several weeks later, and may be the first sign of infection that is noticed as the Lyme rash typically does not itch and is not painful. The likelihood that the facial palsy is caused by Lyme disease should be estimated, based on the recent history of outdoor activities in likely tick habitats during warmer months, a recent history of rash or symptoms such as headache and fever, and whether the palsy affects both sides of the face (much more common in Lyme than in Bell's palsy). If that likelihood is more than negligible, a serological test for Lyme disease should be performed, and if it exceeds 10%, empiric therapy with antibiotics should be initiated, without corticosteroids, and reevaluated upon completion of laboratory tests for Lyme disease. Corticosteroids have been found to harm outcomes for facial palsy caused by Lyme disease.\nOne disease that may be difficult to exclude in the differential diagnosis is the involvement of the facial nerve in infections with the herpes zoster virus. The major differences in this condition are the presence of small blisters, or \"vesicles\", on the external ear, significant pain in the jaw, ear, face, and/or neck, and hearing disturbances, but these findings may occasionally be lacking (zoster sine herpete). Reactivation of existing herpes zoster infection leading to facial paralysis in a Bell's palsy type pattern is known as Ramsay Hunt syndrome type 2. The prognosis for Bell's palsy patients is generally much better than for Ramsay Hunt syndrome type 2 patients.\nTreatment.\nSteroids are effective at improving recovery in Bell's palsy while antivirals have not. In those who are unable to close their eyes, eye-protective measures are required. Management during pregnancy is similar to management in the non-pregnant.\nSteroids.\nCorticosteroids such as prednisone improve recovery at 6 months and are thus recommended. Early treatment (within 3 days after the onset) is necessary for benefit with a 14% greater probability of recovery. There is some debate regarding the optimal dosing strategy which is generally physician dependent.\nAntivirals.\nOne review found that antivirals (such as aciclovir) are ineffective in improving recovery from Bell's palsy beyond steroids alone in mild to moderate disease. Another review found a benefit when combined with corticosteroids but stated the evidence was not very good to support this conclusion.\nIn severe disease, it is also unclear. One 2015 review found no effect regardless of severity. Another review found a small benefit when added to steroids.\nThey are commonly prescribed due to a theoretical link between Bell's palsy and the herpes simplex and varicella zoster virus. There is still the possibility that they might result in a benefit less than 7% as this has not been ruled out.\nEye protection.\nWhen Bell's palsy affects the blink reflex and stops the eye from closing completely, frequent use of tear-like eye drops or eye ointments is recommended during the day, and protecting the eyes with patches or taping them shut is recommended for sleep and rest periods.\nPhysiotherapy.\nPhysiotherapy can be beneficial to some individuals with Bell's palsy as it helps to maintain muscle tone of the affected facial muscles and stimulate the facial nerve. It is important that muscle re-education exercises and soft tissue techniques be implemented before recovery to help prevent permanent contractures of the paralyzed facial muscles. To reduce pain, heat can be applied to the affected side of the face. There is no high-quality evidence to support the role of electrical stimulation for Bell's palsy.\nSurgery.\nSurgery may be able to improve outcomes in facial nerve palsy that has not recovered. A number of different techniques exist. Smile surgery or smile reconstruction is a surgical procedure that may restore the smile for people with facial nerve paralysis. Adverse effects include hearing loss which occurs in 3\u201315% of people. A Cochrane review (updated in 2021), after reviewing applicable randomized and quasi-randomized controlled trials was unable to determine if early surgery is beneficial or harmful. As of 2007 the American Academy of Neurology did not recommend surgical decompression.\nAlternative medicine.\nThe efficacy of acupuncture remains unknown because the available studies are of low quality (poor primary study design or inadequate reporting practices). There is very tentative evidence for hyperbaric oxygen therapy in severe disease.\nPrognosis.\nMost people with Bell's palsy start to regain normal facial function within three weeks\u2014even those who do not receive treatment. In a 1982 study, when no treatment was available, of 1,011 patients, 85% showed first signs of recovery within three weeks after onset. For the other 15%, recovery occurred 3\u20136 months later.\nAfter a follow-up of at least one year or until restoration, complete recovery had occurred in more than two-thirds (71%) of all patients. Recovery was judged moderate in 12% and poor in only 4% of patients. Another study found that incomplete palsies disappear entirely, nearly always in one month. The patients who regain movement within the first two weeks nearly always remit entirely. When remission does not occur until the third week or later, a significantly greater part of the patients develop sequelae. A third study found a better prognosis for young patients, aged below 10 years old, while the patients over 61 years old presented a worse prognosis.\nMajor possible complications of the condition are chronic loss of taste (ageusia), chronic facial spasm, facial pain, and corneal infections. Another complication can occur in case of incomplete or erroneous regeneration of the damaged facial nerve. The nerve can be thought of as a bundle of smaller individual nerve connections that branch out to their proper destinations. During regrowth, nerves are generally able to track the original path to the right destination\u2014but some nerves may sidetrack leading to a condition known as synkinesis. For instance, the regrowth of nerves controlling muscles attached to the eye may sidetrack and also regrow connections reaching the muscles of the mouth. In this way, the movement of one also affects the other. For example, when the person closes the eye, the corner of the mouth lifts involuntarily.\nAround 9% of people have some sort of ongoing problems after Bell's palsy, typically the synkinesis already discussed, or spasm, contracture, tinnitus, or hearing loss during facial movement or crocodile-tear syndrome. This is also called gustatolacrimal reflex or Bogorad's syndrome and results in shedding tears while eating. This is thought to be due to faulty regeneration of the facial nerve, a branch of which controls the lacrimal and salivary glands. Gustatorial sweating can also occur.\nEpidemiology.\nThe number of new cases of Bell's palsy ranges from about one to four cases per 10,000 population per year. The rate increases with age. Bell's palsy affects about 40,000 people in the United States every year. It affects approximately 1 person in 65 during a lifetime.\nA range of annual incidence rates have been reported in the literature: 15, 24, and 25\u201353 (all rates per 100,000 population per year). Bell's palsy is not a reportable disease, and there are no established registries for people with this diagnosis, which complicates precise estimation.\nFrequency.\nAbout 40,000 people are affected by Bell's palsy in the United States every year. It can affect anyone of any gender and age, but its incidence seems to be highest in those in the 15- to 45-year-old age group.\nHistory.\nThe Persian physician Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi (865\u2013925) detailed the first known description of peripheral and central facial palsy.\nCornelis Stalpart van der Wiel (1620\u20131702) in 1683 gave an account of Bell's palsy and credited the Persian physician Ibn Sina (980\u20131037) for describing this condition before him. James Douglas (1675\u20131742) and Nicolaus Anton Friedreich (1761\u20131836) also described it.\nScottish neurophysiologist Sir Charles Bell read his paper to the Royal Society of London on July 12, 1821, describing the role of the facial nerve. He became the first to detail the neuroanatomical basis of facial paralysis. Since then, idiopathic peripheral facial paralysis has been referred to as Bell's palsy, named after him.\nA notable person with Bell's palsy is former Prime Minister of Canada Jean Chr\u00e9tien. During the 1993 federal election, Chr\u00e9tien's first as leader of the Liberal Party, the opposition Progressive Conservative Party ran an attack ad in which voice actors criticized him over images that seemed to highlight his abnormal facial expressions. The ad was interpreted as an attack on Chr\u00e9tien's physical appearance and garnered widespread anger among the public, while Chr\u00e9tien used the ad to make himself more sympathetic to voters. The ad had the adverse effect of increasing Chr\u00e9tien's lead in the polls and the subsequent backlash clinched the election for the Liberals, who won in a landslide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52958", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52958", "title": "Neurological disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "52959", "revid": "11384245", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52959", "title": "Nerologic disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "52961", "revid": "10996774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52961", "title": "Battle of agincourt", "text": ""}
{"id": "52962", "revid": "15947393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52962", "title": "Wallenberg's syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "52963", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52963", "title": "Obstetrics and gynaecology", "text": "Medical specialty encompassing two subspecialties\nObstetrics and gynaecology (also spelled as obstetrics and gynecology; abbreviated as Obst and Gynae, O&amp;G, OB-GYN and OB/GYN) is the medical specialty that encompasses the two subspecialties of obstetrics (covering pregnancy, childbirth, and the postpartum period) and gynaecology (covering the health of the female reproductive system \u2013 vagina, uterus, ovaries, and breasts). The specialization is an important part of care for women's health.\nPostgraduate training programs for both fields are usually combined, preparing the practising obstetrician-gynecologist to be adept both at the care of female reproductive organs' health and at the management of pregnancy, although many doctors go on to develop subspecialty interests in one field or the other.\nScope.\nUnited States.\nAccording to the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ABOG), which is responsible for issuing OB-GYN certifications in the United States, the first step to OB-GYN certification is completing medical school to receive an MD or DO degree. From there doctors must complete a four-year OB-GYN residency program approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). For the 2021 Electronic Residency Application Service (ERAS) match, there were 277 OB-GYN residency programs accepting applicants.\nIn their fourth year of residency, with an affidavit from their director to confirm program completion, OB-GYN residents can choose whether to begin the board certification process by applying to take the ABOG Qualifying Exam, which is a written test. If residents pass the Qualifying Exam, demonstrating they possess the knowledge and skills to potentially become certified OB-GYNs, they are then eligible to sit for the oral Certification Exam. Prior to the Certification Exam, residents must also gather a list of patient cases they've worked on throughout their residency in order to demonstrate their competence and experience in OB-GYN patient care.\nResidents then sit for the three-hour oral exam at ABOG's test center, and if they pass the exam they become \"board certified\" OB-GYNs. Since 2013 at least 82% of all Certifying Exam examinees have passed.\nThis adds up to 11\u201314 years of education and practical experience. The first 7\u20139 years are general medical training.\nExperienced OB-GYN professionals can seek certifications in sub-specialty areas, including maternal and fetal medicine. See Fellowship (medicine).\nUnited Kingdom.\nAll doctors must first complete medical school and obtain a MBBS or equivalent certification. This portion typically takes five years. Following this, they are eligible for provisional registration with the General Medical Council. They then must complete two years of foundation training. After the first year of training is complete, trainees are eligible for full registration with the General Medical Council. After the foundation training is complete applicants take the Part 1 MRCOG examination administered by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. There are an additional seven years of training after this, and two more exams (Part 2 and Part 3 MRCOG exams) which adds up to nine years total minimum in training, although some trainees may take longer.\nSubspecialties.\nExamples of subspecialty training available to physicians in the US are:\nOf these, only the first four are truly recognized sub-specialties by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ABOG). The other subspecialties are recognized as informal concentrations of practice. To be recognized as a board-certified subspecialist by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology or the American Osteopathic Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology, a practitioner must have completed an ACGME or AOA-accredited residency and obtained a Certificate of Added Qualifications (CAQ) which requires an additional standardized examination.\nAdditionally, physicians of other specialties may become trained in Advanced Life Support in Obstetrics (ALSO), a short certification that equips them to better manage emergent OB/GYN situations.\nCommon procedures.\nThere are many procedures that can be provided to people by OB/GYNs. Some procedures may include:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52965", "revid": "50865928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52965", "title": "Obstetrics", "text": "Medical specialty concerning pregnancy and childbirth\nObstetrics is the field of study concentrated on pregnancy, childbirth and the postpartum period. As a medical specialty, obstetrics is combined with gynecology under the discipline known as obstetrics and gynecology (OB/GYN), which is a surgical field.\nMain areas.\nPrenatal care.\nPrenatal care is important in screening for various complications of pregnancy. This includes routine office visits with physical exams and routine lab tests along with telehealth care for women with low-risk pregnancies:\nFirst trimester.\nRoutine tests in the first trimester of pregnancy generally include:\nGenetic screening for Down syndrome (trisomy 21) and Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18), the national standard in the United States, is rapidly evolving away from the AFP-quad screen, done typically in the second trimester at 16\u201318 weeks. The newer integrated screen (formerly called F.A.S.T.E.R for First And Second Trimester Early Results) can be done at 10 plus weeks to 13 plus weeks with an ultrasound of the fetal neck (thicker nuchal skin correlates with higher risk of Down syndrome being present) and two chemicals (analytes), pregnancy-associated plasma protein A and human chorionic gonadotropin (pregnancy hormone level itself). It gives an accurate risk profile very early. A second blood screen at 15 to 20 weeks refines the risk more accurately. The cost is higher than an \"AFP-quad\" screen due to the ultrasound and second blood test, but it is quoted to have a 93% pick up rate as opposed to 88% for the standard AFP/QS. This is an evolving standard of care in the United States.\nThird trimester.\nMost doctors do a sugar load in a drink form of 50 grams of glucose in cola, lime or orange and draw blood an hour later (plus or minus 5 minutes). The standard modified criteria have been lowered to 135 since the late 1980s.\nFetal assessments.\nObstetric ultrasonography is routinely used for dating the gestational age of a pregnancy from the size of the fetus, determining the number of fetuses and placentae, evaluating for an ectopic pregnancy and first trimester bleeding, with the most accurate dating being in the first trimester before the growth of the fetus has been significantly influenced by other factors. Ultrasound is also used for detecting congenital anomalies (or other foetal anomalies) and determining the biophysical profiles (BPP), which are generally easier to detect in the second trimester when the foetal structures are larger and more developed.\nX-rays and computerized tomography (CT) are not used, especially in the first trimester, due to the ionizing radiation, which has teratogenic effects on the foetus. No effects of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the foetus have been demonstrated, but this technique is too expensive for routine observation. Instead, obstetric ultrasonography is the imaging method of choice in the first trimester and throughout the pregnancy, because it emits no radiation, is portable, and allows for realtime imaging.\nThe safety of frequent ultrasound scanning has not been confirmed. Despite this, increasing numbers of women are choosing to have additional scans for no medical purpose, such as gender scans, 3D and 4D scans. A normal gestation would reveal a gestational sac, yolk sac, and fetal pole.\nThe gestational age can be assessed by evaluating the mean gestational sac diameter (MGD) before week 6, and the crown-rump length after week 6. Multiple gestation is evaluated by the number of placentae and amniotic sacs present.\nOther tools used for assessment include:\nDiseases in pregnancy.\nA pregnant woman may have a pre-existing disease, that may become worse or become a risk to the pregnancy, or to postnatal development of the offspring\nInduction and labour.\nInduction is a method of artificially or prematurely stimulating labour in a woman. Reasons to induce can include pre-eclampsia, foetal distress, placental malfunction, intrauterine growth retardation and failure to progress through labour increasing the risk of infection and foetal distresses.\nInduction may be achieved via several methods:\nDuring labour, the obstetrician carries out the following tasks:\nComplications and emergencies.\nThe main emergencies include:\nPostpartum period.\nThe World Health Organization makes a distinction between the use of \"postpartum care\" when it concerns the care of the mother after giving birth, and \"postnatal care\" when the care of the newborn is concerned.\nPostpartum care is provided to the mother following childbirth.\nA woman in the Western world who gives birth in a hospital may leave the hospital as soon as she is medically stable, and chooses to leave, which can be as early as a few hours later, but usually averages a stay of one or two days; the average postnatal stay following delivery by caesarean section is three to four days.\nDuring this time the mother is monitored for bleeding, bowel and bladder function, and baby care. The infant's health is also monitored.\nHistory.\nPrior to the 18th century, caring for pregnant women in Europe was confined exclusively to women, and rigorously excluded men. The expectant mother would invite close female friends and family members to her home to keep her company during childbirth. Skilled midwives managed all aspects of the labour and delivery. The presence of physicians and surgeons was very rare and only occurred if a serious complication had taken place and the midwife had exhausted all measures at her disposal. Calling a surgeon was very much a last resort and having men deliver women in this era was seen as offending female modesty.\nBefore the 18th century.\nPrior to the 18th and 19th centuries, midwifery was well established but obstetrics was not recognized as a specific medical specialty. However, the subject matter and interest in the female reproductive system and sexual practice can be traced back to Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece. Soranus of Ephesus sometimes is called the most important figure in ancient gynecology. Living in the late first century AD and early second century, he studied anatomy and had opinions and techniques on abortion, contraception\u00a0\u2013 most notably \"coitus interruptus\u00a0\"\u2013 and birth complications. After his death, techniques and works of gynecology declined; very little of his works were recorded and survived to the late 18th century when gynecology and obstetrics reemerged as a medical specialism.\n18th century.\nThe 18th century marked the beginning of many advances in European midwifery, based on better knowledge of the physiology of pregnancy and labour. By the end of the century, medical professionals began to understand the anatomy of the uterus and the physiological changes that take place during labour. The introduction of forceps in childbirth also took place at this time. All these medical advances in obstetrics were a lever for the introduction of men into an arena previously managed and run by women \u2013 midwifery.\nThe addition of the male-midwife (or man-midwife) is historically a significant change to the profession of obstetrics. In the 18th century medical men began to train in area of childbirth and believed with their advanced knowledge in anatomy that childbirth could be improved. In France these male-midwives were referred to as \"accoucheurs\", a title later used all over Europe. The founding of lying-in hospitals also contributed to the medicalization and male-dominance of obstetrics. These early maternity hospitals were establishments where women would come to have their babies delivered, as opposed to the practice since time immemorial of the midwife attending the home of the woman in labour. This institution provided male-midwives with endless patients to practice their techniques on and was a way for these men to demonstrate their knowledge.\nMany midwives of the time bitterly opposed the involvement of men in childbirth. Some male practitioners also opposed the involvement of medical men like themselves in midwifery and even went as far as to say that male-midwives only undertook midwifery solely for perverse erotic satisfaction. The accoucheurs argued that their involvement in midwifery was to improve the process of childbirth. These men also believed that obstetrics would forge ahead and continue to strengthen.\n19th century.\n18th-century physicians expected that obstetrics would continue to grow, but the opposite happened. Obstetrics entered a stage of stagnation in the 19th century, which lasted until about the 1880s. The central explanation for the lack of advancement during this time was the rejection of obstetrics by the medical community. The 19th century marked an era of medical reform in Europe and increased regulation over the profession. Major European institutions such as The College of Physicians and Surgeons considered delivering babies ungentlemanly work and refused to have anything to do with childbirth as a whole. Even when Medical Act 1858 was introduced, which stated that medical students could qualify as doctors, midwifery was entirely ignored. This made it nearly impossible to pursue an education in midwifery and also have the recognition of being a doctor or surgeon. Obstetrics was pushed to the side.\nBy the late 19th century, the foundation of modern-day obstetrics and midwifery began developing. Delivery of babies by doctors became popular and readily accepted, but midwives continued to play a role in childbirth. Midwifery also changed during this era due to increased regulation and the eventual need for midwives to become certified. Many European countries by the late 19th century were monitoring the training of midwives and issued certification based on competency. Midwives were no longer uneducated in the formal sense.\nAs midwifery began to develop, so did the profession of obstetrics near the end of the century. Childbirth was no longer unjustifiably despised by the medical community as it once had been at the beginning of the century. But obstetrics was underdeveloped compared to other medical specialities. Many male physicians would deliver children but very few would have referred to themselves as obstetricians. The end of the 19th century did mark a significant accomplishment in the profession with the advancements in asepsis and anaesthesia, which paved the way for the mainstream introduction and later success of the Caesarean section.\nBefore the 1880s mortality rates in lying-hospitals would reach unacceptably high levels and became an area of public concern. Much of these maternal deaths were due to puerperal fever, then known as childbed fever. In the 1800s Ignaz Semmelweis noticed that women giving birth at home had a much lower incidence of childbed fever than those giving birth by physicians in lying-hospitals. His investigation discovered that washing hands with an antiseptic solution before a delivery reduced childbed fever fatalities by 90%. So it was concluded that it was physicians who had been spreading disease from one labouring mother to the next. Despite the publication of this information, doctors still would not wash. It was not until the 20th century when advancements in aseptic technique and the understanding of disease would play a significant role in the decrease of maternal mortality rates among many populations.\nHistory of obstetrics in America.\nThe development of obstetrics as a practice for accredited doctors happened at the turn of the 18th century and thus was very differently developed in Europe and in the Americas due to the independence of many countries in the Americas from European powers. \"Unlike in Europe and the British Isles, where midwifery laws were national, in America, midwifery laws were local and varied widely\".\nGynaecology and Obstetrics gained attention in the American medical field at the end of the nineteenth century through the development of such procedures as the ovariotomy. These procedures then were shared with European surgeons who replicated the surgeries. This was a period when antiseptic, aseptic or anaesthetic measures were just being introduced to surgical and observational procedures and without these procedures surgeries were dangerous and often fatal. Following are two surgeons noted for their contributions to these fields include Ephraim McDowell and J. Marion Sims.\nEphraim McDowell developed a surgical practice in 1795 and performed the first ovariotomy in 1809 on a 47-year-old widow who then lived on for 31 more years. He had attempted to share this with John Bell whom he had practiced under who had retired to Italy. Bell was said to have died without seeing the document but it was published by an associate in \"Extractions of Diseased Ovaria\" in 1825. By the mid-century the surgery was both successfully and unsuccessfully being performed. Pennsylvanian surgeons the Attlee brothers made this procedure very routine for a total of 465 surgeries \u2013 John Attlee performed 64 successfully of 78 while his brother William reported 387 \u2013 between the years of 1843 and 1883. By the middle of the nineteenth century this procedure was successfully performed in Europe by English surgeons Sir Spencer Wells and Charles Clay as well as French surgeons Eug\u00e8ne Koeberl\u00e9, Auguste N\u00e9laton and Jules P\u00e9an.\nJ. Marion Sims was the surgeon responsible for being the first treating a vesicovaginal fistula \u2013 a condition linked to many caused mainly by prolonged pressing of the foetus against the pelvis or other causes such as rape, hysterectomy, or other operations \u2013 and also having been doctor to many European royals and the 20th President of the United States James A. Garfield after he had been shot. Sims does have a controversial medical past. Under the beliefs at the time about pain and the prejudice towards African people, he had practiced his surgical skills and developed skills on slaves. These women were the first patients of modern gynecology. One of the women he operated on was named Anarcha Westcott, the woman he first treated for a fistula.\nHistorical role of gender.\nWomen and men inhabited very different roles in natal care up to the 18th century. The role of a physician was exclusively held by men who went to university, an overly male institution, who would theorize anatomy and the process of reproduction based on theological teaching and philosophy. Many beliefs about the female body and menstruation in the 17th and 18th centuries were inaccurate; clearly resulting from the lack of literature about the practice. Many of the theories of what caused menstruation prevailed from Hippocratic philosophy. Midwives, meaning \"with woman\", were those who assisted in the birth and care of both born and unborn children, a position historically held mainly by women.\nDuring the birth of a child, men were rarely present. Women from the neighbourhood or family would join in on the process of birth and assist in many different ways. The one position where men would help with the birth of a child would be in the sitting position, usually when performed on the side of a bed to support the mother.\nMen entered the field of obstetrics in the nineteenth century, resulting in a change of focus within the profession. Gynecology developed as a new and separate field of study from obstetrics, focusing on the curing of illness and indispositions of female sexual organs, encompassing conditions such as menopause, uterine and cervical problems, and tissue damage as a result of childbirth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52967", "revid": "13403767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52967", "title": "Gynaecology", "text": "Medical area for women's reproductive health\nGynaecology (or gynecology in American English) is the area of medicine concerned with conditions affecting the female reproductive system. It is sometimes combined with the field of obstetrics, which focuses on pregnancy and childbirth, thereby forming the combined area of obstetrics and gynaecology (OB-GYN).\nGynaecology encompasses preventative care, sexual health and diagnosing and treating health issues arising from the female reproduction system, such as the uterus, vagina, cervix, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and breasts; subspecialties include family planning; minimally invasive surgery; paediatric and adolescent gynaecology; and pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery. Transgender, intersex and nonbinary individuals can in some instances require gynaecological care.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"gynaecology\" comes from the oblique stem () of the Greek word () meaning 'woman', and meaning 'study'. Literally translated, it means 'the study of women'. Its counterpart is andrology, which deals with medical issues specific to the male reproductive system.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus, dated to about 1800 BC, deals with gynaecological diseases, fertility, pregnancy, contraception, etc. The text is divided into thirty-four sections, each dealing with a specific problem and containing diagnosis and treatment; no prognosis is suggested. Treatments are non-surgical, consisting of applying medicines to the affected body part or delivering medicines orally. During this time, the womb was sometimes seen as the source of problems manifesting in other body parts.\nAyurveda, an Indian traditional medical system, also provides details about concepts and techniques related to gynaecology, addressing fertility, childbirth complications, and menstrual disorders among other things. These writings provide a post and prenatal care, integrating lifestyle practices, meditations and yoga, and a dietary regime for overall well-being.\nThe Hippocratic Corpus contains several gynaecological treatises dating to the 5th and 4th centuries BC. Aristotle is another source for medical texts from the 4th century BC with his descriptions of biology primarily found in \"History of Animals, Parts of Animals, Generation of Animals.\" The gynaecological treatise \"Gynaikeia\" by Soranus of Ephesus (1st/2nd century AD) is extant (together with a 6th-century Latin paraphrase by Muscio, a physician of the same school). He was the chief representative of the school of physicians known as the \"methodists.\"\nMiddle ages and renaissance period.\nDuring the Middle Age midwives dominated women's health concerns through experienced-based knowledge, traditional remedies, and herbal medicines. Midwifery was often regarded unscientific and was challenged with the rise of gynaecology as an official medical field. The Renaissance period, 16th century, brought about a resurgence of classical scientific advancements, including the rise of medical advancements in the field of gynaecology and obstetrics. Figures like Ambroise Pare were imperative in improving obstetrics techniques during this period. Peter Chamberlen developed the forceps, an important surgical tool that transformed childbirth and lessened maternal mortality.\n18th, 19th and 20th centuries.\nAs medical institutions continued to expand in the 18th-19th centuries, the authority of midwives was challenged by men who dominated medical professions. The formalization of midwifery training by male doctors and advancements in medical knowledge of women's health and anatomy occurred during this period. Figures such as William Smellie, William Hunter, Paul Zweifel, Franz Karl Naegele, and Carl Crede contributed to the understanding of childbirth and women's health in Europe.\nIn the early 18th and 19th centuries, in the United States, the field of gyneacology, as with most medical specialities, had ties to black women and therefore slavery. Brothers Henry and Robert Campbell were editors of the first medical journal in the deep south. Henry worked as gynaecologist including on enslaved women, whilst publishing medical case narratives of operations in the journal the brothers edited. This created a conflict of interest. Others, such as Dr. Mary Putnam Jacobi, challenged the exclusion of women from medical education and shifted gynaecology to a scientific practice.\nJ. Marion Sims is regarded as the father of modern gynaecology. Some of his medical contributions were published, such as development of the Sims' position (1845), the Sims' speculum (1845), the Sims' sigmoid catheter, and gynaecological surgery. He was the first to develop surgical techniques for the repair of vesico-vaginal fistulas (1849), a consequence of protracted childbirth which at the time was without treatment. He founded the first women's hospital in the country in Alabama 1855 and subsequently the Woman's Hospital of New York in 1857. He was elected president of the American Medical Association in 1876. Sims died in 1883. His statue was removed from Central Park, after a unanimous vote in 2018.\nSims' legacy is controversial and debated as he conducted experimental operations on black enslaved women, as recounted in his autobiography. In this era, anaesthesia use was novice and considered dangerous.\u00a0Sims developed his techniques and instruments by operating on women, without anaesthesia. The ethical issues this created are discussed in the \"Journal of Medical Ethics\" and by academic scholars, some of whom have different opinions in regards to consent and why anaesthesia was not used, whilst showing that white women were also subject to experimental procedures. When he left Alabama in 1853, a local newspaper called him \"an honor to our state.\"\nIn terms of common procedures used within the now recognized specialism of gynaecology, the first hysteroscopy was completed in 1869 by Pantaleoni, to treat an endometrial polyp, using a cystoscope.\nObstetrics and gynaecology were recognized as specialties in the mid-19th century, in the United Kingdom. Specialist societies came into being but it became clear that to become disciplines in their own right a separate college was required. William Fletcher Shaw (Professor of Midwifery at Manchester University) and William Blair-Bell (Professor of Obstetrics at Liverpool University) worked to establish The British College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 1929, this later became the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.\nGeorge Nicholas Papanicolaou, from Greece, is credited with discovering the pap smear test, he identified differences in the cytology of normal and malignant cervical cells by viewing swabs smeared on microscopic slides. His first publication of the finding in 1928 went relatively unnoticed. It wasn't until he collaborated with Dr Herbert Traut at an American hospital and they published a book, Diagnosis of Uterine Cancer by the Vaginal Smear that this medical advancement became widely known about. By the 20th century, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (1951) was founded. There were advances in antiseptic techniques, anaesthesia, and diagnostic tools, which transformed gynaecological care.\nSome discrimination continued in the United States with forced sterilizations and eugenic policies that disproportionately targeted minorities. In addition to black women, coerced sterilization was used as a method to restrict perceived undesirable groups from reproducing, such as immigrants, poor people, unmarried mothers, disabled and mentally ill people. Between 1909 and 1979, an estimated 20,000 forced sterilizations occurred in California, primarily in state run mental institutions and prisons. Healthcare later became more focused on the importance of informed consent. Since the 1950's an emphasis on a patients right to choose whether to have treatment or not has existed, albeit with a reliance on those with medical knowledge to advise the best course of treatment. Technological advances have in more recent decades enabled patients themselves to obtain medical information more easily.\nIn Canada, The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons did not formally recognize obstetrics &amp; gynaecology as specialist fields until 1957. Obstetrics and gynaecology were considered part of the division of surgery. During the 1940's, practitioners focused on obstetrics and gynaecology began identifying the need for a separate organization to deal with this specialism and the idea to form the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) was conceived.\nIan Donald, a gynaecologist from the United Kingdom was an early pioneer of the use of sonography within gyneacology and obstetrics. He gained knowledge of radar technology in the air force and working with an engineer called Tom Brown and an engineering company, they developed a compact 2D ultrasound machine. In 1958, he published a paper in the Lancet.\nBirth control trials.\nWomen like Margaret Sanger dedicated themselves to making contraception legal and available. She had worked as a nurse caring for women who had illegal abortions, this created a desire to engage in later activism related to birth control. In 1951 she met Gregory Pincus, a human reproduction medical expert who worked to create a contraceptive pill. She also found a sponsor for the project and trials, Katharine McCormick.\nThe trials for birth control were controversial for a number of reasons. In 1954, due to anti-birth control laws, the first trials in Massachusetts were positioned as being fertility trials. Gregory Pincus and John Rock conducted these trials. Oral progesterone was tested on fertility patients, with consent, however the oral contraceptive was also tested on 28 psychiatric patients (male and female) at Worcester State Hospital. No direct consent was given by these people, instead relatives gave consent on their behalf. They discovered that women stopped ovulating and that this occurred only whilst taking this. To get FDA approval, a larger clinical trial was needed.\nTo expand this research, further clinical trials of took place in Puerto Rico, a territory of the United States. Puerto Rico was densely populated with significant poverty, had no anti-birth control laws and already had services offering birth control. Trials began in Rio Piedras in 1956, and women were offered the pill, called Envoid in 1960, on the basis it prevented pregnancy but without knowing it did not have FDA approval. Three women died in the trial and criticisms include that side effects were not taken as seriously as they should have been. Dr. Edris Rice-Wray, a professor at the Puerto Rico Medical School was aware and vocal of the negative side effects of the pill. Although these trials did not follow modern medical ethical practices, they spearheaded the development of the first oral contraceptive.\nDiagnosis.\nIn some countries or within some healthcare systems, women must first see a general practitioner or family practitioner before seeing a gynaecologist. If the condition cannot be diagnosed or treated and requires a specialist the patient is referred to a gynaecologist. In other countries, patients can see a gynaecologist without a referral.\nAs with all of medicine, the main tools of diagnosis are clinical history, examination and investigations. Gynaecological examination is quite intimate, more so than a routine physical exam. It can also require instruments such as the speculum. The speculum is used to retract the tissues of the vagina to allow examination of the cervix, the lower part of the uterus located within the upper portion of the vagina. Gynaecologists may do a bimanual examination (one hand on the abdomen and one or two fingers in the vagina) to palpate the cervix, uterus, ovaries and pelvis. It is not uncommon to do a rectovaginal examination for a complete evaluation of the pelvis, particularly if any suspicious masses are suspected. Gynaecologists may have a chaperone for their examination or a patient can request this.\nAn abdominal or vaginal ultrasound can be used for diagnostic purposes. This can help to detect growths, such as polyps, endometrial hyperplasia, carcinoma, endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, polycystic ovary syndrome and many other gynaecology conditions. This is a very common diagnostic tool.\nHormone tests can be useful when investigating gynaecology based conditions or symptoms. These may check the hormone levels of oestradiol, progesterone, follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormones, for example. Levels considered not normal, could indicate the presence of conditions and could impact reproductive function.\nConditions and diseases.\nExamples of conditions dealt with by a gynaecologist are:\nSome of these conditions are dealt with by doctors with specialisms other than, or in addition to, gynaecology. For example, a woman with urinary incontinence may be referred to a doctor with urology specialist experience and someone with cancer may be treated by a multidisciplinary team with specialist oncology experience.\nTreatments.\nSurgeries.\nGynaecologists may employ medical and/or surgical treatments, depending on the medical condition they are treating. Pre- and post-operative medical management often employs drug therapies, such as antibiotics, diuretics, antihypertensives, and antiemetics. Additionally, gynaecologists make frequent use of specialized hormone-modulating therapies (such as Clomifene citrate and hormonal contraception) to treat disorders of the female genital tract that are responsive to pituitary or gonadal signals.\nSurgery is commonly used to treat gynaecology conditions. In the past, gynaecologists were not considered \"surgeons\", although this point has always been the source of controversy. Modern advancements in general surgery and gynaecology, have blurred the lines of distinction. The rise of sub-specialties within gynaecology which are primarily surgical in nature (for example urogynaecology and gynaecological oncology) have strengthened the reputations of gynaecologists as surgical practitioners, and many surgeons and surgical societies have come to view gynaecologists as peers. Gynaecologists are now eligible for fellowship in both the American College of Surgeons and Royal Colleges of Surgeons, and many newer surgical textbooks include chapters on (at least basic) gynaecological surgery.\nSome of the more common operations that gynaecologists perform include:\nNon-surgical treatments.\nTranexamic acid has been found to be an effective drug to reduce the amount of bleeding during menstruation and medical procedures, so can be used to treat menorrhagia. Hormone based IUDs, such as Mirena have also been shown to help reduce heavy periods.\nThere are an increasing number of non-surgical treatments available to help uterine fibroids, along with tranexamic acid and progesterone releasing IUSs, such as contraceptive steroid hormones, gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists and antagonists with and without additional hormones, and selective progesterone receptor modulator (SPRM). Organizations such as the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) advocate such treatments before surgical intervention, but studies reveal many women who had a hysterectomy between 2011 and 2019 did not receive any other treatments before this.\nHormonal therapy can be used as a non-surgical treatment for endometriosis. Research shows gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists, like elagolix, can give encouraging results in managing some symptoms. Also encouraging is research on aromatase inhibitors, such as letrozole that has shown efficacy in reducing lesion size and pain severity. Overall, more recent research shows a trend of new non-surgical treatments becoming available for a number of common gynaecology conditions.\nRecent discoveries.\nNewer advancements in gynaecology are using integration of artificial intelligence (AI) in clinical practice, specifically with diagnostics and predictive analytics. AI algorithms are able to interpret complex gynaecological imaging and pathology data, which improves diagnostic accuracy. These technologies are especially used in identifying cervical and ovarian cancers and predicting treatment outcomes.\nLiquid biopsy is emerging as an important noninvasive tool to detect and monitor gynaecology cancers. Tumour-derived biomarkers, such as circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA), circulating tumour cells (CTCs), exosomes and microRNA, can provide insights into the biological behaviour of gynaecology cancers. Some believe this could revolutionize cancer treatment, assisting with earlier detection and predicting disease recurrence but as of 2025, it is not widely used in clinical practice.\nIn terms of surgery, research has led to minimally invasive approaches, such as vaginal natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery. This technique allows surgeons to access the pelvic cavity through the vaginal canal, reducing recovery times, postoperative pain, and complication rates in comparison to traditional methods.\nSpecialist training.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, based in London, encourages the study and advancement of both the science and practice of obstetrics and gynaecology. This is done through postgraduate medical education and training development, and the publication of clinical guidelines and reports on aspects of the specialty and service provision. The RCOG International Office works with other international organizations to help lower maternal morbidity and mortality in under-resourced countries.\nIn the United States, obstetrics and gynaecology requires residency training for four years. This encompasses comprehensive clinical and surgical education. OBGYN residents participate in a yearly in-training exam that is administered by the Council on Resident Education in Obstetrics and Gynecology (CREOG). Research suggests that combining curriculum and focused mentorship can improve residents' performance on the exam and overall educational outcomes.\nGynaecologic oncology is a subspecialty of gynaecology, dealing with gynaecology-related cancer. To become a gynaecology oncologist requires specialist further training. Urogynaecology is also a subspecialty of gynaecology and urology. Further fellowship training is needed to become a urogynaecologist.\nGender of physicians.\nImproved access to education and the professions in recent decades has seen women gynaecologists outnumber men in the once male-dominated medical field of gynaecology. In some gynaecological sub-specialties, where an over-representation of males persists, income discrepancies appear to show male practitioners earning higher averages.\nSpeculations on the decreased numbers of male gynaecologist practitioners report a perceived lack of respect from within the medical profession, limited future employment opportunities and questions to the motivations and character of men who choose the medical field concerned with female sexual organs.\nSurveys of women's views on the issue of male doctors conducting intimate examinations show a large and consistent majority found it uncomfortable, were more likely to be embarrassed and less likely to talk openly or in detail about personal information, or discuss their sexual history with a man. The findings raised questions about the ability of male gynaecologists to offer quality care to patients. This, when coupled with more women choosing female physicians has decreased the employment opportunities for men choosing to become gynaecologists.\nAccording to one source, \"there is a sharp decline in the number of men opting for OB/GYN residency programs and general OB/GYN programs due to the sexist market trends. Female OB/GYN physicians are preferred over males by certain employers due to preference given to the female physicians by health care seekers.\"\nIn the United States, it has been reported that four in five students choosing a residency in gynaecology are now female. In several places in Sweden, to comply with discrimination laws, patients may not choose a doctor\u2014regardless of specialty\u2014based on factors such as gender and declining to see a doctor because of their gender may legally be viewed as refusing care. In Turkey, due to patient preference to be seen by another female, there are now few male gynaecologists working in the field.\nThere have been a number of legal challenges in the US against healthcare providers who have started hiring based on the gender of physicians. Mircea Veleanu argued, in part, that his former employers discriminated against him by accommodating the wishes of female patients who had requested female doctors for intimate exams. A male nurse complained about an advert for an all-female obstetrics and gynaecology practice in Columbia, Maryland, claiming this was a form of sexual discrimination. In 2000, David Garfinkel, a New Jersey-based OB-GYN, sued his former employer after being fired due to, as he claimed, \"because I was male, I wasn't drawing as many patients as they'd expected\".\nHealth disparities in gynaecology.\nSubsequent to research, some organizations such as the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists have called on global governments and international health bodies to address the impact of benign gynaecology conditions in low and middle income countries. They found the years lost to disability from these conditions was greater than combined morbidity from malaria, TB and HIV/AIDS, accounting for 8% of all years lost to disability, for women aged 15\u201349. They argue that such conditions are neglected within the global health arena and have a significant impact on women in low and middle income countries.\nSome benign and common gynaecology conditions have been found to disproportionately impact certain racial and ethnic groups. One study found that black women are three times more likely than white women, to have uterine fibroids, a variety of studies found they are more likely to get these at a younger age and are more likely to have numerous and rapid growing fibroids. This may be due to biological, lifestyle, environmental and clinical factors, further research is needed to understand why this disparity exists. In regards to endometriosis, some research suggests this disproportionately impacts asian women, with black and hispanic women less likely to have this condition. Research about this is somewhat inconsistent suggesting further studies would be beneficial.\nIn the United States, health disparities persist in gynaecology, disproportionately affecting women of colour, low-income women, and those living in rural areas. Black women face higher rates of mortality from some gynaecology based cancers. The reasons for these disparities is complex and involves racial, economic, educational and geographic factors that influence treatment and survival. Importantly, a variation from evidenced-based treatment has been indicated as a modifiable factor that can effect survival outcomes. This problem disproportionately impacts black women and poorer women. These disparities are compounded by barriers such as lack of insurance and best practice not being followed, particularly when funded by Medicaid.\nSome research in the United States shows that hispanic women had a more favourable prognosis compared to non-hispanic women, in regards to certain gynaecology based cancers. With ovarian cancer black women tended to present with more advanced ovarian cancer compared to white women, so were diagnosed at a later stage. The incidence rates of endometrial and ovarian cancer was highest in white women and the incidence of cervical cancer was highest in black women. Research showed that black and hispanic women were less likely to complete the full number of HPV vaccinations, the cause of some gynaecology based cancers. Marginalized groups are less likely to have their pain and symptoms taken seriously by providers, leading to delayed diagnoses and worse outcomes. Addressing these disparities requires having physicians practice cultural humility and physician's addressing their possible bias.\nResearch from the United States shows that disabled women are screened less for cervical cancer and less likely to have pelvic examinations. They report lower levels of receiving family planning services. Health service usage and whether or not they have insurance did not explain differences in screening levels. Research showed they were less likely to receive doctors recommendations. Women with disabilities also have a greater chance of dying from cervical cancer in counties such as South Korea and Sweden.\nIn the United Kingdom, in regards to ovarian cancer socioeconomic factors appear to create a disparity in treatment and outcomes. Delays and treatment inequalities may contribute to worse outcomes for women from more deprived areas, with them less likely to receive surgery or chemotherapy. How wealthy a woman is, directly impacted mortality rates. Cervical screening attendance, which helps to diagnose cervical cancer at an early stage has declined, particularly among minority ethnic groups and in more deprived areas. Medical bias in doctor and patient interactions can cause delays to diagnosis and can stem from subconscious stereotypes, in relation to ethnicity or socioeconomic status.\nThe LGBTQ+ community also face health disparities within gyneacology care. Nearly one in five lesbian and bisexual women have never attended cervical screening. Transexual men and non binary people with a cervix are also less likely to access cervical screening. Research has shown that 22.8% of transgender people avoid accessing healthcare due to anticipated discrimination. Gyneacologists play an important role in caring for transgender patients, who face barriers within health care, as a result of marginalization and discrimination.\nIndigenous women in Australia are more likely to die from gynaecology cancers. Research suggests that strategies to reduce survival disparities should target earlier diagnosis and earlier treatment, as aboriginal women were more likely to present with more advanced cancer at the point of diagnosis and decline treatment. Research in Australia examined the issue of pelvic floor dysfunction in aboriginal women, in New South Wales. This showed a high burden of disease and that there was a reluctance of these women to seek care, due to fear of judgement and embarrassment. The authors concluded that culturally appropriate and tailored care was needed to tackle this.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52970", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52970", "title": "Pete Rose", "text": "American baseball player (1941\u20132024)\nPeter Edward Rose Sr. (April 14, 1941 \u2013 September 30, 2024), nicknamed \"Charlie Hustle\", was an American professional baseball player and manager. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1963 to 1986, most prominently as a member of the Cincinnati Reds lineup known as the Big Red Machine for their dominance of the National League in the 1970s. He also played for the Philadelphia Phillies, where he won his third World Series championship in 1980, and had a brief stint with the Montreal Expos. He managed the Reds from 1984 to 1989.\nRose was a switch hitter and is MLB's all-time leader in hits (4,256), games played (3,562), at-bats (14,053), singles (3,215), and outs (10,328). He won three World Series championships, three batting titles, one Most Valuable Player Award, two Gold Glove Awards, and the Rookie of the Year Award. He made 17 All-Star appearances in an unequaled five positions (second baseman, left fielder, right fielder, third baseman, and first baseman). He won two Gold Glove Awards when he was an outfielder, in 1969 and 1970. He also has the third longest hit streak in MLB history at 44, and remains the last player to hit safely in 40 or more consecutive games.\nIn August 1989 (his last year as a manager and three years after retiring as a player), Rose was penalized with permanent ineligibility from baseball amid accusations that he gambled on baseball games while he played for and managed the Reds; the charges of wrongdoing included claims that he bet on his own team. In 1991, the Baseball Hall of Fame formally voted to ban those on the \"permanently ineligible\" list from induction, after previously excluding such players by informal agreement among voters. After years of public denial, he admitted in 2004 that he bet on baseball and on the Reds. The issue of his election to the Hall of Fame remains contentious throughout baseball. In 2025, he was posthumously reinstated and became eligible for the Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nPeter Edward Rose was born on April 14, 1941, in Cincinnati, Ohio, one of four children born to Harry Francis \"Pete\" Rose and LaVerne (n\u00e9e Bloebaum) Rose. Encouraged by his parents to participate in sports, Rose played baseball and football at Western Hills High School.\nAlthough small for his age, Rose earned the starting running back position on his freshman football team. When he was not promoted to the varsity football team in his sophomore year, Rose was dejected and soon lost interest in his studies. He ended up repeating his sophomore year of high school.\nWhen Rose reached his senior year, he had used up his four years of high school sports eligibility. In the spring of 1960 he played baseball in the Dayton Amateur League for a team sponsored by Frisch's Big Boy of Lebanon, Ohio. Rose played catcher, second base, and shortstop and compiled a .626 batting average. This would have been the pinnacle of Rose's baseball career if not for the help of his uncle, Buddy Bloebaum, a \"bird dog\" scout for the Cincinnati Reds. At Bloebaum's urging, the Reds, who had recently traded away a number of prospects who turned out to be very good, decided to take a chance on Rose. Upon his graduation from high school in 1960, he signed a professional contract for $7,000 (approximately $76,615.95 in 2025). He played with the Macon Peaches, a minor league affiliate of the Cincinnati Reds, from 1962 to 1963. \nProfessional career.\nCincinnati Reds (1963\u20131978).\nNL Rookie of the Year.\nDuring a spring training game against the Chicago White Sox in 1963, the Reds' regular second baseman, Don Blasingame, pulled a groin muscle; Rose got his chance and made the most of it. During another spring training game against the New York Yankees, Whitey Ford gave Rose the derisive nickname \"Charlie Hustle\" after he sprinted to first base after drawing a walk. Rose adopted that nickname as a badge of honor. In Ken Burns's documentary \"Baseball\", Ford's teammate (and best friend) Mickey Mantle claimed that Ford gave Rose the nickname after Rose, playing in left field, made an effort to climb the fence to try to catch a Mantle home run that was about a hundred feet over his head. According to Mantle, when he returned to the dugout, Ford said, \"Hey, Mick, did you see ole Charley Hustle out there trying to catch that ball?\"\nOn April 8, 1963, Rose made his Major League debut against the Pittsburgh Pirates at Crosley Field and drew a walk in his first plate appearance. After going 0-for-11, Rose got his first career Major League hit on April 13, a triple off Pittsburgh's Bob Friend. He hit .273 for the year and won the National League (NL) Rookie of the Year Award, collecting seventeen of twenty votes.\nRose entered the United States Army Reserves after the 1963 baseball season. He was assigned to Fort Knox for six months of active duty, followed by six years of attendance with the 478th Engineering Battalion, an army reserve unit, at Fort Thomas, Kentucky. At Fort Knox, Rose was a platoon guide. Rose remained at Fort Knox to assist his sergeant in training the next platoon and to help another sergeant train the fort's baseball team. Later in his Fort Thomas service, Rose served as a company cook, which entailed coming in early for the one-weekend-per-month meeting so that he could leave early enough to participate in Reds home games. Other Reds players in the unit included Johnny Bench and Alex Johnson.\nEarly years.\nIn an April 23, 1964, road contest against the Houston Colt .45's, Rose reached first base on an error in the top of the ninth inning of a scoreless game and scored on another error. The Colt .45s lost the game in the bottom of the ninth inning, and Ken Johnson became the first major league pitcher to lose a complete game no-hitter.\nRose slumped late in the season and was benched; he finished with a .269 average. In order to improve his batting, Rose played in the Venezuelan Winter League with Leones del Caracas during the 1964\u20131965 offseason. Rose came back to the Reds in 1965, leading the league in hits (209) and at-bats (670), and finishing sixth in NL MVP balloting. It was the first of his ten seasons with 200-plus hits, and his .312 batting average was the first of nine consecutive .300 seasons. He hit a career-high sixteen home runs in 1966, then switched positions from second base to right field the following year.\nIn 1968, Rose started the season with a 22-game hitting streak, missed three weeks (including the All-Star Game) with a broken thumb, then had a 19-game hitting streak late in the season. He had to finish the season 6-for-9 to beat out the Pirates' Matty Alou and win the first of two close NL batting-title races with a .335 average. He finished second to St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Bob Gibson for the NL MVP award, earning six first place votes.\nThe following year, Rose set a career-high in batting (.348) and tied his career-best sixteen homers. As the Reds' leadoff man, he had 218 hits, walking 88 times and pacing the league in runs with 120. He hit 33 doubles and 11 triples, drove in 82 runs, slugged .512 (by far the highest mark of his long career), and had a .432 OBP (also a career best). Despite Pittsburgh's Roberto Clemente going 3-for-4 in the final game, Rose's 1-for-4 was good enough for the title; Rose finished .348; Clemente .345.\n1970 All-Star Game.\nBrand-new Riverfront Stadium had been open for only two weeks on July 14, 1970, when Rose was involved in one of the most infamous plays in All-Star Game history. Facing the California Angels' Clyde Wright in the twelfth inning, Rose singled and advanced to second on another single by the Los Angeles Dodgers' Billy Grabarkewitz. The Chicago Cubs' Jim Hickman then singled sharply to center. Amos Otis's throw went past Cleveland Indians catcher Ray Fosse, as Rose barreled over Fosse to score the winning run. Fosse suffered a fractured and separated shoulder, which went undiagnosed until the next year. Fosse continued to hit for average and finished the season at .307, but with diminished power. He had sixteen home runs before the break but only two afterwards. He played with the Indians until the 1972 season, but never approached his first-year numbers. The collision also caused Rose to miss three games with a bruised knee.\n1973 NL MVP season.\nIn 1973, Rose led the league with 230 hits and a .338 batting average en route to winning the NL MVP award and leading \"the Big Red Machine\" to the 1973 National League Championship Series against the New York Mets.\nDuring the fifth inning of Game Three of the series, Rose was on first base when Joe Morgan hit a double play ball to Mets first baseman John Milner. Rose slid into second base in an attempt to break up the double play. This incited a fight with Mets shortstop Bud Harrelson that resulted in a bench-clearing brawl. When the Reds took the field, the game was nearly called off after the Shea Stadium crowd threw objects at Rose from the stands. The disruption caused Reds manager Sparky Anderson to pull his team off the field until order was restored. Mets manager Yogi Berra and players Willie Mays, Tom Seaver, Cleon Jones and Rusty Staub were summoned by NL President Chub Feeney out to left field to calm the fans. The Reds ended up losing the game, 9\u20132, and the NLCS, 3\u20132, despite Rose's .381 batting average in the series, including his eighth-inning home run to tie Game One and his 12th-inning home run to win Game Four. It was also around this time that Rose, who had previously sported a crewcut, grew his now famous bowl cut, a hair style he would wear for the rest of his career.\nThe Big Red Machine.\nThe Cincinnati Reds of the 1970s earned the nickname \"the Big Red Machine\" as one of the greatest teams in MLB history, including future Hall of Famers Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan and Tony P\u00e9rez. Rose was viewed as one of the club's leaders.\nRose was a significant factor in the Reds' success in 1975 and 1976 when he successfully moved from the outfield to third base. Earlier in his career, the Reds and then-manager Don Heffner tried to force Rose to third base, but Rose chafed at the move and it was soon abandoned. In the spring of 1975, manager Sparky Anderson, knowing how Rose would react to being forced to move, instead asked him if he would do so for the good of the team. Rose immediately agreed. This move strengthened third base and helped to solidify the Reds for those two championship seasons, because it made room for power hitting outfielder George Foster. In 1975, Rose earned World Series MVP honors in leading the Reds to their first championship since 1940, a seven-game triumph over the Boston Red Sox. Rose led the team with ten hits and a .370 batting average in the seven games. He was awarded the Hickok Belt as the top professional athlete of the year, as well as \"Sports Illustrated\" magazine's \"Sportsman of the Year\" award.\nThe following year, Rose was a major force in helping the Reds repeat as World Series champions. The 1976 Reds swept the Philadelphia Phillies in the best-three-of-five NLCS, followed by a four-game sweep of the Yankees in the World Series. The 1976 club remains the only team since the expansion of the playoffs in 1969 to go undefeated in the postseason, and the Reds franchise has not lost a World Series game since game six in 1975 (wins in game seven in 1975, and four-game sweeps in 1976 and 1990).\nThree home-run game and 3,000th hit.\nOn April 29, 1978 at Shea Stadium, in a 14\u20137 rout against the New York Mets, Rose hit a career-high three home runs off of three different pitchers and went 5-for-6, which was perhaps the greatest performance of his career.\nSix days later, on May 5, Rose became the thirteenth player in MLB history to garner his 3,000th career hit when he singled off Montreal Expos pitcher Steve Rogers in front of 37,823 fans at home field Riverfront Stadium.\n44-game hitting streak.\nOn June 14, 1978, Rose singled in the first inning off Cubs pitcher Dave Roberts; Rose would proceed to get a hit in every game he played until August 1, making a run at Joe DiMaggio's record 56-game hitting streak, which had stood virtually unchallenged for thirty-seven years. The streak started quietly, but by the time it had reached thirty games, the media took notice and a pool of reporters accompanied Rose and the Reds to every game. On July 19, in a game against the Phillies, Rose was hitless going into the eighth inning when he walked. His team was trailing in the ninth inning and the streak appeared over, but the Reds batted through their entire lineup and gave Rose another chance to bat. Rose faced Ron Reed and laid down a perfect bunt single to extend the streak to thirty-two games.\nRose would eventually tie Willie Keeler's 1897 single-season NL record at forty-four games, but the streak came to an end on August 1 when Gene Garber of the Atlanta Braves struck out Rose in the ninth inning. With two outs and a 2\u20132 count, Garber decided not to challenge Rose with a fastball. He took full advantage of Rose's predicament by throwing him an off-speed pitch out of the strike zone, which Rose swung at and missed. Rose was livid after the game, blasting Garber and the Braves for treating the situation \"like it was the ninth inning of the seventh game of the World Series\". Garber took the comment as a compliment: \"I said to myself, 'Well, thanks, Pete. That's how I try to pitch every time I'm in a game.'\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies (1979\u20131983).\nThe Philadelphia Phillies had won the National League East three years running (1976\u20131978)\u2014two of which were won with 101-win seasons\u2014but they were unable to make it to the World Series. In 1979, the Phillies believed that Rose was the player who could bring them over the top, and they temporarily made him the highest-paid athlete in team sports when they signed him to a four-year, $3.2-million contract as a free agent. With perennial All-Star Mike Schmidt firmly entrenched at third, Rose moved to first base.\nAlthough the Phillies missed the postseason in Rose's first year with the team, they earned three division titles (one in the first half of the strike-shortened 1981 season), two World Series appearances and their first World Series title (1980) in the following four years.\nRose had the worst season of his career in 1983, which was also the season that the Phillies played in their second World Series in four years. The 42-year-old Rose batted only .245 with 121 hits and found himself benched during the latter part of the 1983 season when he appeared periodically to play and pinch hit. Rose did blossom as a pinch-hitter, with eight hits in 22 at-bats, a .364 average.\nRose bounced back during the postseason, batting .375 (6-for-16) during the NLCS against the Los Angeles Dodgers, and .312 (5-for-16) in the World Series against the Baltimore Orioles. Rose went 1-for-8 in the first two games in Baltimore and was benched for game three in Philadelphia, though he grounded out in a pinch-hitting appearance. In a pre-game interview with Howard Cosell of ABC Sports, Rose objected to manager Paul Owens' decision to bench him. Rose bounced back with four hits in his last seven at-bats in the remaining two games, though the Phillies lost the Series to the Orioles, four games to one.\nMontreal Expos (1984).\nRose was granted an unconditional release from the Phillies in late October 1983. Phillies management wanted to retain Rose for the 1984 season, but he refused to accept a more limited playing role. Months later, he signed a one-year contract with the Montreal Expos.\nOn April 13, 1984, the 21st anniversary of his first career hit, Rose doubled off the Phillies' Jerry Koosman for his 4,000th career hit, becoming the second player in the 4,000 hit club (joining Ty Cobb). Rose played 95 games with the Expos, accumulating 72 hits and 23 RBIs while batting .259.\nReturn to Cincinnati (1984\u20131986).\nOn August 15, 1984, the Expos traded Rose back to the Reds for infielder Tom Lawless. Upon rejoining the Reds, Rose was immediately named player-manager, replacing Vern Rapp as manager. Despite his .259 average for the season prior to joining the Reds, he hit .365 for the Reds in 26 games (with 35 hits and 11 RBIs), finishing with a .286 overall average\u2014a 41-point improvement over the 1983 season. Furthermore, Rose managed the Reds to a 19\u201322 record for the remainder of the season. Though the role was once common, to date Rose is the last person to serve as a player-manager in MLB.\nOn September 8, 1985, Rose collected his 4,190th and 4,191st hit at Wrigley Field off Reggie Patterson in a game that was called due to darkness after the two teams were tied 5\u20135 in the 9th. According to MLB.com, MLB continues to recognize Cobb's final hit total as 4,191, though independent research has revealed two of Cobb's hits were counted twice. This would mean that Rose broke the hits record in Chicago on the 8th. At any rate, on September 11, 1985, Rose broke Cobb's all-time hits record with his 4,192nd hit, a single to left-center field off San Diego Padres pitcher Eric Show that saw Rose get a minutes-long standing ovation from the hometown Cincinnati crowd at Riverfront Stadium. ABC's \"Wide World of Sports\" named Rose its Athlete of the Year after Rose broke Cobb's record. Rose accumulated a total of 4,256 hits before his final career at-bat, a strikeout against San Diego's Goose Gossage on August 17, 1986.\nIn 2010, \"Deadspin\" reported Rose used corked bats during his 1985 pursuit of Cobb's record. Two sports memorabilia collectors who owned Rose's game-used bats from that season had the bats x-rayed and found the telltale signs of corking. Rose had previously denied using corked bats.\nIn a report for \"ESPN: The Magazine\", it was noted that Rose had associated with Tommy Gioiosa, the manager of a Gold's Gym in suburban Cincinnati that sold anabolic steroids in the late 1980s. Gioiosa had first met and befriended Rose in 1978 during spring training, becoming a companion and runner to Rose over the next six years before bringing Rose to his gym in 1984. Rose reportedly had thought about taking a shot to help his bat speed near the end of his career, but told Gioiosa that it was \"too late to try something new\". Attempts to tell Rose about dealing in the gym fell on deaf ears. Gioiosa was later noted as the one individual Rose made bets with, along with later being convicted of conspiracy to sell of cocaine alongside filing a false tax return that included claiming a winning gambling ticket that had actually been Rose's.\nRetirement as a player.\nOn November 11, 1986, Rose was dropped from the Reds' forty-man roster to make room for pitcher Pat Pacillo, and he unofficially retired as a player. Rose finished his career with a number of MLB and NL records that have lasted for many years. Rose, always proud of his ability to hit .300 or better in fifteen of his twenty-four playing seasons, had a lifetime .303 batting average.\nCareer overall.\nStatistics and achievements.\nNote: All-time MLB leader in category is in bold.\nSource:https://https://\nIn 67 postseason games, including 6 World Series (1970, '72, '75, '76, '80, and '83), he batted .321 (86-for-268) with 30 runs scored, 13 doubles, 2 triples, 5 home runs, 22 RBI, 28 walks, .388 on-base percentage, .440 slugging percentage, and .828 on-base plus slugging percentage.\nRose was versatile in the field. He played every position except catcher and shortstop in his MLB career. By position, he played 939 games at first base, 628 games at second base, 634 games at third base, 673 games at left field, 73 games at center field, and 590 games at right field.\nManagerial career.\nCincinnati Reds (1984\u20131989).\nAfter retiring as a player, Rose remained with the Reds as manager until August 24, 1989. With a career record of 426\u2013388 as a manager, Rose ranks fifth in Reds history for managerial wins. During his four full seasons at the helm (1985\u20131988), the Reds posted four second-place finishes in the NL West division.\nSuspensions as a manager.\nThirty-day suspension.\nOn April 30, 1988, during a home game against the New York Mets, with two out in the top of the ninth inning, Mookie Wilson hit what looked like a routine ground ball to shortstop Barry Larkin, but the throw to first base was wide and pulled first baseman Nick Esasky's foot off the bag. Umpire Dave Pallone did not immediately make the safe call and Esasky waited for the call instead of making a play at the plate, allowing Howard Johnson to score all the way from second base with what would turn out to be the game-winning run. Rose, visibly angry and animated, vehemently argued the call. Within seconds, the dispute escalated to the point where Rose forcefully pushed the umpire twice with his shoulder and forearm, knocking Pallone several feet backward. Pallone promptly ejected Rose, as touching an umpire is grounds for immediate ejection. Rose had to be forcibly restrained by his coaches as he came back at Pallone, claiming Pallone had initiated the physical contact. He can be seen in the footage of the incident pointing to his cheek, attempting to explain to umpire Eric Gregg that Pallone had poked him in the face. In his book, Pallone wrote an entire chapter on the incident and denied touching Rose, writing that NL personnel who investigated the incident later agreed with him.\nIn the time it took to remove Rose, Cincinnati fans began showering the field with objects that included radios and cigarette lighters. Even though the inning was not over, all of the players retreated to the dugouts. Reds' owner Marge Schott posted a message onto the electronic billboard, asking fans to stop throwing objects onto the field. After a fifteen-minute suspension of play, Pallone left the field and the game was completed with the remaining three umpires. NL president A. Bartlett Giamatti suspended Rose for thirty days, which as of 2025 remains the longest suspension levied against a manager for an on-field incident. He also fined Rose \"a substantial amount\" which was not disclosed. Giamatti said, \"Such incidents are not business as usual and will not be allowed to become so.\"\nGiamatti also summoned Marty Brennaman and Joe Nuxhall, the Reds' on-air radio announcers, to his office in New York City and chastised them for inciting the fan response with \"inflammatory and completely irresponsible remarks\". Giamatti told Brennaman and Nuxhall, \"There is no excuse for encouraging a situation where the physical safety and well-being of any individual is put significantly at risk. Nothing justifies such unprofessional behavior.\"\nPermanent ineligibility and reinstatement.\nInvestigation.\nAmid reports that he had bet on baseball, Rose was informally questioned in February 1989 by Giamatti and Commissioner of Baseball Peter Ueberroth. With his lawyer present, Rose stated that he had bet on football, basketball and horseracing, but vehemently denied the allegations of betting on baseball. By this time, MLB owners had elected Giamatti to succeed Ueberroth, and the outgoing Commissioner decided to defer the matter to his successor. In the meantime, \"Sports Illustrated\" gave the public their first detailed report of the allegations that Rose had placed bets on baseball games on March 21, 1989, in the cover story of the issue dated April 3, 1989. Giamatti assumed office as the seventh Commissioner of Baseball on April 1. Three days later, lawyer John M. Dowd was retained to investigate the charges against Rose.\nDowd interviewed many of Rose's associates, including alleged bookmakers and bet runners. He delivered a summary of his findings to the Commissioner in May. In it, Dowd documented Rose's alleged gambling activities in 1985 and 1986 and compiled a day-by-day account of his alleged betting on baseball games in 1987. The \"Dowd Report\" documented alleged bets on fifty-two Reds games in 1987, citing Rose wagered a minimum of $10,000 a day; whereas others allegedly involved in the activities claim that number was actually $2,000 a day.\nAlthough the \"Dowd Report\" states that \"no evidence was discovered that Rose bet against the Reds\", Dowd himself stated in a December 2002 interview that he believed Rose probably bet against the Reds while managing them. Those critical of Rose's behavior, including Ohio's own Hall of Fame baseball reporter, Hal McCoy, have observed that \"the major problem with Rose betting on baseball, particularly the Reds, is that as manager he could control games, make decisions that could enhance his chances of winning his bets, thus jeopardizing the integrity of the game.\" The MLB rule that Rose violated prohibits \"any\" bet on a game the bettor is involved in, making no distinction between betting for or against one's team. The rule is: \"Rule 21 Misconduct, (d) Betting on Ball Games, subsection (ii): Any player, umpire, or club, or league official, or employee, who shall bet any sum whatsoever upon any baseball game in connection with which the bettor has a duty to perform shall be declared permanently ineligible.\"\nRose continued to deny all of the accusations against him and refused to appear at a hearing with Giamatti on the matter. He filed a lawsuit in the Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas, the state trial court covering Cincinnati, alleging that the Commissioner had prejudged the case and could not provide a fair hearing. The Court of Common Pleas issued a temporary restraining order to delay the hearing, but Giamatti sought to remove the case to the federal United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio. The Southern District of Ohio granted Giamatti's removal petition. The parties thereafter entered settlement negotiations.\nAftermath.\nOn August 24, 1989, Rose voluntarily accepted a permanent place on baseball's ineligible list. He accepted that there was a factual reason for the ban. In return, MLB agreed to make no formal finding with regard to the gambling allegations. According to baseball's rules, Rose could apply for reinstatement in one year but Giamatti said, \"There is absolutely no deal for reinstatement. That is exactly what we did not agree to in terms of a fixed number of years.\" Rose, with a 412\u2013373 record, was replaced as Reds manager by Tommy Helms.\nGiamatti died of a heart attack on September 1, 1989, eight days after announcing Rose's suspension.\nNational Baseball Hall of Fame Eligibility.\nOn February 4, 1991, the Hall of Fame voted formally to exclude individuals on the permanently ineligible list from being inducted by way of the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA) vote. A longstanding unwritten rule already barred permanently ineligible players from enshrinement. At the beginning of the 2024 season, Rose, Tucupita Marcano (banned in 2024 for betting on his own team's games) and Roberto Alomar (banned in 2021 for sexual misconduct towards a female Toronto Blue Jays staffer) were the only living former players on the ineligible list (although former executive Chris Correa is also on the list for other infractions); Alomar was enshrined several years before his banishment, and his plaque remains in the hall. Players who were not selected by the BBWAA could be considered by the Veterans Committee in the first year after they would have lost their place on the Baseball Writers' ballot. Under the Hall's rules at the time, players could appear on the ballot for only fifteen years, beginning five years after they retired. Had he not been banned from baseball, Rose's name could have been on the writers' ballot beginning in 1992 and ending in 2006. Rose would have been eligible for consideration by the Veterans Committee in 2007, but did not appear on the ballot. In 2008, the Veterans Committee barred players and managers on the ineligible list from consideration. Eight years later, Rose petitioned the Hall of Fame to permit his name to be submitted for induction, saying that he had not expected to be prevented from consideration when agreeing to the lifetime ban.\nAlthough he will not be eligible for the Hall of Fame until December 2027 under the terms of the Fawn Rose and Jeffrey M. Lenkov agreement, artifacts from Rose's career are on display inside the Hall's museum, located on the floor above the plaque gallery. Rose was also inducted into the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame in 2016.\nPrevious reinstatement efforts.\nIn 1992, Rose applied for reinstatement. Fay Vincent, who as deputy commissioner had played a key role in negotiating the agreement banning Rose before becoming Commissioner after Giamatti's death, never acted on Rose's application. In September 1998, Rose applied for reinstatement with Vincent's successor Bud Selig, but Selig also never acted on it.\nIn public comments, Selig said he saw no reason to reconsider Rose's punishment. In March 2003, he acknowledged that he was considering Rose's application, leading to speculation that Rose's return might be imminent. Ultimately, Selig took no action.\nRepresentatives for Rose applied in 2015 for reinstatement with Selig's successor, Rob Manfred. On December 15 of that year, Manfred rejected the request. Manfred stated that Rose had not been forthcoming about his gambling and that Rose (who by this time was living in Las Vegas) was still betting on baseball. Although Rose was placing legal bets by this time, MLB had long barred players, managers and coaches from \"any\" form of gambling on baseball, legal or otherwise. He also felt that Rose did not have \"a mature understanding of his wrongful conduct\" and the damage it had done to the game. For these reasons, Manfred concluded that allowing him back in the game would be an \"unacceptable risk\".\nIn 2020, Rose, along with his lawyers, once again applied for reinstatement in the wake of the Houston Astros sign stealing scandal. In his petition, he stated that his gambling did not affect the outcome of games, whereas other players who used steroids or used electronic signs to steal catchers' signals, did affect games, yet were not banned. He also sent a petition to the Hall of Fame's board of directors, asking them to repeal their 1991 ban on players on the ineligible list. Neither Manfred nor the Hall of Fame's directors responded to this petition.\nIn 2022, Rose again applied for reinstatement. In a letter to Manfred, he stated that he \"still think[s] every day about what it would mean to be considered for the Hall of Fame\". Manfred quickly rejected the request, and stated that any Hall of Fame discussions would be deferred to the Veteran's Committee.\nWhen asked in March 2023 about whether or not MLB's emerging partnerships with sportsbooks would have an effect on Rose's ban, Manfred quickly shot down speculation about possible reinstatement, and later affirmed his stance when further asked about it at that season's All-Star Game.\nReinstatement.\nOn December 17, 2024, Fawn Rose and Rose family attorney Jeffrey M. Lenkov were in New York to discuss the legal issues with filing for reinstatement. On January 8, 2025, Rose and Lenkov officially filed documents to remove her father from the Permanently Ineligible List.\nOn February 28, 2025, President Donald Trump posted on Truth Social that he would be giving Rose a posthumous pardon, though he remained vague about what crimes in particular will be annulled. He also criticized MLB and the BBWAA over Rose's ban, calling for reinstatement and an induction into the Hall of Fame. Manfred responded that he would review the ineligibility after the Fawn Rose meeting from December and the subsequent reinstatement documents filed by her and Lenkov. Manfred later met with Trump in April, and confirmed that Rose and his lifetime ban was among the topics discussed.\nOn May 13, 2025, Manfred instituted a change regarding permanent ineligibility, making it so all bans expire after death of the person on the list. The change directly impacted Pete Rose, who had died in September 2024, and thus was formally reinstated posthumously. Manfred justified the move by stating that \"a deceased individual cannot compromise the integrity of the game,\" while also acknowledging political pressure from Trump, who had announced his intention to pardon Rose and met with Manfred privately in April 2025.\nRose's reinstatement made him eligible for consideration by the Hall of Fame's Veterans Committee under the \"Classic Baseball\" category, which covers players whose primary contributions occurred prior to 1980. The next scheduled vote is expected to take place during the 2027 MLB Winter Meetings.\nRose's reinstatement sparked renewed debate within the baseball community, with supporters highlighting the precedent it sets for other banned players such as \"Shoeless\" Joe Jackson, who was also reinstated under the same policy.\nPost-baseball life.\nTax evasion.\nOn April 20, 1990, Rose entered a plea of guilty to two charges of filing false income tax returns not showing income he received from selling autographs and memorabilia and from horseracing winnings. On July 19, he was sentenced to five months in the minimum security prison camp at the United States Penitentiary in Marion, Illinois, and fined $50,000. Rose was released on January 7, 1991, after having paid $366,041 in back taxes and interest and was required to perform 1,000 hours of community service.\nMLB All-Century Team.\nIn 1999, Rose was selected as an outfielder on the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. To select the team, a panel of experts first compiled a list of the 100 greatest players from the past century. Fans then voted on the players using paper and online ballots.\nAn exception was made to Rose's ban to allow him to participate in the pre-game introduction of the All-Century team before Game Two of the 1999 World Series between the Atlanta Braves and the New York Yankees. Despite never having been a member of the Braves, Rose received the loudest ovation of the All-Century team members from the crowd at Turner Field in Atlanta, Georgia.\nAfter the ceremony on live television, NBC's Jim Gray repeatedly asked Rose if he was ready to admit to betting on baseball and apologize. Many people were outraged over Gray's aggressive questioning, feeling that it detracted from the ceremony. In protest, Yankees outfielder Chad Curtis refused to speak with Gray after his game-winning home run in Game Three. Earlier that season, Rose had been ranked at number 25 on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players.\nIn 2002, Rose appeared during the 2002 World Series in a Mastercard-sponsored event recalling \"Baseball's Most Memorable Moments\". Fans voted Rose's record-breaking hit over Ty Cobb as the sixth most memorable moment in baseball history.\nWhile allowing him to participate in the All-Century Team, and a September 2010 celebration at Great American Ball Park of the 25th anniversary of his 4,192nd hit, MLB refused to allow Rose to participate in other events in Cincinnati, such as the 25th anniversary reunion of the Big Red Machine, the closing of Cinergy Field and the opening of Great American Ball Park, as well as the closing of Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia and 1980 Phillies anniversary celebrations. The year before his retirement in 2015, Selig stated that Rose could participate in the festivities for the 2015 MLB All-Star Game, which was held in Cincinnati (within subjective guidelines), and Rose took the field alongside Reds teammates prior to the game. In 2016, Rose had his jersey retired by the Reds, which had to be approved by MLB.\nSports gambling admission.\nIn his autobiography \"My Prison Without Bars\", published by Rodale, Inc. on January 8, 2004, Rose admitted publicly to betting on baseball games and other sports while playing for and managing the Reds. He also admitted to betting on Reds games, but said he never bet against the team. Rose repeated his admissions in an interview on the ABC news program \"Primetime Thursday\". In the book he stated that he hoped his admissions would help end his ban from baseball so he could reapply for reinstatement. Later in 2004, ESPN broadcast the television film \"Hustle\", starring Tom Sizemore and directed by Peter Bogdanovich, which was primarily based on the \"Dowd Report\".\nIn March 2007, during an interview on \"The Dan Patrick Show\" on ESPN Radio, Rose said, \"I bet on my team every night. I didn't bet on my team four nights a week. I bet on my team to win every night because I loved my team, I believed in my team\u00a0... I did everything in my power every night to win that game.\"\nDowd disputed Rose's contention he bet on the Reds every night, asserting Rose did not bet on his team when Mario Soto or Bill Gullickson pitched. A notebook detailing Rose's daily betting activity shows Rose placed bets on five of the six games Soto started in 1987. The lone exception was April 26, 1987, when Rose allegedly placed bets on hockey and basketball games but no baseball games. There were also four games Rose did not bet on the Reds in which Gullickson started.\nEven after his 2004 admission of gambling, Rose had described his violation of MLB rules with what journalist Kostya Kennedy described as \"a kind of swagger, that familiar screw-you defiance\". On September 11, 2010, at a roast of Rose held at Hollywood Casino Lawrenceburg in Indiana on the 25th anniversary of his 4,192nd hit and attended by many teammates, Rose wept while acknowledging he had \"disrespected baseball\". He apologized to P\u00e9rez and other members of the Big Red Machine, stating, \"I guarantee everyone in this room I will never disrespect you again. I love the fans, I love the game of baseball, and I love Cincinnati baseball\". His words and crying surprised those present; a \"Cincinnati Enquirer\" reporter said, \"It felt completely unscripted, completely sincere and very powerful. I had covered Rose for more than 25 years and hadn't ever heard him like that.\"\nIn June 2015, ESPN concluded its own investigation of Rose and determined that he had bet on baseball while still a player\u2013manager. The results of the investigation were made public, revealing the records of bets made by Rose. Federal authorities had seized the records from one of Rose's associates.\nWWE.\nBetween 1998 and 2000, Rose appeared at World Wrestling Federation's (now WWE) annual WrestleMania pay-per-view event, in what became a running gag. At WrestleMania XIV he served as \"guest ring announcer\" prior to a match between Kane and the Undertaker. Rose took to the ring and started to taunt the Boston crowd about the Reds beating the Red Sox in the 1975 World Series, before he took a Tombstone Piledriver from Kane (also nicknamed \"The Big Red Machine\"). Even though portrayed as a villain, Kane's Tombstone of Rose was cheered by the crowd. For the next year's WrestleMania XV, Rose was portrayed as seeking revenge. To do so, he dressed as the San Diego Chicken and \"attacked\" Kane before his scheduled match, only to take another Tombstone. He returned for a third time the following year, at WrestleMania 2000, but again was thwarted by Kane, as well as Rikishi, his tag team partner that night.\nIn addition to these three appearances, Rose appeared in a Halloween-themed commercial for WWE's No Mercy event in 2002 and was chokeslammed by Kane. In 2004, Rose was inducted into the \"Celebrity Wing\" of the WWE Hall of Fame class of 2004. He was the first celebrity to go into the Hall, and was inducted at a ceremony prior to WrestleMania XX by Kane.\nOn March 22, 2010, Rose was the guest host on \"WWE Raw\", which was the last episode of \"Raw\" before WrestleMania XXVI. As his first order of business, he set up a match between Shawn Michaels and Kane, which Michaels won. Later that night, Kane attacked Rose offscreen.\nRose was briefly mentioned on WWE television again on August 27, 2012. In an anger management segment, Kane stated, \"For reasons never quite explained, I have an unhealthy obsession with torturing Pete Rose.\" Rose was later interviewed on WWE.com about his experiences with Kane's anger.\nBrief managing stint.\nOn June 16, 2014, Rose returned to managing a professional baseball team for one game, serving as guest manager of the Bridgeport Bluefish, a Connecticut-based team. Rose's cameo as a manager did not violate his lifetime ban, as the Bluefish played in the independent Atlantic League of Professional Baseball, which is unaffiliated with Major League Baseball. Rose also coached first base and signed autographs for fans as the Bluefish defeated the Lancaster Barnstormers, 2\u20130.\nFox Sports.\nOn April 16, 2015, it was announced that Rose had been hired by Fox Sports to serve as a guest studio color analyst for MLB coverage on Fox and Fox Sports 1, appearing on the \"MLB on Fox\" pregame show as well as \"MLB Whiparound\", \"America's Pregame\" and \"Fox Sports Live\". He made his Fox Sports 1 debut on May 11, 2015. He was let go in August 2017 when the details of his sexual relationship with a teenager in the 1970s was revealed after he attempted to sue John Dowd.\nAutograph shows.\nRose became a fixture at baseball card and autograph shows. As of \u00a02014[ [update]], Rose reportedly earned more than $1,000,000 annually from many paid public appearances and autograph signings. These included appearances in Cooperstown, New York, around the time of the Hall of Fame induction weekend each year. Although Rose did not stay at the Otesaga Resort Hotel with other baseball people and could not attend the ceremonies, many fans gathered outside for his autograph. He became known for signing baseballs with the phrase \"I'm sorry I bet on baseball\" and, if paid to, would sign anything, including his mugshot after being arrested for tax evasion and copies of the Dowd Report. He was known to spend over 20 hours a week greeting fans and signing autographs at casinos in Las Vegas.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\nRose married Karolyn Englehardt on January 25, 1964. The couple had two children, daughter Fawn (born 1964) and son Pete Rose Jr. (born 1969). The marriage ended in divorce in 1980. In 1978, a paternity suit was filed naming Rose as the father of Morgan Erin Rubio. In a 1996 settlement of the lawsuit, Rose acknowledged that Rubio was his daughter.\nRose married his second wife, Carol J. Woliung, a former Playboy Bunny and Philadelphia Eagles cheerleader, in 1984. They had two children, son Tyler (born 1984) and daughter Cara (born 1989), who was born two days before Rose's banishment from MLB. Rose filed for divorce from Carol in March 2011, citing irreconcilable differences, but his petition did not offer any additional details. Rose did not include a date for their separation. Documents in the filing said that Rose was looking to obtain all memorabilia and other possessions he had acquired before the marriage.\nWhile separated from his second wife, Rose began a relationship with Kiana Kim, a \"Playboy\" model 40 years his junior. During a 2009 interview, Rose discussed this relationship, stating, \"My girl has finally decided to try to shoot for \"Playboy\", and they were kind enough to give her an opportunity to come to Houston for an interview, and we're excited about that.\" A 2013 reality show called \"\" which followed the couple, and his two stepchildren Cassie and Ashton, premiered on TLC on January 14, 2013. Rose and Kim had been engaged since 2011 but never married. They appeared on a national Skechers commercial which aired during Super Bowl XLVIII.\nTwo of Rose's children have lived public lives. Cara has worked as a television actress, appearing as a regular in the first season of the NBC soap opera \"Passions\" and playing a recurring role on Fox's \"Melrose Place\". She uses the stage name \"Chea Courtney\". His son, Pete Jr., spent 16 years as a minor league player, advancing to the majors once for an 11-game stint with the Reds in 1997, and later moving into coaching. Rose's minor league roommate, David Miller, recruited Pete Jr's son Peter Edward Rose III (P. J.) to a National Letter of Intent for the 2026 season for the LaSalle Explorers. The young Rose will be redshirted in 2025 for the program's first game since 2020 in February 2026.\nStatutory rape allegation.\nRose filed a defamation suit against John M. Dowd in July 2016, after Dowd had alleged in a radio interview the previous summer that Rose committed statutory rape. A motion filed in Dowd's defense contained a sworn statement from a woman who said that Rose had engaged in a sexual relationship with her in the 1970s, when she was a minor and he was in his mid-30s. Rose later acknowledged the relationship, defending himself by saying that he did not know that the girl, between 14 and 15 years old at the time, was a minor under Ohio state laws and that he did not have sex with her outside the state. Rose claimed he thought she was 16, which was the age of consent in Ohio at the time. In light of the allegation, the Phillies canceled his upcoming Philadelphia Baseball Wall of Fame ceremony. On December 15, 2017, a judge dismissed the suit when both parties reached an agreement. When questioned about it by Alex Coffey, a female reporter from \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\", in August 2022, Rose replied, \"It was 55 years ago, babe.\"\nDeath.\nRose died at his home in Las Vegas, Nevada, on September 30, 2024, at the age of 83, from hypertensive and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. He had attended an autograph event in Franklin, Tennessee, the day prior. On February 10, 2025, after gaining permission from Manfred, the Reds announced that they would add #14 patches to their uniforms throughout the entire season in Rose's honor.\nRecords and achievements.\nAside from the numerous records he set and individual titles he won, Rose was also honored with the 1968 Hutch Award, the 1969 Lou Gehrig Memorial Award, and the 1976 Roberto Clemente Award. Despite his status of permanent ineligibility for the Hall of Fame, Rose received 9.5% of the votes (17th place overall) in his first year on the ballot for the BBWAA. He continued to receive votes for the next two years but failed to achieve the minimum of 5% to keep him on the ballot. Rose was inducted into the Baseball Reliquary's Shrine of the Eternals in 2010.\nRose made the National League All-Star roster seventeen times. Only three National League players (Hank Aaron, Willie Mays, and Stan Musial) and five American League (AL) players (Mickey Mantle, Cal Ripken, Ted Williams, Rod Carew, and Carl Yastrzemski) have more appearances. He was voted the National League's Most Valuable Player in 1973, but also finished in the top five vote-getters in 1968, 1969, 1975, and 1976. He led the league in batting average three times (1968, 1969, 1973), in plate appearances and hits seven times, in games played and doubles five times, in at-bats and runs scored four times, and in on-base percentage twice (1968, 1979).\nRose also accumulated 63 four-hit games in his MLB career.\nRose retired in 1986 with the highest modern-day career fielding percentage for a right fielder at 99.14% and the highest National League modern-day career fielding percentage for a left fielder at 99.07%, behind only the AL's Joe Rudi and then-active players Gary Roenicke and Brian Downing, who also primarily played in the AL.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1985, pop-artist Andy Warhol produced a limited edition screenprint in which Rose was the subject. The work was released in an edition of 50, with each work signed and numbered in pencil on lower right.\nRose was referenced in the lyrics of the song \"Zanzibar\" originally released by Billy Joel in 1978 on the \"52nd Street\" album: \"Rose, he knows he's such a credit to the game / But the Yankees grab the headlines every time.\" In later live performances instead of singing of Rose being \"a credit to the game,\" Joel jokes that he will \"never make the Hall of Fame,\" although he modified this to \"Hall of Popularity\" during a concert in Cincinnati.\nIn the sport of wakeboarding, there is a trick named \"Pete Rose\", so named because riders attempting to learn it would \"slide like Pete Rose\" when crashing.\nThe song \"Cleveland\" by Luke Doucet and the White Falcon, on the 2008 \"Blood's Too Rich\" album, refers to Rose and his supporters, and a time when Doucet and Rose shared an elevator.\nIn the popular American television show, \"Better Call Saul\", the protagonist is repeatedly referred to as \"Charlie Hustle\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52974", "revid": "50977533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52974", "title": "Emergency medicine", "text": "Medical specialty concerned with care for patients who require immediate medical attention\nEmergency medicine is the medical specialty concerned with the care of illnesses or injuries requiring immediate medical attention. Emergency physicians (or \"ER doctors\") specialize in providing care for unscheduled and undifferentiated patients of all ages. As frontline providers, in coordination with emergency medical services, they are responsible for initiating resuscitation, stabilization, and early interventions during the acute phase of a medical condition. Emergency physicians generally practice in hospital emergency departments, pre-hospital settings via emergency medical services, and intensive care units. Still, they may also work in primary care settings such as urgent care clinics.\nSub-specialties of emergency medicine include disaster medicine, medical toxicology, point-of-care ultrasonography, critical care medicine, emergency medical services, hyperbaric medicine, sports medicine, palliative care, or aerospace medicine.\nVarious models for emergency medicine exist internationally. In countries following the Anglo-American model, emergency medicine initially consisted of surgeons, general practitioners, and other physicians. However, in recent decades, it has become recognized as a specialty in its own right with its training programs and academic posts, and the specialty is now a popular choice among medical students and newly qualified medical practitioners. By contrast, in countries following the Franco-German model, the specialty does not exist, and emergency medical care is instead provided directly by anesthesiologists (for critical resuscitation), surgeons, specialists in internal medicine, pediatricians, cardiologists, or neurologists as appropriate. Emergency medicine is still evolving in developing countries, and international emergency medicine programs offer hope of improving primary emergency care where resources are limited.\nScope.\nEmergency medicine is a medical specialty\u2014a field of practice based on the knowledge and skills required to prevent, diagnose, and manage acute and urgent aspects of illness and injury affecting patients of all age groups with a full spectrum of undifferentiated physical and behavioural disorders. It further encompasses an understanding of the development of pre-hospital and in-hospital emergency medical systems and the skills necessary for this development.\nThe field of emergency medicine encompasses care involving the acute care of internal medical and surgical conditions. In many modern emergency departments, emergency physicians see many patients, treating their illnesses and arranging for disposition\u2014either admitting them to the hospital or releasing them after treatment as necessary. They also provide episodic primary care to patients during off-hours and those who do not have primary care providers. Most patients present to emergency departments with low-acuity conditions (such as minor injuries or exacerbations of chronic disease), but a small proportion will be critically ill or injured. Therefore, the emergency physician requires broad knowledge and procedural skills, often including surgical procedures, trauma resuscitation, advanced cardiac life support and advanced airway management. They must have some of the core skills from many medical specialities\u2014the ability to resuscitate a patient (intensive care medicine), manage a difficult airway (anesthesiology), suture a complex laceration (plastic surgery), set a fractured bone or dislocated joint (orthopaedic surgery), treat a heart attack (cardiology), manage strokes (neurology), work-up a pregnant patient with vaginal bleeding (obstetrics and gynaecology), control a patient with mania (psychiatry), stop a severe nosebleed (otolaryngology), place a chest tube (cardiothoracic surgery), and conduct and interpret x-rays and ultrasounds (radiology). This generalist approach can obviate barrier-to-care issues seen in systems without specialists in emergency medicine, where patients requiring immediate attention are instead managed from the outset by specialty doctors such as surgeons or internal physicians. However, this may lead to barriers through acute and critical care specialities disconnecting from emergency care.\nEmergency medicine may separate from urgent care, which refers to primary healthcare for less emergent medical issues, but there is obvious overlap, and many emergency physicians work in urgent care settings. Emergency medicine also includes many aspects of acute primary care and shares with family medicine the uniqueness of seeing all patients regardless of age, gender or organ system. The emergency physician workforce also includes many competent physicians who have medical skills from other specialities.\nPhysicians specializing in emergency medicine can enter fellowships to receive credentials in subspecialties such as palliative care, critical care medicine, medical toxicology, wilderness medicine, pediatric emergency medicine, sports medicine, disaster medicine, tactical medicine, ultrasound, pain medicine, pre-hospital emergency medicine, or undersea and hyperbaric medicine.\nThe practice of emergency medicine is often quite different in rural areas where there are far fewer other specialities and healthcare resources. In these areas, family physicians with additional skills in emergency medicine often staff emergency departments. Rural emergency physicians may be the only health care providers in the community and require skills that include primary care and obstetrics.\nWork patterns.\nPatterns vary by country and region. In the United States, the employment arrangement of emergency physician practices are either private (with a co-operative group of doctors staffing an emergency department under contract), institutional (physicians with or without an independent contractor relationship with the hospital), corporate (physicians with an independent contractor relationship with a third-party staffing company that services multiple emergency departments), or governmental (for example, when working within personal service military services, public health services, veterans' benefit systems or other government agencies).\nIn the United Kingdom, all consultants in emergency medicine work in the National Health Service, and there is little scope for private emergency practice. In other countries like Australia, New Zealand, or Turkey, emergency medicine specialists are almost always salaried employees of government health departments and work in public hospitals, with pockets of employment in private or non-government aeromedical rescue or transport services, as well as some private hospitals with emergency departments; they may be supplemented or backed by non-specialist medical officers, and visiting general practitioners. Rural emergency departments are sometimes run by general practitioners alone, sometimes with non-specialist qualifications in emergency medicine.\nHistory.\nDuring the French Revolution, after seeing the speed with which the carriages of the French flying artillery maneuvered across the battlefields, French military surgeon Dominique Jean Larrey applied the idea of ambulances, or \"flying carriages\", for rapid transport of wounded soldiers to a central place where medical care was more accessible and practical. Larrey operated ambulances with trained crews of drivers, corpsmen and litter-bearers and had them bring the wounded to centralized field hospitals, effectively creating a forerunner of the modern MASH units. Dominique Jean Larrey is sometimes called the Father of Emergency Medicine for his strategies during the French wars.\nEmergency medicine as an independent medical specialty is relatively young. Before the 1960s and 1970s, hospital emergency departments (EDs) were generally staffed by physicians on staff at the hospital on a rotating basis, among them family physicians, general surgeons, internists, and a variety of other specialists. In many smaller emergency departments, nurses would triage patients, and physicians would be called in based on the type of injury or illness. Family physicians were often on call for the emergency department and recognized the need for dedicated emergency department coverage. Many of the pioneers of emergency medicine were family physicians and other specialists who saw a need for additional training in emergency care.\nDuring this period, physicians began to emerge who had left their respective practices to devote their work entirely to the ED. In the UK in 1952, Maurice Ellis was appointed as the first \"casualty consultant\" at Leeds General Infirmary. In 1967, the Casualty Surgeons Association was co-established with Maurice Ellis as its first president. In the US, the first of such groups managed by Dr James DeWitt Mills in 1961, along with four associate physicians; Dr Chalmers A. Loughridge, Dr William Weaver, Dr John McDade, and Dr Steven Bednar, at Alexandria Hospital in Alexandria, Virginia, established 24/7 year-round emergency care, which became known as the \"Alexandria Plan\".\nIt was not until Dr. John Wiegenstein founded the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) the recognition of emergency medicine training programs by the AMA and the AOA, and in 1979 a historic vote by the American Board of Medical Specialties that emergency medicine became a recognized medical specialty in the US. The first emergency medicine residency program in the world began in 1970 at the University of Cincinnati. Furthermore, the first department of emergency medicine at a US medical school occurred in 1971 at the University of Southern California. The second residency program in the United States soon followed at what was then called Hennepin County General Hospital in Minneapolis, with two residents entering the program in 1971.\nIn 1990 the UK's Casualty Surgeons Association changed its name to the British Association for Accident and Emergency Medicine and subsequently became the British Association for Emergency Medicine (BAEM) in 2004. In 1993, an intercollegiate Faculty of Accident and Emergency Medicine (FAEM) became a \"daughter college\" of six royal medical colleges in England and Scotland to arrange professional examinations and training. In 2005, the BAEM and the FAEM became a single unit to form the College of Emergency Medicine, now the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, which conducts membership and fellowship examinations and publishes guidelines and standards for the practice of emergency medicine.\nFinancing and practice organization.\nReimbursement.\nMany hospitals and care centres feature departments of emergency medicine, where patients can receive acute care without an appointment. While many patients get treated for life-threatening injuries, others utilize the emergency department (ED) for non-urgent reasons such as headaches or a cold. (defined as \"visits for conditions for which a delay of several hours would not increase the likelihood of an adverse outcome\"). As such, EDs can adjust staffing ratios and designate an area of the department for faster patient turnover to accommodate various patient needs and volumes. Policies have improved to assist better ED staff (such as emergency medical technicians, paramedics). The emergency department, welfare programs, and healthcare clinics serve as a critical part of the healthcare safety net for uninsured patients who cannot afford medical treatment or adequately utilize their coverage. \nIn emergency departments in Australia, the government utilises an \"Activity based funding and management\", meaning that the amount of funding to emergency departments are allocated money based on the number of patients and the complexity of their cases or illnesses. However, rural emergency departments of Australia are funded under the principle of providing the necessary equipment and staffing levels required to provide safe and adequate care, not necessarily on the number of patients.\nCompensation.\nIn the United States, Emergency Physicians are compensated at a higher rate than some other specialities, ranking 10th out of 26 physician specialities in 2015, at an average salary of $306,000 annually. They are compensated in the mid-range (averaging $13,000 annually) for non-patient activities, such as speaking engagements or acting as an expert witness; they also saw a 12% increase in salary from 2014 \u2013 2015 (which was not out of line with many other physician specialities that year). While emergency physicians work 8\u201312 hour shifts and do not tend to work on-call, the high level of stress and need for solid diagnostic and triage capabilities for the undifferentiated, acute patient contributes to arguments justifying higher salaries for these physicians. Emergency care must be available every hour of every day and requires a doctor to be available on-site 24/7, unlike an outpatient clinic or other hospital departments with more limited hours and may only call a physician in when needed. The necessity to have a physician on staff and all other diagnostic services available every hour of every day is thus a costly arrangement for hospitals.\nPayment systems.\nAmerican health payment systems are undergoing significant reform efforts, Which include compensating emergency physicians through \"pay for performance\" incentives and penalty measures under commercial and public health programs, including Medicare and Medicaid. This payment reform aims to improve the quality of care and control costs, despite the differing opinions on the existing evidence to show that this payment approach is effective in emergency medicine. Initially, these incentives would only target primary care providers (PCPs), but some would argue that emergency medicine is primary care, as no one refers patients to the ED. In one such program, two specific conditions listed were directly tied to patients frequently seen by emergency medical providers: acute myocardial infarction and pneumonia. (See: Hospital Quality Incentive Demonstration.)\nThere are some challenges with implementing these quality-based incentives in emergency medicine in that patients are often not given a definitive diagnosis in the ED, making it challenging to allocate payments through https://. Additionally, adjustments based on patient risk-level and multiple co-morbidities for complex patients further complicate attribution of positive or negative health outcomes. It is not easy to assess whether much of the costs directly result from the emergent condition treated in acutely care settings. It is also difficult to quantify the savings due to preventive care during emergency treatment (i.e. workup, stabilizing treatments, coordination of care and discharge, rather than a hospital admission). Thus, ED providers tend to support a modified fee-for-service model over other payment systems.\nOverutilization.\nSome patients without health insurance utilize EDs as their primary form of medical care, as their financial status limits their access to consistent care. Because these patients cannot utilize insurance or primary care systems, emergency medical providers often increased volumes of lower acuity patients and risk of financial loss, especially since many patients cannot pay for their care (see below). ED overuse produces $38 billion in spending each year (i.e. care delivery and coordination failures, over-treatment, administrative complexity, pricing failures, and fraud), Moreover, it unnecessarily drains departmental resources, reducing the quality of care across all patients. While overuse is not limited to the uninsured, the uninsured constitute a growing proportion of non-urgent ED visits. Insurance coverage can help mitigate overutilization by improving access to alternative forms of care and lowering the need for emergency visits.\nA common misconception identifies frequent ED visitors as a significant factor in excess spending. However, frequent ED users make up a small portion of those contributing to overutilization and are often insured.\nUncompensated care.\nInjury and illness are often unforeseen, and patients of lower socioeconomic status are especially susceptible to being suddenly burdened with the cost of a necessary ED visit. For example, in the event that a patient is unable to pay for medical care received, the hospital, under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA), is obligated to treat emergency conditions regardless of a patient's ability to pay and therefore faces an economic loss for this uncompensated care. Estimates suggest that over half (approximately 55%) of all quantifiable emergency care is uncompensated and inadequate reimbursement has led to the closure of many EDs. Policy changes (such as the Affordable Care Act) are expected to decrease the number of uninsured people and thereby reduce uncompensated care.\nIn addition to decreasing the uninsured rate, ED overutilization might reduce by improving patient access to primary care and increasing patient flow to alternative care centres for non-life-threatening injuries. Financial disincentives, patient education, and improved management for patients with chronic diseases can also reduce overutilization and help manage costs of care. Moreover, physician knowledge of prices for treatment and analyses, discussions on costs with their patients, and a changing culture away from defensive medicine can improve cost-effective use. A transition towards more value-based care in the ED is an avenue by which providers can contain costs.\nEmergency Medicine Becoming Primary Provider of Healthcare..\nThe emergency department is commonly used only in emergencies. However, some individuals use the emergency department as their primary form of healthcare. The emergency room is characterized by high wait times, and it's mainly due to the misuse of the emergency department for non-emergencies. Individuals experiencing homelessness can't afford to see a primary care provider, and most homeless individuals don't have health insurance. Homeless individuals do not have access to preventative healthcare, which causes them to be at risk for health problems and have higher mortality rates. These contributions make homeless individuals use hospitals frequently, especially the emergency department. A survey conducted in 2017 by the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care found that there were an estimated 990,000 emergency department visits by homeless individuals .\nAlthough patients who experience homelessness are the ones most frequently seen in the emergency department, they have the worst clinical outcomes among other patients . The care provided to these homeless individuals is influenced by how the physician was trained. Caring for the homeless population is complex, challenging, and resource-intensive. Emergency medicine education is lacking in formal curricula on the topic of homelessness, despite the benefits for resident morale and patient care . Informal teaching methods in residents and personal experiences with homeless patients have left physicians with misinterpretations and biased opinions about this population of patients . Residents often described feeling burned out when working with patients experiencing homelessness . This means that they are a need for improvement in training emergency providers on how to deal with this population in an empathetic and non-biased way. If physicians were trained to treat these individuals in a non-biased manner, clinical outcomes could be better in homeless patients.\nEMTALA.\nDoctors that work in the EDs of hospitals receiving Medicare funding are subject to the provisions of EMTALA. The US Congress enacted EMTALA in 1986 to curtail \"patient dumping\", a practice whereby patients were refused medical care for economic or other non-medical reasons. Since its enactment, ED visits have substantially increased, with one study showing a rise in visits of 26% (which is more than double the increase in population over the same period). While more individuals are receiving care, a lack of funding and ED overcrowding may be affecting quality. To comply with the provisions of EMTALA, hospitals, through their ED physicians, must provide medical screening and stabilize the emergency medical conditions of anyone that presents themselves at a hospital ED with patient capacity. EMTALA holds both the hospital and the responsible ED physician liable for civil penalties of up to $50,000 if there is no help for those in need. While both the Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (OIG) and private citizens can bring an action under EMTALA, courts have uniformly held that ED physicians can only be held liable if the case is prosecuted by OIG (whereas hospitals are subject to penalties regardless of who brings the suit). Additionally, the Centres for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) can discontinue provider status under Medicare for physicians that do not comply with EMTALA. Liability also extends to on-call physicians that fail to respond to an ED request to come to the hospital to provide service. While the goals of EMTALA are laudable, commentators have noted that it appears to have created a substantial unfunded burden on the resources of hospitals and emergency physicians. As a result of financial difficulty, between the period of 1991\u20132011, 12.6% of EDs in the US closed.\nCare delivery in different ED settings.\nRural.\nDespite the practice emerging over the past few decades, the delivery of emergency medicine has significantly increased and evolved across diverse settings related to cost, provider availability and overall usage. Before the Affordable Care Act (ACA), low-acuity emergency medicine visits were leveraged primarily by \"uninsured or underinsured patients, women, children, and minorities, all of whom frequently face barriers to accessing primary care\". While this still exists today, as mentioned above, it is critical to consider the location in which care is delivered to understand the population and system challenges related to overutilization and high cost. In rural communities where provider and ambulatory facility shortages exist, a primary care physician (PCP) in the ED with general knowledge is likely to be the only source of health care for a population, as specialists and other health resources are generally unavailable due to lack of funding and desire to serve in these areas. As a result, the incidence of complex co-morbidities not managed by the appropriate provider results in worse health outcomes and eventually costlier care that extends beyond rural communities. Though typically quite separated, PCPs in rural areas must partner with larger health systems to comprehensively address the complex needs of their community, improve population health, and implement strategies such as telemedicine to improve health outcomes and reduce ED utilization for preventable illnesses. (See: Rural health.)\nRural care has benefitted in the post-pandemic (2020) era by the rapid expansion of telemedicine programs, including those that assist with Emergency Medical care. This has enhanced the ability of non-Emergency Medicine boarded physicians, physician assistants and nurse practitioners to provide a higher level of care by partnering with Emergency Physicians at larger centers, via telehealth.\nUrban.\nAlternatively, emergency medicine in urban areas consists of diverse provider groups, including physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners and registered nurses who coordinate with specialists in both inpatient and outpatient facilities to address patients' needs, more specifically in the ED. For all systems, regardless of funding source, EMTALA mandates EDs to conduct a medical examination for anyone that presents at the department, irrespective of paying ability. Non-profit hospitals and health systems \u2013 as required by the ACA \u2013 must provide a certain threshold of charity care \"by actively ensuring that those who qualify for financial assistance get it, by charging reasonable rates to uninsured patients and by avoiding extraordinary collection practices.\" While there are limitations, this mandate provides support to many in need. That said, despite policy efforts and increased funding and federal reimbursement in urban areas, the triple aim (of improving patient experience, enhancing population health, and reducing the per-capita cost of care) remains a challenge without providers' and payers' collaboration to increase access to preventive care and decrease in ED usage. As a result, many experts support the notion that emergency medical services should only serve immediate risks in urban and rural areas.\nPatient\u2013provider relationships.\nAs stated above, EMTALA includes provisions that protect patients from being turned away or transferred before adequate stabilisation. Upon making contact with a patient, EMS providers are responsible for diagnosing and stabilising a patient's condition without regard for the ability to pay. In the pre-hospital setting, providers must exercise appropriate judgement in choosing a suitable hospital for transport. Hospitals can only turn away incoming ambulances if they are on diversion and incapable of providing adequate care. However, once a patient has arrived on hospital property, care must be provided. At the hospital, a triage nurse first contacts the patient, who determines the appropriate level of care needed.\nAccording to \"Mead v. Legacy Health System\", a patient-physician relationship is established when \"the physician takes an affirmative action with regard to the care of the patient\". Initiating such a relationship forms a legal contract in which the physician must continue to provide treatment or adequately terminate the relationship. This legal responsibility can extend to physician consultations and on-call physicians even without direct patient contact. In emergency medicine, termination of the patient\u2013provider relationship prior to stabilization or without handoff to another qualified provider is considered abandonment. In order to initiate an outside transfer, a physician must verify that the next hospital can provide a similar or higher level of care. Hospitals and physicians must also ensure that the patient's condition will not be further aggravated by the transfer process.\nThe setting of emergency medicine presents a challenge for delivering high quality, patient-centered care. Clear, effective communication can be particularly difficult due to noise, frequent interruptions, and high patient turnover. The Society for Academic Emergency Medicine has identified five essential tasks for patient-physician communication: establishing rapport, gathering information, giving information, providing comfort, and collaboration. The miscommunication of patient information is a crucial source of medical error; minimising shortcoming in communication remains a topic of current and future research.\nMedical error.\nMany circumstances, including the regular transfer of patients in emergency treatment and crowded, noisy and chaotic ED environments, make emergency medicine particularly susceptible to medical error and near misses. One study identified an error rate of 18 per 100 registered patients in one particular academic ED. Another study found that where a lack of teamwork (i.e. poor communication, lack of team structure, lack of cross-monitoring) was implicated in a particular incident of ED medical error, \"an average of 8.8 teamwork failures occurred per case [and] more than half of the deaths and permanent disabilities that occurred were judged avoidable.\" Particular cultural (i.e. \"a focus on the errors of others and a 'blame-and-shame' culture\") and structural (i.e. lack of standardisation and equipment incompatibilities) aspects of emergency medicine often result in a lack of disclosure of medical error and near misses to patients and other caregivers. While concerns about malpractice liability are one reason why disclosure of medical errors is not made, some have noted that disclosing the error and providing an apology can mitigate malpractice risk. Ethicists uniformly agree that the disclosure of a medical error that causes harm is a care provider's duty. The critical components of the disclosure include \"honesty, explanation, empathy, apology, and the chance to lessen the chance of future errors\" (represented by the mnemonic HEEAL). The nature of emergency medicine is such that error will likely always be a substantial risk of emergency care. However, maintaining public trust through open communication regarding a harmful error can help patients and physicians constructively address problems when they occur.\nTreatments.\nEmergency medicine is a primary or first-contact point of care for patients requiring the use of the health care system. Specialists in emergency medicine are required to possess specialist skills in acute illness diagnosis and resuscitation. Emergency physicians are responsible for providing immediate recognition, evaluation, care, and stabilisation to adult and pediatric patients in response to acute illness and injury.\nEmergency medical physicians provide treatments to a range of cases requiring vast knowledge. They deal with patients from mental illnesses to physical and anything in-between. An average treatment process would likely involve investigation, then diagnosis, then either treatment or the patient being admitted. In terms of procedures, they cover a wide and broad range, including treatment to GSW's (Gun Shot Wounds), Head and body traumas, stomach bugs, mental episodes, seizures and much more. They are some of the most highly trained physicians in the world and are responsible for providing immediate recognition, evaluation, care, and stabilisation to adult and paediatric patients in response to acute illness and injury.\nTraining.\nThere are a variety of international models for emergency medicine training. There are two different models among those with well-developed training programs: a \"specialist\" model or \"a multidisciplinary model\". Additionally, in some countries, the emergency medicine specialist rides in the ambulance. For example, in France and Germany, the physician, often an anesthesiologist, rides in the ambulance and provides stabilising care at the scene. The patient is directed to the appropriate hospital department, so emergency care is much more multidisciplinary than the Anglo-American model.\nIn countries such as the US, the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia, ambulances crewed by paramedics and emergency medical technicians respond to out-of-hospital emergencies and transport patients to emergency departments, meaning there is more dependence on these healthcare providers and there is more dependence on paramedics and EMTs for on-scene care. Emergency physicians are therefore more \"specialists\" since all patients are taken to the emergency department. Most developing countries follow the Anglo-American model: the gold standard is three or four-year independent residency training programs in emergency medicine. Some countries develop training programs based on a primary care foundation with additional emergency medicine training. In developing countries, there is an awareness that Western models may not be applicable and may not be the best use of limited health care resources. For example, specialty training and pre-hospital care in developed countries are too expensive and impractical for use in many developing countries with limited health care resources. International emergency medicine provides a critical global perspective and hope for improvement in these areas.\nA brief review of some of these programs follows:\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, the SAE (Sociedad Argentina de Emergencias) is the leading organisation of emergency medicine. There are many residency programs. Also, it is possible to reach the certification with a two-year postgraduate university course after a few years of ED background.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nThe specialist medical college responsible for emergency medicine in Australia and New Zealand is the Australasian College for Emergency Medicine (ACEM). The training program is nominally seven years in duration, after which the trainee is awarded a Fellowship of ACEM, conditional upon passing all necessary assessments.\nDual fellowship programs also exist for paediatric medicine (in conjunction with the Royal Australasian College of Physicians) and intensive care medicine (in conjunction with the College of Intensive Care Medicine). These programs nominally add one or more years to the ACEM training program.\nFor medical doctors not (and not wishing to be) specialists in emergency medicine but have a significant interest or workload in emergency departments, the ACEM provides non-specialist certificates and diplomas.\nThe Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) is the responsible body for the training and upholding of standards for practice and provision of rural and remote medical care. Prospective rural generalists undertaking this four-year fellowship program have an opportunity to complete Advanced Specialised Training (AST) in emergency medicine.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium there are three recognised ways to practice emergency medicine. Until 2005 there was no accredited emergency medicine program. Emergency medicine was performed by general practitioners (having followed a 240-hour course, Acute Medicine) or by specialists (surgeon, internal medicine, neurologist, anesthesiologist) with or without supra-specialty training in emergency medicine.\nSince 2005 residency training exists for acute medicine (3 years) or emergency medicine (6 years). At least 50% of the training is in the emergency department; the other part is a rotation between disciplines like pediatrics, surgery, orthopedic surgery, anesthesiology and critical care medicine.\nAlternative an attending physician with one of following specialties (anesthesiology, internal medicine, cardiology, gastro-enterology, pneumology, rheumatology, urology, general surgery, plastic &amp; reconstructive surgery, orthopedic surgery, neurology, neurosurgery, pediatrics) can follow a supra-specialty program of two years to become an emergency medicine specialist.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, the first emergency medicine residency program was created at Hospital Pronto Socorro de Porto Alegre in 1996. In 2002, the emergency medical services were standardized nationally with the creation of SAMU (Servi\u00e7o de atendimento m\u00f3vel de urg\u00eancia), inspired by French EMS, which also provides training to its employees. The nacional emergency medicina association (ABRAMEDE \u2013 Associa\u00e7\u00e3o Brasileira de Medicina de Emerg\u00eancia) was created in 2007. In 2008 the second residency program was started at Messejana Hospital in Fortaleza. Then, in 2015, emergency medicine was formally recognized as a medical specialty by the Brazilian Medical Association. After formal recognition, multiple residency programs were created nationwide (e.g. Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais in 2016 and Universidade de S\u00e3o Paulo in 2017). The residency consists of a three-year program with training in all emergency department specialties (i.e. internal medicine, surgery, pediatrics, orthopedics, OB/GYN), EMS and intensive care.\nChile.\nIn Chile, emergency medicine begins its journey in Chile with the first specialty program at the beginning of the 1990s, at the University of Chile and the University of Santiago of Chile. Currently, it is a primary specialty legally recognised by the Ministry of Health since 2013. It has multiple training programs for specialists, notably the University of Chile, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, Cl\u00ednica Alemana \u2013 Universidad del Desarrollo, San Sebastian University \u2013 MUE and University of Santiago of Chile (USACH). Currently, and intending to strengthen the specialty at the country level, FOAMed initiatives have emerged (free open access medical education in emergency medicine) and the #ChileEM initiative that brings together the programs of the Universidad San Sebasti\u00e1n / MUE, Universidad Cat\u00f3lica de Chile and Universidad de Chile, intend to hold joint clinical meetings between the leading training programs, regularly and open to all the health team working in the field of urgency. The specialists already trained are grouped in the Chilean Society of Emergency Medicine (SOCHIMU).\nCanada.\nThe two routes to emergency medicine certification can be summarized as follows:\nCCFP(EM) emergency physicians outnumber FRCP(EM) physicians by a ratio of about 3 to 1, and they tend to work primarily as clinicians with a minor focus on academic activities such as teaching and research. FRCP(EM) Emergency Medicine Board specialists tend to congregate in academic centres and have more academically oriented careers, which emphasize administration, research, critical care, disaster medicine, and teaching. They also tend to sub-specialize in toxicology, critical care, pediatric emergency medicine, and sports medicine. Furthermore, the FRCP(EM) residency length allows more time for formal training in these areas.\nPhysician assistants are currently practising in the field of emergency medicine in Canada.\nChina.\nThe current post-graduate emergency medicine training process is highly complex in China. The first EM post-graduate training took place in 1984 at the Peking Union Medical College Hospital. Because specialty certification in EM has not been established, formal training is not required to practice emergency medicine in China.\nAbout a decade ago, emergency medicine residency training was centralized at the municipal levels, following the Ministry of Public Health guidelines. Residency programs in all hospitals are called residency training bases, which have to be approved by local health governments. These bases are hospital-based, but the residents are selected and managed by the municipal associations of medical education. These associations are also the authoritative body of setting up their residents' training curriculum. All medical school graduates who want to practice medicine have to undergo five years of residency training at designated training bases, the first three years of general rotation followed by two more years of specialty-centred training.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, emergency medicine is not handled as a specialization (\"Facharztrichtung\"), but any licensed physician can acquire an additional qualification in emergency medicine through an 80-hour course monitored by the respective \"\u00c4rztekammer\" (medical association, responsible for licensing of physicians). This qualifies the emergency physician to work in the pre-hospital field. These physicians usually work on a volunteering basis and are often anesthesiologists but may be specialists of any kind. If a hospital has an emergency department, which is not generally required, it is usually staffed by residents without specialty training in emergency medicine.\nIndia.\nIndia is an example of how family medicine can be a foundation for emergency medicine training. Many private hospitals and institutes have been providing emergency medicine training for doctors, nurses and paramedics since 1994, with certification programs varying from six months to three years. However, emergency medicine was only recognized as a separate specialty by the Medical Council of India in July 2009.\nMalaysia.\nThere are three universities (Universiti Sains Malaysia, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, and Universiti Malaya) that offer master's degrees in emergency medicine \u2013 postgraduate training programs of four years in duration with clinical rotations, examinations and a dissertation. The first cohort of locally trained emergency physicians graduated in 2002.\nSaudi Arabia.\nIn Saudi Arabia, the Certification of Emergency Medicine takes the four-year Saudi Board of Emergency Medicine (SBEM), which the Saudi Council accredits for Health Specialties (SCFHS). It requires passing the two-part exam: first and final part (written and oral) to obtain the SBEM certificate, equivalent to a doctorate.\nSwitzerland.\nEmergency medicine is still not recognised as a fully-fledged specialty in a country that has only recently grasped the importance of having an organised acute medical specialty (during the COVID-19 outbreak). Many attempts to organize the specialty have resulted in a subspecialists training pathway, but to this day, internal medicine, anesthesiology and surgery are still vocally opposed to an emergency medicine specialist title.\nUnited States.\nMost programs are three years in duration, but some programs are four years long. There are several combined residencies offered with other programs, including family medicine, internal medicine and paediatrics. The US is well known for its excellence in emergency medicine residency programs, leading to some controversy about specialty certification.\nThere are three ways to become board-certified in emergency medicine:\nSeveral ABMS fellowships are available for emergency medicine graduates, including pre-hospital medicine (emergency medical services), international medicine, advanced resuscitation, hospice and palliative care, research, undersea and hyperbaric medicine, sports medicine, pain medicine, ultrasound, pediatric emergency medicine, disaster medicine, wilderness medicine, toxicology, and critical care medicine.\nIn recent years, workforce data has led to a recognition of the need for additional training for primary care physicians who provide emergency care. It has led to several supplemental training programs in first-hour emergency care and a few fellowships for family physicians in emergency medicine.\nFunding for training.\n\"In 2010, there were 157 allopathic and 37 osteopathic emergency medicine residency programs, which collectively accept about 2,000 new residents each year. Studies have shown that attending emergency physician supervision of residents correlates to higher quality and more cost-effective practice, primarily when an emergency medicine residency exists.\" Medical education is primarily funded through the Medicare program; payments are given to hospitals for each resident. \"Fifty-five per cent of ED payments come from Medicare, fifteen per cent from Medicaid, five per cent from private payment and twenty-five per cent from commercially insured patients.\" However, choices of physician specialties are not mandated by any agency or program, so even though emergency departments see many Medicare/Medicaid patients and thus receive much funding for training from these programs, there is still concern over a shortage of specialty-trained emergency medicine providers.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Royal College of Emergency Medicine has a role in setting professional standards and assessing trainees. Emergency medical trainees enter specialty training after five or six years of Medical school followed by two years of foundation training. Specialty training takes six years to complete, and success in the assessments and a set of five examinations results in the award of Fellowship of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (FRCEM).\nHistorically, emergency specialists were drawn from anaesthesia, medicine, and surgery. Many established EM consultants were surgically trained; some hold the fellowship of Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in accident and emergency \u2013 FRCSEd (A&amp;E). trainees in emergency medicine may dual accredit in intensive care medicine or seek sub-specialisation in paediatric emergency medicine.\nTurkey.\nEmergency medicine residencies last four years in Turkey. These physicians have a two-year obligatory service in Turkey to be qualified to have their diploma. After this period, EM specialists can choose to work in private or governmental emergency departments.\nPakistan.\nThe College of Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan accredited the training in emergency medicine in 2010. Emergency medicine training in Pakistan lasts for five years. The initial two years involve trainees being sent to three major areas: medicine and allied, surgery, and allied and critical care. It is divided into six months each, and the rest six months out of the first two years are spent in the emergency department. In the last three years, trainee residents spend most of their time in the emergency room as senior residents. Certificate courses include ACLS, PALS, ATLS, and research and dissertations are required to complete the training successfully. At the end of five years, candidates become eligible to sit for the FCPS part II exam. After fulfilling the requirement, they become fellows of the College of Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan in emergency medicine (https://).\nInstitutions providing this training include Shifa International Hospitals Islamabad, Aga Khan University Hospital Karachi, POF Hospital Wah, Lady Reading Hospital Peshawar, Indus Hospital Karachi and Jinnah Post Graduate Medical Center Karachi, and Mayo Hospital, Lahore.\nIran.\nThe first residency program in Iran started in 2002 at Iran University of Medical Sciences, and there are now three-year standard residency programs running in Tehran, Tabriz, Mashhad, Isfahan, and some other universities. All these programs work under the supervision of the emergency medicine specialty board committee. There are now more than 200 (and increasing) board-certified Emergency Physicians in Iran.\nEthical and medicolegal issues.\nEthical and medico-legal issues are embedded within the nature of emergency medicine. Issues surrounding competence, end of life care, and the right to refuse care are encountered daily within the emergency department. Of growing significance are the ethical issues and legal obligations that surround the Mental Health Act, as increasing numbers of suicide attempts and self-harm are seen in the emergency department. The Wooltorton case of 2007, in which a patient arrived at the emergency department post overdose with a note specifying her request for no interventions, highlights the dichotomy that often exists between a physician's ethical obligation to \"do no harm\" and the legality of a patient's right to refuse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52975", "revid": "45093986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52975", "title": "Emergency medical services", "text": "Services providing acute medical care\nEmergency medical services (EMS), also known as ambulance services, pre-hospital care or paramedic services, are emergency services that provide urgent pre-hospital treatment and stabilisation for serious illness and injuries and transport to definitive care. They may also be known as a first aid squad, FAST squad, emergency squad, ambulance squad, ambulance corps, life squad or by other initialisms such as EMAS or EMARS.\nIn most places, EMS can be summoned by members of the public (as well as medical facilities, other emergency services, businesses and authorities) via an emergency telephone number which puts them in contact with a dispatching centre, which will then dispatch suitable resources for the call. Ambulances are the primary vehicles for delivering EMS, though squad cars, motorcycles, aircraft, boats, fire apparatus, and others may be used. EMS agencies may also operate a non-emergency patient transport service, and some have rescue squads to provide technical rescue or search and rescue services.\nWhen EMS is dispatched, they will initiate medical care upon arrival on scene. If it is deemed necessary or a patient requests transport, the unit is then tasked with transferring the patient to the next point of care, typically an emergency department of a hospital. Historically, ambulances only transported patients to care, and this remains the case in parts of the developing world. The term \"emergency medical service\" was popularised when these services began to emphasise emergency treatment at the scene. In some countries, a substantial portion of EMS calls do not result in a patient being taken to hospital.\nTraining and qualification levels for members and employees of emergency medical services vary widely throughout the world. In some systems, members may be present who are qualified only to drive ambulances, with no medical training. In contrast, most systems have personnel who retain at least basic first aid certifications, such as basic life support (BLS). In English-speaking countries, they are known as emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and paramedics, with the latter having additional training such as advanced life support (ALS) skills. Physicians and nurses may also provide pre-hospital care to varying degrees in certain countries, a model which is popular in Europe.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nEmergency care in the field has been rendered in different forms since the beginning of recorded history. The New Testament contains the parable of the Good Samaritan, in which a man who has been beaten is cared for by a passing Samaritan. Luke 10:34 (NIV) \u2013 \"He went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. Then he put the man on his own donkey, took him to an inn and took care of him.\" During the Middle Ages, the Knights Hospitaller were known for rendering assistance to wounded soldiers in the battlefield.\nThe first use of the ambulance as a specialized vehicle in battle came about with the \"ambulances volantes\" designed by Dominique Jean Larrey (1766\u20131842), Napoleon Bonaparte's chief surgeon. Larrey was present at the battle of Spires, between the French and Prussians, and was distressed by the fact that wounded soldiers were not picked up by the numerous ambulances (which Napoleon required to be stationed two and half miles back from the scene of battle) until after hostilities had ceased, and set about developing a new ambulance system. Having decided against using the Norman system of horse litters, he settled on two- or four-wheeled horse-drawn wagons, which were used to transport fallen soldiers from the (active) battlefield \"after\" they had received early treatment in the field. Larrey's projects for 'flying ambulances' were first approved by the Committee of Public Safety in 1794. Larrey subsequently entered Napoleon's service during the Italian campaigns in 1796, where his ambulances were used for the first time at Udine, Padua and Milan, and he adapted his ambulances to the conditions, even developing a litter which could be carried by a camel for a campaign in Egypt.\nEarly civilian ambulances.\nA major advance was made (which in future years would come to shape policy on hospitals and ambulances) with the introduction of a transport carriage for cholera patients in London during 1832. The statement on the carriage, as printed in \"The Times\", said \"The curative process commences the instant the patient is put in to the carriage; time is saved which can be given to the care of the patient; the patient may be driven to the hospital so speedily that the hospitals may be less numerous and located at greater distances from each other\". This tenet of ambulances providing instant care, allowing hospitals to be spaced further apart, displays itself in modern emergency medical planning.\nThe first known hospital-based ambulance service operated out of Commercial Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio (now the Cincinnati General) by 1865. This was soon followed by other services, notably the New York service provided out of Bellevue Hospital which started in 1869 with ambulances carrying medical equipment, such as splints, a stomach pump, morphine, and brandy, reflecting contemporary medicine.\nAnother early ambulance service was founded by Jaromir V. Mundy, Count J. N. Wilczek, and Eduard Lamezan-Salins in Vienna after the disastrous fire at the Vienna Ringtheater in 1881. Named the \"Vienna Voluntary Rescue Society,\" it served as a model for similar societies worldwide.\nIn June 1887 the St John Ambulance Brigade was established to provide first aid and ambulance services at public events in London. It was modelled on a military-style command and discipline structure.\nMotorization.\nAlso in the late 19th century, the automobile was being developed, and in addition to horse-drawn models, early 20th century ambulances were powered by steam, gasoline, and electricity, reflecting the competing automotive technologies then in existence. However, the first motorized ambulance was brought into service in the last year of the 19th century, with the Michael Reese Hospital, Chicago, taking delivery of the first automobile ambulance, donated by 500 prominent local businessmen, in February 1899. This was followed in 1900 by New York City, who extolled its virtues of greater speed, more safety for the patient, faster stopping and a smoother ride. These first two automobile ambulances were electrically powered with 2\u00a0hp motors on the rear axle.\nDuring World War I, further advances were made in providing care before and during transport; traction splints were introduced during the war and were found to have a positive effect on the morbidity and mortality of patients with leg fractures. Two-way radios became available shortly after World War I, enabling for more efficient radio dispatch of ambulances in some areas. Prior to World War II, there were some areas where a modern ambulance carried advanced medical equipment, was staffed by a physician, and was dispatched by radio. In many locations, however, ambulances were hearses, the only available vehicle that could carry a recumbent patient, and were thus frequently run by funeral homes. These vehicles, which could serve either purpose, were known as combination cars.\nPrior to World War II, hospitals provided ambulance service in many large cities. With the severe manpower shortages imposed by the war effort, it became difficult for many hospitals to maintain their ambulance operations. City governments in many cases turned ambulance services over to the police or fire department. No laws required minimal training for ambulance personnel and no training programs existed beyond basic first aid. In many fire departments, assignment to ambulance duty became an unofficial form of punishment.\nRise of modern EMS.\nAdvances in the 1960s, especially the development of CPR and defibrillation as the standard form of care for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, along with new pharmaceuticals, led to changes in the tasks of the ambulances. In Belfast, Northern Ireland the first experimental mobile coronary care ambulance successfully resuscitated patients using these technologies. Freedom House Ambulance Service was the first civilian emergency medical service in the United States to be staffed by paramedics, all of whom were African-American.\nOne well-known report in the US during that time was \"\", also known as \"The White Paper\". The report concluded that ambulance services in the US varied widely in quality and were often unregulated and unsatisfactory. These studies placed pressure on governments to improve emergency care in general, including the care provided by ambulance services. The government reports resulted in the creation of standards in ambulance construction concerning the internal height of the patient care area (to allow for an attendant to continue to care for the patient during transport), and the equipment (and thus weight) that an ambulance had to carry, and several other factors.\nIn 1971 a progress report was published at the annual meeting, by the then president of American Association of Trauma, Sawnie R. Gaston M.D. Dr. Gaston reported the study was a \"superb white paper\" that \"jolted and wakened the entire structure of organized medicine.\" This report is created as a \"prime mover\" and made the \"single greatest contribution of its kind to the improvement of emergency medical services\". Since this time a concerted effort has been undertaken to improve emergency medical care in the pre-hospital setting. Such advancements included Dr. R Adams Cowley creating the country's first statewide EMS program, in Maryland.\nThe developments were paralleled in other countries. In the United Kingdom, a 1973 law merged the municipal ambulance services into larger agencies and set national standards. In France, the first official SAMU agencies were founded in the 1970s.\nOrganization.\nDepending on country, area within country, or clinical need, emergency medical services may be provided by one or more different types of organization. This variation may lead to large differences in levels of care and expected scope of practice. Some countries closely regulate the industry (and may require anyone working on an ambulance to be qualified to a set level), whereas others allow quite wide differences between types of operator.\nMunicipal \"third service\" ambulance service.\nOperating separately from (although alongside) the fire and police services of the area, these ambulances are funded by local, provincial or national governments. In some countries, these only tend to be found in big cities, whereas in countries such as the United Kingdom, almost all emergency ambulances are part of a national health system.\nIn the United States, ambulance services provided by a local government are often referred to as \"third service\" EMS (the fire department, police department, and EMS department forming an emergency services trio) by the members of said service, as well as other city officials and residents. The most notable examples of this model in the United States are Pittsburgh Bureau of Emergency Medical Services, Boston EMS, New Orleans Emergency Medical Services, and Cleveland EMS. Government ambulance services also have to take civil service exams just like government fire departments and police. In the United States, certain federal government agencies employ emergency medical technicians at the basic and advanced life support levels, such as the National Park Service and the Federal Bureau of Prisons.\nFire- or police-linked service.\nIn countries such as the United States, Japan, France, South Korea and parts of India, ambulances can be operated by the local fire or police services. Fire-based EMS is the most common model in the United States, where nearly all urban fire departments provide EMS and a majority of emergency transport ambulance services in large cities are part of fire departments. Examples of this model are the New York City Fire Department (FDNY) and the Baltimore City Fire Department.\nIt is rare for a police department in the United States to provide EMS or ambulance services, although many police officers have basic medical training (such as Nalaxone use and CPR). One notable example is New Orleans Emergency Medical Services, which was formed as a hospital-based service, was operated by the New Orleans Police Department from 1947 to 1985, and is currently operated by the New Orleans Health Department and the New Orleans Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness, separate from the New Orleans Fire Department.\nCharity/not-for-profit ambulance service.\nCharities or non-profit ambulance departments operate some emergency medical services. They are primarily staffed by volunteers, though many also have paid personnel. These may be linked to a volunteer fire service, and some volunteers may provide both services. Some ambulance charities specialize in providing cover at public gatherings and events (e.g. sporting events), while others provide care to the wider community.\nThe International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is the largest charity in the world that provides emergency medicine. (in some countries, it operates as a private ambulance service). Other organisations include St John Ambulance, the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and Hatzalah, as well as small local volunteer/paid departments. In the United States, volunteer ambulances are rarer, but can still be seen in both metropolitan and rural areas (e.g. Hatzalah). Charities such as BASICS Scotland, specialise in facilitating training medical professionals to volunteer to assist the statutory ambulance services in the care of patients, through their attendance at those with serious illnesses or injuries.\nA few charities provide ambulances for taking patients on trips or vacations away from hospitals, hospices or care homes where they are in long-term care. Examples include the UK's Jumbulance project.\nPrivate/corporate ambulance service.\nSome ambulances are operated by commercial companies with paid employees, usually on a contract to the local or national government, Hospital Networks, Health Care Facilities and Insurance Companies.\nIn the U.S., private ambulance companies provide emergency medical services in large cities and rural areas by contracting with local governments. In areas where the local county or city provide their own emergency services, private companies provide discharges and transfers from hospitals and to/from other health related facilities and homes. In most areas private companies are part of the local government emergency disaster plan, and are relied upon for the overall EMS response, treatment and recovery.\nIn some areas, private companies may provide only the patient transport elements of ambulance care (i.e. non-urgent), but in some places, they are contracted to provide emergency care, or to form a 'second tier' response, where they only respond to emergencies when all of the full-time emergency ambulance crews are busy. This may mean that a government or other service provide the 'emergency' cover, whilst a private firm may be charged with 'minor injuries' such as cuts, bruises or even helping the mobility-impaired if they have for example fallen and simply need help to get up again, but do not need treatment. This system has the benefit of keeping emergency crews available at all times for genuine emergencies. These organisations may also provide services known as 'Stand-by' cover at industrial sites or at special events. In Latin America, private ambulance companies are often the only readily-available EMS service.\nCombined emergency service.\nThese are full service emergency service agencies, which may be found in places such as airports or large colleges and universities like for example the UCLA EMS.Their key feature is that all personnel are trained not only in ambulance (EMT) care, but as a firefighter and a peace officer (police function). They may be found in smaller towns and cities, where demand or budget is too low to support separate services. This multi-functionality allows to make the most of limited resource or budget, but having a single team respond to any emergency.\nHospital-based service.\nHospitals or larger hospital systems may provide their own ambulance service as a service to the community, or where ambulance care is unreliable or chargeable. Many hospital-based EMS departments operate solely with their hospital, though some operate more independently and can transport patients to whichever hospital may be needed or desired.\nInternal ambulances.\nMany large factories and other industrial centers, such as chemical plants, oil refineries, breweries, and distilleries, have emergency medical services provided by employers as a means of protecting their interests and the welfare of their staff. These are often used as first response vehicles in the event of a fire or explosion.\nPurpose.\nEmergency medical services exists to fulfill the basic principles of first aid, which are to Preserve Life, Prevent Further Injury, and Promote Recovery. This common theme in medicine is demonstrated by the \"star of life\". The Star of Life shown here, where each of the 'arms' to the star represent one of the six points, are used to represent the six stages of high quality pre-hospital care, which are:\nStrategies for delivering care.\nAlthough a variety of differing philosophical approaches are used in the provision of EMS care around the world, they can generally be placed into one of two categories; one physician-led and the other led by pre-hospital allied health staff such as emergency medical technicians or paramedics. These models are commonly referred to as the Franco-German model and Anglo-American model.\nStudies have been inconclusive as to whether one model delivers better results than the other. A 2010 study in the Oman Medical Journal suggested that rapid transport was a better strategy for trauma cases, while stabilization at the scene was a better strategy for cardiac arrests.\nLevels of care.\nMany systems have tiers of response for medical emergencies. For example, a common arrangement in the United States is that fire engines or volunteers are sent to provide a rapid initial response to a medical emergency, while an ambulance is sent to provide advanced treatment and transport the patient. In France, fire service and private company ambulances provide basic care, while hospital-based ambulances with physicians on board provide advanced care. In many countries, an air ambulance provides a higher level of care than a regular ambulance.\nExamples of level of care include:\nTransport-only.\nThe most basic emergency medical services are provided as a transport operation only, simply to take patients from their location to the nearest medical treatment. This was historically the case in all countries. It remains the case in much of the developing world, where operators as diverse as taxi drivers and undertakers may transport people to hospital.\nTransport-centered EMS.\nThe Anglo-American model is also known as \"load and go\" or \"scoop and run\". In this model, ambulances are staffed by paramedics and/or emergency medical technicians. They have specialized medical training, but not to the same level as a physician. In this model it is rare to find a physician actually working routinely in ambulances, although they may be deployed to major or complex cases. The physicians who work in EMS provide oversight for the work of the ambulance crews. This may include off-line medical control, where they devise protocols or 'standing orders' (procedures for treatment). This may also include on-line medical control, in which the physician is contacted via radio or phone to provide advice and authorization for various medical interventions or for a patient's desire to refuse care.\nIn some cases, such as in the UK, South Africa and Australia, a paramedic may be an autonomous medical professional, and does not require the permission of a physician to administer interventions or medications from an agreed list, and can perform roles such as suturing or prescribing medication to the patient. Recently \"Telemedicine\" has been making an appearance in ambulances. Similar to online medical control, this practice allows paramedics to remotely transmit data such as vital signs and 12 and 15 lead ECGs to the hospital from the field. This allows the emergency department to prepare to treat patients prior to their arrival. This is allowing lower level providers (Such as EMT-B) in the United States to utilize these advanced technologies and have the doctor interpret them, thus bringing rapid identification of rhythms to areas where paramedics are stretched thin. While most insurance companies only reimburse EMS providers for transporting patients to 911 receiving facilities (e.g. Emergency Departments),the Center to Medicare and Medicaid Services is in the process of evaluating a payment model to enable reimbursement for patients evaluated and treated on-scene.\nMajor trauma.\nThe essential decision in prehospital care is whether the patient should be immediately taken to the hospital, or advanced care resources are taken to the patient where they lie. The \"scoop and run\" approach is exemplified by the MEDEVAC aeromedical evacuation helicopter, whereas the \"stay and play\" is exemplified by the French and Belgian SMUR emergency mobile resuscitation unit or the German \"Notarzt\"-System (preclinical emergency physician).\nThe strategy developed for prehospital trauma care in North America is based on the Golden Hour theory, i.e., that a trauma victim's best chance for survival is in an operating room, with the goal of having the patient in surgery within an hour of the traumatic event. This appears to be true in cases of internal bleeding, especially penetrating trauma such as gunshot or stab wounds. Thus, minimal time is spent providing prehospital care (spine immobilization; \"ABCs\", i.e. ensure \"a\"irway, \"b\"reathing and \"c\"irculation; external bleeding control; endotracheal intubation) and the victim is transported as fast as possible to a trauma centre.\nThe aim in \"Scoop and Run\" treatment is generally to transport the patient within ten minutes of arrival, hence the birth of the phrase, \"the platinum ten minutes\" (in addition to the \"golden hour\"), now commonly used in EMT training programs. The \"Scoop and Run\" is a method developed to deal with trauma, rather than strictly medical situations (e.g. cardiac or respiratory emergencies), however, this may be changing. Increasingly, research into the management of S-T segment elevation myocardial infarctions (STEMI) occurring outside of the hospital, or even inside community hospitals without their own PCI labs, suggests that time to treatment is a clinically significant factor in heart attacks, and that trauma patients may not be the only patients for whom 'load and go' is clinically appropriate. In such conditions, the gold standard is the door to balloon time. The longer the time interval, the greater the damage to the myocardium, and the poorer the long-term prognosis for the patient. Current research in Canada has suggested that door to balloon times are significantly lower when appropriate patients are identified by paramedics in the field, instead of the emergency room, and then transported directly to a waiting PCI lab. The STEMI program has reduced STEMI deaths in the Ottawa region by 50 per cent. In a related program in Toronto, EMS has begun to use a procedure of 'rescuing' STEMI patients from the Emergency Rooms of hospitals without PCI labs, and transporting them, on an emergency basis, to waiting PCI labs in other hospitals.\nPhysician-led EMS.\nPhysician-led EMS is also known as the Franco-German model, \"stay and play\", \"stay and stabilize\" or \"delay and treat\". In a physician-led system, doctors respond directly to all major emergencies requiring more than simple first aid. The physicians will attempt to treat casualties at the scene and will only transport them to hospital if it is deemed necessary. If patients are transported to hospital, they are more likely to go straight to a ward rather than to an emergency department. Countries that use this model include Austria, France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Italy, Spain, Brazil and Chile.\nIn some cases in this model, such as France, there is no direct equivalent to a paramedic. Physicians and (in some cases) nurses provide all medical interventions for the patient. Other ambulance personnel are not non-medically trained and only provide driving and heavy lifting. In other applications of this model, as in Germany, a paramedic equivalent does exist, but is an assistant to the physician with a restricted scope of practice. They are only permitted to perform Advanced Life Support (ALS) procedures if authorized by the physician, or in cases of immediate life-threatening conditions. Ambulances in this model tend to be better equipped with more advanced medical devices, in essence, bringing the emergency department to the patient. High-speed transport to hospitals is considered, in most cases, to be unnecessarily unsafe, and the preference is to remain and provide definitive care to the patient until they are medically stable, and then accomplish transport. In this model, the physician and nurse may actually staff an ambulance along with a driver, or may staff a rapid response vehicle instead of an ambulance, providing medical support to multiple ambulances.\nPersonnel.\nAmbulance personnel are generally professionals and in some countries their use is controlled through training and registration. While these job titles are protected by legislation in some countries, this protection is by no means universal, and anyone might, for example, call themselves an 'EMT' or a 'paramedic', regardless of their training, or the lack of it. In some jurisdictions, both technicians and paramedics may be further defined by the environment in which they operate, including such designations as 'Wilderness', 'Tactical', and so on.\nA unique aspect of EMS is that there are two hierarchies of authority, as the chain of command is separate to medical authority.\nBasic life support (BLS).\nEmergency medical dispatcher.\nAn emergency medical dispatcher is also called an EMD. An increasingly common addition to the EMS system is the use of highly trained dispatch personnel who can provide \"pre-arrival\" instructions to callers reporting medical emergencies. They use carefully structured questioning techniques and provide scripted instructions to allow callers or bystanders to begin definitive care for such critical problems as airway obstructions, bleeding, childbirth, and cardiac arrest. Even with a fast response time by a first responder measured in minutes, some medical emergencies evolve in seconds. Such a system provides, in essence, a \"zero response time,\" and can have an enormous impact on positive patient outcomes.\nFirst responder.\nCertified first responders may be sent to provide first aid, sometimes to an advanced level. Their duties include the provision of immediate life-saving care in the event of a medical emergency; commonly advanced first aid, oxygen administration, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and automated external defibrillator (AED) usage. The first responder training is considered a bare minimum for emergency service workers who may be sent out in response to an emergency call. First responders are commonly dispatched by the ambulance service to arrive quickly and stabilize the patient before the ambulance arrives, and to then assist the ambulance crew.\nSome EMS agencies have set up volunteer schemes, who can be dispatched to a medical emergency before the ambulance arrives. Examples of this include Community First Responder schemes run by ambulance services the UK and similar volunteer schemes operated by the fire services in France. In some countries such as the US, there may be autonomous groups of volunteer responders such as rescue squads. Police officers and firefighters who are on duty for another emergency service may also be deployed in this role, though some firefighters are trained to a more advanced medical level.\nBesides first responders who are deployed to an emergency, there are others who may be stationed at public events. The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and St John Ambulance both provide first aiders in these roles.\nAmbulance driver.\nSome agencies separate the 'driver' and 'attendant' functions, employing ambulance driving staff with no medical qualification (or just a first aid and CPR certificates), whose job is to drive ambulances. While this approach persists in some countries, such as India, it is generally becoming increasingly rare. Ambulance drivers may be trained in radio communications, ambulance operations and emergency response driving skills.\nNon-emergency attendant.\nMany countries employ ambulance staff who only carry out non-emergency patient transport duties (which can include stretcher or wheelchair cases). Dependent on the provider (and resources available), they may be trained in first aid or extended skills such as use of an AED, oxygen therapy, pain relief and other live-saving or palliative skills. In some services, they may also provide emergency cover when other units are not available, or when accompanied by a fully qualified technician or paramedic. The role is known as an Ambulance Care Assistant in the United Kingdom.\nEmergency care assistant.\nEmergency care assistants are of a frontline under both emergency and non-emergency conditions to incidents. Their role is to assist the clinician that they are working with, either a Technician or Paramedic, in their duties, whether that be drawing up drugs, setting up fluids (but not attaching), doing basic observations or performing 12 lead ECG assessments.\nEmergency medical technician.\nEmergency medical technicians are usually able to perform a wide range of emergency care skills, such as automated defibrillation, care of spinal injuries and oxygen therapy. In few jurisdictions, some EMTs are able to perform duties as IV and IO cannulation, administration of a limited number of drugs (including but not limited to Epinephrine, Narcan, Oxygen, Aspirin, Nitroglycerin \u2013 dependent on country, state, and medical direction), more advanced airway procedures, CPAP, and limited cardiac monitoring. Most advanced procedures and skills are not within the national scope of practice for an EMT. As such most states require additional training and certifications to perform above the national curriculum standards. In the United States, an EMT certification requires intense courses and training in field skills. Certifications are state-specific and last varying durations, though National Registry certification simplifies the reciprocity process in many states. The National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians renamed the certification levels for EMS professionals as follows: Emergency Medical Responder (NREMR), Emergency Medical Technician (NREMT), Advanced EMT (NRAEMT), and Paramedic (NRP).\nAdvanced life support (ALS).\nParamedic.\nA paramedic has a high level of pre-hospital medical training and usually involves key skills not performed by technicians, often including cannulation (and with it the ability to use a range of drugs to relieve pain, correct cardiac problems, and perform endotracheal intubation), cardiac monitoring, 12-lead ECG interpretation, ultrasound, intubation, pericardiocentesis, cardioversion, thoracostomy, and other skills such as performing a surgical cricothyrotomy. The most important function of the paramedic is to identify and treat any life-threatening conditions and then to assess the patient carefully for other complaints or findings that may require emergency treatment. In many countries, this is a protected title, and use of it without the relevant qualification may result in criminal prosecution. In the United States, paramedics represent the highest licensure level of prehospital emergency care. In addition, several certifications exist for Paramedics such as Wilderness ALS Care, Flight Paramedic Certification (FP-C), and Critical Care Emergency Medical Transport Program certification.\nCritical care paramedic.\nA critical care paramedic, also known as an advanced practice paramedic or specialist paramedic, is a paramedic with additional training to deal with critically ill patients. Critical care paramedics often work on air ambulances, which are more likely to be dispatched to emergencies requiring advanced care skills. They may also work on land ambulances. The training, permitted skills, and certification requirements vary from one jurisdiction to the next. It also varies to whether they are trained externally by a university or professional body or 'in house' by their EMS agency.\nThese providers have a vast array of and medications to handle complex medical and trauma patients. Examples of medication are dobutamine, dopamine, Propofol, blood and blood products to name just a few. Some examples of skills include, but not limited to, life support systems normally restricted to the ICU or critical care hospital setting such as mechanical ventilators, Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) and external pacemaker monitoring. Depending on the service medical direction, these providers are trained on placement and use of UVCs (Umbilical Venous Catheter), UACs (Umbilical Arterial Catheter), surgical airways, central lines, arterial lines and chest tubes.\nEmergency care practitioner.\nIn the United Kingdom and South Africa, some serving paramedics receive additional university education to become practitioners in their own right, which gives them absolute responsibility for their clinical judgement, including the ability to autonomously prescribe medications. An emergency care practitioner or paramedic practitioner is a position that is designed to bridge the link between ambulance care and the care of a general practitioner. ECPs are university graduates in Emergency Medical Care or qualified paramedics who have undergone further training, and are authorized to perform specialized techniques. Additionally some may prescribe medicines for longer-term care, such as antibiotics and in the United Kingdom they can prescribe a broad range of medicines. With respect to a Primary Health Care setting, they are also educated in a range of Diagnostic techniques.\nTraditional healthcare professionals in EMS.\nRegistered nurses.\nThe use of registered nurses (RNs) in the pre-hospital setting is common in many countries in absence of paramedics. In some regions of the world nurses are the primary healthcare worker that provides emergency medical services. In European countries such as France or Italy, also use nurses as a means of providing ALS services. These nurses may work under the direct supervision of a physician, or, in rarer cases, independently. In some places in Europe, notably Norway, paramedics do exist, but the role of the 'ambulance nurse' continues to be developed, as it is felt that nurses may bring unique skills to some situations encountered by ambulance crews.\nIn North America, and to a lesser extent elsewhere in the English-speaking world, some jurisdictions use specially trained nurses for medical transport work. These are mostly air-medical personnel or critical care transport providers, often working in conjunction with a technician, paramedic or physician on emergency interfacility transports. In the United States, the most common uses of ambulance-based registered nurses is in the Critical Care/Mobile Intensive Care transport, and in Aeromedical EMS. Such nurses are normally required by their employers (in the US) to seek additional certifications beyond the primary nursing licensure. Four individual states have an Intensive Care or Prehospital Nurse licensure. Many states allow registered nurses to also become registered paramedics according to their role in the emergency medical services team. In Estonia 60% of ambulance teams are led by nurse. Ambulance nurses can do almost all emergency procedures and administer medicines pre-hospital such as physicians in Estonia. In the Netherlands, all ambulances are staffed by a registered nurse with additional training in emergency nursing, anesthesia or critical care, and a driver-EMT. In Sweden, since 2005, all emergency ambulances should be staffed by at least one registered nurse since only nurses are allowed to administer drugs. And all Advanced Life Support Ambulances are staffed at least by a registered nurse in Spain. In France, since 1986, fire department-based rescue ambulances have had the option of providing resuscitation service (reanimation) using specially trained nurses, operating on protocols, while SAMU-SMUR units are staffed by physicians and nurses\nPhysician.\nIn countries with a physician-led EMS model, such as France, Italy, the German-speaking countries (Germany, Switzerland, Austria), and Spain, physicians respond to all cases that require more than basic first aid. In some versions of this model (such as France, Italy, and Spain), there is no direct equivalent to a paramedic, as ALS is performed by physicians. In the German-speaking countries, paramedics are assistants to ambulance physicians (called Notarzt). In these countries, if a physician is present, paramedics require permission from the physician to administer treatments such as defibrillation and drugs. If there is no physician on scene and a life-threatening condition is present, they may administer treatments that follow the physician's instructions.\nIn countries where EMS is led by paramedics, the ambulance service may still employ physicians. They may serve on specialist response vehicles, such as the air ambulances in the UK. They may also provide advice and devise protocols for treatment, with a medical director acting as the most senior medical adviser to the ambulance service. In the United States, EMS became an officially recognized subspecialty by the American Board of Emergency Medicine in 2010, and the first examinations were held in 2013. Many states now recommend EMS board certification for newly hired medical directors of EMS agencies.\nSpecialist EMS.\nAir ambulances.\nAir ambulances (also known as medevac) often complement a land ambulance service. In some remote areas, they may even form the primary ambulance service. Like many innovations in EMS, medical aircraft were first used in the military. One of the first recorded aircraft rescues of a casualty was in 1917 in Turkey, when a soldier in the Camel Corps who had been shot in the ankle was flown to hospital in a de Havilland DH9. In 1928, the first civilian air medical service was founded in Australia to provide healthcare to people living in remote parts of the Outback. This service became the Royal Flying Doctor Service. The use of helicopters was pioneered in the Korean War, when time to reach a medical facility was reduced from 8 hours to 3 hours in World War II, and again to 2 hours by the Vietnam War.\nAircraft can travel faster and operate in a wider coverage area than a land ambulance. They have a particular advantage for major trauma injuries, especially when they occur in rural or isolated areas. The well-established theory of the golden hour suggests that major trauma patients should be transported as quickly as possible to a specialist trauma center. Therefore, medical first responders in a helicopter can provide both a higher level of care at the scene, faster transport to a specialist hospital and critical care during the journey. A disadvantage is that it can be dangerous and potentially not possible for them to fly at night or in bad weather.\nTactical (hazardous area).\nSome EMS agencies have set up specialist teams to help those injured in a major incident or a dangerous situation. These include tactical police operations, active shooters, bombings, hazmat situations, building collapses, fires and natural disasters. In the US, these are often known as Tactical EMS teams and are often deployed alongside police SWAT teams. The equivalent in UK ambulance services is a Hazardous Area Response Team (HART).\nWilderness.\nWilderness EMS-like systems (WEMS) have been developed to provide medical responses in remote areas, which may have significantly different needs to an urban area. Examples include the National Ski Patrol or the regional-responding Appalachian Search and Rescue Conference (USA based). Like traditional EMS providers, all wilderness emergency medical (WEM) providers must still operate under on-line or off-line medical oversight. To assist physicians in the skills necessary to provide this oversight, the Wilderness Medical Society and the National Association of EMS Physicians jointly supported the development in 2011 of a unique \"Wilderness EMS Medical Director\" certification course, which was cited by the Journal of EMS as one of the Top 10 EMS Innovations of 2011. Skills taught in WEMT courses exceeding the EMT-Basic scope of practice include catheterization, antibiotic administration, use of intermediate Blind Insertion Airway Devices (i.e. King Laryngeal Tube), Nasogastric Intubation, and simple suturing; however, the scope of practice for the WEMT still falls under BLS level care. A multitude of organizations provide WEM training, including private schools, non-profit organizations such as the Appalachian Center for Wilderness Medicine and the Wilderness EMS Institute, military branches, community colleges and universities, EMS-college-hospital collaborations, and others.\nOccupational Health Hazards in EMS.\nHazards.\nThe rate of occupational injuries for EMS workers is greater than the rate for the general population. Occupational hazards for health professionals are well studied and generally apply to EMS. Occupational health hazards in emergency medical services include lifting injuries, violent patients, transportation incidents and harmful exposures (exposure to loud noises, chemicals and infectious diseases).\nThe National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) established that the most common injury/illness of EMS clinicians are sprains/strains (41%) and exposures (20%). The occupational hazard with the greatest rate of lethality in Emergency Medical Services is ground and air ambulance crashes. Crashes are uncommon and Injuries from crashes make up less than 8% of injuries to EMS clinicians.\nHazard Mitigation.\nIn the US, OSHA and CDC associated NIOSH have published guidelines to protect EMS workers from the occupational hazards presented by the job's requirements. These guidelines include sanitization practices, PPE requirements, and fatigue protocols. Fundamental facets of safety, such as providing workers with clear roles and clear communication of expectations to discourage risk-taking and encourage safe practices are essential to minimize occupational hazards.\nOverexertion injuries can be avoided with core training, increasing flexibility, and improving muscular endurance. \u00a0Safe lifting form is encouraged.\u00a0 Exposure to\u00a0 chemical, biological, sensory and physical hazards can all be mitigated with an increased use of PPE.\u00a0Psychosocial hazards such as job stress and exposure to violence or trauma can be managed with peer support resources for emergency responders who are suffering mental health effects. Most (80%) of states have established independent agency critical incident stress debriefing/management (CISD/M) programs that come into action whenever an incident is deemed particularly traumatic. Transportation related injury and fatality can be minimized with better driver training programs and protocols.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52977", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52977", "title": "Clinical neurophysiology", "text": "Medical specialty\nClinical neurophysiology is a medical specialty that studies the central and peripheral nervous systems through the recording of bioelectrical activity, whether spontaneous or stimulated. It encompasses both research regarding the pathophysiology along with clinical methods used to diagnose diseases involving both central and peripheral nervous systems. \nExaminations in the clinical neurophysiology field are not limited to tests conducted in a laboratory. It is thought of as an extension of a neurologic consultation. Tests that are conducted are concerned with measuring the electrical functions of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves in the limbs and muscles. It can give the precise definition of site, the type and degree of the lesion, along with revealing the abnormalities that are in question. Due to these abilities, clinical neurophysiology is used to mainly help diagnose diseases rather than treat them.\nIn some countries it is a part of neurology or psychiatry, for example the United States and Germany. In other countries it is an autonomous specialty, such as Spain, Portugal, Italy, the United Kingdom, Finland, Sweden and Norway.\nHospitals that have neurologists and neurosurgeons tend to house clinical neurophysiology departments. Usually these tend to be larger hospitals that are able to employ more specialized staff units. In hospitals that possess clinical neurophysiology facilities, the major diagnostic modalities employed include:\nIn the United States.\nThe pathway to becoming a clinical neurophysiologist in the U.S. includes completing an undergraduate degree, medical school, and postgraduate medical education, usually in neurology. Following the completion of an accredited residency program, clinicians may choose to enter a fellowship in Clinical Neurophysiology. Programs may expose their fellows to the broad spectrum of electrodiagnostic neurophysiologic studies, or may focus on a single area such as EEG or electrodiagnostic medicine. Clinical neurophysiology fellowships are generally 1\u20132 years in duration and may lead to board certification in one or more subspecialty areas.\nIn the United Kingdom.\nThere are two healthcare professionals who typically perform neurophysiological investigations in the UK. These are medical staff trained in clinical neurophysiology, and clinical physiologists who undertake four years of practical training whilst undertaking an honours degree. Physiologists perform the majority of EEGs, evoked potentials and a portion of the nerve conduction studies. They are then clinically reported either by the physiology staff or the medical staff. Their professional organisations are the British Society for Clinical Neurophysiology and the Association of Neurophysiological Scientists\nRelationship to electrodiagnostic medicine.\nElectrodiagnostic medicine is a subset of clinical neurophysiology. Electrodiagnostic medicine focuses only on the peripheral nervous system and not the central nervous system. Whereas a clinical neurophysiologist is trained to perform all the following studies EEG, intraoperative monitoring, nerve conduction studies, EMG and evoked potentials, and electrodiagnostic physician focuses mainly on nerve conduction studies, needle EMG, and evoked potentials. The American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology provides certification examination in clinical neurophysiology. The American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine provides certification in EDX medicines. The American Board of Clinical Neurophysiology certifies in electroencephalography (EEG), Evoked Potentials (EP), Polysomnography (PSG), Epilepsy Monitoring, and Neurologic Intraoperative Monitoring (NIOM). In the US physicians typically specialize in EEG or EDX medicine but not both.\nNeurophysiologists in hospitals.\nHospitals that have neurologists and neurosurgeons tend to house clinical neurophysiology departments. Usually these tend to be larger hospitals that are able to employ more specialized staff units.\nClinical neurophysiologists are responsible for analyzing and writing reports on tests that take place within the department. They must also interpret the results that they receive and convey this information to the doctor that referred the patient to the particular neurophysiologist. Many tests involve carrying out an EMG to read the evoked potential recordings. Nerve conduction recordings are extremely common as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52978", "revid": "37068836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52978", "title": "Jewish principles of faith", "text": "A universal formulation of principles of faith, recognized across all branches of Judaism, remains undefined. There is no central authority in Judaism in existence today, although the Sanhedrin, the supreme Jewish religious court, could fulfill this role for some if it were re-established. Instead, Jewish principles of faith remain debated by the rabbis based on their understanding of the sacred writings, laws, and traditions, which collectively shape Jewish theological and ethical frameworks.\nThe most widely recognized existing version is the 13 principles outlined by Maimonides. He stressed the importance of believing that there is one single, omniscient, transcendent, non-corporeal, non-compound God who created the universe and continues to interact with his creation and judge souls' reward or punishment. Other principles include the future emergence of the Messiah, the resurrection of the dead, and the principle that God revealed his laws and 613 mitzvot to the Jewish people in the form of the Written and Oral Torahs.\nConception of God.\nMonotheism.\nJudaism is based on a strict, absolute monotheism\u2014a belief in one single, indivisible, non-compound God. This is illustrated in what is considered the closest to a statement of belief that Judaism has: the Shema, which encapsulates the fundamentally monotheistic theology of Judaism: \"Hear, O Israel: The LORD is our God; the LORD is one.\"\n\"Judaism emphatically rejects any concept of plurality with respect to God,\" according to Aryeh Kaplan, explicitly rejecting polytheism, dualism, and trinitarianism, which are \"incompatible with monotheism as Judaism understands it.\" The unity of God is noted many times in Jewish tradition, including as the second of the Maimonidean principles of faith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This God is One, not two or more than two, but One whose unity is different from all other unities that there are. He is not one as a genus, which contains many species, is one. Nor is He one as a body, containing parts and dimensions, is one. But His is a unity that which there is no other anywhere\" (\"Yad\", \"Yesode Ha-Torah\" 1:7).\nIn Jewish tradition, dualistic and trinitarian conceptions of God are generally referred to as \"shituf\" (\"partnership\"), which, though incorrect, is not synonymous with idolatry.\nGod is the creator of the universe.\nTraditionally, Jews believe that God is the creator of the universe, though contemporary Jewish sects differ in their interpretation of the Genesis creation narrative. For example, some strictly Orthodox groups, such as Chabad, reject the theory of evolution and the scientific consensus on the age of Earth in favor of young Earth creationism, dating creation to year 1 of the Hebrew calendar. Conversely, some Orthodox and most non-Orthodox Jews reject a literal interpretation of the creation narrative, believing that Judaism does not conflict with the scientific view that the universe is billions of years old. Norbert M. Samuelson writes the \"question of dating the universe has never been a problem of Jewish philosophy, ultimately because that philosophy has never taken the literal meaning of the Bible to be its revealed, true meaning\".\nMaimonides (12th century) wrote that \"by virtue of the existence of the Creator, everything exists\", and that \"time itself is part of creation\"; therefore, \"when God is described as existing before the creation of the universe, the notion of time should not be understood in its normal sense\". The 15th-century Jewish philosopher Joseph Albo argued similarly in his \"Sefer ha-Ikkarim\" that there are two types of time: \"Measured time which depends on motion, and time in the abstract\", the second of which has no origin and is \"the infinite space of time before the universe was created\". Albo argued that \"although it is difficult to conceive of God existing in such a duration, it is likewise difficult to imagine God outside space\". Other Jewish writers have come to different conclusions, such as 13th-century scholar Bahya ben Asher, 16th-century scholar Moses Almosnino, and the 18th-century Hasidic teacher Nahman of Bratslav, who expressed a view\u2014similar to that expressed by the Christian Neo-Platonic writer Boethius\u2014that God \"lives in the eternal present\" and transcends or is above all time.\nNature of God.\nThe Jewish view is that God is eternal, with \"neither beginning nor end\", a principle stated in a number of biblical passages. The rabbis taught a \"quite literally ... down-to-earth\" view of the eternalness of God: \"God is eternal, but it is not given to man to explore the full meaning of this idea.\" So, \"one cannot, therefore, expect to find in the rabbinic literature anything like a detailed examination of what is meant by divine eternity.\" A famous statement in the Mishnah attempts to \"pierce the veil\" is this: \"Whoever reflects on four things, it were better for him that he had not come into the world: \"What is above? What is beneath? what is before? and what is after?\"\nVarious Jewish thinkers, however, have proposed a \"finite God\", sometimes in response to the problem of evil and ideas about free will. Louis Jacobs writes that modern Jewish thinkers such as Levi Olan, echoing some classical Jewish writers such as the 14th-century Talmudist Gersonides, have \"thought of God as limited by His own nature so that while He is infinite in some respects he is finite in others\", referencing the idea, present in classical sources, that \"there is a primal formless material co-existent with God from all eternity upon which God has to work, and that God only knows the future in a general sense, but not how individual men will exercise their choice\". On the topic of omniscience and free will, Jacobs writes that in the medieval period, three views were put forth: Maimonides, who wrote that God had foreknowledge and man is free; Gersonides, who wrote that man is free and consequently God does not have complete knowledge, and Hasdai Crescas, who wrote in \"Or Adonai\" that God has complete foreknowledge and consequently man is not really free.\nSeveral Jewish writers have dealt with the issue of theodicy: whether and how God is all-powerful and all-good, given the existence of evil in the world, particularly the Holocaust. Jon D. Levenson argues that omnipotence doctrine fails to \"give due regard to \"'the formidability and resilience of the forces counteracting creation\" (such as the primordial state of chaos existing before creation) and \"leads to a neglect of the role of humanity in forming and stating the world order. Hans Jonas proposed a \"tentative myth\" that \"God 'chose' in the beginning to give God's self 'over to the chance and risk and endless variety of becoming, entering into the adventure of space in time\". Jonas said, \"God does not create the world by fiat (although God does create the world), but leads it by beckoning it into novel possibilities of becoming. Jonas, who was influenced by the Holocaust experience, believed that God is omnipresent, but not \"in all respects non-temporal, impassible, immutable, and unqualified omnipotent.\"\nTraditionally, Judaism views God as a personal god. This is shown in the Jewish liturgy, such as in the Adon Olam hymn, which includes a \"confident affirmation\" that \"He is my God, my living God...Who hears and answers\". Edward Kessler writes that the Hebrew Bible \"portrays an encounter with a God who cares passionately and who addresses humanity in the quiet moments of its existence.\" British chief rabbi Jonathan Sacks suggests that God \"is not distant in time or detached, but passionately engaged and present.\" The predicate 'personal' as applied to God does not mean that God is corporeal or anthropomorphic, views which Judaism has always rejected; instead, \"personality\" refers not to physicality, but to \"inner essence, psychical, rational, and moral\". Although most Jews believe that \"God can be experienced\", it is understood that \"God cannot be understood\" because \"God is utterly unlike humankind\" (as shown in God's response to Moses when Moses asked for God's name: \"I Am that I Am\"); all anthropomorphic statements about God \"are understood as linguistic metaphors; otherwise, it would be impossible to talk about God at all\".\nAlthough the dominant strain in Judaism is that God is personal, there is an \"alternate stream of tradition exemplified by ... Maimonides\", who, along with several other Jewish philosophers, rejected the idea of a personal God. This reflected his belief in negative theology: that God can only be described by what God is not. Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan, who developed Reconstructionist Judaism and taught at the Conservative Jewish Theological Seminary of America, also rejected the idea of a personal God. Kaplan instead thought of God \"as a force, like gravity, built into the very structure of the universe\", believing that \"since the universe is constructed to enable us to gain personal happiness and communal solidarity when we act morally, it follows that there is a moral force in the universe; this force is what the Constructionists mean by God\", although some Reconstructionists do believe in a personal God. According to Joseph Telushkin and Morris N. Kertzer, Kaplan's \"rationalist rejection of the traditional Jewish understanding of God exerted a powerful influence\" on many Conservative and Reform rabbis, influencing many to stop believing in a personal God\". According to the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life's 2008 U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, Americans who identify as Jewish by religion are twice as likely to favor ideas of God as \"an impersonal force\" over the idea that \"God is a person with whom people can have a relationship\".\nSole Devotion to the Creator.\nWithin Judaism, the essence of worship is deeply rooted in the belief of monotheism, emphasizing the exclusive devotion to the Creator. This principle dictates that worship and reverence should be directed solely towards God, as articulated by Maimonides' fifth principle of faith. According to this belief, no entity besides the Creator is deemed worthy of worship.\nRevelation.\nScripture.\nThe Hebrew Bible or Tanakh is the Jewish scriptural canon and central source of Jewish law. The word is an acronym formed from the initial Hebrew letters of the three traditional subdivisions of the Tanakh: The Torah (\"Teaching\", also known as the \"Five Books of Moses\" or \"Pentateuch\"), the Nevi'im (\"Prophets\") and the Ketuvim (\"Writings\"). The Tanakh contains 24 books in all; its authoritative version is the Masoretic Text. Traditionally, the text of the Tanakh was said to have been finalized at the Council of Jamnia in 70\u00a0CE, although this is uncertain. In Judaism, the term \"Torah\" refers not only to the Five Books of Moses, but also to all of the Jewish scriptures (the whole of Tanakh), and the ethical and moral instructions of the rabbis (the Oral Torah).\nThe origin of the Torah.\nThe Torah is composed of five books, called in English Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. They chronicle the history of the world and the Israelites until Moses' death and also contain the commandments that Jews are to follow.\nRabbinic Judaism holds that the Torah extant today is the same one that was given to Moses by God on Mount Sinai. Maimonides explains: \"We do not know exactly how the Torah was transmitted to Moses. But when it was transmitted, Moses merely wrote it down like a secretary taking dictation...[Thus] every verse in the Torah is equally holy, as they all originate from God, and are all part of God's Torah, which is perfect, holy and true.\"\n\"Haredi\" Jews generally believe that the Torah today is no different from what was received from God to Moses, with only the most minor of scribal errors. They note that the Masoretes (7th to 10th centuries) compared all known Torah variations in order to create a definitive text.\nHowever, even according to this position that the scrolls that Jews possess today are not letter-perfect, the Torah scrolls are certainly the word-perfect textus receptus that was divinely revealed to Moses. Indeed, the general consensus of Orthodox rabbinic authority posits this belief in the word-perfect nature of the Torah scroll as a defining feature of Orthodox Judaism.\nProphecy.\nJews believe that God at times chooses to issue prophecy to humans, communicated by a prophet serving as an intermediary. Many such occurrences are described in the Nevi'im (books of the Prophets). However, since the destruction of the First Temple, prophecy has ceased.\nOrthodox and Conservative Jews hold that the prophecy of Moses was superior in nature to the prophecy of all other prophets in history. This belief was expressed by Maimonides, who wrote that \"Moses was superior to all prophets, ... Moses attained the highest possible level of human achievement. He perceived God to a degree surpassing every human that ever existed... God spoke to all other prophets through an intermediary. Moses alone did not need this; this is what the Torah means when God says: 'Mouth to mouth, I speak to him'.\" The great Jewish philosopher Philo understands this type of prophecy to be an extraordinarily high level of philosophical understanding, which had been reached by Moses and which enabled him to write the Torah through his own rational deduction of natural law. Maimonides describes a similar concept of prophecy since a voice that did not originate from a body cannot exist, and Moses's understanding was based on his lofty philosophical understandings.\nFor Reform Jews, the prophecy of Moses was not the highest degree of prophecy. Instead, it was the first in a long chain of progressive revelations in which humanity gradually began to understand the will of God better and better. As such, they maintain that the laws of Moses are no longer binding, and today's generation must assess what God wants of them. This principle is also rejected by most Reconstructionist Jews, but for a different reason; most posit that God is not a being with a will; thus, they maintain that no will can be revealed.\nOral Torah.\nWith the exception of Karaites, Jewish tradition does not assert that the text of the Torah should be understood literally. Rather, Rabbinic tradition maintains that God conveyed the Torah's words and the Torah's meaning. God gave rules on how the laws were to be understood and implemented, which were passed down as an oral tradition. This oral law was passed down from generation to generation and ultimately written down almost 2,000 years later in the Mishna and the two Talmuds.\nPirkei Avot gives the traditional view of the transmission of the Oral Torah: \"Moses received the Torah on Sinai, and transmitted it to Joshua, and Joshua to the elders, and the elders to the prophets, and the prophets transmitted it to the men of the Great Assembly\", after which the Oral Torah was transmitted to the Zugot, and from them to the early rabbis of the Mishnah. The traditions attributed to the Oral Torah, as well as subsequent discussions and elaborations on them, are contained in works such as the Mishnah and the Talmud (which takes the form of a commentary of Mishnah). These works are both codifications and redactions of the Jewish oral traditions.\nOrthodox Jews view the Written and Oral Torah as the same as Moses taught, for all practical purposes. Conservative Jews tend to believe that much of the Oral law is divinely inspired, while Reform and Reconstructionist Jews tend to view all of the Oral law as an entirely human creation. Traditionally, the Reform movement held that Jews were obliged to obey the ethical but not the ritual commandments of Scripture, although today many Reform Jews have adopted many traditional ritual practices. Karaite Jews traditionally consider the Written Torah to be authoritative, viewing the Oral Law as only one possible interpretation of the Written Torah.\nMost Modern Orthodox Jews will agree that, while certain laws within the Oral Law were given to Moses, most of the Talmudic laws were derived organically by the Rabbis of the Mishnaic and Talmudic eras.\nHumanity and the world.\nHuman nature.\nJewish tradition mostly emphasizes free will, and most Jewish thinkers reject determinism, on the basis that free will and the exercise of free choice have been considered a precondition of moral life. \"Moral indeterminacy seems to be assumed both by the Bible, which bids man to choose between good and evil, and by the rabbis, who hold the decision for following the good inclination, rather than the evil, rests with every individual.\" Maimonides asserted the compatibility of free will with foreknowledge of God. Only a handful of Jewish thinkers have expressed deterministic views. This group includes the medieval Jewish philosopher Hasdai Crescas and the 19th-century Hasidic rabbi Mordechai Yosef Leiner of Izbica.\nAll is necessary for God because He is perfect but for mankind all is possible by virtue of choice; the two types of view are true with knowing about the prophet who is in Devekut with God to be wise and to perform miracle for Him.\nJudaism affirms that people are born with both a \"yetzer ha-tov\" (\u05d9\u05e6\u05e8 \u05d4\u05d8\u05d5\u05d1), an inclination or impulse to do good, and with a \"yetzer hara\" (\u05d9\u05e6\u05e8 \u05d4\u05e8\u05e2), an inclination or impulse to do evil. These phrases reflect the concept that \"within each person, there are opposing natures continually in conflict\" and are referenced many times in the rabbinic tradition. The rabbis even recognize a positive value to the \"yetzer ha-ra\": without the \"yetzer ha-ra\" there would be no civilization or other fruits of human labor. Midrash states: \"Without the evil inclination, no one would father a child, build a house, or make a career.\" The implication is that \"yetzer ha-tov\" and \"yetzer ha-ra\" are best understood not only as moral categories of good and evil, but as the inherent conflict within man between selfless and selfish orientations.\nJudaism recognizes two classes of \"sin\": offenses against other people, and offenses against God. Offenses against God may be understood as the violation of a contract (the covenant between God and the Children of Israel). Once a person has sinned, there are various means by which they may obtain atonement (see Atonement in Judaism).\nJudaism rejects the belief in \"original sin\". Both ancient and modern Judaism teaches that every person is responsible for his own actions. The existence of some \"innate sinfulness on each human being was discussed\" in both biblical (Genesis 8:21, Psalms 51.5) and post-biblical sources; however, in the biblical verses this is brought as an argument for divine mercy, as humans cannot be blamed for the nature they were created with. Some apocrypha and pseudepigraphic sources express pessimism about human nature (\"A grain of evil seed was sown in Adam's heart from the beginning\"), and the Talmud (b. Avodah Zarah 22b) has an unusual passage which Edward Kessler describes as \"the serpent seduced Eve in paradise and impregnated her with spiritual-physical 'dirt' which was inherited through the generations\", but the revelation at Sinai and the reception of the Torah cleansed Israel. Kessler states that \"although it is clear that belief in some form of original sin did exist in Judaism, it did not become mainstream teaching, nor dogmatically fixed\", but remained at the margins of Judaism.\nReward and punishment.\nThe mainstream Jewish view is that God will reward those who observe His commandments and punish those who intentionally transgress them. Examples of rewards and punishments are described throughout the Bible, and throughout classical rabbinic literature. The common understanding of this principle is accepted by most Orthodox and Conservative and many Reform Jews; it is generally rejected by the Reconstructionists.\nThe rewards and punishments described by Jewish texts occur both in this life (e.g. health, wealth, offspring as rewards; suffering, poverty, death as punishments) and in the afterlife. According to the Talmud, after death Jewish sinners go to a purifying place (sometimes referred to as \"Gehinnom\", i. e., Hell, but more analogous to the Christian Purgatory) to \"learn their lesson\". There is, however, for the most part, no eternal damnation. The vast majority of souls only go to that reforming place for a limited amount of time (less than one year). Certain categories of sinners are spoken of as having \"no part in the world to come\", but this appears to mean annihilation rather than an eternity of torment. In the rationalist conception of Maimonides, if one perfected his intellect through Torah study, then the part of his intellect that connected to God \u2013 the active intellect \u2013 would be immortalized and enjoy the \"Glory of the Presence\" for all eternity. Punishment in the afterlife would simply be that this would not happen; no part of one's intellect would be immortalized with God.\nThe Kabbalah (mystical tradition in Judaism) contains further elaborations, though some Jews do not consider these authoritative. For example, it admits the possibility of reincarnation, which is generally rejected by non-mystical Jewish theologians and philosophers. It also believes in a triple soul, of which the lowest level (\"nefesh\" or animal life) dissolves into the elements, the middle layer (\"ruach\" or intellect) goes to \"Gan Eden\" (Paradise) while the highest level (\"neshamah\" or spirit) seeks union with God.\nIsrael chosen for a purpose.\nGod chose the Jewish people to be in a unique covenant with God; the description of this covenant is the Torah itself. God further declared in the Torah through prophecy to Moses that his \"firstborn\" is the Israelites. However, closeness and being chosen does not imply exclusivity, as anyone can join and convert. Included in the idea of being chosen is that Jews were chosen for a specific mission, a duty: to be a light unto the nations, and to have a covenant with God as described in the Torah.\nRabbi Lord Immanuel Jakobovits, former Chief Rabbi of the United Synagogue of Great Britain, describes the mainstream Jewish view on this issue: \"Yes, I do believe that the chosen people concept as affirmed by Judaism in its holy writ, its prayers, and its millennial tradition. In fact, I believe that every people\u2014and indeed, in a more limited way, every individual\u2014is 'chosen' or destined for some distinct purpose in advancing the designs of Providence. Only, some fulfill their mission and others do not. Maybe the Greeks were chosen for their unique contributions to art and philosophy, the Romans for their pioneering services in law and government, the British for bringing parliamentary rule into the world, and the Americans for piloting democracy in a pluralistic society. The Jews were chosen by God to be 'peculiar unto Me' as the pioneers of religion and morality; that was and is their national purpose.\"\nThe messiah.\nJudaism acknowledges an afterlife, but does not have a single or systemic way of thinking about the afterlife. Judaism places its overwhelming stress on \"Olam HaZeh\" (this world) rather than \"Olam haba\" (the World to Come), and \"speculations about the World to Come are peripheral to mainstream Judaism\". In Pirkei Avot, it is said that \"One hour of penitence and good deeds in this world is better than all the life of the world to come; but one hour of spiritual repose in the world to come is better than all the life of this world\", reflecting both a view of the significance of life on Earth and the spiritual repose granted to the righteous in the next world.\nJews reject the idea that Jesus of Nazareth was the messiah and agree that the messiah has not yet come. Throughout Jewish history there have been a number of Jewish Messiah claimants considered false by Jews, including most notably Simon bar Kokhba and Sabbatai Zevi; followers of the latter were known as Sabbateans.\nThe twelfth of Maimonides' 13 principles of faith was: \"I believe with perfect faith in the coming of the messiah (\"mashiach\"), and though he may tarry, still I await him every day.\" Orthodox Jews believes that a future Jewish messiah (the \"Mashiach\", \"anointed one\") will be a king who will rule the Jewish people independently and according to Jewish law. In a traditional view, the Messiah was understood to be a human descendant of King David (that is, of the Davidic line).\nLiberal, or Reform Judaism does not believe in the arrival of a personal Messiah who will ingather the exiles in the Land of Israel and cause the physical resurrection of the dead. Rather, Reform Jews focus on a future age in which there is a perfected world of justice and mercy.\nHistory and development.\nA number of formulations of Jewish beliefs have appeared over the centuries, and there is some dispute over the number of basic principles. Though they were incorporated in the liturgy to a limited extent and utilized for purposes of instruction, these formulations carried no weight other than that imparted to them by the fame and scholarship of their respective authors. None of them had an authoritative character analogous to that given by Christianity to its three great formulas (the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene, and the Athanasian), or to the Muslim Shahada. Of the Jewish formulations, the most widely accepted is that of Maimonides.\nTalmudic period.\nThe first to attempt to formulate Jewish principles of faith was Philo of Alexandria in the 1st century CE. He enumerated five articles: God is and rules; God is one; the world was created by God; Creation is one, and God's providence rules Creation.\nMany early rabbis were drawn into controversies with both Jews and non-Jews, and had to fortify their faith against the attacks of contemporaneous philosophy as well as against rising Christianity. The Mishnah (c.\u2009200 CE) excludes from the world to come the Epicureans and those who deny belief in resurrection or in the divine origin of the Torah. Rabbi Akiva (died 135\u00a0CE) labeled as heretical the readers of \"external books\" (sefarim hitsonim) \u2013 certain theological writings that rabbinic tradition did not canonize \u2013 as well as individuals who used magical incantations for healing. Abba Saul designated as suspected heretics those that pronounce the ineffable name of God.\nSome early rabbis attempted to summarize Judaism via a small number of guiding principles. Rabbi Simlai (3rd century) traces the development of Jewish religious principles from Moses with his 613 commandments, through David, who (according to Simlai) enumerates eleven; through Isaiah, with six; Micah, with three; to Habakkuk who sums up all religion in the single phrase, \"The pious lives in his faith\". Akiva himself declares that the command to love one's neighbor is the fundamental principle of the Torah (\"kelal gadol batorah\"); while Ben Azzai assigns this distinction to the Biblical verse \"This is the book of the generations of man\". Hillel the Elder declared to a would-be convert, \"That which you find hateful, do not do to others, the rest is commentary.\"\nMedieval era.\nDetailed constructions of articles of faith did not find favor in Judaism until the medieval era, when Jews were forced to defend their faith from both Islamic and Christian inquisitions, disputations, and polemics. The necessity of defending their religion against the attacks of other philosophies induced many Jewish leaders to define and formulate their beliefs. A number of Jewish scholars formulated such lists of principles of faith. By this time, centers of Jewish learning and law were dispersed geographically, and no central authority existed that might bestow official approval on any particular list.\nSaadia Gaon's \"Emunot ve-Deot\" (c.\u2009933 CE) is an exposition of the main tenets of Judaism. Saadia lists these as: The world was created by God; God is one and incorporeal; belief in revelation (including the divine origin of tradition); man is called to righteousness, and endowed with all necessary qualities of mind and soul to avoid sin; belief in reward and punishment; the soul is created pure; after death, it leaves the body; belief in resurrection; Messianic expectation, retribution, and final judgement.\nJudah Halevi endeavored, in his Kuzari, to determine the fundamentals of Judaism on another basis. He rejects all appeal to speculative reason, repudiating the method of the Islamic Motekallamin. The miracles and traditions are, in their natural character, both the source and the evidence of the true faith. In this view, speculative reason is considered fallible due to the inherent impossibility of objectivity in investigations with moral implications.\nMaimonides' 13 principles of faith.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n13 principles of faith, summarized:\nMaimonides (1135\u20131204 CE) formulated 13 principles of faith, which appear in his commentary on the Mishnah.\nSome modern Orthodox scholars have pointed out apparent inconsistencies in Maimonides's writings with respect to the 13 principles of faith. Maimonides himself, while enumerating his principles, added the following caveat: \n\"There is no difference between [the Biblical statement] 'his wife was Mehithabel' [Genesis 10,6] on the one hand [i. e., an \"unimportant\" verse], and 'Hear, O Israel' on the other [i. e., an \"important\" verse]... anyone who denies even such verses thereby denies God and shows contempt for his teachings more than any other skeptic, because he holds that the Torah can be divided into essential and non-essential parts...\"\nEventually, Maimonides' 13 principles of faith became the most widely accepted Jewish statement of belief, even \"canonized\" in certain periods, though disputed in others. Two poetic restatements of Maimonides' principles (\"Ani Ma'amin\" and \"Yigdal\") became standard parts of the Jewish prayerbook.\nAfter Maimonides.\nDespite the popular acceptance of Maimonides' principles, \"even a cursory examination of Jewish literature shows that Maimonides' principles were never regarded as the last word in Jewish theology\". The 13 principles are simultaneously understood as rooted in legitimate Talmudic scholarship and Jewish tradition, and also remain somewhat controversial as scholars who both preceded and succeeded Maimonides (and Maimonides himself, in one case) offered different views. Nevertheless, in most cases the divergence from Maimonides' principles was relatively minor.\nSome successors of Maimonides, from the 13th to the 15th centuries\u2014Nahmanides, Abba Mari ben Moses, Simon ben Zemah Duran, Joseph Albo, Isaac Arama, and Joseph Jaabez\u2014narrowed his 13 articles to three core beliefs: belief in God; in creation (or revelation); and in providence (or retribution).\nOthers, like Hasdai Crescas and David ben Samuel Estella, spoke of seven fundamental articles, laying stress on free-will. On the other hand, David ben Yom Tov ibn Bilia adds to the 13 of Maimonides 13 of his own\u2014a number which a contemporary of Albo also chose for his fundamentals; while Jedaiah Penini (c.\u20091270\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091340) enumerated no fewer than 35 cardinal principles.\nIsaac Abarbanel argued that while Maimonides' 13 principles are necessary, they are not sufficient as really the truth of every belief or narrative in the Torah should be an article of faith.\nFor Maimonides, the uniqueness of the 13 beliefs was that even a rejection out of ignorance placed one outside Judaism, whereas the rejection of the rest of Torah must be a conscious act for a person to be classified as a heretic. Others, such as Rabbi Joseph Albo and the Raavad, criticized Maimonides' list as containing items that, while true, in their opinion did not place those who rejected them out of ignorance in the category of heretics. Many others criticized any such formulation as minimizing acceptance of the entire Torah. As noted, however, neither Maimonides nor his contemporaries viewed these principles as encompassing all of Jewish belief, but rather as the core theological underpinnings of the acceptance of Judaism.\nThe role of \"mitzvot\".\nSome scholars have debated whether the practice of \"mitzvot\" in Judaism is inherently connected to Judaism's principles of faith. Moses Mendelssohn, in his \"Jerusalem\" (1783), defended the non-dogmatic nature of the practice of Judaism. Rather, he asserted, the beliefs of Judaism, although revealed by God in Judaism, consist of universal truths applicable to all mankind. Rabbi Leopold L\u00f6w (1811\u20131875), among others, took the opposite view, and considered that the Mendelssohnian theory had been carried beyond its legitimate bounds. Underlying the practice of the Law was assuredly the recognition of certain fundamental principles, he asserted, culminating in the belief in God and revelation, and likewise in the doctrine of divine justice.\nThe procedure of conversion suggests the relative priority placed by Judaism on observance versus belief. Converts to Judaism must accept the \"mitzvot\" (commandments of the Torah) as binding, while the profession of faith demanded is limited to the acknowledgment of the unity of God and the rejection of idolatry. The aim of teaching during the conversion process is to convey a knowledge of \"halakha\" (Jewish law), obedience to which manifests the acceptance of the underlying religious principles; namely, the existence of God and the mission of Jews as the people of God's covenant.\nJudah ha-Levi (\"Kuzari\" 1:115, c.\u20091140 CE) states:\nWe are not putting on an equality with us a person entering our religion through confession alone. We require deeds, including in that term self-restraint, purity, study of the Law, circumcision, and the performance of other duties demanded by the Torah.\nThe belief of non-Jews.\nAccording to Jewish belief, righteousness is not restricted to Jews, and \"Righteous people of all nations have a share in the world to come\". This \"righteousness\" is measured by observance of the Seven Laws of Noah. For Maimonides, non-Jews are rewarded for keeping the Seven Laws only if they accept them due to them having been given by God to Moses (i.e. an acceptance of Jewish principles of faith), and not if they arrived at these laws by use of reason. According to Steven Schwarzschild, \"many of the most outstanding spokesmen of Judaism themselves dissented sharply from\" this position, which is \"individual and certainly somewhat eccentric\" in comparison to other Jewish thinkers. Rather, according to the other thinkers, observance of the Seven Laws is rewarded even if not accompanied by belief in their origin with Moses.\nThe Enlightenment.\nIn the late-18th century Europe was swept by a group of intellectual, social and political movements, together known as the Enlightenment. These movements promoted scientific thinking and free thought; they allowed people to question previously unshaken religious dogmas. Like Christianity, Judaism developed several responses to this unprecedented phenomenon. One response saw the Enlightenment as positive, while another saw it as negative. The Enlightenment meant equality and freedom for many Jews in many countries, so some felt that it should be warmly welcomed. Scientific study of religious texts would allow people to study the history of Judaism. Some Jews felt that Judaism should accept modern secular thought and change in response to these ideas. Others, however, believed that the divine nature of Judaism precluded changing any fundamental beliefs.\nOrthodox Jewish rabbis such as Samson Raphael Hirsch (1808\u20131888), who were open to the changing times, nevertheless rejected any doubt in the traditional theological foundation of Judaism. Historical-critical methods of research and new philosophy led to the formation of various non-Orthodox denominations, as well as of Jewish secular movements.\nKaraism.\nA contemporary of Maimonides, the 12th-century Karaite scholar and liturgist Judah Hadassi, formulated non-Rabbinic articles of faith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) God is the Creator of all created beings; (2) He is premundane and has no peer or associate; (3) the whole universe is created; (4) God called Moses and the other Prophets of the Biblical canon; (5) the Law of Moses alone is true; (6) to know the language of the Bible is a religious duty; (7) the Temple at Jerusalem is the palace of the world's Ruler; (8) belief in Resurrection contemporaneous with the advent of the Messiah; (9) final judgment; (10) retribution.\u2014\u200a\nPrinciples of faith in Modern Judaism.\nOrthodox Judaism.\nOrthodox Judaism continuously maintained the historical rabbinic Judaism. Therefore, as above, it accepts philosophic speculation and statements of dogma only to the extent that they exist within, and are compatible with, the system of written and oral Torah. As a matter of practice, Orthodox Judaism lays stress on the performance of the actual commandments. Dogma is considered to be the self-understood underpinning of the practice of the Mitzvot.\nOwing to this, there is no one official statement of principles. Rather, all formulations by accepted early Torah leaders are considered to have possible validity. Maimonides' 13 principles have been cited by adherents as the most influential: They are often printed in prayer books, and in some congregations, a hymn (Yigdal) incorporating them is sung on Friday nights or even every morning in some communities.\nConservative Judaism.\nConservative Judaism developed in Europe and the United States in the late 1800s, as Jews reacted to the changes brought about by the Jewish Enlightenment and Jewish emancipation. In many ways, it was a reaction to what were seen as the excesses of the Reform movement. For much of the movement's history, Conservative Judaism deliberately avoided publishing systematic explications of theology and belief; this was a conscious attempt to hold together a wide coalition. This concern became a non-issue after the left-wing of the movement seceded in 1968 to form the Reconstructionist movement, and after the right-wing seceded in 1985 to form the Union for Traditional Judaism.\nIn 1988, the Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism finally issued an official statement of belief, \"Emet Ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism\". It noted that a Jew must hold certain beliefs. However, the Conservative rabbinate also notes that the Jewish community never developed any one binding catechism. Thus, Emet Ve-Emunah affirms belief in God and in God's revelation of Torah to the Jews. However, it also affirms the legitimacy of multiple interpretations of these issues. Atheism, Trinitarian views of God, and polytheism are all ruled out. All forms of relativism, and also of literalism and fundamentalism, are also rejected. It teaches that Jewish law is both still valid and indispensable, but also holds to a more open and flexible view of how law has, and should, develop than the Orthodox view.\nReform Judaism.\nReform Judaism has had a number of official platforms, especially in the United States. The first platform was the 1885 \"Declaration of Principles (\"The Pittsburgh Platform\")\"\u00a0\u2013 the adopted statement of a meeting of reform rabbis from across the United States November 16\u201319, 1885.\nThe next platform\u00a0\u2013 \"The Guiding Principles of Reform Judaism (\"The Columbus Platform\")\"\u00a0\u2013 was published by the Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR) in 1937.\nThe CCAR rewrote its principles in 1976 with its \"Reform Judaism: A Centenary Perspective\" and rewrote them again in 1999's \"A Statement of Principles for Reform Judaism\". While original drafts of the 1999 statement called for Reform Jews to consider re-adopting some traditional practices on a voluntary basis, later drafts removed most of these suggestions. The final version is thus similar to the 1976 statement.\nAccording to the CCAR, personal autonomy still has precedence over these platforms; lay people need not accept all, or even any, of the beliefs stated in these platforms. Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR) President Rabbi Simeon J. Maslin wrote a pamphlet about Reform Judaism, entitled \"What We Believe... What We Do...\". It states that, \"If anyone were to attempt to answer these two questions authoritatively for all Reform Jews, that person's answers would have to be false. Why? Because one of the guiding principles of Reform Judaism is the autonomy of the individual. A Reform Jew has the right to decide whether to subscribe to this particular belief or to that particular practice.\" Reform Judaism affirms \"the fundamental principle of Liberalism: that the individual will approach this body of mitzvot and minhagim in the spirit of freedom and choice. Traditionally, Israel started with harut, the commandment engraved upon the Tablets, which then became freedom. The Reform Jew starts with herut, the freedom to decide what will be harut\u00a0\u2013 engraved upon the personal Tablets of his life.\" [Bernard Martin, Ed., Contemporary Reform Jewish Thought, Quadrangle Books 1968.] In addition to those, there were the 42 Affirmations of Liberal Judaism in Britain from 1992, and the older Richtlinien zu einem Programm f\u00fcr das liberale Judentum (1912) in Germany, as well as others, all stressing personal autonomy and ongoing revelation.\nReconstructionist Judaism.\nReconstructionist Judaism is an American denomination that has a naturalist theology as developed by Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan. Reconstructionism posits that God is neither personal nor supernatural. Rather, God is said to be the sum of all natural processes that allow man to become self-fulfilled. Rabbi Kaplan wrote that \"to believe in God means to take for granted that it is man's destiny to rise above the brute and to eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation from human society\".\nMany Reconstructionist Jews reject theism, and instead define themselves as religious naturalists. These views have been criticized on the grounds that they are actually atheists, which has only been made palatable to Jews by rewriting the dictionary. A significant minority of Reconstructionists have refused to accept Kaplan's theology, and instead affirm a theistic view of God.\nAs in Reform Judaism, Reconstructionist Judaism holds that personal autonomy has precedence over Jewish law and theology. It does not ask that its adherents hold to any particular beliefs, nor does it ask that halakha be accepted as normative. In 1986, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association (RRA) and the Federation of Reconstructionist Congregations (FRC) passed the official \"Platform on Reconstructionism\" (2 pages). It is not a mandatory statement of principles, but rather a consensus of current beliefs. [FRC Newsletter, Sept. 1986, pages D, E.] Major points of the platform state that:\nThis platform puts Reconstructionist Jews at odds with all other Jews, as it seems to accuse all other Jews of being racist. Jews outside of the Reconstructionist movement strenuously reject this charge.\nAlthough Reconstructionist Judaism does not require its membership to subscribe to any particular dogma, the Reconstructionist movement actively rejects or marginalizes certain beliefs held by other branches of Judaism, including many (if not all) of the 13 Principles. For example, Rabbi Kaplan \"rejected traditional Jewish understandings of messianism. His God did not have the ability to suspend the natural order, and could thus not send a divine agent from the house of David who would bring about a miraculous redemption.\" Rather, in keeping with Reconstructionist naturalist principles, \"Kaplan believed strongly that ultimately, the world will be perfected, but only as a result of the combined efforts of humanity over generations.\" (Id. at 57) Similarly, Reconstructionism rejects the 13th principle of resurrection of the dead, which Kaplan believed \"belonged to a supernatural worldview rejected by moderns\". (Id. at 58.) Thus, the Reconstructionist Sabbath Prayer Book erases all references to a messianic figure, and the daily 'Amidah replaces the traditional blessing of reviving the dead with one that blesses God \"who in love remembers Thy creatures unto life\". (Id. at 57-59.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52979", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52979", "title": "Jewish principle of faith", "text": ""}
{"id": "52980", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52980", "title": "Hakka Chinese", "text": "Sinitic language originating in southern China\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHakka (; \"Pha\u030dk-fa-s\u1e73: \", ; \"Pha\u030dk-fa-s\u1e73: \") forms a language group of varieties of Chinese, spoken natively by the Hakka people in parts of Southern China, Taiwan, some diaspora areas of Southeast Asia and in overseas Chinese communities around the world.\nDue to its primary usage in isolated regions where communication is limited to the local area, Hakka has developed numerous varieties or dialects, spoken in different provinces, such as Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, Fujian, Sichuan, Hunan, Jiangxi, Guizhou, as well as in Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia. Hakka is not mutually intelligible with Yue, Wu, Min, Mandarin or other branches of Chinese, and itself contains a few mutually unintelligible varieties. It is most closely related to Gan and is sometimes classified as a variety of Gan, with a few northern Hakka varieties even being partially mutually intelligible with southern Gan. There is also a possibility that the similarities are just a result of shared areal features.\nTaiwan designates Hakka as one of its national languages, thus regarding the language as a subject for its study and preservation. Pronunciation differences exist between the Taiwanese Hakka dialects and mainland China's Hakka dialects; even in Taiwan, two major local varieties of Hakka exist.\nThe Meixian dialect (Moiyen) of northeast Guangdong in mainland China has been taken as the \"standard\" dialect by the government of mainland China. The Guangdong Provincial Education Department created an official romanization of Moiyen in 1960, one of four languages receiving this status in Guangdong.\nThe She ethnic group and Hakka people have a history of contact; the She Chinese language is either closely related to or heavily influenced by Hakka, if not both.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the Hakka people who are the predominant original native speakers of the variety literally means \"guest families\" or \"guest people\": \"Hak\" (Mandarin: ) means \"guest\", and \"ka\" (Mandarin: ) means \"family\". Among themselves, Hakka people variously called their language \"Hak-ka-fa\" (\"-va\"), \"Kak-ka-fa\" (\"-va\"), \"Hak-fa\" (\"-va\"), \"Kak-fa\" (\"-va\"), \"Tu-gong-dung-fa\" (\"-va\"), literally \"Native Guangdong language\", and \"Ngai-fa\" (\"-va\"), \"My/our language\". In Tonggu County, Jiangxi province, people call their language \"Huai-yuan-fa\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIt is commonly believed that Hakka people have their origins in several episodes of migration from northern China into southern China during periods of war and civil unrest dating back as far as the end of Western Jin. The forebears of the Hakka came from present-day Central Plains provinces of Henan and Shaanxi, and brought with them features of Chinese varieties spoken in those areas during that time. (Since then, the speech in those regions has evolved into dialects of modern Mandarin). The presence of many archaic features occur in modern Hakka, including final consonants , as are found in other modern southern Chinese varieties, but which have been lost in Mandarin.\nLaurent Sagart (2002) considers Hakka and southern Gan Chinese to be sister dialects that descended from a single common ancestral language (Proto-Southern Gan) spoken in central Jiangxi during the Song Dynasty. In Hakka and southern Gan, Sagart (2002) identifies a non-Chinese substratum that is possibly Hmong-Mien, an archaic layer, and a more recent Late Middle Chinese layer. Lexical connections between Hakka, Kra-Dai, and Hmong-Mien have also been suggested by Deng (1999).\nDue to the migration of its speakers, Hakka may have been influenced by other language areas through which the Hakka-speaking forebears migrated. For instance, common vocabulary is found in Hakka, Min, and the She (Hmong\u2013Mien) languages. Today, most She people in Fujian and Zhejiang speak She, which is closely related to Hakka.\nLinguistic development.\nA regular pattern of sound change can generally be detected in Hakka, as in most Chinese varieties, of the derivation of phonemes from earlier forms of Chinese. Some examples:\nDialects.\nHakka has as many regional dialects as there are counties with Hakka speakers as the majority. Some of these Hakka dialects are not mutually intelligible with each other. Meixian is surrounded by the counties of Pingyuan, Dabu, Jiaoling, Xingning, Wuhua, and Fengshun. Each county has its own special phonological points of interest. For instance, Xingning lacks the codas and . These have merged into and , respectively. Further away from Meixian, the Hong Kong dialect lacks the medial, so whereas the Meixian dialect pronounces the character \u5149 as , the Hong Kong Hakka dialect pronounces it as , which is similar to the Hakka spoken in neighbouring Shenzhen.\nTones also vary across the dialects of Hakka. The majority of Hakka dialects have six tones. However, there are dialects which have lost all of their checked tones (\"rusheng\"), and the characters originally of this tone class are distributed across the non-\"ru\" tones. An example of such a dialect is Changting, which is situated in Western Fujian province. Moreover, there is evidence of the retention of an earlier Hakka tone system in the dialects of Haifeng and Lufeng, situated in coastal southeastern Guangdong province. They contain a yin-yang splitting in the \"qu\" tone, giving rise to seven tones in all (with yin-yang registers in \"ping\" and \"ru\" tones and a \"shang\" tone).\nIn Taiwan, there are two main dialects: Sixian and Hailu (alternatively known as Haifeng; Hailu refers to Haifeng County and Lufeng County). Most Hakka speakers in Taiwan can trace their ancestry to these two regions. Sixian speakers come from Jiaying Prefecture, mainly from the four counties of Chengxiang (now Meixian District), Zhengping (now Jiaoling), Xingning and Pingyuan. Most dialects of Taiwanese Hakka, except Sixian and Dabu, preserved postalveolar consonants (, , and ), which are uncommon in other southern Chinese varieties.\n\"Ethnologue\" reports the dialects of Hakka as being \"Yue-Tai\" (Meixian, Wuhua, Raoping, Taiwan Kejia: Meizhou above), \"Yuezhong \"(Central Guangdong), \"Huizhou, Yuebei\" (Northern Guangdong), \"Tingzhou\" (Min-Ke), \"Ning-Long\" (Longnan), \"Yugui,\" and \"Tonggu.\"\nVocabulary.\nLike other southern Chinese varieties, Hakka retains many single syllable words from earlier stages of Chinese; thus, a large number of syllables are distinguished by tone and final consonant. This reduces the need for compound words. However, like other Chinese varieties, it does have words of more than one syllable.\nHakka, as well as numerous other Chinese varieties such as Min and Cantonese, prefers the verb \u8b1b when referring to 'saying', rather than the Mandarin \u8aaa (Hakka / ).\nHakka uses \u98df( / ) for the verb 'to eat' and 'to drink', unlike Mandarin which prefers \u5403 (Hakka / ) as 'to eat' and \u559d (Hakka ) as 'to drink' where the meanings in Hakka are different, 'to stutter' and 'be thirsty' respectively.\nWriting systems.\nChinese script.\nHakka Chinese is typically written using Chinese characters (, \"Hon-s\u1e73\").\nLatin script.\nVarious dialects of Hakka such as Taiwanese Hakka, is sometimes written in the Latin script or Pha\u030dk-fa-s\u1e73.\nDialects of Hakka have been written in a number of Latin orthographies, largely for religious purposes, since at least the mid-19th century. The popular \"The Little Prince\" has also been translated into Hakka (2000), specifically the Miaoli dialect of Taiwan (itself a variant of the Sixian dialect). This also was dual-script, albeit using the Tongyong Pinyin scheme.\nMedia.\nIn 1950, China Central People's Broadcasting Station recruited the first Hakka broadcaster, Zhang Guohua, based on a radius of two kilometers from the Meixian government. On 10 April 1950, the Voice of Hakka () started broadcasting. It broadcast nine hours of Hakka Chinese programs every day through shortwave radio and online radio, targeting countries and regions where Hakka people gather, such as Japan, Indonesia, Mauritius, Reunion Island, Australia, Hong Kong and Taiwan.\nIn 1988, Meizhou Television Station () was founded. In 1994, Hakka Public Channel, also known as Meizhou TV-2 had started broadcasting. Hakka Chinese began to appear in television programs. In 2021, it was renamed .\nIn 1991, Meizhou People\u2019s Broadcasting Station (), also known as Meizhou Wired Broadcasting Station () officially started broadcasting. Meizhou Radio News: FM94.8 or urban FM101.9. Meizhou Radio Traffic Channel: FM105.8\u00a0MHz. Meizhou Radio Private Car Channel: FM94.0 or urban FM103.9. Until now, Hakka Chinese is still used for news program, radio drama program, emotional program, entertainment program and cultural program.\nIn 1999, 3CW Chinese Radio Australia () was launched. It used Mandarin, Cantonese and Hakka.\nIn 2001, Meizhou Television Station merged with Meizhou People\u2019s Broadcasting Station and was renamed (MRT, ). In 2004, the station had officially completed its establishment.\nIn 2003, Taiwan Broadcasting System established a Hakka satellite cable channel Hakka TV. In Taiwan, there are seven Hakka Chinese radio channels.\nIn 2005, Meixian Radio and Television Station () was reorganized after the separation of the National Cultural System Reform Bureau. It is a public institution under the jurisdiction of the Meixian County Party Committee and County Government. The channel can be watched in Meizhou and surrounding area with an audience of over 4 million people.\nIn 2012, Voice of Hong Kong () started broadcasting. Hakka Chinese is used on Sihai Kejia Channel.\nIn 2019, Shenzhou Easy Radio () added a Hakka Chinese radio break which broadcasts to the southeast coast of Mainland China, Taiwan, Southeast Asia, the South Pacific and Japan. On Radio The Greater Bay (), Sihai Kejia Channel has also joined.\nIn 2023, the \"Xuexi Qiangguo\" platform under the supervision of the Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party had added automatic broadcasting in Hakka Chinese.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52982", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52982", "title": "Deep frying", "text": "Cooking food under hot fat\nDeep frying (also referred to as deep fat frying) is a cooking method in which food is submerged in hot fat, traditionally lard but today most commonly oil, as opposed to the shallow frying used in conventional frying done in a frying pan. Normally, a deep fryer or chip pan is used for this; industrially, a pressure fryer or vacuum fryer may be used. Deep frying may also be performed using oil that is heated in a pot. Deep frying is classified as a hot-fat cooking method. Typically, deep frying foods cook quickly since oil has a high rate of heat conduction and all sides of the food are cooked simultaneously.\nThe term \"deep frying\" and many modern deep-fried foods were not invented until the 19th century, but the practice has been around for millennia. Early records and cookbooks suggest that the practice began in certain European countries before other countries adopted the practice.\nDeep frying is popular worldwide, with deep-fried foods accounting for a large portion of global caloric consumption.\nHistory.\nThe English term \"deep-fried\" is attested from the early 20th century.\nDeep-fried dough known as Zalabiyeh was eaten as early as the late 2nd millennium BC in Canaan. Frying food in olive oil is attested in Classical Greece from about the 5th century BC. The 5th century AD Roman cookbook Apicius (De Re Coquinaria) offers a recipe for deep fried chicken in a cream sauce \"Pullus leucozomus\" fried in olive oil. Sanskrit texts such as the 12th century Manasollasa (\"Bhartur Upabhogak\u0101ra\u1e47a)\" mention snacks like malpua and vataka being submersed and fried in ghee. Deep-fried foods such as funnel cakes arrived in northern Europe by the 13th century, and deep-fried fish recipes have been found in cookbooks in Spain and Portugal at around the same time. Falafel arrived in the Middle East from Egypt as early as the 14th century.\nFrench fries, invented in the early 17th century in Chile, became popular in the early 19th century western Europe. In 1860, Joseph Malin combined deep fried fish with chips (french fries) to open the first fish and chip shop in London.\nModern deep frying in the United States began in the 19th century with the growing popularity of cast iron, particularly around the American South which led to the development of many modern deep-fried dishes. Doughnuts were invented in the mid-18th century, with foods such as onion rings, deep-fried turkey, and corn dogs all being invented in the early 20th century. In recent years, the growth of fast food has expanded the reach of deep-fried foods, especially french fries.\nTechnique.\nDeep frying food is defined as a process where food is submerged in hot oil at temperatures typically between and , but deep frying oil can reach temperatures of over 400\u00a0\u00b0F (205\u00a0\u00b0C).\u00a0 One common method for preparing food for deep frying involves adding multiple layers of batter around the food, such as cornmeal, flour, or tempura; breadcrumbs may also be used.\nWhile most foods need batter coatings for protection, it is not as necessary for cooked noodles and potatoes because their high starch content enables them to hold more moisture and not shrink. Meats are sometimes cooked before deep frying to ensure that they are done inside while keeping juiciness.\nWhen performed properly, deep frying does not make food excessively greasy, because the moisture in the food repels the oil. The hot oil heats the water within the food, steaming it; oil cannot go against the direction of this powerful flow because (due to its high temperature) the water vapor pushes the bubbles toward the surface. As long as the oil is hot enough and the food is not immersed in the oil for too long, oil penetration will be confined to the outer surface. Foods deep-fried at proper temperatures typically absorb less than 2 tablespoons per 2.5 (~) of oil used. This oil absorption rate is around the same as occurs with shallow frying, such as in a pan.\nHowever, if the food is cooked in the oil for too long, much of the water will be lost and the oil will begin to penetrate the food. The correct frying temperature depends on the thickness and type of food, but in most cases it lies between . An informal test for a temperature close to this range involves adding a tiny amount of flour into the oil and watching to see if it sizzles without immediately burning. A second test involves adding one piece of food to deep fry and watching it sink somewhat and rise back up. Sinking without resurfacing indicates that the oil is too cold; not sinking at all indicates that the oil is too hot.\nIt is recommended that deep fryers be cleaned often to prevent contamination. The process of cooking with oil can also contaminate nearby surfaces as oil may splatter on adjacent areas. Oil vapors can also condense on more distant surfaces such as walls and ceilings. Supplies such as dish detergent and baking soda can effectively clean affected surfaces.\nTools.\nDeep frying is done with a deep fryer, a pan such as a wok or chip pan, a Dutch oven, or a cast-iron pot. Additional tools include fry baskets, which are used to contain foods in a deep fryer and to strain foods when removed from the oil, and cooking thermometers, used to gauge oil temperature. Tongs, slotted spoons, wooden spoons, and sieves may be used to remove or separate foods from the hot oil.\nJapanese deep frying tools include long metal chopsticks; the \"agemono-nabe\" deep frying pot, which is heavy for retaining heat and deep for holding oil; the \"ami-shakushi\" net ladle used for scooping out batter debris; and the \"abura-kiri\" oil drying rack pan.\nDishes, foods, and culture.\nDeep-fried foods are common in many countries, and have also been described as \"a staple of almost all street cuisines on all continents\". There are hundreds of dishes that are associated with deep frying as most foods can be deep-fried. Examples of food that can be deep-fried include meat, poultry, fish and vegetables. Fish and chips, for instance, combines deep-fried fish and deep-fried potatoes. French fries, doughnuts, onion rings, and hushpuppies are common deep-fried foods. Other common deep-fried foods include Chinese \"you Bing\" deep-fried pancakes, Southeast Asian \"jin deui\", and Japanese tempura. Less common deep-fried foods include maple leaves, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, pizza, Mars and Snickers bars.\nIn the United States, the \"Chicago Tribune\" notes that \"you can deep fry almost anything\". The American South has been noted as a modern center of innovation in the area of deep-fried food. According to the owner of a deep frying restaurant in the South, \"If something is edible, you can bet that someone south of the Mason-Dixon line has tried to cook it in oil\".\nAfrica.\nIn Northern Africa, deep-fried dishes are a part of the cuisine. A common food in this region is the deep-fried fritter, also referred to as \"sponges\". In East Africa deep fried food is common, cooked in cast iron or earthenware pots. Frying in batter is common. A Ugandan specialty is a kind of doughnut called Mandazi. In areas of Southern Africa, street foods include deep-fried potato and cassava chips. Deep-fried foods in the country of South Africa include fish and chips, \"vetkoek\" and \"koeksisters\", among others.\nAsia.\nJapanese tempura is a popular deep-fried food that generally consists of battered and fried seafood and vegetables. Japanese deep-fried dishes, or Agemono, include other styles besides tempura, such as Karaage, Korokke, Kushikatsu, and Tonkatsu.\nIn areas of Southeast Asia such as Thailand, insects are commonly deep-fried for human consumption. Western-style fast food items such as donuts, deep-fried chicken, and deep-fried potatoes are also becoming popular in Asia.\nIn Indonesia deep fried food is quite common, serving as either a main dish or a snack. The ingredients are usually deep fried in palm oil, the most widely used cooking oil in the country. Some popular deep fried foods include \"ayam goreng\" (chicken), \"pecel lele\" (catfish), \"pempek\" (fishcake) and tempeh. Fritters in Indonesia is generally identified as \"gorengan\", the most popular one including \"pisang goreng\" (banana fritter), \"bakwan jagung\" (corn) and \"tahu goreng\" (tofu).\nDeep-fried fish, tofu, and ' are commonly eaten in Vietnamese cuisine. Deep frying is also used to make several kinds of ', including ' (fried rice ball), ' (sesame ball), ' (hollow doughnut), ' (sweet potato pancake), ' (banana fritter), H\u1ed3 T\u00e2y\u2013style ' (shrimp fritter), and \"\" (pillow cake).\nDeep-fried sticks of dough, known as youtiao in Chinese, are eaten in many East and Southeast Asian cuisines.\nIn Hong Kong, is a popular food.\nIn South Asia, popular deep fried snacks are samosa, jalebi, and pakora.\nEurope.\nMany countries such as the United Kingdom use pure or hydrogenated rapeseed oil for deep-frying. Fish and chips is a very popular deep-fried dish in the U.K. since it originated in London in the 19th century and became popular among the working class. Its popularity continues with 229 million portions of fish and chips being sold annually in England alone.\nThere is an annual trade fair devoted to deep-fried foods called the International Symposium on Deep-Fat Frying which features discussions on deep fat frying as well as exhibitions by companies involved with the process.\nBelgian tradition requires French fries to be deep-fried in filtered fat of cattle, locally called \"blanc de boeuf\" or \"ossewit\".\nThe Mediterranean diets traditionally use olive oil for deep-frying, which it is absorbed by the food in the process. Research indicates that virgin olive oil is unique among other cooking oils because it is very rich in monounsaturated fatty acids and contains beneficial micronutrients.\nThe deep-fried Mars bar originated in Scotland, with The Carron Fish Bar in Stonehaven claiming to have invented it in the early 1990s.\nNorth America.\nIn the United States, soybean oil is often used for deep-frying. Beignets, originally a French dish, are a popular deep-fried pastry in the U.S. city of New Orleans. Deep-fried food has been a core part of the culture of the American South with many restaurants solely serving deep-fried foods. The owner of one such restaurant has said of deep-fried food that \"in the South it's a way of life\". Fast food is one of the most common ways to consume deep-fried food in North America.\nNovelty deep-fried foods are popular today in American fairs, especially those in the American South. Hundreds of items are served at these fairs. Some of them include deep-fried beer, butter, and bubblegum. Additionally, deep frying can be used as a form of artwork by frying non-edible objects, such as electronics. Artists such as Henry Hargreaves have deep-fried replicas of electronic items such as iPads, Game Boys, and laptops.\nDeep-fried food contests are frequently held at fairs such as the Texas State Fair, where they hold an annual contest for the most creative deep-fried food. Notable past winners have included fried Coke and deep-fried butter, both invented by Abel Gonzales. Since 2013, an American reality competition show called \"deep-fried Masters\", produced by Discovery Networks, holds deep frying competitions at several state fairs across the country.\nOceania.\nFish and chip shops in Australia may purvey several types of deep-fried foods, along with other food types.\nSouth America.\nThe bu\u00f1uelo, a fried dough ball popular in Central America and Greece, is a popular deep-fried snack and street food in South America. Picarone, a Peruvian dessert originated in the colonial period, are deep-fried doughs made with pumpkin and sweet potatoes, popular in Peru and Chile, especially during harvest festivals., a family of deep fried cakes is well known across, sopaipillas a Chilean bread are deep fried in oil or butter also made with pumpkin, Chancay a Peruvian bread made of flour, salt and yeast, known as chip\u00e1 cuerito in Paraguay and Torta frita in Argentina and Uruguay, made of flour, salt and yeast, sometimes addition with milk and animal fat and fried in cow fat, the churro, a fried dough popular in Spain is a popular fried snack and street food in Argentina and Uruguay, milanesa a deep fried breaded veal beef from Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay.\nOil deterioration and chemical changes.\nDeep fat frying involves heating oil to temperatures in excess of 180\u00a0\u00b0C in the presence of moisture and air. These conditions can induce a series of complex chemical reactions which may impact the quality of both the food and the oil it is cooked in. Examples of different chemical reactions include the production of free radicals, oxidation, hydrolysis, isomerization and polymerization. The exact reactions are dependent upon factors such as the oil type, frying conditions, and food being cooked. When frying, water can attack the ester linkage of triacylglycerols, resulting in mono- and diglycerols, glycerol, and free fatty acids (a type of hydrolysis reaction). The aforementioned hydrolysis reaction is enhanced by the produced fatty acids and other low molecular weight acid compounds.\nOverheating or over-using the frying oil leads to formation of rancid-tasting products of oxidation, polymerization, and other deleterious, unintended or even toxic compounds such as acrylamide (from starchy foods). Recent research suggests fat deterioration may be worse when fat or oil is fried with food than when fat or oil is tested on its own in a laboratory. Deep-frying under vacuum helps to significantly reduce acrylamide formation, but this process is not widely used in the food industry due to the high investment cost involved.\nSome useful tests and indicators of excessive oil deterioration are the following:\nInstruments that indicate total polar compounds, currently the best single gauge of how deep-fried an object is, are available with sufficient accuracy for restaurant and industry use.\nHazards.\nCooking oil is not flammable at room temperature but can become flammable when used at high temperatures. Fires ensue if it gets ignited under these conditions. Further, attempts to extinguish an oil fire with water can cause an extremely dangerous condition (a slopover) as they cause the water to flash into steam due to the high heat of the oil, in turn sending the burning oil in all directions and thus aggravating the fire. This is the leading cause of house fires in the United Kingdom. Instead, oil fires must be extinguished with a class F fire extinguisher or by starving the fire of oxygen, such as can be accomplished by putting a lid back on the pan or using a fire blanket. Other means of extinguishing an oil fire include application of dry powder (e.g., baking soda, salt) or firefighting foam. Most commercial deep fryers are equipped with automatic fire suppression systems using foam.\nSpilled hot cooking oil can also cause severe third degree burns, In the worst-case scenario, severe burns can be fatal. The higher temperatures and tendency of oil to stick to the skin make spilled hot cooking oil far more dangerous than spilled hot water. Children can accidentally place their hands on top of the stove, play with the materials while being cooked, or accidentally pull the pot down, which can cause significant injury. If children are present, the utmost care should be used when deep frying so that their safety can be protected at all times.\nEnvironmental.\nDeep frying produces large amounts of waste oil, which must be disposed of properly. Waste oil can contribute to the creation of fatbergs, overflow sewage systems, bind to the walls of sewage pipes, and interfere with sewage treatment. Waste oil from deep frying is increasingly being recycled and refined into biodiesel.\nThe heating element in a deep fryer consumes enormous energy, electricity or otherwise. According to one source, an average home appliance deep fryer draws 2,000 watts. Potatoes that are stored in artificially humidified warehouses contain more water, which makes the time required to deep fry them into chips longer. This increases the carbon dioxide footprint of commercially producing chips because more energy is required for frying over a longer time.\nHealth.\nThe process of deep frying food is generally detrimental to its nutritional value. The oils that foods absorb in their batter typically contain large amounts of saturated fats and trans fats. Consumption of large amounts of saturated and trans fats has been linked to a higher risk for some cancers.\nEating deep-fried foods has also been linked to higher cholesterol levels, obesity, heart attacks, and diabetes. Deep-fried foods cooked at certain temperatures can also contain acrylamide. This discovery in 2002 led to international health concerns. Subsequent research has however found that it is not likely that the acrylamides in burnt or well-cooked food cause cancer in humans; Cancer Research UK categorizes the idea that burnt food causes cancer as a \"myth\".\nAdditionally, fat degradation processes (lipid peroxidation) during deep frying results in the loss of nutritional value in deep-fried foods.\nCooking oil that has been used for too long may in addition cause blood pressure elevation and vascular hypertrophy.\nTrans fats are used in shortenings for deep-frying in restaurants, as they can be used for longer than most conventional oils before becoming rancid. In the early 21st century, non-hydrogenated vegetable oils that have lifespans exceeding that of the frying shortenings became available. As fast-food chains routinely use different fats in different locations, trans fat levels in fast food can have large variations. The amount of trans fat that is formed during frying appears to increase with frying temperature, frying time, oil oxidation, and oil reuse.\nSome studies have found that deep frying in olive and sunflower oils has been found to be less of a detriment to health and in some cases have positive effects on insulin levels. Oil can be reused a few times after original use after straining out solids. However, excessive use of the same oil can cause it to break down and release compounds into the food that may be carcinogenic, affect liver health, or influence the body's ability to absorb vitamins. Some European countries have set public health standards for the safety of frying oil.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52983", "revid": "41625146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52983", "title": "Hot salt frying", "text": "Cooking technique\nHot sand frying and hot salt frying are cooking techniques used by street-side food vendors in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, China and Sri Lanka. Hot salt frying is an old cooking technique, and is used in villages throughout Asia and other parts of the world. Many foods are fried with hot salt or sand, even in common households.\nHot salt frying.\nMuri, or puffed rice, is also a common snack in the Indian subcontinent and is one of their oldest foods. The puffed rice is made by heating salt or sand in a karahi (in India), a patil (in Bangladesh), or a wok over a fire in a traditional Indian stove, then pouring parboiled or dried pre-cooked rice into it and stirring. The puffed rice is then quickly removed with a metal sieve and set to cool.\nIn Pakistan, hot salt frying is mostly used by street vendors to cook corn. Rock salt is preheated in a wok. Either the whole corn or individual kernels are buried in the salt and occasionally turned. In India, this technique is used by street vendors selling shelled peanuts, chickpeas, or popcorn cooked in salt heated in an iron wok.\nCoarse sea salt is placed in a large wok and heated to a high temperature. Dry food items, such as eggs in shell, are buried in the hot salt and occasionally turned with a spatula.\nHot sand frying.\nHot sand frying is a common cooking technique for street-side food vendors in China and India to cook chestnuts and peanuts. A large wok is filled with sand, which turns black from accumulating carbonized particles from the food items being fried, and heated to high temperature. Nuts are buried in the hot sand and occasionally turned with a spatula, then the sand and nuts are separated through a wire-mesh screen. Hot sand frying is also used in many villages throughout Asia. A common cooking technique in villages is to wrap fish or other meat in a banana leaf, tie it off, and then place the banana leaf in the heated sand one side at a time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52984", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52984", "title": "Hot sand frying", "text": ""}
{"id": "52985", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52985", "title": "Pan frying", "text": "Cooking technique\nPan frying or pan-frying is a form of frying food characterized by the use of minimal cooking oil or fat (compared to shallow frying or deep frying), typically using just enough to lubricate the pan. In the case of a greasy food such as bacon, no oil or fats may need to be added. As a form of frying, the technique relies on oil or fat as the heat transfer medium, and on correct temperature and time to not overcook or burn the food. Pan frying can serve to retain the moisture in foods such as meat and seafood. The food is typically flipped at least once to ensure that both sides are cooked properly.\nSpecifics.\nPan frying takes place at lower heat than saut\u00e9ing. This is because the food to be pan fried \u2013 such as chicken breasts, steak, pork chops, or fish fillets \u2013 is \"not\" cut into small pieces before cooking. It requires a lower heat so that the exterior of the food does not overcook by the time the interior reaches the proper temperature, and to keep foods in a moister state. However, the oil should always be hot enough to ensure that the moisture in the food can escape in the form of steam; the force of the steam escaping keeps the oil from soaking into the food. The same amount of oil is used as for saut\u00e9ing \u2013 just enough to glaze the pan.\nEquipment.\nGenerally, a shallower cooking vessel is used for pan frying than for deep frying; however, using a deep pan with a small amount of oil, butter or bacon grease does reduce spatter. A denser cooking vessel is better than a less dense pan because the added mass will improve temperature regulation. An electric skillet can be used analogously to an electric deep fryer, and many of these devices have a thermostat to keep the liquid (in this case, oil) at the desired temperature.\nBreading.\nFoods to be pan fried are sometimes covered with a batter or breading. Batters consist of dried ingredients such as flour or cornstarch in conjunction with liquids such as milk, water or other beverages. Breading can be as simple as dusting the food in flour or, more commonly, what is called the \"standard breading procedure\", which involves first dusting the food in flour (taking care to shake off the excess), then dipping it in beaten eggs, and finally putting it into bread crumbs (or some other form of outer coating). The food is seasoned with salt and pepper prior to applying any coating. Allowing the food to rest for 15\u201330 minutes before frying but after applying the breading enables the coating to stick to the food with greater tenacity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52986", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52986", "title": "Saut\u00e9ing", "text": "Cooking method\nSaut\u00e9ing or sauteing (, ; from fr \" saut\u00e9\", , 'jumped', 'bounced', in reference to tossing while cooking) is a method of cooking that uses a relatively small amount of oil or fat in a shallow pan over relatively high heat. Various saut\u00e9 methods exist.\nDescription.\nIngredients for saut\u00e9ing are usually cut into small pieces or thinly sliced to provide a large surface area, which facilitates fast cooking. The primary mode of heat transfer during saut\u00e9ing is conduction between the pan and the food being cooked. Food that is saut\u00e9ed is browned while preserving its texture, moisture, and flavor. If meat, chicken, or fish is saut\u00e9ed, the saut\u00e9 is often finished by deglazing the pan's residue to make a sauce.\nSaut\u00e9ing may be compared with pan frying, in which larger pieces of food (for example, chops or steaks) are cooked quickly in oil or fat, and flipped onto both sides. Some cooks make a distinction between the two based on the depth of the oil used, while others use the terms interchangeably.\nSaut\u00e9ing differs from searing in that searing only browns the surface of the food.\nCertain oils should not be used to saut\u00e9 due to their low smoke point. Clarified butter, rapeseed oil and sunflower oil are commonly used for saut\u00e9ing; whatever the fat, it must have a smoke point high enough to allow cooking on medium-high heat, which is the temperature at which saut\u00e9ing is done. For example, although regular butter would impart more flavor, it would also burn at a lower temperature and more quickly than other fats due to the presence of milk solids. Clarified butter is more fit for this use.\nMethods.\nIn a saut\u00e9, all the ingredients are heated at once and cooked quickly. To facilitate this, the ingredients are rapidly moved around in the pan, either by the use of a utensil or by repeatedly jerking the pan itself. A saut\u00e9 pan must be large enough to hold all of the food in one layer, so steam can escape, which keeps the ingredients from stewing and promotes the development of fond. Most pans sold specifically as saut\u00e9 pans have a wide flat base and low sides, to maximize the surface area available for heating. The low sides allow quick evaporation and escape of steam. While skillets typically have flared or rounded sides, saut\u00e9 pans typically have straight vertical sides. This keeps the ingredients from escaping as the pan is jerked or stirred.\nOnly enough fat to lightly coat the bottom of the pan is needed for saut\u00e9ing; too much fat will cause the food to fry rather than just to slide, and may interfere with the development of fond. The food is spread across the hot fat in the pan, and left to brown, turning or tossing frequently for even cooking. The saut\u00e9 technique involves gripping the handle of the saut\u00e9 pan firmly and using a sharp elbow motion to rapidly jerk the pan back toward the cook, repeating as necessary to ensure the ingredients have been thoroughly jumped. Tossing or stirring the items in the pan by shaking the pan too often, however, can cause the pan to cool and make the saut\u00e9 take longer.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52987", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52987", "title": "Grilling", "text": "Form of cooking that involves dry heat\nGrilling is a form of cooking that involves heat applied to the surface of food, commonly from above, below or from the side. Grilling usually involves a significant amount of direct, radiant heat, and tends to be used for cooking meat and vegetables quickly. Food to be grilled is cooked on a grill (an open wire grid such as a gridiron with a heat source above or below), using a cast iron/frying pan, or a grill pan (similar to a frying pan, but with raised ridges to mimic the wires of an open grill).\nHeat transfer to the food when using a grill is primarily through thermal radiation. Heat transfer when using a grill pan or griddle is by direct conduction. In the United States, when the heat source for grilling comes from above, grilling is called broiling. In this case, the pan that holds the food is called a broiler pan, and heat transfer is through thermal radiation.\nDirect heat grilling can expose food to temperatures often in excess of . Grilled meat acquires a distinctive roast aroma and flavor from a chemical process called the Maillard reaction. The Maillard reaction only occurs when foods reach temperatures in excess of .\nNot all foods are suitable for grilling. Grilling is an inappropriate treatment for large, tough cuts of meat as this fast technique would not allow the meat to cook slowly and tenderise. When using the grilling method, food is usually placed on a heat-resistant wire rack. This allows the fat, excess oils or juices to drain away.\nStudies have shown that cooking beef, pork, poultry, and fish at high temperatures can lead to the formation of heterocyclic amines, benzopyrenes, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which are carcinogens.\nMarination may reduce the formation of these compounds. Grilling is often presented as a healthy alternative to cooking with oils, although the fat and juices lost by grilling can contribute to drier food.\nMethods.\nGrid ironing.\nGrid ironing is the cooking of meats or other foods using a grill suspended above a heat source. Grilling is often performed outdoors using charcoal (real wood or preformed briquettes), wood, or propane gas. Food is cooked using direct radiant heat. Some outdoor grills include a cover so they can be used as smokers or for grill-roasting/barbecue. The suspended metal grate is often referred to as a gridiron.\nOutdoor grilling on a gridiron may be referred to as \"barbecue\", though in US usage, the term \"barbecue\" refers to the cooking of meat through indirect heat and smoke. \"Barbecue\" may refer to the grilled food itself, to a distinct type of cooked meat called Southern barbecue, to the grilling device used to cook the food (a \"barbecue grill\"), or to the social event of cooking and eating such food (which may also be called a \"cook-out\" or \"braai\").\nCharcoal kettle-grilling.\nCharcoal kettle-grilling refers to the process of grilling over a charcoal fire in a kettle, to the point that the edges are charred, or charred grill marks are visible. Some restaurants seek to re-create the charcoal-grilled experience via the use of ceramic lava rocks or infrared heat sources,offering meats that are cooked in this manner as \"charcoal-cooked\" or \"charcoal-grilled\". \nGrill-baking.\nBy using a baking sheet pan placed above the grill surface, as well as a drip pan below the surface, it is possible to combine grilling and roasting to cook meats that are stuffed or coated with breadcrumbs or batter, and to bake breads and even casseroles and desserts. When cooking stuffed or coated meats, the foods can be baked first on the sheet pan, and then placed directly on the grilling surface for char marks, effectively cooking twice; the drip pan will be used to capture any crumbs that fall off from the coating or stuffing.\nGrill-braising.\nIt is possible to braise meats and vegetables in a pot on top of a grill. A gas or electric grill would be the best choices for what is known as \"barbecue-braising\" or \"grill-braising\", or combining grilling directly on the surface and braising in a pot. To braise on a grill, put a pot on top of the grill, cover it, and let it simmer for a few hours. There are two advantages to barbecue-braising. The first is that this method allows for browning the meat directly on the grill before the braising, and the second is that it also allows for glazing the meat with sauce and finishing it directly over the fire after the braising, effectively cooking the meat three times, which results in a soft textured product that falls right off the bone. This method of cooking is slower than regular grilling but faster than pit-smoking, starting out fast, slowing down, and then speeding up again to finish. If a pressure cooker is used, the cooking time will be much faster.\nIndoor grilling.\nMany restaurants incorporate an indoor grill as part of their cooking apparatus. These grills resemble outdoor grills, in that they are made up of a grid suspended over a heat source. However, indoor grills are more likely to use electric or gas-based heating elements. Some manufacturers of residential cooking appliances now offer indoor grills for home use, either incorporated into a stove top or as a standalone electric device.\nSear grilling.\nSear-grill and gear grilling is a process of searing food items over high temperatures. Sear grilling can be achieved using a gas grill, charcoal grill, hybrid grill, or infrared grill where the below flame heats the grill grates to temperatures over 480\u00a0\u00b0C (900\u00a0\u00b0F).\nSear-grilling instantly sears the outside of meat to make the food more flavorful. Commonly, grilling heats the surrounding air to cook food. In this method, the grill directly heats the food, not the air.\nStove-top pan grilling.\nStove-top pan grilling is an indoor cooking process that uses a grill pan \u2014 similar to a frying pan but with raised ridges to emulate the function or look of a gridiron. In pan grilling, heat is applied directly to the food by the raised ridges and indirectly through the heat radiating off the lower pan surface by the stove-top flame. Stove-top grill pans can be used to put sear marks on meat before it is finished by overhead radiant heat. When cooking leaner meats, oil is often applied to the pan ridges to aid in food release.\nSome griddles designed for stove-top use incorporate raised ridges in addition to a flat cooking area. These are either on half of the cooking surface or, in the case of reversible two-sided griddles, on one side with the flat surface on the other.\nFlattop grilling.\nFoods termed \"grilled\" may actually be prepared on a hot griddle or flat pan. The griddle or pan may be prepared with oil (or butter), and the food is cooked quickly over a high heat. Griddle-grilling is best for relatively greasy foods such as sausages. Some griddle-grilled foods may have grill marks applied to them during the cooking process with a \"branding plate\", to mimic the appearance of charbroil-cooked food.\nA flattop grill is a cooking appliance that resembles a griddle but performs differently because the heating element is circular rather than straight (side to side). This heating technology creates an extremely hot and even cooking surface, as heat spreads in a radial fashion over the surface.\nThe first flattop grills originated in Spain and are known as planchas or la plancha. Food that is cooked a la plancha means grilled on a metal plate. Plancha griddles or flat tops are chrome plated which prevents reaction with the food. Some base metal griddles will impart a subtle flavor to the food being cooked.\nThe flattop grill is a versatile platform for many cooking techniques such as saut\u00e9ing, toasting, steaming, stir frying, grilling, baking, braising, and roasting, and can also be used in flamb\u00e9ing. In addition, pots and pans can be placed directly on the cooking surface for even more cooking flexibility. In most cases, the steel cooking surface is seasoned like cast iron cookware, providing a natural non-stick surface.\nCharbroiling.\nCharbroiling, or chargrilling outside North America, refers to grilling on a surface with wide raised ridges, to the point of having the food slightly charred in texture.\nOverhead grilling.\nIn the United States, oven pan broiling refers to a method of cooking inside an oven on a broil pan with raised ridges, where the heat can be applied from either above or below. In gas and electric ovens, this is accomplished with a heating element and a broil pan. Sometimes, the food is placed near the upper heating element to intensify the heat. The lower heating element may or may not be left off and the oven door is sometimes opened partially. Gas ovens often have a separate compartment for broiling, sometimes a drawer below the bottom flame.\nSalamander.\nA salamander (also salamander oven or salamander broiler) is a culinary grill characterized by very high temperature overhead electric or gas heating elements. It is used primarily in professional kitchens for overhead grilling. It is also used for toasting, browning of gratin dishes, melting cheeses onto sandwiches, and caramelizing desserts such as \"cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e\".\nSalamanders are generally similar to an oven without a front door; the heating element is at the top. They are also more compact: typically only half the height and depth of a conventional oven. For convenience, they are often wall mounted at eye level, enabling easy access and close control of the cooking process. Many salamanders can be fitted with a cast-iron \"branding\" plate which is used to make grill marks on the surface of meat. Some grills can also be fitted with a rotisserie accessory for roasting meats.\nOverhead heat has the advantage of allowing foods containing fats, such as steaks, chops and other cuts of meat, to be grilled without the risk of flare-ups caused by the rendered fat dripping onto the heat source. The salamander's facility for extremely high temperature also takes less cooking time than other grilling techniques, reducing preparation time, which is a benefit in professional kitchens during a busy meal service.\nModern salamanders take their name from the 18th century \"salamander\", the tool of choice for toasting the top of a dish. It consisted of a thick plate of iron attached to the end of a long handle, with two feet, or rests, arranged near the iron plate for propping the plate over the food to be browned. Its name in turn was taken from the legendary salamander, a mythical amphibian that was believed to be immune to fire.\nTwo-sided grilling.\nSome commercial devices permit the simultaneous grilling of both sides of the meat at the same time.\nThe flame-grilling machine at Burger King, Carl's Jr./Hardee's, and other fast food restaurants is called a 'broiler'. It works by moving meat patties along a chain conveyor belt between top and bottom burners, grilling both sides of the meat patty at the same time. This concept was invented in 1898, when the Bridge and Beach Co. of St. Louis, Missouri, started manufacturing a vertical cast iron stove. These stoves were designed to allow the meat to be flame-broiled (flame-grilled) on both sides at the same time. Custom hinged steel wire gridirons were built for use in the vertical broilers. The hinged gridirons were slid in and out of the stoves holding the meat while it cooked evenly on both sides, like modern day oven racks. These stoves took up a small amount of counter space. They were used in lunch spots to feed factory workers.\nDuring the 1990s, double-sided grilling was popular in the USA using consumer electrical grills (e.g., the popular George Foreman Grill). US marketers of electric double-sided grilling appliances opted for the global term 'grill' rather than the geographically isolated term \"broiler.\" Hinged double-sided grills are generically known as contact grills.\nWhole grilling.\nWhole grilling involves grilling a whole carcass as opposed to grilling individual portion sized cuts. This method is often used in order to avoid the need for complicated grill equipment during, for example, a hunt or expedition in the wild. It is also the traditional method of cooking in several cultures where they do a pig roast, luau, or barbacoa. There are several primitive methods and modern equipment that copies and automates the primitive version:\nHealth risks.\nAs is true of any high-temperature frying or baking, when meat is grilled at high temperatures, the cooking process can generate carcinogenic chemicals. Two processes are thought to be responsible. Heterocyclic amines (HCAs) are formed when amino acids, sugars, and creatine react at high temperatures. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are formed when fat and juices from meat grilled directly over an open fire drip onto the fire, causing flames. These flames contain PAHs that then adhere to the surface of the meat. Avoiding prolonged cooking times or direct exposure to open flames and hot metal surfaces may reduce HCA and PAH formation. Precooking meat in a microwave can help by reducing the length of exposure to high heat required to finish cooking.\nRegional variations.\nAsia.\nJapan.\nIn Japanese cities, yakitori carts, restaurants, or shops can be found. These contain charcoal-fired grills and marinated grilled meat on a stick. Yakiniku is a type of food where meat and vegetables are grilled directly over small charcoal or gas grills at high temperatures. This style of cooking has become popular throughout Asia.\nKorea.\nIn Korean cuisine, \"gui\" is a grilled dish. Examples of Korean barbecue include bulgogi (thinly sliced or shredded beef marinated in soy sauce, sesame oil, garlic, sugar, green onions, and black pepper), galbi (pork or beef ribs), dak-galbi (spicy marinated chicken), and samgyeopsal (pork belly). Other examples of grilled dishes include gopchang-gui (small intestines), tteok-galbi (grilled short rib patties), and makchang-gui (beef abomasum).\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, pork or chicken inihaw (similar in taste to yakitori), inasal, isaw, and satti are sold commonly as street food or in specialist restaurants.\nMalaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, and Thailand.\nIn Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, and Thailand, the popular food item from food vendors is satay, which is marinated meat on a bamboo skewer grilled over a charcoal fire and served with peanut (sate) sauce.\nEurope.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, the most prominent outdoor form of grilling is using the gridiron over a bed of burning charcoal. Care is taken that the charcoal does not produce flames. Often beer is sprinkled over the sausages or meat and used to suppress flames. The meat is usually marinated before grilling. Besides charcoal, sometimes gas and electric heat sources are used. Other methods are used less frequently.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, grilling directly over hot coals is the most prominent form of grilling. Usually the meat is Boston butt, pork chops or pork fillet. It is also common to cook meat and vegetables together on a skewer, called \"grillspett\".\nUnited Kingdom and Ireland.\nIn the United Kingdom, Commonwealth countries, and Ireland, grilling generally refers to cooking food directly under a source of direct, dry heat. The \"grill\" is usually a separate part of an oven where the food is inserted just under the element. This practice is referred to as \"broiling\" in North America.\nIn electric ovens, grilling may be accomplished by placing the food near the upper heating element, with the lower heating element off and the oven door partially open. Grilling in an electric oven may create a large amount of smoke and cause splattering in the oven. Both gas and electric ovens often have a separate compartment for grilling, such as a drawer below the flame or one of the stove top heating elements.\nNorth and South America.\nArgentina and Uruguay.\nIn Argentina and Uruguay, both \"asado\" (beef roasted on a fire) and steak \"a la parrilla\" (beefsteak cooked on traditional grill) are staple dishes and even hailed as national specialties.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the term most often used is barbecuing, but grilling is used as well. Most Canadians use gas or charcoal grills, with a small electric grill market. Barbecuing in Canada is done all year, with many opting to grill only in the warmer months, while storing their grills indoors during the winter. Restaurants that serve barbecue products are plentiful and many stores stock grills and grilling accessories.\nMexico.\nIn Northern Mexico, \"carne asada\" (Spanish for \"grilled meat\") is a staple food. Popular cuts include arrachera, beefsteak and rib eye, as well as chorizo and chicken, among others. Charcoal, mesquite or firewood are used for the grilling.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the use of the word grill refers to cooking food directly over a source of dry heat, typically with the food sitting on a metal grate that leaves \"grill marks.\" Grilling is usually done outdoors on charcoal grills or gas grills; a recent trend is the concept of infrared grilling. Grilling may also be performed using stove-top \"grill pans\" which have raised metal ridges for the food to sit on, or using an indoor electric grill.\nA skewer, brochette, or rotisserie may be used to cook small pieces of food. The resulting food product is often called a \"kabob\" (U.S. term) or \"kebab\" which means \"to grill\" in Persian. Kebab is short for \"shish kebab\" (shish = skewer).\nMesquite or hickory wood chips (damp) may be added on top of the coals to create a smoldering effect that provides additional flavor to the food. Other hardwoods such as pecan, apple, maple and oak may also be used.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52988", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52988", "title": "Poaching (cooking)", "text": "Cooking technique\nPoaching is a cooking technique that involves heating food submerged in a liquid, such as water, milk, stock or wine. Poaching is differentiated from the other \"moist heat\" cooking methods, such as simmering and boiling, in that it uses a relatively lower temperature (about ). This temperature range makes it particularly suitable for delicate food, such as eggs, poultry, fish and fruit, which might easily fall apart or dry out using other cooking methods. Poaching is often considered a healthy cooking method because it does not use fat for cooking or flavoring the food.\nVariations.\nShallow poaching.\nThis moist-heat cooking method uses a sautoir or other shallow cooking vessel; heat is transferred by conduction from the pan, to the liquid, to the food. Shallow poaching is best suited for boneless, naturally tender, single-serving-size, sliced, or diced pieces of meat, poultry, or fish.\nThis preparation involves smearing the inside of the pan with whole butter and adding aromatics to the pan. The items to be cooked are then placed on top of the aromatics presentation side up. Cold poaching liquid is poured in until the product is partially submerged and then heated. The liquid should never be allowed to boil but kept as close to boiling as possible.\nA more contemporary technique of shallow poaching involves BPA-free plastic bags and is very convenient for the home cook.\nDeep poaching.\nThis technique is similar to shallow poaching, but the product is fully submerged. The pot used for deep poaching should hold the food, liquid, and aromatics comfortably. There should also be enough space so the surface can be skimmed throughout cooking. A tight-fitting lid may help bring the liquid up to temperature.\nPoaching liquid.\nThe poaching liquid traditionally uses a stock, broth or court-bouillon, which can consist of an acid (wine, lemon juice) and aromatics, such as herbs and spices (for example, bouquet garni and mirepoix), although any flavorful liquid can be used in poaching. The liquid should ideally be around , but when poaching chicken, the chicken must reach an internal temperature of at least in the core to be eaten safely.\nA significant amount of flavor is transferred from the food to the cooking liquid, and so making stock. For maximum flavor, the cooking liquid (stock or cuisson) is usually reduced and used as the base for a soup or sauce.\nPoached eggs are generally cooked in water, with or without vinegar, fish in white wine, poultry in stock, and fruit in red wine.\nThe liquid used for shallow poaching is typically called a cuisson and can be reduced and used as a base for the poached item's sauce.\nTypical preparation.\nPoaching allows the proteins to denature without pulling too much (if any at all) moisture out of the food. For this reason, it is important to keep the heat low and the poaching time to a bare minimum, which will also preserve the flavor of the food.\nTypically an egg is poached just to the point where the white is no longer runny, and the yolk is beginning to harden around the edges. Creating a whirlpool before dropping in the egg may help it stay together while poaching by wrapping the white around the yolk.\nComparison to other methods of preparation.\nWater is a relatively efficient conductor of heat, but it also has a fairly low limit to its maximum potential temperature ( at sea level). As such, it is a technique that applies to a broad spectrum of methods and results. It is used to regulate food at a low temperature for extended periods, as with sous-vide. It is also used to rapidly raise the temperature of foods, as with blanching.\nPoaching is part of a family of moist-heat cooking methods but separates itself because it is primarily for delicate foods such as eggs. Simmering generally uses a higher temperature for cooking, and because it surrounds the food in water that maintains a more or less constant temperature, simmering cooks food very evenly. Boiling uses the absolute highest temperature for water and is least likely to be used in cooking delicate foods.\nWhile it cannot achieve caramelization, which to many is very desirable, many find the delicate nuance of so-called \"blanc\" foods very pleasant. Poaching is often confused with stewing, as both techniques involve cooking through simmering. However, the purpose of poaching is to cook while retaining the basic shape and structure of the food rather than to soften it, as with stewing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52989", "revid": "6518951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52989", "title": "Poaching", "text": "Illegal hunting of wildlife\nPoaching is the illegal hunting or capturing of wild animals, usually associated with land use rights.\nPoaching was once performed by impoverished peasants for subsistence purposes and to supplement meager diets. It was set against the hunting privileges of nobility and territorial rulers.\nSince the 1980s, the term \"poaching\" has also been used to refer to the illegal harvesting of wild plants. In agricultural terms, the term 'poaching' is also applied to the loss of soils or grass by the damaging action of feet of livestock, which can affect availability of productive land, water pollution through increased runoff and welfare issues for cattle. Stealing livestock, as in cattle raiding, classifies as theft rather than poaching.\nThe United Nations' Sustainable Development Goal 15 enshrines the sustainable use of all wildlife. It targets the taking of action on dealing with poaching and trafficking of protected species of flora and fauna to ensure their availability for present and future generations.\nLegal aspects.\nIn 1998, environmental scientists from the University of Massachusetts Amherst proposed the concept of poaching as an environmental crime and defined as any illegal activity that contravenes the laws and regulations established to protect renewable natural resources, including the illegal harvest of wildlife with the intention of possessing, transporting, consuming or selling it and using its body parts. They considered poaching as one of the most serious threats to the survival of plant and animal populations. Wildlife biologists and conservationists consider poaching to have a detrimental effect on biodiversity both within and outside protected areas as wildlife populations decline, species are depleted locally, and the functionality of ecosystems is disturbed.\nContinental Europe.\nAustria and Germany refer to poaching not as theft but as intrusion into third-party hunting rights. While ancient Germanic law allowed any free man, including peasants, to hunt, especially on common land, Roman law restricted hunting to the rulers. In medieval Europe rulers of feudal territories from the king downward tried to enforce exclusive rights of the nobility to hunt and fish on the lands that they ruled. Poaching was deemed a serious crime punishable by imprisonment, but enforcement was comparably weak until the 16th century. Peasants were still allowed to continue small game hunting, but the right of the nobility to hunt was restricted in the 16th century and transferred to land ownership. The low quality of guns made it necessary to approach the game as close as . Poachers in the Salzburg region were typically unmarried men around 30 years of age and usually alone on their illegal trade.\nThe development of modern hunting rights is closely connected to the comparatively modern idea of exclusive private ownership of land. In the 17th and the 18th centuries, the restrictions on hunting and shooting rights on private property were enforced by gamekeepers and foresters. They denied shared usage of forests, such as resin collection and wood pasture and the peasants right to hunt and fish. However, by end of the 18th century, comparably-easy access to rifles increasingly allowed peasants and servants to poach. Hunting was used in the 18th century as a theatrical demonstration of the aristocratic rule of the land and also had a strong impact on land use patterns. Poaching not only interfered with property rights but also clashed symbolically with the power of the nobility. Between 1830 and 1848, poaching and poaching-related deaths increased in Bavaria. The German revolutions of 1848\u201349 were interpreted as a general permission for poaching in Bavaria. The reform of the hunting law in 1849 restricted legal hunting to rich landowners and middle classes who could pay hunting fees, which led to disappointment among the general public, who continued to view poachers favourably. Some of the frontier regions, where smuggling was important, showed especially strong resistance to that development. In 1849, the Bavarian military forces were asked to occupy a number of municipalities on the frontier with Austria. Both in Wallgau (now part of Garmisch-Partenkirchen) and in Lackenh\u00e4user, in the Bavarian forest, each household had to feed and accommodate one soldier for a month as part of a military mission to quell the disturbance. The people of Lackenh\u00e4user had several skirmishes with Austrian foresters and military that started due to poached deer. The well-armed people set against the representatives of the state were known as \"bold poachers\" (\"kecke Wilderer\").\nSome poachers and their violent deaths, like Matthias Klostermayr (1736\u20131771), Georg Jennerwein (1848\u20131877) and Pius Walder\u00a0(1952\u20131982) gained notoriety and have had a strong cultural impact, which has persisted until today. Poaching was used as a dare. It had a certain erotic connotation, as in Franz Schubert's Hunter's love song, (1828, Schubert Thematic Catalogue\u00a0909). The lyrics of Franz von Schober connected unlimited hunting with the pursuit of love. Further poaching related legends and stories ranged from the 1821 opera Freisch\u00fctz to Wolfgang Franz von Kobell's 1871 story about the Brandner Kasper, a Tegernsee locksmith and poacher who struck a special deal with the Grim Reaper.[5]\nWhile poachers had strong local support until the early 20th century, Walder's case showed a significant change in attitudes. Urban citizens still had some sympathy for the hillbilly rebel, but the local community were much supportive.\nUnited Kingdom.\nPoaching, like smuggling, has a long history in the United Kingdom. The verb \"poach\" is derived from the Middle English word \"pocchen\" literally meaning \"bagged\", \"enclosed in a bag\", which is cognate with \"pouch\".\nPoaching was dispassionately reported for England in \"Pleas of the Forest\", transgressions of the rigid Anglo-Norman forest law. William the Conqueror, who was a great lover of hunting, established and enforced a system of forest law. This system operated outside the common law and served to protect game animals and their forest habitat from hunting by the common people of England, while reserving hunting rights for the new French-speaking Anglo-Norman aristocracy. Henceforth, hunting of game in royal forests by commoners was punishable by hanging. In 1087, the poem \"The Rime of King William\", contained in the Peterborough Chronicle, expressed English indignation at the severe new laws. Poaching was romanticised in literature from the time of the ballads of Robin Hood, as an aspect of the \"greenwood\" of Merry England. In one tale, Robin Hood is depicted as offering King Richard the Lion Heart venison from deer that was illegally hunted in the Sherwood Forest, the King overlooking the fact that this hunting was a capital offence. The widespread acceptance of the common criminal activity is encapsulated in the observation \"Non est inquirendum, unde venit venison\" (\"It is not to be inquired, whence comes the venison\") that was made by Guillaume Bud\u00e9 in his \"Traitte de la v\u00e9nerie\". However, the English nobility and land owners were in the long term extremely successful in enforcing the modern concept of property, such as expressed in the enclosures of common land and later in the Highland Clearances, both of which were forced displacement of people from traditional land tenancies and erstwhile-common land. The 19th century saw the rise of acts of legislation, such as the Night Poaching Act 1828 and the Game Act 1831 (1 &amp; 2 Will. 4. c. 32) in the United Kingdom, and various laws elsewhere.\nUnited States.\nIn North America, the blatant defiance of the laws by poachers escalated to armed conflicts with law authorities, including the Oyster Wars of the Chesapeake Bay and the joint US-British Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations of 1891 over the hunting of seals. In the Chesapeake Bay in the 1930s one of the biggest threats to waterfowl was local poachers using flat boats with swivel cannons that killed entire flocks with one shot.\nViolations of hunting laws and regulations concerning wildlife management, local or international wildlife conservation schemes constitute wildlife crimes that are typically punishable. The following violations and offenses are considered acts of poaching in the US:\nAfrica.\nStephen Corry, the director of the human rights group Survival International, has argued that the term \"poaching\" has at times been used to criminalize the traditional subsistence techniques of indigenous peoples and to bar them from hunting on their ancestral lands when they are declared as wildlife-only zones. Corry argues that parks such as the Central Kalahari Game Reserve are managed for the benefit of foreign tourists and safari groups at the expense of the livelihoods of tribal peoples such as the Kalahari bushmen.\nMotives.\nSociological and criminological research on poaching indicates that in North America people poach for commercial gain, home consumption, trophies, pleasure, and thrill in killing wildlife or because they disagree with certain hunting regulations, claim a traditional right to hunt, or have negative dispositions toward legal authority. In rural areas of the United States, the key motives for poaching are poverty. Interviews conducted with 41 poachers in the Atchafalaya River basin in Louisiana revealed that 37 of them hunt to provide food for themselves and their families; 11 stated that poaching is part of their personal or cultural history; nine earn money from the sale of poached game to support their families; and eight feel exhilarated and thrilled by outsmarting game wardens.\nIn rural areas in Africa, the key motives for poaching are the lack of employment opportunities and a limited potential for agriculture and livestock production. Poor people rely on natural resources for their survival and generate cash income through the sale of bushmeat, which attracts high prices in urban centres. Body parts of wildlife are also in demand for traditional medicine and ceremonies.\nThe existence of an international market for poached wildlife implies that well-organised gangs of professional poachers enter vulnerable areas to hunt, and crime syndicates organise the trafficking of wildlife body parts through a complex interlinking network to markets outside the respective countries of origin. Armed conflict in Africa has been linked to intensified poaching and wildlife declines within protected areas, likely reflecting the disruption of traditional livelihoods, which causes people to seek alternative food sources.\nResults of an interview survey conducted in several villages in Tanzania indicate that one of the major reasons of poaching is for consumption and sale of bushmeat. Usually, bushmeat is considered a subset of poaching because of the hunting of animals regardless of the laws that conserve certain species of animals. Many families consume more bushmeat if there are no alternative sources of protein available such as fish. The further the families were from the reserve, the less likely they were to illegally hunt wildlife for bushmeat. They were more likely to hunt for bushmeat right before the harvest season and during heavy rains, as before the harvest season, there is not much agricultural work, and heavy rainfall obscures human tracks and makes it easier for poachers to get away with their crimes.\nPoverty seems to be a large impetus to cause people to poach, something that affects both residents in Africa and Asia. For example, in Thailand, there are anecdotal accounts of the desire for a better life for children, which drive rural poachers to take the risk of poaching even though they dislike exploiting the wildlife.\nAnother major cause of poaching is the cultural high demand of wildlife products, such as ivory, which are seen as symbols of status and wealth in China. According to Joseph Vandegrift, China saw an unusual spike in demand for ivory in the 21st century because the economic boom allowed more middle-class Chinese to have a higher purchasing power, which incentivized them to show off their newfound wealth by using ivory, which has been a rare commodity since the Han dynasty.\nIn China, there are problems with wildlife conservation, specifically relating to tigers. Several authors collaborated on the piece \"Public attitude toward tiger farming and tiger conservation in Beijing, China\", and explored the option of whether it would be a better policy to raise tigers on a farm or put them in a wildlife conservation habitat to preserve the species. Conducting a survey on 1,058 residents of Beijing, China, with 381 being university students and the other 677 being regular citizens, they tried to gauge public opinion about tigers and conservation efforts for them. They were asked questions regarding the value of tigers in relations to ecology, science, education, aestheticism, and culture. However, one reason emerged as to why tigers are still highly demanded in illegal trading: culturally, they are still status symbols of wealth for the upper class, and they are still thought to have mysterious medicinal and healthcare effects.\nEffects.\nThe detrimental effects of poaching can include:\nProducts.\nThe body parts of many animals, such as tigers and rhinoceroses, are traditionally believed in some cultures to have certain positive effects on the human body, including increasing virility and curing cancer. These parts are sold in areas where these beliefs are practiced \u2013 mostly Asian countries, particularly Vietnam and China \u2013 on the black market. Such alternative medical beliefs are pseudoscientific and are not supported by evidence-based medicine.\nTraditional Chinese medicine often incorporates ingredients from all parts of plants, the leaf, stem, flower, root, and also ingredients from animals and minerals. The use of parts of endangered species (such as seahorses, rhinoceros horns, binturong, pangolin scales and tiger bones and claws) has created controversy and resulted in a black market of poachers. Deep-seated cultural beliefs in the potency of tiger parts are so prevalent across China and other east Asian countries that laws protecting even critically endangered species such as the Sumatran tiger fail to stop the display and sale of these items in open markets, according to a 2008 report from TRAFFIC. Popular \"medicinal\" tiger parts from poached animals include tiger genitals, believed to improve virility, and tiger eyes.\nRhino populations face extinction because of demand in Asia (for traditional medicine and as a luxury item) and in the Middle East (where horns are used for decoration). A sharp surge in demand for rhino horn in Vietnam was attributed to rumors that the horn cured cancer, though this has no basis in science. In 2012, one kilogram of crushed rhino horn has sold for as much as $60,000, more expensive than a kilogram of gold. Vietnam is the only nation which mass-produces bowls made for grinding rhino horn.\nIvory, which is a natural material of several animals, plays a large part in the trade of illegal animal materials and poaching. Ivory is a material used in creating art objects and jewelry where the ivory is carved with designs. China is a consumer of the ivory trade and accounts for a significant amount of ivory sales. In 2012, \"The New York Times\" reported on a large upsurge in ivory poaching, with about 70% of all illegal ivory flowing to China.\nFur is also a natural material which is sought after by poachers. A Gamsbart, literally \"chamois beard\", a tuft of hair traditionally worn as a decoration on trachten-hats in the alpine regions of Austria and Bavaria formerly was worn as a hunting (and poaching) trophy. In the past, it was made exclusively from hair from the chamois' lower neck.\nAnti-poaching efforts.\nThere are different anti-poaching efforts around the world. Some research suggests that such work may be more effective at improving populations affected by poaching than protected area expansion\nAfrica.\nThe Traffic conservation programme brings to light many of the poaching areas and trafficking routes and helps to clamp down on the smuggling routes the poachers use to get the ivory to areas of high demand, predominantly Asia.\nAs many as 35,000 African elephants are slaughtered yearly to feed the demand for their ivory tusks. This ivory then goes on to be used in jewelry, musical instruments, and other trinkets.\nMembers of the Rhino Rescue Project have implemented a technique to combat rhino poaching in South Africa by injecting a mixture of indelible dye and a parasiticide into the animals' horns, which enables tracking of the horns and deters consumption of the horn by purchasers. Since rhino horn is made of keratin, advocates say the procedure is painless for the animal.\nAnother strategy being used to counter rhino poachers in Africa is called RhODIS, which is a database that compiles rhino DNA from confiscated horns and other goods that were being illegally traded, as well as DNA recovered from poaching sites. RhODIS cross-references the DNA as it searches for matches; if a match is found, it is used to track down the poachers.\nAfrica's Wildlife Trust seeks to protect African elephant populations from poaching activities in Tanzania. Hunting for ivory was banned in 1989, but poaching of elephants continues in many parts of Africa stricken by economic decline. The International Anti-Poaching Foundation has a structured military-like approach to conservation, employing tactics and technology generally reserved for the battlefield. Founder Damien Mander is an advocate of the use of military equipment and tactics, including Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, for military-style anti-poaching operations. Such military-style approaches have been criticised for failing to resolve the underlying reasons for poaching, but to neither tackle \"the role of global trading networks\" nor the continued demand for animal products. Instead, they \"result in coercive, unjust and counterproductive approaches to wildlife conservation\".\nChengeta Wildlife is an organization that works to equip and train wildlife protection teams and lobbies African governments to adopt anti-poaching campaigns.\nJim Nyamu's elephant walks are part of attempts in Kenya to reduce ivory poaching.\nIn 2013, the Tanzanian Minister of Natural Resources and Tourism urged that poachers be shot on sight in an effort to stop the mass killing of elephants.\nSince December 2016, anti-poaching police units in Namibia are permitted to return fire on poachers if fired upon.\nThe government of Botswana adopted a shoot-to-kill policy against poachers in 2013 as a \"legitimate conservation strategy\" and \"a necessary evil\", which has reduced poaching to the point it is thought to be \"virtually non-existent\" in the country, and that neighbouring countries like South Africa should also adopt similar measures in order to save wildlife from extinction.\nIn May 2018, the Kenyan government announced that poachers will face the death penalty, as fines and life imprisonment have \"not been deterrence enough to curb poaching, hence the proposed stiffer sentence\". Human rights organizations oppose the move, but wildlife advocates support it. Save the Rhino, a UK-based wildlife advocacy organization notes that in Kenya, 23 rhinos and 156 elephants were killed by poachers between 2016 and 2017. As of March 2019, the measure is being put on the fast track to implementation by Kenyan lawmakers.\nAsia.\nLarge quantities of ivory are sometimes destroyed as a statement against poaching, a.k.a. \"ivory crush\". In 2013 the Philippines were the first country to destroy their national seized ivory stock. In 2014, China followed suit and crushed six tons of ivory as a symbolic statement against poaching.\nThere are two main solutions according to Frederick Chen that would attack the supply side of this poaching problem to reduce its effects: enforcing and enacting more policies and laws for conservation and by encouraging local communities to protect the wildlife around them by giving them more land rights.\nNonetheless, Frederick Chen wrote about two types of effects stemming from demand-side economics: the bandwagon and snob effect. The former deals with people desiring a product due to many other people buying it, while the latter is similar but with one distinct difference: people will clamour to buy something if it denotes wealth that only a few elites could possibly afford. Therefore, the snob effect would offset some of the gains made by anti-poaching laws, regulations, or practices: if a portion of the supply is cut off, the rarity and price of the object would increase, and only a select few would have the desire and purchasing power for it. While approaches to dilute mitigate poaching from a supply-side may not be the best option as people can become more willing to purchase rarer items, especially in countries gaining more wealth and therefore higher demand for illicit goods\u2014Frederick Chen still advocates that we should also focus on exploring ways to reduce the demand for these goods to better stop the problem of poaching. Indeed, there is some evidence that interventions to reduce consumer demand may be more effective for combatting poaching than continually increased policing to catch poachers. However, almost no groups deploying interventions that attempt to reduce consumer demand evaluate the impact of their actions.\nAnother solution to alleviate poaching proposed in \"Tigers of the World\" was about how to implement a multi-lateral strategy that targets different parties to conserve wild tiger populations in general. This multi-lateral approach include working with different agencies to fight and prevent poaching since organized crime syndicates benefit from tiger poaching and trafficking; therefore, there is a need to raise social awareness and implement more protection and investigative techniques. For example, conservation groups raised more awareness amongst park rangers and the local communities to understand the impact of tiger poaching\u2014they achieved this through targeted advertising that would impact the main audience. Targeting advertising using more violent imagery to show the disparity between tigers in nature and as a commodity made a great impact on the general population to combat poaching and indifference towards this problem. The use of spokespeople such as Jackie Chan and other famous Asian actors and models who advocated against poaching also helped the conservation movement for tigers too.\nIn July 2019, rhino horns encased in plaster were seized in Vietnam that were being trafficked from the United Arab Emirates. Despite the ban on trade since the 1970s, poaching level of rhino horns has risen over the last decade, leading the rhino population into crisis.\nPoaching has many causes in both Africa and China. The issue of poaching is not a simple one to solve as traditional methods to counter poaching have not taken into the account the poverty levels that drive some poachers and the lucrative profits made by organized crime syndicates who deal in illegal wildlife trafficking. Conservationists hope the new emerging multi-lateral approach, which would include the public, conservation groups, and the police, will be successful for the future of these animals.\nUnited States.\nSome game wardens have made use of robotic decoy animals placed in high visibility areas to draw out poachers for arrest after the decoys are shot. Decoys with robotics to mimic natural movements are also in use by law enforcement. The Marine Monitor radar system watches sensitive marine areas for illicit vessel movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52991", "revid": "134766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52991", "title": "Pressure cooker", "text": "Device for preparing food\nA pressure cooker is a sealed vessel for cooking food with the use of high pressure steam and water or a water-based liquid, a process called pressure cooking. The high pressure limits boiling and creates higher temperatures not possible at lower pressures, allowing food to be cooked faster than at normal pressure.\nThe prototype of the modern pressure cooker was the steam digester invented in the seventeenth century by the physicist Denis Papin. It works by expelling air from the vessel and trapping steam produced from the boiling liquid. This is used to raise the internal pressure up to one atmosphere above ambient and gives higher cooking temperatures between . Together with high thermal heat transfer from steam it permits cooking in between a half and a quarter the time of conventional boiling as well as saving considerable energy.\nAlmost any food that can be cooked in steam or water-based liquids can be cooked in a pressure cooker. Modern pressure cookers have many safety features to prevent the pressure cooker from reaching a pressure that could cause an explosion. After cooking, the steam pressure is lowered back to ambient atmospheric pressure so that the vessel can be opened. On all modern devices, a safety lock prevents opening while under pressure.\nAccording to the \"New York Times Magazine\", 37% of U.S. households owned at least one pressure cooker in 1950. By 2011, that rate dropped to only 20%. Part of the decline has been attributed to fear of explosion (although this is extremely rare with modern pressure cookers) along with competition from other fast cooking devices such as the microwave oven. However, third-generation pressure cookers have many more safety features and digital temperature control, do not vent steam during cooking, and are quieter and more efficient, and these conveniences have helped make pressure cooking more popular.\nHistory.\nIn 1679, French physicist Denis Papin, better known for his studies on steam, invented the \"steam digester\" in an attempt to reduce the cooking time of food. His airtight cooker used steam pressure to raise the water's boiling point, thus cooking food more quickly. In 1681 Papin presented his invention to the Royal Society of London as a scientific study; he was later elected as a member.\nIn 1864, Georg Gutbrod of Stuttgart began manufacturing pressure cookers made of tinned cast iron.\nAlthough the concept of cooking with pressurized steam had been known for two centuries, the term \"pressure cooker\" was not commonly used until the early 20th century. The earliest citation of the phrase given in the Oxford English Dictionary is from a Lincoln, Nebraska, newspaper in 1914. However, the Dictionary editors apparently overlooked or did not have access to certain Colorado newspapers from a few years earlier than that. As early as 1910, the inventor Zeno E. Crook founded a business called \"The Pressure Cooker Company\" in Denver, Colorado. Crook had developed an aluminum cooker of a size practical for home use, and soon began marketing it to communities in the high country of Colorado, where the device proved to be well suited for use in high-altitude cooking. In many of these communities, Crook's pressure cooker was hailed as a marvelous new invention, until 1918, when \"Popular Science Monthly\" broke the news that this \"invention\" was actually more than 200 years old.\nIn 1918, Spain granted a patent for the pressure cooker to Jos\u00e9 Alix Mart\u00ednez from Zaragoza. Mart\u00ednez named it the \"olla expr\u00e9s\", literally \"express cooking pot\", under patent number 71143 in the \"Bolet\u00edn Oficial de la Propiedad Industrial\". In 1924, the first pressure cooking pot recipe book was published, written by Jos\u00e9 Alix and titled \"360 f\u00f3rmulas de cocina Para guisar con la 'olla expres'\", or \"360 recipes for cooking with a pressure cooker\".\nIn 1935, the Automa pressure cooker was introduced. Mountaineers attempting to climb Mount Everest took it along with them to cook in higher altitudes.\nIn 1938, Alfred Vischer presented his invention, the \"Flex-Seal Speed Cooker\", in New York City. Vischer's pressure cooker quickly gained popularity, and its success led to competition among American and European manufacturers. At the 1939 New York World's Fair, the National Pressure Cooker Company, later renamed National Presto Industries, introduced its own pressure cooker.\nFirst generation.\nAlso known as \"old type\" pressure cookers, these operate with a weight-modified or \"jiggler\" valve, which releases pressure during operation. Some people consider them loud because the valve rattles as excess steam is released. Older pressure cookers typically offered only one pressure level, but from the 1960s onwards some allow the operator to change the weight of the valve, thus changing the pressure.\nToday most pressure cookers are variations on the first-generation cookers, with the addition of new safety features such as a mechanism that prevents the cooker from being opened until it is entirely depressurized.\nSecond generation.\nThese operate with a spring-loaded valve that is often hidden from view in a proprietary mechanism. This generation is characterized by two or more pressure settings. Some of these pressure cookers do not release any steam during operation (non-venting) and instead use a rising indicator with markings to show the pressure level. These only release steam when the pan is opened, or as a safety precaution if the heat source is not reduced enough when the pan reaches the required cooking pressure. Others use a dial that the operator can advance by a few clicks (which alters the spring tension) to change the pressure setting or release pressure; these release steam during operation (venting).\nThird generation \"electric pressure cookers\".\nAfter the stove-top pressure cookers came the electric pressure cookers in 1991, called the \"third generation\" pressure cookers.\nThese include an electric heat source that is automatically regulated to maintain the operating temperature and pressure. They also include a spring-loaded valve (as described above) and are typically non venting during cooking.\nAn electric pressure cooker integrates a timer. Depending on cooking control capability, there are three generations of electric pressure cookers:\nSome pressure cookers are multifunctional (multicookers): pressure cooker, saute/browning, slow cooker, rice cooker, egg cooker, yogurt maker, steamer, sous vide, canner, and stockpot warmer that can also be used to keep cooked food warm. Since 2018, with the release of the Ninja Foodi pressure cooker, which was the first pressure cooker that could also air fry, several other pressure cooker manufacturers, including Instant Pot, have come out with their own pressure cookers that can air fry, which are now known as \"air fryer pressure cookers\". Air fryer pressure cookers generally have two separate lids, one for pressure cooking, and one for air frying.\nTheory.\nAt standard pressure the boiling point of water is . With any food containing or cooked with water, once the temperature reaches the boiling point, any excess heat causes some of the water to vaporize into steam efficiently carrying away heat keeping the food temperature at 100\u00a0\u00b0C.\nIn a sealed pressure cooker, as the water boils, the steam is trapped in the cooker which raises the pressure. However, the boiling point of water increases with pressure resulting in superheated water.\nThe equation for the pressure, temperature and volume of the steam is given by the ideal gas law:\nformula_1\norformula_2\nwhere formula_3, formula_4 and formula_5 are the pressure, volume and temperature; formula_6 is the amount of substance; and formula_7 is the ideal gas constant.\nIn a sealed pressure cooker the volume and amount of steam is fixed, so the temperature can be controlled either directly or by setting the pressure, such as with a pressure release valve.\nFor example, if the pressure reaches 1 bar or above the existing atmospheric pressure, the water will have reached a temperature of approximately which cooks the food much faster.\nPressure cookers also use steam and water to rapidly transfer the heat to the food and all parts of the vessel. While compared to an oven, a pressure cooker's 120\u00a0\u00b0C is not particularly high, ovens contain air which is subject to thermal boundary layer effects which greatly slows heating, whereas pressure cookers flush air from the cooking vessel during warm up and replace it with hot steam. For items not placed within the liquid, as this steam condenses on the food it transfers water's latent heat of vaporization, which is extremely large (2.275\u00a0kJ/g), to the surface, rapidly bringing the surface of the food up to cooking temperature. Because the steam condenses and drips away, no significant boundary layer forms and heat transfer is exceptionally efficient, and food heats much faster and more evenly.\nHowever some recipes require browning to develop flavors as during roasting or frying. Higher temperatures are attainable with conventional cooking where the surface of the food can dry out. Such browning occurs via the Maillard reaction, at temperatures higher than the roughly achieved in pressure cooking. Because those temperatures are not reached in pressure cooking, foods are generally browned by searing them, either in the open pressure cooker or another pan beforehand.\nHigh altitudes.\nA pressure cooker can be used to compensate for lower atmospheric pressure at high elevations. The boiling point of water drops by approximately 1\u00a0\u00b0C per every 294 metres of altitude (see: High-altitude cooking), causing the boiling point of water to be significantly below the at standard pressure. This is problematic because temperatures above roughly 90\u00a0\u00b0C are necessary to cook many common vegetables in a reasonable time. For example, on the summit of Everest (), the boiling point of water would be only . Without the use of a pressure cooker, many boiled foods may remain undercooked, as described in Charles Darwin's \"The Voyage of the Beagle\" (chapter XV, March 20, 1835):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Having crossed the Peuquenes [Piuquenes], we descended into a mountainous country, intermediate between the two main ranges, and then took up our quarters for the night. We were now in the republic of Mendoza. The elevation was probably not under [...]. At the place where we slept water necessarily boiled, from the diminished pressure of the atmosphere, at a lower temperature than it does in a less lofty country; the case being the converse of that of a Papin's digester. Hence the potatoes, after remaining for some hours in the boiling water, were nearly as hard as ever. The pot was left on the fire all night, and next morning it was boiled again, but yet the potatoes were not cooked.\nWhen pressure cooking at high altitudes, cooking times need to be increased by approximately 5% for every above elevation. Since the regulators work off the pressure differential between interior and ambient pressure, the absolute pressure in the interior of a pressure cooker will always be lower at higher altitudes.\nWeight is a concern with backpackers, so mountaineering pressure cookers are designed to operate at a lower differential pressure than stove-top units. This enables them to use thinner, and therefore lighter materials. Generally, the goal is to raise the cooking temperature enough to make cooking possible and to conserve fuel by reducing heat lost through boiling. Lightweight pressure cookers as small as weighing are available for mountain climbers. Sherpas often use pressure cookers in base camp.\nHealth benefits.\nSome food toxins can be reduced by pressure cooking. A Korean study of aflatoxins in rice (associated with \"Aspergillus\" fungus) showed that pressure cooking was capable of reducing aflatoxin concentrations to 32% of the amount in the uncooked rice, compared to 77% from ordinary cooking.\nDesign.\nPressure cookers employ one or more regulators to control the pressure/temperature. All types have a calibrated pressure relief valve, as well as one or more emergency valves.\nWith the simplest types, once the desired pressure is reached, the valve opens, and steam escapes cooling the vessel and limiting the temperature. More advanced stovetop models have pressure indicators that permit the user to adjust the heat to prevent the steam from escaping. Third generation types automatically measure the state of the vessel and control the power so as to not release steam in operation.\nCapacity.\nPressure cookers are available in different capacities for cooking larger or smaller amounts, with 6 litres' capacity being common. The maximum capacity of food is less than the advertised capacity because pressure cookers can only be filled up to 2/3 full, depending on ingredients and liquid (see Safety features section).\nPan.\nBecause of the forces that pressure cookers must withstand, they are usually heavier than conventional pots of similar size. The increased weight of conventional pressure cookers makes them unsuitable for applications in which saving weight is a priority, such as camping. Nonetheless, small, lightweight pressure cookers are available for mountain climbers \"(see High altitudes)\".\nLid.\nLids usually have a number of features:\nGasket.\nA gasket or sealing ring, made from either rubber or silicone, forms a gas-tight seal that does not allow air or steam to escape between the lid and pan. Normally, the only way steam can escape is through a regulator on the lid while the cooker is pressurized. If the regulator becomes blocked, a safety valve provides a backup escape route for steam.\nTo seal the gasket there are several main methods used. Each determines the design of the pressure cooker:\nGaskets (sealing rings) require special care when cleaning (e.g., not washed with kitchen knives), unlike a standard lid for a saucepan. Food debris, fats, and oils must be cleaned from the gasket after every use. Gasket/sealing rings need replacing with a new one about once a year (or sooner if it is damaged e.g. a small split). A very dry gasket can make it difficult or impossible to close the lid. Smearing the gasket sparingly with vegetable oil alleviates this problem (using too much vegetable oil can make the gasket swell and prevent it sealing properly). A gasket that has lost its flexibility makes bringing the cooker up to pressure difficult as steam can escape before sufficient pressure is generated to provide an adequate seal; this is usually a sign that the gasket needs replacing with a new one. Oiling the gasket with vegetable oil may alleviate the problem temporarily, but a new gasket is often required.\nPressure cooker manufacturers sell replacement gaskets and recommend their replacement at regular intervals e.g. annually.\nIf the pressure cooker has not been used for a long time, the gasket and other rubber or silicone parts will dry out and will likely need replacing.\nSafety features.\nEarly pressure cookers equipped with only a primary safety valve risked explosion from food blocking the release valve. On modern pressure cookers, food residues blocking the steam vent or the liquid boiling dry will trigger additional safety devices. Modern pressure cookers sold from reputable manufacturers have sufficient safety features to prevent the pressure cooker itself from exploding. When excess pressure is released by a safety mechanism, debris of food being cooked may also be ejected with the steam, which is loud and forceful. This can be avoided if the pressure cooker is regularly cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and never overfilled with food and/or liquid.\nModern pressure cookers typically have two or three redundant safety valves and additional safety features, such as an interlock lid that prevents the user from opening the lid when the internal pressure exceeds atmospheric pressure, preventing accidents from a sudden release of hot liquid, steam and food. If safety mechanisms are not correctly in place, the cooker will not pressurize the contents. Pressure cookers should be operated only after reading the instruction manual, to ensure correct usage. Pressure cooker failure is dangerous: a large quantity of scalding steam and water will be forcefully ejected and if the lid separates it may be propelled with considerable force. Some cookers with an internally fitted lid may be particularly dangerous upon failure as the lid fits tighter with increasing pressure, preventing the lid from deforming and venting around the edges. Due to these dangers pressure cookers are generally over-engineered in a safety regard and some countries even have regulations to prevent the sale of non-compliant cookers.\nFor first generation pressure cookers with a weighted valve or \"jiggler\", the primary safety valve or regulator is usually a weighted stopper, commonly called \"the rocker\" or \"vent weight\". This weighted stopper is lifted by the steam pressure, allowing excess pressure to be released. There is a backup pressure release mechanism that releases pressure quickly if the primary pressure release mechanism fails (e.g., food jams the steam discharge path). One such method is a hole in the lid that is blocked by a low melting point alloy plug and another is a rubber grommet with a metal insert at the center. At a sufficiently high pressure, the grommet will distort and the insert will blow out of its mounting hole to release pressure. If the pressure continues to increase, the grommet itself will blow out to release pressure. These safety devices usually require replacement when activated by excess pressure. Newer pressure cookers may have a self-resettable spring device, fixed onto the lid, that releases excess pressure.\nOn second generation pressure cookers, a common safety feature is the gasket, which expands to release excess pressure downward between the lid and the pot. This release of excess pressure is forceful and sufficient to extinguish the flame of a gas stove.\nPressure cookers sold in the European Union (EU) must comply with the Pressure Equipment Directive.\nMaximum fill levels.\nThe recommended maximum fill levels of food/liquid avoids blockage of the steam valve or developing excess pressure: two-thirds full with solid food, half full for liquids and foods that foam and froth (e.g., rice, pasta; adding a tablespoon of cooking oil minimizes foaming), and no more than one-third full for pulses (e.g., lentils).\nMaterials.\nPressure cookers are typically made of aluminum (aluminium) or stainless steel. Aluminum pressure cookers may be stamped, polished, or anodized, but all are unsuitable for the dishwasher. They are cheaper, but the aluminum is reactive to acidic foods, whose flavors are changed in the reactions, and are less durable than stainless steel pressure cookers. Some aluminum pressure cookers from Afghanistan are known to be contaminated with lead and imported pots were responsible for the lead poisoning of Afghani refugees in Washington state in 2019.\nHigher-quality stainless steel pressure cookers are made with heavy, three-layer, or copper-clad bottoms (heat spreader) for uniform heating because stainless steel has lower thermal conductivity. Most modern stainless steel cookers are dishwasher safe, although some manufacturers may recommend washing by hand. Some pressure cookers have a non-stick interior.\nOperation.\nLiquid.\nPressure cooking always requires a water-based liquid to generate the steam to raise the pressure within the cooker. Pressure cooking cannot be used for cooking methods that produce little steam such as roasting, pan frying, or deep frying. A minimum quantity of liquid is required to create and maintain pressure, as indicated in the manufacturer's instruction manual. For venting cookers more liquid is required for longer cooking times. This is not desirable for food requiring much less liquid, but recipes and books for pressure cookers take this into account.\nAssembling.\nFood is placed inside the pressure cooker with a small amount of water or other liquid such as stock. Food is either cooked in the liquid or above the liquid for steaming; the latter method prevents the transfer of flavors from the liquid.\nSauces which contain starch thickeners can tend to burn onto the interior base of the pressure cooker which may prevent the cooker from reaching operating pressure. Because of this issue, sauces may require thickening or reduction after pressure cooking.\nWith \"pot in pot\" pressure cooking, some or all of the food is placed in an elevated pot on a trivet above water or another food item which generates the steam. This permits the cooking of multiple foods separately, and allows for minimal water mixed with the food, and thicker sauces, which would otherwise scorch onto the bottom of the pan.\nBringing to pressure.\nThe lid is closed, the pressure setting is chosen and the pressure cooker is heated to boil the liquid. The cooker fills with steam and vents air. As the internal temperature rises, the pressure rises until it reaches the desired gauge pressure.\nIt usually takes several minutes for the pressure cooker to reach the selected pressure level. It can take 10 minutes or longer depending on the quantity of food, the temperature of the food (cold or frozen food delays pressurization), the amount of liquid, the power of the heat source, and the size of the pressure cooker. There is typically a pop-up indicator that shows that the cooker has pressure inside, but it does not reliably signal that the cooker has reached the selected pressure. The pop-up indicator shows the state of the interlock which prevents the lid from being opened while there is any internal pressure. Manufacturers may use their own terminology for this, such as calling it a \"locking indicator.\"\nTiming the recipe begins when the selected pressure/pressure is reached. Once the cooker reaches full pressure, the heat is lowered to maintain the pressure. With pressure cookers accurate timing is essential using an audible timer.\nWith first generation designs, the pressure regulator weight begins levitating above its nozzle, allowing excess steam to escape. In second generation pressure cookers, either a relief valve subsequently opens, releasing steam to prevent the pressure from rising any further or a rod rises with markers to indicate the pressure level, without constantly venting steam. At this stage, the heat source is reduced to the lowest possible heat that still maintains pressure, as extra heat wastes energy and increases liquid loss. In third generation pressure cookers, the device will detect the vessel has reached the required cooking temperature/pressure and will maintain it for the programmed time, generally without further loss of steam.\nRecipes for foods using raising agents such as steamed puddings call for gentle pre-steaming, without pressure, in order to activate the raising agents prior to cooking and achieve a light, fluffy texture.\nFood containers.\nSmall containers such as plastic pudding containers can be used in a pressure cooker, if the containers (and any covering used) can withstand temperatures of and are not placed directly on the interior base. The containers can be used for cooking foods that are prone to burning on the base of the pressure cooker. A lid for the container may be used if the lid allows some steam to come into contact with the food and the lid is securely fitted; an example is foil or greaseproof paper, pleated in the center and tied securely with string. Containers that are cracked or have otherwise sustained damage are not suitable. Cooking time is longer when using covered containers because the food is not in direct contact with the steam. Since non-metal containers are poorer heat conductors, the type of container material stated in the recipe cannot be substituted without affecting the outcome. For example, if the recipe time is calculated using a stainless steel container and a plastic container is used instead, the recipe will be undercooked, unless the cooking time is increased. Containers with thicker sides, e.g., oven-proof glass or ceramic containers, which are slower to conduct heat, will add about 10 minutes to the cooking time. Liquid can be added inside the container when pressure cooking foods such as rice, which need to absorb liquid in order to cook properly.\nPre-frying ingredients.\nThe flavor of some foods, such as meat and onions, can be improved by gently cooking with a little pre-heated cooking oil, butter or other fat in the open pressure cooker over medium heat for stove-top models (unless the manufacturer advises against this) before pressure cooking, while avoiding overheating the empty pressure cooker not heating the empty cooker with the lid and gasket in place to avoid damage. Electric pressure cookers usually have a \"saute\" or \"brown\" option for frying ingredients. The pressure cooker needs to cool briefly before adding liquid; otherwise some of the liquid will evaporate instantly, possibly leaving insufficient liquid for the entire pressure cooking time; if deglazing the pan, more liquid may need to be added.\nPressure release methods.\nAfter cooking, there are three ways of releasing the pressure, either quickly or slowly, before the lid can be opened. Recipes for pressure cookers state which release method is required at the end of the cooking time for proper results. Failure to follow the recommendation may result in food that is under-cooked or over-cooked.\nTo avoid opening the pressure cooker too often while cooking different vegetables with varying cooking times, the vegetables that take longer to cook can be cut into smaller pieces and vegetables that cook faster can be cut into larger pieces.\nTo inspect the food, the pressure cooker needs to be opened, which halts the cooking process. With a conventional saucepan, this can be done in a matter of seconds by visually inspecting the food.\nManual, normal, regular, or automatic release.\nThis method is sometimes called a \"quick release,\" not to be confused with the cold water release (mentioned below). It involves the quick release of vapor by gradually lifting (or removing) the valve, pushing a button, or turning a dial. It is most suitable to interrupt cooking to add food that cooks faster than what is already in the cooker. For example, since meat takes longer to cook than vegetables, it is necessary to add vegetables to stew later so that it will cook only for the last few minutes. Releasing the steam with care avoids the risk of being scalded by the rapid release of hot steam. This release method is not suitable for foods that foam and froth while cooking; the hot contents might spray outwards due to the pressure released from the steam vent. Pressure cookers should be operated with caution when releasing vapour through the valve, especially while cooking foamy foods and liquids (lentils, beans, grains, milk, gravy, etc.) This release method takes about two minutes to release the pressure before the lid can be opened.\nNatural release.\nThe natural release method allows the pressure to drop slowly. This is achieved by removing the pressure cooker from the heat source and allowing the pressure to lower without action. It takes approximately 10 to 15 minutes (possibly longer) for the pressure to disappear before the lid can be opened. On many pressure cookers, a coloured indicator pin will drop when the pressure has gone. This natural release method is recommended for foods that foam and froth during cooking, such as rice, legumes, or recipes with raising agents such as steamed puddings. The texture and tenderness of meat cooked in a pressure cooker can be improved by using the natural release method. The natural release method finishes cooking foods or recipes that have longer cooking times because the inside of the pressure cooker stays hot. This method is not recommended for foods that require very short cooking times, otherwise the food overcooks.\nCold water quick release.\nThis method is the fastest way of releasing pressure with portable pressure cookers, but can be dangerous if performed incorrectly. Hence it is safer to release pressure by using the other methods. The manufacturer's instruction book may advise against the cold water release or require it to be performed differently.\nThe cold water release method involves using slow running cold tap water, over the edge of the pressure cooker lid, being careful to avoid the steam vent or any other valves or outlets, and never immersing the pressure cooker under water, otherwise steam can be ejected from under the lid, which could cause scalding injury to the user; also the pressure cooker lid can be permanently damaged by an internal vacuum if water gets sucked into the pressure cooker, since the incoming water blocks the inrush of air.\nThe cold water release is most suitable for foods with short cooking times. It takes about 20 seconds for the cooker to cool down enough to lower the pressure so that it can be safely opened. This method is not suitable for electric pressure cookers, as they are not immersible. This type of pressure cooker cannot be opened with a cold water quick-release method.\nThe cold water release method is not recommended when cooking pulses e.g. red kidney beans, as the sudden release of pressure can cause the bean to burst its skin.\nPressure settings.\nMost pressure cookers have a cooking (operating) pressure setting between 0.8\u20131 bar (11.6\u201315 psi) (gauge) so the pressure cooker operates at 1.8 to 2.0 bar (absolute). The standard cooking pressure of 15 psi gauge was determined by the United States Department of Agriculture in 1917. At this pressure, water boils at (described in vapour pressure of water article).\nThe higher temperature causes food to cook faster; cooking times can typically be reduced to one-third of the time for conventional cooking methods. The actual cooking time also depends on the pressure release method used after timing \"(see Pressure release methods for details)\" and the thickness and density of the food, since thicker (and denser) foods take longer to cook. Meat joints and some other foods like sponge puddings and Christmas puddings are typically timed according to their weight. Frozen foods need extra cooking time to allow for thawing.\nWhen pressure cooking at 1 bar/15 psi (gauge), approximate cooking times are one minute for shredded cabbage, seven minutes for boiled potatoes (if cut small, not diced) and three minutes for fresh green beans. If the pressure is released naturally after timing \"(see Pressure release methods for details),\" cooking times are even shorter. Food cooks more quickly when cut into smaller pieces.\nSome recipes may require cooking at lower than 1 bar/15 psi (gauge) e.g. fresh vegetables, as these can easily overcook. Many pressure cookers have 2 or more selectable pressure settings or weights.\nSome pressure cookers have a lower or higher \"maximum\" pressure than 1 bar/15 psi (gauge) or can be adjusted to different pressures for some recipes; cooking times will increase or decrease accordingly. This is typically done by having different regulator weights or different pressure or temperature settings. Some pressure cookers operate at lower pressures than others. If the recipe is devised for a higher pressure and the pressure cooker does not reach that pressure, the cooking time can be increased to compensate.\nEfficiency.\nPressure cookers are considerably more expensive than conventional saucepans of the same size.\nThe minimum quantity of water or liquid that keeps a pressure cooker filled with steam is sufficient, so pressure cookers can use much less liquid than the amount required for conventional cooking. When less water or liquid is heated, the food reaches its cooking temperature faster and less energy is required than that of boiling, steaming, or oven cooking. It is also not necessary to immerse food in water. Additionally, with non-venting pressure cookers, steam isn't continually escaping, thus evaporation losses are non existent once it has reached pressure. Overall, energy used by third generation pressure cookers can be as much as 70% lower than conventional pan cooking.\nEffect on food.\nPressure cooking requires much less water than conventional boiling, so food can be ready sooner.\nBecause of this, vitamins and minerals are not leached (dissolved) away by water, as they would be if food were boiled in large amounts of water. Due to the shorter cooking time, vitamins are preserved relatively well during pressure cooking.\nSeveral foods can be cooked together in the pressure cooker, either for the same amount of time or added later for different times. Manufacturers provide steamer baskets to allow more foods to be cooked together inside the pressure cooker.\nNot only is this steam energy transmitted quickly to food, it is also transmitted rapidly to any micro-organisms that are present, easily killing even the deadliest types that are able to survive at the boiling point. Because of this enhanced germ killing ability, a pressure cooker can be used as an effective sanitizer for jam pots, glass baby bottles, or for water while camping.\nFoods unsuitable for pressure cooking.\nSome foods are not recommended for pressure cooking. Foods such as noodles, pasta, cranberries, cereals and oatmeal can expand too much, froth and sputter, potentially blocking the steam vent and creating an unsafe condition.\nUse as weapons.\nThe appliance has been adapted as a crude type of bomb, which has been used in terrorist attacks.\nRelated devices.\nAn \"autoclave\" (\u2265 121 \u00b0C) is a type of pressure cooker used by laboratories and hospitals to sterilize equipment. A \"stovetop autoclave\" is essentially a higher-pressure cooker with a gauge, used as an autoclave in poorer areas.\n\"Pressure canners\" are large pressure cookers which have the capacity to hold jars used in home canning. Pressure canners are specifically designed for canning, whereas ordinary pressure cookers are not recommended for canning due to the risk of botulism poisoning. Pressure canners hold heat (\u2265 115 \u00b0C) and pressure for much longer than ordinary pressure cookers; these factors are a critical part of the total processing time required to destroy harmful microbes such as bacterial spores.\n\"Pressure fryers\" are used for deep fat frying under pressure, because ordinary pressure cookers are not suitable for pressure frying.\nAn \"air fryer pressure cooker\" (not to be confused with a \"pressure fryer\") is a recent combination of a pressure cooker and an air fryer, with two separate lids, one for pressure cooking and one for air frying. The air frying lid has a convection fan inside that allows it to air fry foods, similar to an air fryer oven. This innovation was popularized by the Ninja Foodi Pressure Cooker, marketed as the first pressure cooker that can crisp and air fry.\nA \"pressure oven\" is a recent combination of an oven and pressure cooker, usually as a countertop convection oven. Pressure ovens operate at low pressures, , compared to other pressure cookers. Their main function is as an enhanced oven or broiler for meat and poultry, avoiding drying. As such, they often include a rotisserie. Although having insufficient pressure for most conventional pressure cooking functions, they do also have non-pressure oven modes.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52993", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52993", "title": "Roasting", "text": "Cooking method using dry air heat\nRoasting is a cooking method that uses dry heat where hot air covers the food, cooking it evenly on all sides with temperatures of at least from an open flame, oven, or other heat source. Roasting can enhance the flavor through caramelization and Maillard browning on the surface of the food. Roasting uses indirect, diffused heat (as in an oven), and is suitable for slower cooking of meat in a larger, whole piece. Meats and most root and bulb vegetables can be roasted. Any piece of meat, especially red meat, that has been cooked in this fashion is called a roast. Meats and vegetables prepared in this way are described as \"roasted\", e.g., roasted chicken or roasted squash.\nMethods.\nFor roasting, the food may be placed on a rack, in a roasting pan or, to ensure even application of heat, may be rotated on a spit or rotisserie. If a pan is used, the juice can be retained for use in gravy, Yorkshire pudding, etc. During oven roasting, hot air circulates around the meat, cooking all sides evenly. There are several plans for roasting meat: low-temperature cooking, high-temperature cooking, and a combination of both. Each method can be suitable, depending on the food and the tastes of the people.\nIn general, in either case, the meat is removed from the heat before it has finished cooking and left to sit for a few minutes, while the inside cooks further from the residual heat content, known as carry over cooking.\nThe objective in any case is to retain as much moisture as possible, while providing the texture and color. As meat cooks, the structure and especially the collagen breaks down, allowing juice to come out of the meat. So meat is juiciest at about medium rare while the juice is coming out. During roasting, meats and vegetables are frequently basted on the surface with butter, lard, or oil to reduce the loss of moisture by evaporation. In recent times, plastic oven bags have become popular for roasts. These cut cooking times and reduce the loss of moisture during roasting, but reduce flavor development from Maillard browning, somewhat more like (boiled or steamed) stew or pot roast. They are particularly popular for turkeys.\nUntil the late 19th century, roasting by dry heat in an oven was called \"baking\". Roasting originally meant cooking meat or a bird on or in front of a fire, as with a grill or spit. It is one of the oldest forms of cooking known.\nTraditionally recognized roasting methods consist only of baking and cooking over or near an open fire. Grilling is normally not technically a roast, since a grill (gridiron) is used. Barbecuing and smoking differ from roasting because of the lower temperature and controlled smoke application.\nMeat.\nBefore the invention and widespread use of stoves, food was primarily cooked over open flames from a hearth. To roast meat, racks with skewers, or, if accessible, complicated gear arrangements, would be utilized to turn the piece(s). In the past, this method was often associated with the upper class and special occasions, rather than customary mealtimes, because it required freshly killed meat and close attention during cooking. It was easy to ruin the meat's taste with a smoky fire or negligence to rotate it at regular intervals. Thus, elite families, who were able to afford quality meat, appointed this task to servants or invested in technology like automatic turning devices. With further technological advances, cooking came to accommodate new opportunities. By the 1860s, working families were able to afford low-priced stove models that became sufficiently available. However, the key element of observation during roasting became difficult and dangerous to do with the coal oven. Hence, traditional roasting disappeared as kitchens became no longer equipped for this custom and soon thereafter, \"baking\" came to be \"roasting\".\nRoasting can be applied to a wide variety of meat. In general, it works best for cooking whole chickens, turkey, and leaner cuts of lamb, pork, and beef. The aim is to highlight the flavor of the meat itself rather than a sauce or stew, as it is done in braising or other moist-heat methods. Many roasts are tied with string prior to roasting, often using the reef knot or the packer's knot. Tying holds them together during roasting, keeping any stuffing inside, and keeps the roast in a round profile, which promotes even cooking. A hock lock is a food accoutrement used to secure the hock (hind legs) of a bird such as a chicken or turkey during roasting and are typically composed of heat-resistant nylon or metal.\nRed meats such as beef, lamb, and venison, and certain game birds are often roasted to be \"medium rare\" \"rare\", meaning that the center of the roast is still red. Roasting is a preferred method of cooking for most poultry, and certain cuts of beef, pork, or lamb. Although there is a growing fashion in some restaurants to serve \"rose pork\", temperature monitoring of the center of the roast is the only sure way to avoid foodborne disease.\nIn Britain, Ireland, and Australia, a roast of meat may be referred to as a \"joint\", or a leg, if it is a leg.\nVegetables.\nSome vegetables, such as brussels sprouts, potatoes, carrots, eggplants/aubergines, zucchini/courgette, pumpkin, turnips, rutabagas/swedes, parsnips, cauliflower, asparagus, squash, peppers, yam and plantain, lend themselves to roasting as well. Roasted chestnuts are also a popular snack in winter.\nFish.\nRoasting fish is done with whole fish, and will work well with snapper, or any medium-sized, whole round fish such as trout, ocean perch and black sea bass will work.\nTraybake.\nIn the United States and Britain, a mix of vegetables and meat roasted together in the same pan are known as a traybake.\nRoasts in the context of the meal in Western Europe.\nRoast meats have typically been high-status foods, due in part to the expense and scarcity of meat and in part to the expense of the extra fuel needed for roasting, compared to the fuel used for boiling foods in a pot. For that reason, roast meats were the centerpiece of high-status meals for centuries.\nEarly use of the term.\nAmong the earliest texts in Western Europe to include recipes for roast meats and fowl is \"Le Viandier\" (c. 1300), which includes twenty-nine recipes for various roasts, placed under the heading \"\"Rostz de chair\" (roast meats) in some manuscripts. Similar recipes under the heading \"Rost de char\"\" also appear in \"Le M\u00e9nagier de Paris\" (1393), which also includes menus with roasts in the second and third stages of the meal.\nIn the later \"Petit traict\u00e9 auquel verrez la maniere de faire cuisine\" (c. 1536), more widely known from a later edition titled \"Livre fort excellent de cuisine\" (1542), in a collection of menus at the end of the book, the meal is presented in four stages: the \"entree de table\" (entrance to the table), \"potaiges\" (foods boiled or simmered \"in pots\"), \"services de rost\" (meat or fowl \"roasted\" in dry heat), and \"issue de table\" (departure from the table).\nThe terms \"entree de table\" and \"issue de table\" are organizing words, \"describing the structure of a meal rather than the food itself\". The terms \"potaiges\" and \"rost\" indicate cooking methods but not ingredients. The menus, though, give some idea of both the ingredients and the cooking methods that were characteristic of each stage of the meal.\nThe meat and fowl considered appropriate for roasting included domestic fowl, feathered game, small furred game, suckling pig, and, less commonly, lamb. Roasts were rarely of other butcher's meat, large furred game, or organ meats.\nOther dishes were often served alongside the roasts, including sauced and stuffed meats and meat pies. The roasts themselves might be accompanied by a sauce, but the sauce was served separately from the roast itself.\nThe arrangement of dishes in the \"Livre fort excellent\" is very similar to that of the menus in the \"M\u00e9nagier de Paris\", written 150 years before the \"Petit traict\u00e9\". One notable difference is that the roast fowl and meats in the M\u00e9nagier were often followed by roast fish, a practice not evident in the \"Livre fort excellent\".\nThe roast in the \"Classical Order\" of table service.\nBetween the mid-16th and mid-17th century, the stages of the meal underwent several significant changes. Notably, potage became the first stage of the meal and the entr\u00e9e became the second stage, followed by the roast, entremets, and dessert.\nWhile cookbooks and dictionaries of the 17th and 18th centuries rarely discuss the type of dishes appropriate to each stage of the meal with any specificity, roasts and the dishes of the other stages of the meal can be distinguished from each other by certain characteristics, such as their ingredients, cooking methods, and serving temperatures. The distinct characteristics of roasts for the roast course were at first loosely observed, or perhaps more accurately, the \"rules\" were in a formative stage for several decades. By the early 18th century, though, certain ingredients and cooking methods were increasingly confined to the roast stage of the meal.\nIn the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, meat and fowl for the roast course on meat days included all sorts of domestic fowl, feathered game, and small furred game, ingredients that were less commonly included in entr\u00e9es and entremets. Goose, gosling, and domestic duck were not fashionable in any course; turkeys and wild ducks were preferred in their place. Organ meats were often roasted, but they were served in the entr\u00e9e and entremets courses, not in the roast course.\nIn the 17th century, large cuts of roasted butcher's meat and furred game were sometimes served in the roast course; sauced and stuffed meats and pies were also served alongside the roasts; but in the 18th and 19th centuries, all such dishes were served only in the entr\u00e9e or entremets courses, always in a sauce. By the 18th century, only fowl, feathered game, and small furred game were considered appropriate for the roast course.\nRoasted fowl and small game in Classical Service were spit-roasted and nicely browned, served \"dry\" and not in a sauce or rago\u00fbt. Sauces in the roast course might be served alongside the roasted fowl or game, but the roasts were not prepared or served in the sauce like roasted fowl and meats in the entr\u00e9e course.\nOn lean days, fish replaced meat and fowl in every stage of the meal other than dessert. In the roast course, whole fish replaced meat-day roasts, but the fish were poached or fried, not roasted. The fish were substitutions or counterparts to the roasts served on meat days, corresponding to their position in the meal but not their cooking method.\nThe salient feature of lean-day fish in the roast course, whether poached or fried, was that they were served \"dry\", placed on a napkin and not served in a sauce or rago\u00fbt. In contrast, poached and fried fish served as entr\u00e9es, hors d\u2019\u0153uvre, or relev\u00e9s, were always served in a sauce or rago\u00fbt. Additionally, poached fish in the roast course were prepared with the scales still on the fish, if they were attractive, unlike whole fish served as relev\u00e9s, which were always served without scales.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes, references, and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52994", "revid": "36269730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52994", "title": "Barr body", "text": "Form taken by the inactive X chromosome in a female somatic cell\nA Barr body (named after discoverer Murray Barr) or X-chromatin is an inactive X chromosome. In species with XY sex-determination (including humans), females typically have two X chromosomes, and one is rendered inactive in a process called lyonization. Errors in chromosome separation can also result in male and female individuals with extra X chromosomes. The Lyon hypothesis states that in cells with multiple X chromosomes, all but one are inactivated early in embryonic development in mammals. The X chromosomes that become inactivated are chosen randomly, except in marsupials and in some extra-embryonic tissues of some placental mammals, in which the X chromosome from the sperm is always deactivated.\nIn humans with euploidy, a genotypical female (46,XX karyotype) has one Barr body per somatic cell nucleus, while a genotypical male (46,XY) has none. The Barr body can be seen in the interphase nucleus as a darkly staining small mass in contact with the nucleus membrane. Barr bodies can be seen in neutrophils at the rim of the nucleus.\nIn humans with more than one X chromosome, the number of Barr bodies visible at interphase is always one fewer than the total number of X chromosomes. For example, people with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) have a single Barr body, and people with a 47,XXX karyotype have two Barr bodies.\nHistory.\n1928 - Foundational research.\nThe discovery of the Barr body was based on the research of geneticist Emil Heitz studying the dynamics of moss chromatin during mitosis. Heitz distinguished between heterochromatin and euchromatin, noting that certain regions of some chromosomes (and in some instances, entire chromosomes) retained their staining following mitosis. This retained staining is indicative of condensed chromatin which he hypothesized, in the absence of mitosis, reflects silent regions of chromosomes (heterochromatin).\n1949 - Discovery of the Barr body.\nBarr bodies were first discovered in 1949 by Canadian researcher Murray Barr and his undergraduate student Ewart Bertram. While examining the neuronal cells of female cats, they observed a distinct, densely staining structure that was absent in male cells. This structure was initially referred to as a \"nucleolar satellite.\" Although its significance was not immediately understood, the observation laid the foundation for subsequent research in cytogenetics.\n1955 - Development of the buccal smear test.\nIn 1955, Barr, in collaboration with K.L. Moore, developed the buccal smear test, a non-invasive method for collecting epithelial cells from the inner lining of the mouth. This technique allowed the detection of Barr bodies in somatic cells and provided a simple tool for identifying chromosomal abnormalities, such as those seen in Turner syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome. The test became widely used in the mid-20th century and was among the earliest tools for determining chromosomal sex in clinical and research contexts.\n1959 - Identification of the inactivated X chromosome.\nIn 1959, Japanese geneticist Susumu Ohno demonstrated that the previously identified \"nucleolar satellite\" was in fact the inactivated X chromosome in female somatic cells. Using chromosomal staining techniques in animal models, such as rodents, he confirmed its identity and named it the \"Barr body\" in recognition of Barr's earlier discovery. Ohno's work clarified that the Barr body was not merely a structural feature but represented the functional silencing of one X chromosome.\n1961 - Discovery of Lyonization.\nIn 1961, British geneticist Mary Lyon proposed the concept of X chromosome inactivation, now known as Lyonization. Her hypothesis suggested that in females, one of the two X chromosomes is randomly inactivated during early embryonic development to balance gene dosage. This idea was based on her observations of genetic mosaicism in coat color patterns in mice. Lyon's work provided a mechanistic explanation for the presence of the Barr body, linking it directly to the process of X inactivation.\nMechanism.\nAll individuals with two X chromosomes (such as the majority of human females) possesses only one Barr body per somatic cell, while all individuals with one X chromosome (such as most human males) have none.\nThe Barr body allows for equal expression of X chromosomes in the majority of human males and females. If X inactivation did not occur, females (XX) would be expressing two X chromosomes, and males (XY) would only be expressing one. The disappearance of a Barr body in females (expressing both X chromosomes) can result in misregulation of heterochromatin. This misregulation leaves the potential of epigenetic instability and irregular gene expression. Autosomal genes can be silenced when there is translocation of the X inactivation complex on the X chromosome to an autosome.\nMammalian X-chromosome inactivation is initiated from the X inactivation centre or \"Xic\", usually found near the centromere. The centre contains twelve genes, seven of which code for proteins and five for untranslated RNAs. From the untranslated RNAs, only two are known to play an active role in the X inactivation process, \"Xist\" and \"Tsix\". The centre also appears to be important in chromosome counting: ensuring that random inactivation only takes place when two or more X-chromosomes are present. The provision of an extra artificial \"Xic\" in early embryogenesis can induce inactivation of the single X found in male cells.\nThe roles of \"Xist\" and \"Tsix\" appear to be antagonistic. The loss of \"Tsix\" expression on the future inactive X chromosome results in an increase in levels of \"Xist\" around the \"Xic\". Meanwhile, on the future active X \"Tsix\" levels are maintained; thus the levels of \"Xist\" remain low. This shift allows \"Xist\" to begin coating the future inactive chromosome, spreading out from the \"Xic\". In non-random inactivation this choice appears to be fixed and current evidence suggests that the maternally inherited gene may be imprinted. Variations in Xi frequency have been reported with age, pregnancy, the use of oral contraceptives, fluctuations in menstrual cycle and neoplasia.\nIt is thought that this constitutes the mechanism of choice, and allows downstream processes to establish the compact state of the Barr body. These changes include histone modifications, such as histone H3 methylation (i.e. H3K27me3 by PRC2 which is recruited by Xist) and histone H2A ubiquitination, as well as direct modification of the DNA itself, via the methylation of CpG sites. These changes help inactivate gene expression on the inactive X-chromosome and to bring about its compaction to form the Barr body. 3D reconstructions and microscopic analyses of the Barr body using chromosome painting have found that it has a smoother and rounder morphology than autosomes and the active X chromosome, though it is similar in size to the latter, suggesting its chromatin is only slightly more condensed.\nRole in cancer.\nThe X chromosome encodes several tumour suppressor genes and oncogenes, thus incorrect dosage compensation may contribute to cancer development through their reactivation or silencing. This could be achieved through poor epigenetic regulation of the Xi \u2013 it has been observed in several cancer types (medulloblastoma, glioblastoma, breast cancer, and acute myeloid leukemia) that the Xi accumulates more mutations than the autosomes. \nReactivation of a Barr body is possible, and has been observed in breast and ovarian cancer cells. One study showed that the frequency of Barr bodies in breast carcinoma was significantly lower than in healthy controls, indicating reactivation of previously inactivated X chromosomes. In breast cancer cell lines, a loss of the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 was observed on the inactive X chromosome, disrupting its silenced state and leading to the expression of genes that are typically repressed. This includes the bi-allelic expression of X-linked genes such as TBL1X and HDAC8, which may alter key pathways of transcriptional regulation, contributing to cancer pathogenesis. \nIt is more widely accepted that the loss of the Barr body in female cancers is the result of the duplication of the active X chromosome through mitotic error. In any case, it is likely the abnormal over-expression of these X-linked genes that may contribute to tumour progression and cancer development. \nUses.\nBarr bodies in ancient samples: observation and relevance in gender identification of extinct species.\nBarr bodies are condensed, inactive X chromosomes found in the somatic cells of female mammals. Their detection in ancient samples provides a powerful tool for gender identification in extinct species, offering insights into population dynamics, biology, and evolution.\nIn forensic science, gender determination can be determined by analyzing Barr bodies in dental pulp. Teeth are durable in the human body and is commonly used in forensics because of its characteristic of being less vulnerable to contamination by external DNA and its abundance in the body. The presence of Barr bodies in dental pulp can be examined using histopathological and cytopathological techniques, where mean Barr body count is more in females than in male samples. While the presence of Barr bodies is indicative of female sex, their absence is not sufficient to confirm male sex due to the possibility of chromosomal abnormalities or variations.\nRecent advancements in histological and genomic techniques have made it possible to observe Barr bodies in ancient remains, including fossilized bones and tissues:\nIn a notable example, Barr bodies were detected in osteocytes from ancient mammalian remains, demonstrating the potential of this approach for studying gender in extinct populations.\nFuture directions.\nFurther research into the detection of Barr bodies may enhance our ability to:\nBarr body analysis in genetic disorder diagnosis.\nBarr bodies analysis is a rapid screening tool that can be used for preliminary identification of potential X chromosome aneuploidy. Results can be available within an hour, compared to karyotyping that typically takes 1-2 weeks. Although Barr body analysis cannot provide a definitive diagnosis, as karyotyping is required for confirmation, diagnostic accuracy is high. The conditions that can be identified include:\nTurner syndrome (45,X).\nTurner syndrome is caused by the complete or partial absence of a second X chromosome in phenotypic females. Approximately 50% of cases involve monosomy X, resulting in a 45,X karyotype that lacks a Barr body due to the presence of only one X chromosome. In cases involving partial deletions or structural abnormalities of the second X chromosome, Barr bodies are typically also absent, as a fully functional second copy of the X chromosome is required for X inactivation and subsequent Barr body formation.\nKlinefelter syndrome (47,XXY).\nKlinefelter syndrome is an aneuploidy in phenotypic males, characterized presence of two or more X chromosomes. The most common karyotype is 47,XXY but other variations (48,XXXY, and 49,XXXXY) have been reported. Unlike typical 46,XY males, individuals with Klinefelter syndrome undergo X chromosome inactivation, with the additional X chromosome forming a Barr body. In cases involving multiple extra X chromosomes, more than one Barr body may be observed.\nTriple X syndrome (47,XXX).\nTriple X syndrome is an aneuploidy of the X chromosome in phenotypic females, resulting in an additional X chromosome. Individuals with this condition typically have two Barr bodies per somatic cell, as two of the three X chromosomes undergo inactivation.\nReferences.\nLinks to full text articles are provided where access is free, in other cases only the abstract has been linked."}
{"id": "52995", "revid": "14264656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52995", "title": "Smoking (cooking)", "text": "Exposing food to smoke to flavor or preserve it\nSmoking is the process of flavoring, browning, cooking, or preserving food, particularly meat, fish and tea, by exposing it to smoke from burning or smoldering material, most often wood.\nIn Europe, alder is the traditional smoking wood, but oak is more often used now, and beech to a lesser extent. In North America, hickory, mesquite, oak, pecan, alder, maple, and fruit tree woods, such as apple, cherry, and plum, are commonly used for smoking. Other biomass besides wood can also be employed, sometimes with the addition of flavoring ingredients. Chinese tea-smoking uses a mixture of uncooked rice, sugar, and tea, heated at the base of a wok.\nSome North American ham and bacon makers smoke their products over burning corncobs. Peat is burned to dry and smoke the barley malt used to make Scotch whisky and some beers. In New Zealand, sawdust from the native manuka (tea tree) is commonly used for hot-smoking fish. In Iceland, dried sheep dung is used to cold-smoke fish, lamb, mutton, and whale.\nHistorically, farms in the West included a smokehouse, a small building where meats could be smoked and stored. This was generally well separated from other buildings both because of fire danger and smoke emanations. The smoking of food may possibly introduce polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which may lead to an increased risk of some types of cancer; however, this association is debated.\nFood can be smoked by cold smoking, warm smoking or hot smoking. However, these methods of imparting smoke only affect the food surface, and are unable to preserve food, thus, smoking is paired with other microbial hurdles, such as chilling and packaging, to extend food shelf-life. Smoke-like flavor can be added by flavoring such as liquid smoke.\nHistory.\nThe smoking of food likely dates back to the Paleolithic era. This process was later combined with pre-curing the food in salt or salty brine, resulting in a remarkably effective preservation process that was adapted and developed by numerous cultures around the world. Until the modern era, smoking was of a more \"heavy duty\" nature as the main goal was to preserve the food. Large quantities of salt were used in the curing process and smoking times were quite long, sometimes involving days of exposure.\nThe advent of modern transportation made it easier to transport food products over long distances and the need for the time and material intensive heavy salting and smoking declined. Smoking became more of a way to flavor than to preserve food. In 1939 a device called the Torry Kiln was invented at the Torry Research Station in Scotland. The kiln allowed for uniform mass-smoking and is considered the prototype for all modern large-scale commercial smokers. Although refinements in technique and advancements in technology have made smoking much easier, the basic steps involved remain essentially the same today as they were hundreds if not thousands of years ago.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Types by method of application.\nCold smoking.\nCold smoking differs from hot smoking in that it does not cook anything; when cold smoking is finished, the food is still raw. Smokehouse temperatures for cold smoking are typically between . In this temperature range, foods take on a smoked flavor, but remain relatively moist. Since cold smoking does not cook foods, meats should be fully cured before cold smoking. Cold smoking can be used as a flavor enhancer for items such as cheese or nuts, along with meats such as chicken breasts, beef, pork chops, salmon, scallops, and steak. The item is often hung in a dry environment first to develop a pellicle; it can then be cold smoked up to several days to ensure it absorbs the smoke flavor. Some cold smoked foods are baked, grilled, steamed, roasted, or saut\u00e9ed before eating.\nCold smoking meats should not be attempted at home, according to the US National Center for Home Food Preservation: \"Most food scientists cannot recommend cold-smoking methods because of the inherent risks.\"\nCold smoking meats should only be attempted by personnel certified in HACCP [...] to ensure that it is safely prepared.\nWarm smoking.\nWarm smoking exposes foods to temperatures of .\nHot smoking.\nHot smoking cooks foods and simultaneously flavors them with smoke in a controlled environment such as a smoker oven or smokehouse. It requires consistent control of both the temperature of the food and the amount of smoke being applied to it. Some smokers have a heat source built into them, while others use the heat from a stove-top or oven. Like cold smoking, the item may be hung first to develop a pellicle; it is then smoked from 1 hour to as long as 24 hours. Although foods that have been hot smoked are often reheated or further cooked, they are typically safe to eat without further cooking. The temperature range for hot smoking is usually between . Foods smoked in this temperature range are usually fully cooked, but still moist and flavorful. At smoker temperatures hotter than , foods can shrink excessively, buckle, or even split. Smoking at high temperatures also reduces yield, as both moisture and fat are cooked away.\nLiquid smoke.\nLiquid smoke, a product derived from smoke compounds in water, is applied to foods through spraying or dipping.\nSmoke roasting.\nSmoke-roasting refers to any process that has the attributes of both roasting and smoking. This smoking method is sometimes referred to as barbecuing or pit-roasting. It may be done in a smoke-roaster, a closed wood-fired oven, or a barbecue pit, any smoker that can reach above , or in a conventional oven by placing a pan filled with hardwood chips on the floor of the oven so that the chips can smolder and produce a smoke-bath. In North America, this smoking method is commonly referred to as \"barbecuing\", \"pit baking\", or \"pit roasting\".\nTypes of fuel.\nWood smoke.\nHardwoods are made up mostly of three materials: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Cellulose and hemicellulose are the basic structural material of the wood cells; lignin acts as a kind of cell-bonding glue. Some softwoods, especially pines and firs, hold significant quantities of resin, which produces a harsh-tasting soot when burned; these woods are not often used for smoking.\nCellulose and hemicellulose are aggregate sugar molecules; when burnt, they effectively caramelize, producing carbonyls, which provide most of the color components and sweet, flowery, and fruity aromas. Lignin, a highly complex arrangement of interlocked phenolic molecules, also produces a number of distinctive aromatic elements when burnt, including smoky, spicy, and pungent compounds such as guaiacol, phenol, and syringol, and sweeter scents such as the vanilla-scented vanillin and clove-like isoeugenol. Guaiacol is the phenolic compound most responsible for the \"smoky\" taste, while syringol is the primary contributor to smoky aroma. Wood also contains small quantities of proteins, which contribute roasted flavors. Many of the odor compounds in wood smoke, especially the phenolic compounds, are unstable, dissipating after a few weeks or months.\nA number of wood smoke compounds act as preservatives. Phenol and other phenolic compounds in wood smoke are both antioxidants, which slow rancidification of animal fats, and antimicrobials, which slow bacterial growth. Other antimicrobials in wood smoke include formaldehyde, acetic acid, and other organic acids, which give wood smoke a low pH\u2014about 2.5. Some of these compounds are toxic to people as well, and may have health effects in the quantities found in cooking applications.\nSince different species of trees have different ratios of components, various types of wood do impart a different flavor to food. Another important factor is the temperature at which the wood burns. High-temperature fires see the flavor molecules broken down further into unpleasant or flavorless compounds. The optimal conditions for smoke flavor are low, smoldering temperatures between . This is the temperature of the burning wood itself, not of the smoking environment, which uses much lower temperatures. Woods that are high in lignin content tend to burn hot; to keep them smoldering requires restricted oxygen supplies or a high moisture content. When smoking using wood chips or chunks, the combustion temperature is often raised by soaking the pieces in water before placing them on a fire.\nTypes of smokers.\nOffset.\nThe main characteristics of the offset smoker are that the cooking chamber is usually cylindrical in shape, with a shorter, smaller diameter cylinder attached to the bottom of one end for a firebox. To cook the meat, a small fire is lit in the firebox, where airflow is tightly controlled. The heat and smoke from the fire are drawn through a connecting pipe or opening into the cooking chamber.\nThe heat and smoke cook and flavor the meat before escaping through an exhaust vent at the opposite end of the cooking chamber. Most manufacturers' models are based on this simple but effective design, and this is what most people picture when they think of a \"BBQ smoker\". Even large capacity commercial units use this same basic design of a separate, smaller fire box and a larger cooking chamber.\nReverse flow offset.\nA reverse flow offset smoker is a variation of the traditional offset design. In this configuration, a solid baffle plate or duct forces the heat and smoke to travel beneath the food before rising and reversing direction to exit through a chimney positioned on the same side as the firebox. \nThis setup promotes more consistent temperatures across the cooking chamber and enhances smoke distribution, which can result in more even cooking. Reverse flow smokers are popular among pitmasters seeking stable heat and reduced hot spots.\nUpright drum.\nThe upright drum smoker (also referred to as an ugly drum smoker or UDS) is exactly what its name suggests: an upright steel drum that has been modified for the purpose of pseudo-indirect hot smoking. There are many ways to accomplish this, but the basics include the use of a complete steel drum, a basket to hold charcoal near the bottom, and a cooking rack (or racks) near the top, all covered by a vented lid of some sort. These smokers have been built using many different sizes of steel drums, such as , , and , but the most popular size is the common 55-gallon drum.\nThis design is similar to smoking with indirect heat due to the distance between the coals and the cooking racks, which is typically . The temperature is controlled by limiting the air intake at the bottom of the drum, and allowing a similar amount of exhaust out of vents in the lid. UDSs use their fuel very efficiently, and are flexible in their ability to produce proper smoking conditions with or without the use of a water pan or drip pan.\nVertical water.\nA vertical water smoker (also referred to as a bullet smoker because of its shape) is a variation of the upright drum smoker. It uses charcoal or wood to generate smoke and heat, and contains a water bowl between the fire and the cooking grates. The water bowl serves to maintain optimal smoking temperatures and also adds humidity to the smoke chamber. It also creates an effect in which the water vapor and smoke condense together, which adds flavor to smoked foods. In addition, the bowl catches any drippings from the meat that may cause a flare-up. Vertical water smokers are extremely temperature stable and require very little adjustment once the desired temperature has been reached. Because of their relatively low cost and stable temperature, they are sometimes used in barbecue competitions where propane and electric smokers are not allowed.\nPropane.\nA propane smoker is designed to allow the smoking of meat in a somewhat more temperature controlled environment. The primary differences are the sources of heat and of the smoke. In a propane smoker, the heat is generated by a gas burner directly under a steel or iron box containing the wood or charcoal that provides the smoke. The steel box has few vent holes, on the top of the box only. By starving the heated wood of oxygen, it smokes instead of burning. Any combination of woods and charcoal may used. This method uses much less wood but does require propane fuel.\nSmoke box.\nThis more traditional method uses a two-box system: a fire box and a food box. The fire box is typically adjacent or under the cooking box, and can be controlled to a finer degree. The heat and smoke from the fire box exhausts into the food box, where it is used to cook and smoke the meat. These may be as simple as an electric heating element with a pan of wood chips placed on it, although more advanced models have finer temperature controls.\nElectric smokers.\nThe most convenient of the various types of smokers are the insulated electric smokers. These devices house a heating element that can maintain temperatures ranging from that required for a cold smoke all the way up to with little to no intervention from the user. Although wood chunks, pellets, and even in some cases automatically fed wood pucks are used to generate smoke, the amount of flavor obtained is less than traditional wood or charcoal smokers.\nTrench.\nIn this method the firebox is a narrow trench cut down a slope pointing into the prevailing wind. The middle part of the trench is covered over to make it into a tunnel. At the upper end of the trench is a vertical framework covered to form a chimney within which is placed the rack of foodstuff. At the lower upwind end of the trench is lit a small smokey fire, and sustained day and night until the foodstuff is cured.\nCommercial smokehouse.\nCommercial smokehouses, mostly made from stainless steel, have independent systems for smoke generation and cooking. Smoke generators use friction, an electric coil or a small flame to ignite sawdust on demand. Heat from steam coils or gas flames is balanced with live steam or water sprays to control the temperature and humidity. Elaborate air handling systems reduce hot or cold spots, to reduce variation in the finished product. Racks on wheels or rails are used to hold the product and facilitate movement.\nPellet smokers.\nA pellet smoker is a temperature controlled smoker that burns wood pellets made of dried-out sawdust, about an inch long and 1/4 inch wide. The wood pellets are stored in a gravity-fed hopper that feeds into a motor-controlled auger by the temperature regulator. This auger pushes the pellets into the fire pot. An ignition rod within the auger ignites the pellets where a combustion fan keeps them smouldering. The motor and the combustion fan regulate the temperature of the smoker by feeding it more pellets and increasing airflow in the auger. Above the auger is a heat shield to disperse the direct heat before it reaches the heat box to allow the wood smoke to keep the heat box at an even temperature throughout. The heat sensor inside the heat box relays the current temperature inside the box back to the temperature regulator that controls the fan speed and pellet hopper motor, which either increase or decrease the amount of pellets in the auger or the amount of air available to the fire to maintain the desired temperature for the cook.\nThe popularity of this type of smoker is on the rise after many BBQ pit-masters began using them in barbecue competitions.\nPreservation.\nSmoke is both an antimicrobial and antioxidant, but it is insufficient for preserving food because it does not penetrate far into meat or fish; therefore, if the food is to be preserved, smoking is typically combined with salt-curing or drying.\nSmoking is especially useful for oily fish, as its antioxidant properties inhibit surface fat rancidification and delay oxygen from reaching the interior fat and degrading it. Some heavily salted, long-smoked fish can keep without refrigeration for weeks or months.\nArtificial smoke flavoring (such as liquid smoke) can be purchased to mimic smoking's flavor, but such products have no preservative qualities.\nCompetitive smoking.\nCompetitive BBQ smoking is becoming increasingly popular, especially in the southern United States, where BBQ enthusiasts come together over a weekend to cook various cuts of meat such as a whole hog or a beef brisket.\nOrganisations such as Kansas City Barbeque Society run competitions all over America.\nHealth concerns.\nRegularly consuming smoked meats and fish may increase the risk of several types of cancer.\nList of smoked foods and beverages.\nSome of the more common smoked foods and beverages include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52996", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52996", "title": "Steaming", "text": "Cooking technique\nSteaming is a method of cooking using steam. This is often done with a food steamer, a kitchen appliance made specifically to cook food with steam, but food can also be steamed in a wok. In the American Southwest, steam pits used for cooking have been found dating back about 5,000 years. Steaming is considered a healthy cooking technique that can be used for many kinds of foods.\nCompared to full immersion in boiling water, steaming can be faster and more energy-efficient because it requires less water and takes advantage of the excellent thermodynamic heat transfer properties of steam.\nHistory.\nSome of the world's earliest examples of steam cooking were found in China's Yellow River Valley; early steam cookers made of stoneware have been found dating back as far as 5,000 BCE. And also in Gunma Prefecture, Japan, created during the Stone Age. Some of the earliest examples of steam cooking have been found in Italy and Sardinia, created during the Bronze Age, and in Cochise County, Arizona, where steam pits were used for cooking about 10,000 years ago. From the eighth century CE, thin cypress strips were used to make steamers; today, their slatted bases are constructed from bamboo. The classic steamer has a chimney in the center, which distributes the steam among the tiers.\nWhile steaming has not caught up in the west for assorted dishes, the technique has been heavily popularized worldwide by Chinese and East Asian cuisine. The two main classic steamers feature the ancient bamboo steamer as well as the modern metal (aluminium or stainless steel) steamer, with the difference being that the bamboo lid takes longer to heat up but absorbs excess moisture and allows heat to condense again over the delicate food. Other developments were the creation of microwaveable silicone steamers and plastic-hybrid steamers.\nMethod.\nSteaming works by boiling water continuously, causing it to vaporize into steam; the steam then carries heat to the nearby food, thus cooking the food. The food is kept separate from the boiling water but has direct contact with the steam, resulting in a moist texture to the food. This differs from double boiling, in which food is not directly exposed to steam, or pressure cooking, which uses a sealed vessel but is capable of pressure steaming or submerging.\nSuch cooking is most often done by placing the food in a food steamer, typically a circular container made of metal, wood, or bamboo. The steamer usually has a lid that is placed on top of the container during cooking to allow the steam to cook through the food. When a steamer is unavailable, food can be steamed inside a wok, supported over boiling water in the bottom of the wok by a metal frame. Some modern home microwave ovens include a structure to cook food with steam vapor produced in a separate water container, providing a similar result to being cooked on a stove. There are also specialized steam ovens available.\nSteamed foods.\nIn Japan, glutinous rice is steamed to prepare \"mochi\" rice cakes. Traditional Japanese sweets or \"wagashi\" making involves steaming rice or wheat dough for making mochigashi and manju.\nIn Western cooking, steaming is most often used to cook vegetables\u2014it is rarely used to cook meats. However, steamed clams are prepared by steaming. With Chinese cuisine, vegetables are usually stir fried or blanched and seldom steamed. Seafood and meat dishes are steamed. For example: Steamed whole fish, steamed crab, steamed pork spare ribs, steamed ground pork or beef, steamed chicken and steamed goose.\nRice can be steamed too, although in Chinese cooking this is simply referred to as \"cooking\" rather than \"steaming\". In Thailand steaming is the definition of minimalist cooking. Wheat foods are steamed as well. Examples include buns and Chinese steamed cakes. Similarly, in Mexican and Central American cuisine, tamales are made by steaming a dough made from nixtamalized maize (called masa) in wrappers made from corn husks or banana leaves; the dough can be stuffed or left plain.\nSteamed meat dishes (except fish and some dim sum) are less common in Chinese restaurants than in traditional home cooking, because meats usually require longer cooking times to steam than to stir fry. Commercially sold frozen foods (such as dim sum) formerly had instructions to reheat by steaming, until the rise in popularity of home microwave ovens, which have considerably shorter cooking times.\nChinese dishes.\nStaple foods\nDim sum \nRice\nSeafood\nSoup\nSweets\nOthers\n*: served at festive occasions with azuki bean and color agent added to enhance red color.\n*Mochi: prepared with steamed rice and kneaded.\nJapanese dishes.\nThere are recipes where sauce is added to the main ingredients, aiming to control smell or aroma, or keep moisture to the ingredients.\nRecipes named after the container.\n*Sea bream milt steamed in yugama\nSweets: steaming is an important process in Japanese sweets making such as manj\u016b, y\u014dkan, uir\u014d, karukan or suama.\nBenefits.\nOvercooking or burning food is easily avoided when steaming it. Individuals preferring to avoid additional fat intake may prefer steaming to methods which require cooking oil.\nA 2007 USDA comparison between steaming and boiling vegetables shows the most affected nutrients are folic acid and vitamin C. When compared to raw consumption, steaming reduces folic acid by 15%, and boiling reduces it by 35%. Steaming reduces vitamin C by 15%, and boiling reduces it by 25%.\nSteaming, compared to boiling, showed 42% higher amount of glucosinolates in broccoli cooked for medium firmness. Phenolic compounds with antioxidant properties have been found to retain significantly better through steaming than through boiling or microwaving. Steaming compared to boiling retained \u03b2-carotene in carrots. The effect of cooking food may increase or decrease the nutrients.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52997", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52997", "title": "Double steaming", "text": "Cooking technique\nDouble steaming, sometimes called \"double boiling\", is a Chinese cooking technique to prepare delicate food such as bird's nest soup and shark fin soup. The food is covered with water and put in a covered ceramic jar and the jar is then steamed for several hours. This technique ensures there is no loss of liquid or moisture (its essences) from the food being cooked, hence it is often used with expensive ingredients like Chinese herbal medicines.\nIn Cantonese, double steaming is called \"dun\" (). The meaning of the Chinese character for \"dun\" in Cantonese is different from that in Mandarin, because \"dun\" means to simmer or stew in Mandarin. This technique is also common in Fujian, a neighbouring province of Guangdong (Canton).\nIn ancient China, the double steaming method was based on the Chinese philosophy of maintaining health through diet dates as far back as the 6th century BC, when the founder of Taoism, Lao Tzu, famously said, \u201cmedicine and food are from the same source\u201d.It was mostly used on the emperor's meal during the fall and winter of the year, when most people are more easily getting sick. The significant difference between its and other meals is that it can cooked expensive food and Precious medicinal materials into one meal. It was served to the emperor for nourishment purpose and continuded in modern time.\nThis technique is said to achieve the maximum extraction of flavour with little compromise to the flavour or texture of the ingredients used. It is therefore the method of choice for coaxing forth the delicate flavour. Full flavour extraction can take up to 5 hours.\nFamous examples.\nTong sui, or dessert soups, which contain medicinal herbs can be cooked using double steaming.\nCantonese cuisine is famous for its slow-cooked soup. One famous dish of this kind is called the \"winter melon urn\" (). It is prepared by emptying the inside of a winter melon to make an urn. The outside of the winter melon is often carved with artistic patterns. The inside is then filled with soup ingredients, such as Chinese cured ham, and Chinese herbs. The whole urn, complete with its original melon lid, is double-steamed for four hours. The flavour of the soup is soaked into the flesh of the melon. The whole melon and its contents are brought to the dinner table. The soup is served by scooping out the liquid and the inside wall of the melon. In this case, the edible melon takes the place of the double steaming jar. This application is possible because winter melon has a waxy, and thus waterproof, rind. Winter melon is believed to be nourishing and it is seldom cooked with ingredients that are believed to be too \"yin\" or too \"yang\".\nA dessert dish called \"double-steamed frog ovaries in a coconut\" (\u6930\u9752\u71c9\u96ea\u86e4\u818f) is traditionally prepared for women. Chinese medicinal ingredients (including \"hasma\"), spices, and rock sugar, are placed inside a young coconut to soak in the original coconut juice. The filled coconut is then double-steamed for several hours. The whole coconut is served whole at the table after dinner. The contents and the inside wall of the coconut are scooped out to be consumed."}
{"id": "52999", "revid": "47078414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52999", "title": "Phobos (moon)", "text": "Larger of the two moons of Mars\nPhobos () is the innermost and larger of the two natural satellites of Mars, the other being Deimos. The two moons were discovered in 1877 by American astronomer Asaph Hall. Phobos is named after the Greek god of fear and panic, who is the son of Ares (Mars) and twin brother of Deimos.\nPhobos is a small, irregularly shaped object with a mean radius of . It orbits from the Martian surface, closer to its primary body than any other known natural satellite to a planet. It orbits Mars much faster than Mars rotates and completes an orbit in just 7 hours and 39 minutes. As a result, from the surface of Mars it appears to rise in the west, move across the sky in 4 hours and 15 minutes or less, and set in the east, twice each Martian day. Phobos is one of the least reflective bodies in the Solar System, with an albedo of 0.071. Surface temperatures range from about on the sunlit side to on the shadowed side. The notable surface feature is the large impact crater Stickney, which takes up a substantial proportion of the moon's surface. The surface is also marked by many grooves, and there are numerous theories as to how these grooves were formed.\nImages and models indicate that Phobos may be a rubble pile held together by a thin crust that is being torn apart by tidal interactions. Phobos gets closer to Mars by about per year.\nDiscovery and etymology.\nPhobos was discovered by the American astronomer Asaph Hall on 18 August 1877 at the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C., at about 09:14 Greenwich Mean Time. (Contemporary sources, using the pre-1925 astronomical convention that began the day at noon, give the time of discovery as 17 August at 16:06 Washington Mean Time, meaning 18 August 04:06 in the modern convention.) Hall had discovered Deimos, Mars's other moon, a few days earlier.\nThe discoveries were made using the world's largest refracting telescope, the 26-inch \"Great Equatorial\".\nThe names, originally spelled \"Phobus\" and \"Deimus\" respectively, were suggested by the British academic Henry Madan, a science master at Eton College, who based them on Greek mythology, in which Phobos is a companion to the god, Ares.\nPlanetary moons other than Earth's were never given symbols in the astronomical literature. Denis Moskowitz, a software engineer who designed most of the dwarf planet symbols, proposed a Greek phi (the initial of Phobos) combined with Mars's spear as the symbol of Phobos (). This symbol is not widely used.\nPhysical characteristics.\nPhobos has dimensions of , and retains too little mass to be rounded under its own gravity. Phobos does not have an atmosphere due to its low mass and low gravity. It is one of the least reflective bodies in the Solar System, with an albedo of about 0.071. Infrared spectra show that it has carbon-rich material found in carbonaceous chondrites, and its composition shows similarities to that of Mars's surface. Phobos's density is too low to be solid rock, and it is known to have significant porosity. These results led to the suggestion that Phobos might contain a substantial reservoir of ice. Spectral observations indicate that the surface regolith layer lacks hydration, but ice below the regolith is not ruled out. Surface temperatures range from about on the sunlit side to on the shadowed side.\nUnlike Deimos, Phobos is heavily cratered, with one of the craters near the equator having a central peak despite the moon's small size. The most prominent of these is the crater Stickney, an impact crater in diameter, which takes up a substantial proportion of the moon's surface area. As with the Saturnian moon Mimas's crater Herschel, the impact that created Stickney probably almost shattered Phobos.\nMany grooves and streaks cover the oddly shaped surface. The grooves are typically less than deep, wide, and up to in length, and were originally assumed to have been the result of the same impact that created Stickney. Analysis of results from the \"Mars Express\" spacecraft revealed that the grooves are not radial to Stickney, but are centered on the leading apex of Phobos in its orbit (which is not far from Stickney). Researchers suspected that they had been excavated by material ejected into space by impacts on the surface of Mars. The grooves thus formed as crater chains, and all of them fade away as the trailing apex of Phobos is approached. They have been grouped into 12 or more families of varying age, presumably representing at least 12 Martian impact events. In November 2018, based on computational probability analysis, astronomers concluded that the many grooves on Phobos were caused by boulders ejected from the asteroid impact that created Stickney crater. These boulders rolled in a predictable pattern on the surface of the moon.\nFaint dust rings produced by Phobos and Deimos have long been predicted but attempts to observe these rings have, to date, failed. Images from \"Mars Global Surveyor\" indicate that Phobos is covered with a layer of fine-grained regolith at least 100 meters thick; it is hypothesized to have been created by impacts from other bodies, but it is not known how the material stuck to an object with almost no gravity.\nThe unique Kaidun meteorite that fell on a Soviet military base in Yemen in 1980 has been hypothesized to be a piece of Phobos, but this could not be verified because little is known about the exact composition of Phobos.\nShklovsky's \"Hollow Phobos\" hypothesis.\nIn the late 1950s and 1960s, the unusual orbital characteristics of Phobos led to speculations that it might be hollow. Around 1958, Russian astrophysicist Iosif Samuilovich Shklovsky, studying the secular acceleration of Phobos's orbital motion, suggested a \"thin sheet metal\" structure for Phobos, a suggestion which led to speculations that Phobos was of artificial origin. Shklovsky based his analysis on estimates of the upper Martian atmosphere's density, and deduced that for the weak braking effect to be able to account for the secular acceleration, Phobos had to be very light\u2014one calculation yielded a hollow iron sphere across but less than thick. In a February 1960 letter to the journal \"Astronautics\", Fred Singer, then science advisor to U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, said of Shklovsky's theory:\nIf the satellite is indeed spiraling inward as deduced from astronomical observation, then there is little alternative to the hypothesis that it is hollow and therefore Martian made. The big 'if' lies in the astronomical observations; they may well be in error. Since they are based on several independent sets of measurements taken decades apart by different observers with different instruments, systematic errors may have influenced them.\nSubsequently, the systematic data errors that Singer predicted were found to exist, the claim was called into doubt, and accurate measurements of the orbit available by 1969 showed that the discrepancy did not exist. Singer's critique was justified when earlier studies were discovered to have used an overestimated value of per year for the rate of altitude loss, which was later revised to per year. The secular acceleration is now attributed to tidal effects, which create drag on the moon and therefore cause it to spiral inward.\nThe density of Phobos has now been directly measured by spacecraft to be . Current observations are consistent with Phobos being a rubble pile. Images obtained by the \"Viking\" probes in the 1970s showed a natural object, not an artificial one. Nevertheless, mapping by the \"Mars Express\" probe and subsequent volume calculations do suggest the presence of voids and indicate that it is not a solid chunk of rock but a porous body. The porosity of Phobos was calculated to be 30% \u00b1 5%, or a quarter to a third being empty.\nNamed geological features.\nGeological features on Phobos are named after astronomers who studied Phobos and people and places from Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\".\nCraters on Phobos.\nSome craters have been named, and are listed in the following map and table.\nSKYRESH\nFLIMNAP\nGRILDRIG\nRELDRESAL\nCLUSTRIL\nGULLIVER\nDRUNLO\nSTICKNEY\nLIMTOC\nKEPLER DORSUM\nLAPUTA REGIO?\nLAGADO PLANITIA? \nSHKLOVSKY?\nWENDELL?\n\u00d6pik \nOther named features.\nThere is one named regio, \"Laputa Regio\", and one named planitia, \"Lagado Planitia\"; both are named after places in \"Gulliver's Travels\" (the fictional , a flying island, and Lagado, imaginary capital of the fictional nation Balnibarbi). The only named ridge on Phobos is \"Kepler Dorsum\", named after the astronomer Johannes Kepler.\nOrbital characteristics.\nThe orbital motion of Phobos has been intensively studied, making it \"the best studied natural satellite in the Solar System\" in terms of orbits completed. Its close orbit around Mars produces some distinct effects. With an altitude of , Phobos orbits Mars below the synchronous orbit radius, meaning that it moves around Mars faster than Mars itself rotates. Therefore, from the point of view of an observer on the surface of Mars, it rises in the west, moves comparatively rapidly across the sky (in 4 h 15 min or less) and sets in the east, approximately twice each Martian day (every 11 h 6 min). Because it is close to the surface and in an equatorial orbit, it cannot be seen above the horizon from latitudes greater than 70.4\u00b0. Its orbit is so low that its angular diameter, as seen by an observer on Mars, varies visibly with its position in the sky. Seen at the horizon, Phobos is about 0.14\u00b0 wide; at zenith, it is 0.20\u00b0, one-third as wide as the full Moon as seen from Earth. By comparison, the Sun has an apparent size of about 0.35\u00b0 in the Martian sky. Phobos's phases, inasmuch as they can be observed from Mars, take 0.3191 days (Phobos's synodic period) to run their course, a mere 13 seconds longer than Phobos's sidereal period.\nSolar transits.\nAn observer situated on the Martian surface, in a position to observe Phobos, would see regular transits of Phobos across the Sun. Several of these transits have been photographed by the Mars Rover \"Opportunity\". During the transits, Phobos casts a shadow on the surface of Mars; this event has been photographed by several spacecraft. Phobos is not large enough to cover the Sun's disk, and so cannot cause a total eclipse.\nPredicted destruction.\nTidal deceleration is gradually decreasing the orbital radius of Phobos by approximately every 100 years, and with decreasing orbital radius the likelihood of breakup due to tidal forces increases, estimated in approximately 30\u201350 million years, or about 43 million years in one study's estimate.\nPhobos's grooves were long thought to be fractures caused by the impact that formed the Stickney crater. Other modelling suggested since the 1970s support the idea that the grooves are more like \"stretch marks\" that occur when Phobos gets deformed by tidal forces, but in 2015 when the tidal forces were calculated and used in a new model, the stresses were too weak to fracture a solid moon of that size, unless Phobos is a rubble pile surrounded by a layer of powdery regolith about thick. Stress fractures calculated for this model line up with the grooves on Phobos. The model is supported with the discovery that some of the grooves are younger than others, implying that the process that produces the grooves is ongoing.[]\nGiven Phobos's irregular shape and assuming that it is a pile of rubble (specifically a Mohr\u2013Coulomb body), it will eventually break up due to tidal forces when it reaches approximately 2.1 Mars radii. When Phobos is broken up, it will form a planetary ring around Mars. This predicted ring may last from 1 million to 100 million years. The fraction of the mass of Phobos that will form the ring depends on the unknown internal structure of Phobos. Loose, weakly bound material will form the ring. Components of Phobos with strong cohesion will escape tidal breakup and will enter the Martian atmosphere.\nOrigin.\nThe origin of the Martian moons has been disputed. Phobos and Deimos both have much in common with carbonaceous C-type asteroids, with spectra, albedo, and density very similar to those of C- or D-type asteroids. Based on their similarity, one hypothesis is that both moons may be captured main-belt asteroids. Since both moons have nearly circular orbits that lie almost exactly in Mars's equatorial plane, a capture origin for them requires a mechanism for circularizing their initially highly eccentric orbits and adjusting their inclinations into the equatorial plane, most probably by a combination of atmospheric drag and tidal forces. However, it is not clear that sufficient time is available for this to occur for Deimos. Capture also requires dissipation of energy. The current Martian atmosphere is too thin to capture a Phobos-sized object by atmospheric braking. Geoffrey A. Landis has pointed out that the capture could have occurred if the original body was a binary asteroid that separated under tidal forces.\nPhobos could be a second-generation Solar System object that coalesced in orbit after Mars formed, rather than forming concurrently out of the same birth cloud as Mars.\nAnother hypothesis is that Mars was once surrounded by many Phobos- and Deimos-sized bodies, perhaps ejected into orbit around it by a collision with a large planetesimal. The high porosity of the interior of Phobos (based on the density of 1.88 g/cm3, voids are estimated to comprise 25 to 35 percent of Phobos's volume) is inconsistent with an asteroidal origin. Observations of Phobos in the thermal infrared suggest a composition containing mainly phyllosilicates, which are well known from the surface of Mars. The spectra are distinct from those of all classes of chondrite meteorites, again pointing away from an asteroidal origin. Both sets of findings support an origin of Phobos from material ejected by an impact on Mars that reaccreted in Martian orbit, similar to the prevailing theory for the origin of Earth's moon.\nSome areas of the surface are reddish in color, while others are bluish. The hypothesis is that gravity pull from Mars makes the reddish regolith move over the surface, exposing relatively fresh, unweathered and bluish material from the moon, while the regolith covering it over time has been weathered due to exposure of solar radiation. Because the blue rock differs from known Martian rock, it could contradict the theory that the moon is formed from leftover planetary material after the impact of a large object.\nIn February 2021, Amirhossein Bagheri (ETH Zurich), Amir Khan (ETH Zurich), Michael Efroimsky (US Naval Observatory) and their colleagues proposed a new hypothesis on the origin of the moons. By analyzing the seismic and orbital data from Mars InSight Mission and other missions, they proposed that the moons are born from disruption of a common parent body around 1 to 2.7 billion years ago. The common progenitor of Phobos and Deimos was most probably hit by another object and shattered to form both moons.\nExploration.\nLaunched missions.\nPhobos has been photographed in close-up by several spacecraft whose primary mission has been to photograph Mars. The first was \"Mariner 7\" in 1969, followed by \"Mariner 9\" in 1971, \"Viking 1\" in 1977, Phobos 2 in 1989 \"Mars Global Surveyor\" in 1998 and 2003, \"Mars Express\" in 2004, 2008, 2010 and 2019, and \"Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter\" in 2007 and 2008. On 25 August 2005, the \"Spirit\" rover, with an excess of energy due to wind blowing dust off of its solar panels, took several short-exposure photographs of the night sky from the surface of Mars, and was able to successfully photograph both Phobos and Deimos.\nThe Soviet Union undertook the Phobos program with two probes, both launched successfully in July 1988. \"Phobos 1\" was shut down by an erroneous command from ground control issued in September 1988 and lost while still en route. \"Phobos 2\" arrived at the Mars system in January 1989 and, after transmitting a small amount of data and imagery shortly before beginning its detailed examination of Phobos's surface, abruptly ceased transmission due either to failure of the onboard computer or of the radio transmitter, already operating on backup power. Other Mars missions collected more data, but no dedicated sample return mission has been successfully performed.\nThe Russian Space Agency launched a sample return mission to Phobos in November 2011, called \"Fobos-Grunt\". The return capsule also included a life science experiment of The Planetary Society, called Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment, or LIFE. A second contributor to this mission was the China National Space Administration, which supplied a surveying satellite called \"Yinghuo-1\", which would have been released in the orbit of Mars, and a soil-grinding and sieving system for the scientific payload of the Phobos lander. After achieving Earth orbit, the \"Fobos-Grunt\" probe failed to initiate subsequent burns that would have sent it to Mars. Attempts to recover the probe were unsuccessful and it crashed back to Earth in January 2012.\nOn 1 July 2020, the Mars orbiter of the Indian Space Research Organisation was able to capture photos of the body from 4,200\u00a0km away.\nDuring the end of its 12 March 2025 gravity assist from Mars, en route to 65803 Didymos, the ESA's \"Hera\" was able to observe Phobos retreating from the planet in its orbit at distances less than 13,000 km away.\nPlanned missions.\nThe Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) unveiled on 9 June 2015 the Martian Moons Exploration (MMX), a sample return mission targeting Phobos. MMX will land and collect samples from Phobos multiple times, along with conducting Deimos flyby observations and monitoring Mars's climate. By using a corer sampling mechanism, the spacecraft aims to retrieve a minimum 10\u00a0g amount of samples. NASA, DLR, and CNES are also participating in the project, and will provide scientific instruments and a rover for the mission, named Idefix. MMX is scheduled for launch in 2026, and will return samples to Earth in 2031.\nProposed and undeveloped missions.\nIn 1997 and 1998, the \"Aladdin\" mission was selected as a finalist in the NASA Discovery Program. The plan was to visit both Phobos and Deimos, and launch projectiles at the satellites. The probe would collect the ejecta as it performed a slow flyby (~1\u00a0km/s). These samples would be returned to Earth for study three years later. The Principal Investigator was Dr. Carle Pieters of Brown University. The total mission cost, including launch vehicle and operations was $247.7 million. Ultimately, the mission chosen to fly was \"MESSENGER\", a probe to Mercury.\nIn 2007, the European aerospace subsidiary EADS Astrium was reported to have been developing a mission to Phobos as a technology demonstrator. Astrium was involved in developing a European Space Agency plan for a sample return mission to Mars, as part of the ESA's Aurora programme, and sending a mission to Phobos with its low gravity was seen as a good opportunity for testing and proving the technologies required for an eventual sample return mission to Mars. The mission was envisioned to start in 2016, was to last for three years. The company planned to use a \"mothership\", which would be propelled by an ion engine, releasing a lander to the surface of Phobos. The lander would perform some tests and experiments, gather samples in a capsule, then return to the mothership and head back to Earth where the samples would be jettisoned for recovery on the surface.\nIn 2007, the Canadian Space Agency funded a study by Optech and the Mars Institute for an uncrewed mission to Phobos known as \"Phobos Reconnaissance and International Mars Exploration\" (PRIME). A proposed landing site for the PRIME spacecraft is at the \"Phobos monolith\", a prominent object near Stickney crater. The PRIME mission would be composed of an orbiter and lander, and each would carry 4 instruments designed to study various aspects of Phobos's geology.\nIn 2008, NASA Glenn Research Center began studying a Phobos and Deimos sample return mission that would use solar electric propulsion. The study gave rise to the \"Hall\" mission concept, a New Frontiers-class mission under further study as of 2010.\nAnother concept of a sample return mission from Phobos and Deimos is OSIRIS-REx II, which would use heritage technology from the first OSIRIS-REx mission.\nIn 2013, \"Phobos Surveyor\" mission wa proposed by Stanford University, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\nIn 2014, a Discovery-class mission was proposed to place an orbiter in Mars orbit by 2021 to study Phobos and Deimos through a series of close flybys. The mission is called Phobos And Deimos &amp; Mars Environment (PADME). Two other Phobos missions that were proposed for the Discovery 13 selection included a \"Merlin\", which would flyby Deimos but actually orbit and land on Phobos, and \"Pandora\" which would orbit both Deimos and Phobos.\nRussia plans to repeat Fobos-Grunt mission in the late 2020s, and the European Space Agency is assessing a sample-return mission for 2024 called Phootprint.\nHuman missions.\nPhobos has been proposed as an early target for a human mission to Mars. The teleoperation of robotic scouts on Mars by humans on Phobos could be conducted without significant time delay, and planetary protection concerns in early Mars exploration might be addressed by such an approach.\nA landing on Phobos would be considerably less difficult and expensive than a landing on the surface of Mars itself. A lander bound for Mars would need to be capable of atmospheric entry and subsequent return to orbit without any support facilities, or would require the creation of support facilities in-situ. A lander instead bound for Phobos could be based on equipment designed for lunar and asteroid landings. Furthermore, due to Phobos's very weak gravity, the delta-v required to land on Phobos and return is only 80% of that required for a trip to and from the surface of the Moon.\nIt has been proposed that the sands of Phobos could serve as a valuable material for aerobraking during a Mars landing. A relatively small amount of chemical fuel brought from Earth could be used to lift a large amount of sand from the surface of Phobos to a transfer orbit. This sand could be released in front of a spacecraft during the descent maneuver causing a densification of the atmosphere just in front of the spacecraft.\nWhile human exploration of Phobos could serve as a catalyst for the human exploration of Mars, it could be scientifically valuable in its own right.\nSpace elevator base.\nFirst discussed in fiction in 1956 by Fontenay, Phobos has been proposed as a future site for space elevator construction. This would involve a pair of space elevators: one extending 6,000\u00a0km from the Mars-facing side to the edge of Mars's atmosphere, the other extending from the other side and away from Mars. A spacecraft launching from Mars's surface to the lower space elevator would only need a delta-v of , as opposed to the over needed to launch to low Mars orbit. The spacecraft could be lifted up using electrical power and then released from the upper space elevator with a hyperbolic velocity of , enough to reach Earth and a significant fraction of the velocity needed to reach the asteroid belt. The space elevators could also work in reverse to help spacecraft enter the Martian system. The great mass of Phobos means that any forces from space elevator operation would have minimal effect on its orbit. Additionally, materials from Phobos could be used for space industry."}
{"id": "53000", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53000", "title": "Stir frying", "text": "Cooking technique\nStir frying () is a cooking technique in which ingredients are fried in a small amount of very hot oil while being stirred or tossed in a wok. The technique originated in China and in recent centuries has spread into other parts of Asia and the West. It is similar to saut\u00e9ing in Western cooking technique.\nWok frying may have been used as early as the Han dynasty (206 BC\u00a0\u2013 220 AD), although initially for drying grain, not for cooking. It was not until the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644) that the wok reached its modern shape and allowed quick cooking in hot oil. However, research indicates that metal woks and stir-frying of dishes were already popular in the Song dynasty (960\u20131279), and stir-frying as a cooking technique is mentioned in the 6th-century AD Qimin Yaoshu. Stir-frying has been recommended as a healthy and appealing method of preparing vegetables, meats, and fish, provided calories are kept at a reasonable level.\nThe English-language term \"stir fry\" was coined and introduced in Buwei Yang Chao's \"How to Cook and Eat in Chinese\", first published in 1945, as her translation of the Chinese word \"ch\u01ceo\" \u7092. Although using \"stir-fry\" as a noun is commonplace in English, in Chinese, \"ch\u01ceo\" is used as a verb or adjective only.\nTechnique.\nBroadly speaking, there are two primary techniques: \"chao\" and \"bao\". Both techniques use high heat, but \"chao\" adds a liquid and the ingredients are softer, whereas \"bao\" stir-fries are more crispy because of the Maillard reaction.\n\"Chao\" technique.\nThe \"chao\" (\u7092) technique is similar to the Western technique of saut\u00e9ing. There are regional variations in the amount and type of oil, the ratio of oil to other liquids, the combinations of ingredients, the use of hot peppers, and such, but the same basic procedure is followed in all parts of the country.\nFirst the wok is heated to a high temperature, and just as or before it smokes, a small amount of cooking oil is added down the side of the wok (a traditional expression is \u70ed\u9505\u51b7\u6cb9 \"hot wok, cold oil\") followed by dry seasonings such as ginger, garlic, scallions, or shallots. The seasonings are tossed with a spatula until they are fragrant; other ingredients are then added, beginning with the ones taking the longest to cook, such as meat or tofu. When the meat and vegetables are nearly cooked, combinations of soy sauce, vinegar, wine, salt, or sugar may be added, along with thickeners such as cornstarch, water chestnut flour, or arrowroot.\nA single ingredient, especially a vegetable, may be stir-fried without the step of adding another ingredient, or two or more ingredients may be stir-fried to make a single dish. Although large-leaf vegetables, such as cabbage or spinach, do not need to be cut into small pieces, in dishes which combine ingredients, they should all be cut to roughly the same size and shape.\n\"Wok hei\".\n\"Wok hei\" () romanization is based on the Cantonese Chinese pronunciation of the phrase; when literally translated into English, it can be translated as 'wok thermal radiation' or, metaphorically, as the 'breath of the wok'. The phrase \"breath of a wok\" is a poetic translation Grace Young first coined in her cookbook \"The Wisdom of the Chinese Kitchen\". In her book \"The Breath of a Wok\", Young further explores the ideas and concepts of \"wok hei\". An essay called \"Wok Hay: The Breath of a Wok\" explains how the definition of \"wok hei\" varies among cooks and how difficult it is to translate the term. Some define it as the \"taste of the wok,\" a \"harmony of taste,\" etc.: \"I think of wok hay as the breath of a wok\u2014when a wok breathes energy into a stir fry, giving foods a unique concentrated flavor and aroma.\"\nWhen read in Mandarin, the second character is transliterated as \"qi\" (\"ch'i\" according to its Wade-Giles romanization, so \"wok hei\" is sometimes rendered as \"wok chi\" in Western cookbooks) is the flavour, tastes, and \"essence\" imparted by a hot wok on food during stir-frying. Out of the Eight Culinary Traditions of China, \"wok hei\" is encountered the most in Cantonese cuisine, whereas it may not even be an accepted concept in some of the others.\nTo impart \"wok hei\" the traditional way, the food is cooked in a seasoned wok over a high flame while being stirred and tossed quickly. The distinct taste of \"wok hei\" is partially imbued into the metal of the wok itself from previous cooking sessions and brought out again when cooking over high heat. In practical terms, the flavour imparted by chemical compounds results from caramelization, Maillard reactions, and the partial combustion of oil that come from charring and searing of the food at very high heat in excess of . Aside from flavour, \"wok hei\" also manifests itself in the texture and smell of the cooked items.\n\"Bao\" technique.\nIn the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the \"bao\" technique () of stir-frying on a high flame was typical of cuisine from the northern Chinese province of Shandong. The wok is first heated to a dull red glow over a high fire. The oil, seasonings, and meats are then added in rapid succession. The food is continually tossed, stopping only to add other ingredients such as broths, vegetables, or more seasonings. The purpose of \"bao\" is to highlight natural tastes, so minimal seasoning is added. Because of the high heat, \"bao\" is ideal for small amounts of food that cook quickly, so the juices do not flow out of the items. Meat is coated with egg white or starch in order to contain the juices. When the food is cooked, it is poured and ladled out of the wok. The wok must then be quickly rinsed to prevent food residues from charring and burning onto the wok bottom because of residual heat.\nA larger amount of cooking fat with a high smoke point, such as refined plant oil, is often used in \"bao\". The main ingredients are usually cut into smaller pieces to aid in cooking.\nHistory.\nIn China.\nThe Chinese character \u7092 is attested in inscriptions on bronze vessels from the Eastern Zhou period (771\u2013256 BC), but not in the sense of stir frying. Dry stirring was used in the Han dynasty (206 BC\u00a0\u2013 220 AD) to parch grain. Although there are no surviving records of Han dynasty stir frying, archaeological evidence of woks and the tendency to slice food thinly indicate that the technique was likely used for cooking.\nThe term initially appears in the sense of \"stir frying\" in the \"Qimin Yaoshu\" (\u9f4a\u6c11\u8981\u8853), a sixth-century agricultural manual, including in a recipe for scrambled eggs. In sources from the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907), \"chao\" refers not to a cooking technique, but to a method for roasting tea leaves. It reappears as a cooking method in a dozen recipes from the Song dynasty (960\u20131279). The Song period is when the Chinese started to use vegetable oil for frying instead of animal fats. Until then, vegetable oil had been used chiefly in lamps.\nHistorically, stir frying was not as important a technique as boiling or steaming, since the oil needed for stir frying was expensive. The technique became increasingly popular in the late Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), in part because the wood and charcoal used to fire stoves were becoming increasingly expensive near urban centers, and stir-frying could cook food quickly without wasting fuel. \"The increasingly commercial nature of city life\" in the late Ming and Qing (1644\u20131912) periods also favored speedy methods. But even as stir frying became an important method in Chinese cuisine, it did not replace other cooking techniques. For instance, \"only five or six of over 100 recipes recorded in the sixteenth-century novel \"Jin Ping Mei\" are stir fry recipes and wok dishes accounted for only 16 percent of the recipes in the most famous eighteenth century recipe book, the \"Suiyuan shidan\"\".\nBy the late Qing, most Chinese kitchens were equipped with a wok range (\"chaozao\" \u7092\u7076 or \"paotai zao\" \u70ae\u81fa\u7076) convenient for stir-frying because it had a large hole in the middle to insert the bottom of a wok into the flames.\nIn the West.\nStir frying was brought to America by early Chinese immigrants, and has been used in non-Asian cuisine.\nThe term \"stir fry\" as a translation for \"chao\" was coined in the 1945 book \"How To Cook and Eat in Chinese\", by Buwei Yang Chao. An excerpt from the book defines the term:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Roughly speaking, \"ch'ao\" may be defined as a big-fire-shallow-fat-continual-stirring-quick-frying of cut-up material with wet seasoning. We shall call it 'stir-fry' or 'stir' for short. The nearest to this in western cooking is \"saut\u00e9\". ... Because stir-frying has such critical timing and is done so quickly, it can be called 'blitz-cooking.'\nAlthough using the term \"stir-fry\" as a noun is commonplace in English, in Chinese, the word \u7092 (ch\u01ceo) is used as a verb or adjective only. In the West, stir frying spread from Chinese family and restaurant kitchens into general use. One popular cookbook noted that in the \"health-conscious 1970s\" suddenly it seemed that \"everyone was buying a wok, and stir frying remained popular because it was quick.\" Many families had difficulty fitting a family dinner into their crowded schedules but found that stir-fried dishes could be prepared in as little as fifteen minutes.\nEffects on nutritional value.\nWriters extol the quick cooking at high heat for retaining color, texture, and nutritional value. One study compared the effects of boiling, steaming, and stir frying on bamboo shoots. Boiling and steaming decreased the amount of protein, soluble sugar, ash, and total free amino acids by more than one-third. Stir-frying bamboo shoots increased their fat content by 528.57% due to the addition of oil. With 78.9% retention, stir frying preserved significantly more vitamin C than boiling. Taking into consideration the total retention of nutrients, the study concluded that stir frying is the method best suited for bamboo shoots. Similar results were found for stir frying red peppers.\nAnother study examined the nutritional value of broccoli after five common cooking techniques: steaming, boiling, microwaving, stir-frying and stir-frying followed by deep frying. The study found that the two most common methods of home cooking in China, stir-frying and stir-frying combined with deep frying in soybean oil, resulted in a much greater loss of chlorophyll, soluble protein, soluble sugar and vitamin C. The method which affected these values the least was steaming. Stir frying for five minutes and stir frying combined with boiling caused the highest loss of glucosinolates, which according to this study are best preserved by steaming. A study performed by the Spanish National Research Counsel stir-fried the broccoli for only three minutes and thirty seconds and found that nutritional value of these broccoli samples varied depending on which cooking oil was used. Comparing these results to an uncooked sample, the study found that phenolics and vitamin C were reduced more than glucosinolates and minerals. Stir-frying with soybean, peanut, safflower or extra virgin olive oil did not reduce glucosinolates, and broccoli stir-fried with extra virgin olive oil or sunflower oil had vitamin C levels similar to uncooked broccoli. These levels were significantly lower with other edible oils.\nStir frying is not without health risks. Recent studies show that heterocyclic amines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are formed by stir frying meat at very high temperatures. These chemicals may cause DNA changes that may contribute to increased risk of cancer.\nUses in traditional medicine.\nStir-frying is used in the preparation of some Chinese herbal medicines, in a process known as \"dry-frying\". Dry-frying a medical herb with honey is commonly used to increase its sweetness and consequently its supposed tonic effects on spleen and stomach \"qi\". Stir frying in vinegar is typically used to direct the properties of a herb more to the liver, under the belief that the sour taste belongs to the liver. There is no scientific evidence for any of these medicinal claims.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53004", "revid": "8551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53004", "title": "Montone decreasing", "text": ""}
{"id": "53005", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53005", "title": "Monotone decreasing", "text": ""}
{"id": "53006", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53006", "title": "Monotone increasing", "text": ""}
{"id": "53007", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53007", "title": "Iridium (element)", "text": ""}
{"id": "53008", "revid": "50686819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53008", "title": "Iridium Communications", "text": "American satellite communications company\nIridium Communications Inc. (formerly Iridium Satellite LLC) is a publicly traded American company headquartered in McLean, Virginia, United States. Iridium operates the Iridium satellite constellation, a system of 80 satellites: 66 are active satellites and the remaining fourteen function as in-orbit spares. Iridium Satellites are used for worldwide voice and data communication from handheld satellite phones, satellite messenger communication devices and integrated transceivers, as well as for two-way satellite messaging service from supported conventional mobile phones. The nearly polar orbit and communication between satellites via inter-satellite links provide global service availability.\nHistory.\nThe Iridium communications service was launched on November 1, 1998, formerly known as Iridium SSC. The first Iridium call was made from Vice President of the United States Al Gore to Gilbert Grosvenor, the great-grandson of Alexander Graham Bell and chairman of the National Geographic Society. Motorola provided the technology and major financial backing. The logo of the company represents the Big Dipper. The company derives its name from the chemical element iridium, which has an atomic number of 77, equaling the initial number of satellites which were calculated to be required for global coverage. However, due to optimizations of orbit trajectories, technology updates and real-world conditions, only 66 are required for global coverage. A total of 95 satellites were launched in this constellation, with 66 active and the remaining 29 satellites operating as spares.\nOn August 13, 1999, nine months after the launch of the organization, the founding company went into Chapter 11 bankruptcy. The handsets could not operate as promoted until the entire constellation of satellites was in place, requiring a massive initial capital cost of billions of dollars. The cost of service dissuaded many potential users. Reception indoors was difficult and the handheld devices, when compared to terrestrial cellular mobile phones were bulkier and more expensive, both of which discouraged adoption among potential users.\nMismanagement is another major factor that was cited in the original program's failure. In 1999, CNN writer David Rohde detailed how he applied for Iridium service and was sent information kits, but was never contacted by a sales representative. He encountered programming problems on Iridium's website, and a \"run-around\" from the company's representatives. After Iridium filed bankruptcy, it cited \"difficulty gaining subscribers.\"\nThe initial commercial failure of Iridium had a damping effect on other proposed commercial satellite constellation projects, including Teledesic. Other schemes (Orbcomm, ICO Global Communications, and Globalstar) followed Iridium into bankruptcy protection, while a number of other proposed schemes were never even constructed.\nIn August 2000, Motorola announced that the Iridium satellites would have to be deorbited. Despite this, they remained in orbit and operational. In December 2000, the US government stepped in to save Iridium by providing US$72 million in exchange for a two-year contract. They also approved the fire sale of the company from US bankruptcy court for $25 million in March 2001. This erased over $4 billion in debt.\nIridium service was restarted in 2001, by the newly founded Iridium Satellite LLC, which was owned by a group of private investors.\nOn February 10, 2009, the Iridium 33 satellite collided with a defunct Russian satellite, named Kosmos 2251, over Siberia. Two large debris clouds were created.\nIridium NEXT launch campaign.\nIridium replaced its original constellation by sending 75 new Iridium satellites into space on SpaceX Falcon 9 rockets in a series of 8 launches. The campaign also consisted of upgrades to Iridium ground infrastructure.\nThe Iridium NEXT launch campaign was announced in 2007. Within three years, Iridium completed financing and began work on launching new satellites. In June 2010, Iridium announced a fixed-price contract with Thales Alenia Space for the design and construction of the next-generation satellites for the upgraded constellation. Two weeks later, Iridium announced a $492 million contract designating the Falcon 9 as a major provider of launch services for the Iridium NEXT campaign, becoming the largest single commercial launch deal ever signed (simultaneously representing a benchmark in cost-effective satellite delivery to space). The total expenditures of approximately $2.9 billion were partially financed with debt: between 2010 and 2017, the debt of Iridium Communications Inc. grew from $37.4 millions to $1,455.6 millions.\nOn January 14, 2017, 10 years after the campaign was first announced, the first of eight Iridium NEXT launches took place with SpaceX from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Over the next two years, Iridium sent an additional 65 satellites into low Earth orbit to completely replace the original satellite constellation. The final Iridium NEXT launch took place on January 11, 2019, less than two years after the first launch.\nThe Iridium NEXT network covers the entire Earth, including poles, oceans and airways, with 66 satellites, with the remaining nine acting as active backups, for a total of 75 launched. Six remain on the ground as spares for a total of 81 built. Of the six spare satellites five have been launched on 20 May 2023 while the last one, Iridium 101, is still on the ground.\nPresent status.\nIridium Satellite LLC merged with a special-purpose acquisition company (GHQ) created by the investment bank Greenhill &amp; Co. in September 2009 to create Iridium Communications Inc. The public company trades on NASDAQ under the symbol \"IRDM\". The company surpassed one million subscribers in March 2018. Revenue for the full year 2018 was $523.0 million with operational EBITDA of $302.0 million, a 14% increase from $265.6 million in the prior year.\nIridium manages several operations centers, including Tempe, Arizona and Leesburg, Virginia, United States.\nThe system is being used by the U.S. Department of Defense.\nMatt Desch is the current CEO of Iridium LLC.\nHosted Payload Alliance.\nIridium is a founding member of the Hosted Payload Alliance (HPA), a satellite industry alliance program. Membership in the HPA is open to satellite operators, satellite manufacturers, system integrators, and other interested parties.\nAir safety communications.\nIn July 2011, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued a ruling that approves the use of Iridium for Future Air Navigation System (FANS) data links, enabling satellite data links with air-traffic control for aircraft flying in the FANS environment, including areas not served by Inmarsat (above or below 70 degrees latitude) which includes polar routes.\nGlobal Maritime Distress and Safety System.\nIn January 2020, the Iridium constellation was certified for use in the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS). The certification ended a monopoly on the provision of maritime distress services that had previously been held by Inmarsat since the system became operational in 1999.\nAdoption of standard-based solutions for cellphones.\nIn 2023, Qualcomm and Iridium announced an agreement that was supposed to bring two-way satellite messaging service to Android smartphones. The service, called Snapdragon Satellite, should have been supported starting with devices that feature Snapdragon 8 Gen 2 chipsets, which was expected to be launched in the second half of 2023. The solution for smartphones was supposed to utilize Iridium's L Band spectrum for downlink and uplink.\nOn November 9, 2023, Iridium announced that Qualcomm had notified them about the end of their partnership due to a lack of interest in Qualcomm's and Iridium's proprietary solution by smartphone manufacturers. A Qualcomm spokesman stated \"Smartphone makers have indicated a preference towards standards-based solutions for satellite-to-phone connectivity. We expect to continue to collaborate with Iridium on standards-based solutions while discontinuing efforts on the proprietary solution that was introduced earlier this year.\"\nIn 2024, Iridium introduced Project Stardust, a 3GPP standard-based satellite-to-cellphone service focusing on messaging, emergency communications and IoT for devices like cars, smartphones, tablets and related consumer applications. The solution will be supported using a version of the NB-IoT standard for 5G non-terrestrial networks (NTN). Scheduled for launch in 2026, it won't replace the company\u2019s proprietary solution for voice and high-speed data; instead it will co-exist with that offering on the Iridium's existing global low-earth orbit satellite network.\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nFrom 2015\u20132022, Iridium Satellite was selling navigation systems directly to its Russian subsidiary, Iridium Communications. In 2022, the Moscow-based subsidiary gave the National Guard of Russia access to the satellite constellation.\nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Iridium structured their operations to comply with US sanctions and stopped shipment of end-user equipment to Russia. Despite this, In 2023, Iridium Communications, via some unknown intermediaries, imported machines made by the American parent company for receiving and converting voice and images.\nIridium satellite constellation.\nThe Iridium system requires 66 active satellites in low Earth orbit to complete its constellation and 9 spare satellites are kept in-orbit to serve in case of failure. The satellites are in six polar orbital planes at a height of approximately . Satellites communicate with neighboring satellites via Ka band intersatellite links to relay communications to and from ground stations. The original constellation was launched in the late 1990s before the company went through bankruptcy. In January 2017, Iridium began to launch its next-generation satellites through its $3 billion launch campaign, Iridium NEXT. The new satellites were sent into space on SpaceX Falcon 9 launch vehicles from Vandenberg AFB Space Launch Complex 4 in California over the course of eight launches between January 2017 and January 2019. On January 14, 2017, SpaceX launched 10 of the new Iridium satellites into orbit. The second launch of Iridium NEXT satellites took place on June 25, 2017 on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket out of Vandenberg Space Force Base. This was the second of eight scheduled launches. The third launch of 10 NEXT satellites took place on October 9, 2017. On December 22, 2017, ten additional satellites were deployed after a successful launch on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket. On May 22, SpaceX successfully launched an additional five Iridium NEXT satellites from Vandenberg Space Force Base.\nOn January 11, 2019, the final ten satellites were placed in orbit by SpaceX.\nSubscriber equipment.\nHandsets.\nIridium offers four satellite handsets: the 9555, 9575A (which is only available to US government customers), the Extreme, and the Extreme PTT.\nWi-Fi Hotspots.\nIn 2014, Iridium began to offer the Iridium Go! hotspot, which can also be used as a distress beacon under certain circumstances. As of September 2020, Iridium's manufacturing contractor, Beam Communications, had built 50,000 of these devices.\nOne-way pagers.\nTwo pagers were made for the Iridium network\u00a0\u2013 the Motorola 9501 and Kyocera SP-66K. These are one-way devices that could receive messages sent in the form of SMS.\nMessages are delivered to pre-selected \"MDAs\" which cover a certain geographic area. Three of these MDAs may be selected on a web-based portal or updated automatically if the paging service is bound to an Iridium phone. Each country has its own MDA based on its country code; some of the larger countries are divided into several MDAs, while separate MDAs exist for sections of ocean and common aeronautic routes.\nPagers are assigned with telephone numbers in area code 480 and can also be contacted using email, SMS and the web-based interface used to send messages to Iridium phones.\nTwo-way satellite messengers.\nIn 2017, Garmin announced inReach SE+ and inReach Explorer+ satellite communicators, which use Iridium satellite network for global coverage. The Garmin inReach Mini, a satellite messenger, was announced a year later. These devices can send and receive text messages with any cell phone number, email address or another inReach device, as well as to provide location sharing, navigation and direct communication options to emergency services.\nZOLEO satellite communicator uses global Iridium network when cellular or Wi-Fi coverage is unavailable. It does so by means of Bluetooth connection to provide two-way messaging to connected smartphone or tablet devices.\nOther satellite phones.\nSeveral other Iridium-based telephones exist, such as payphones, and equipment intended for installation on ships and aircraft. The DPL handset made by NAL Research combined with a 9522 transceiver is used for some of these products. This handset provides a user interface nearly identical to that of the 9505 series phones.\nStandalone transceiver units.\nThese can be used for data-logging applications in remote areas (as in data collection satellites). Some types of buoys, such as those used for the tsunami warning system, use Iridium satellites to communicate with their base. The remote device is programmed to call or send short burst data (SBD) messages to the base at specified intervals, or it can be set to accept calls in order for it to offload its collected data.\nThe following transceivers have been released over the years:\nShort burst data modems.\nThese devices support only SBD for Internet of things (IoT) services and do not use a SIM card.\nIridium OpenPort.\nIridium OpenPort is a broadband satellite voice and data communications system for maritime vessels. The system is used for crew calling and e-mail services on sea vessels such as merchant fleets, government and navy vessels, fishing fleets and personal yachts.\nIridium operates at only 2.2 to 3.8\u00a0kbit/s, which requires very aggressive voice compression and decompression algorithms. (By comparison, AMR used in 3G phones requires a minimum of 4.75\u00a0kbit/s, G.729 requires 6.4\u00a0kbit/s, and iLBC requires 13.33\u00a0kbit/s.) Latency for data connections averages 1800\u00a0ms round-trip, with a mode of 1300 to 1400\u00a0ms and a minimum around 980\u00a0ms. Latency is highly variable depending on the path data takes through the satellite constellation as well the need for retransmissions due to errors, which may be around 2 to 3% for mobile originated packets under good conditions.\nIridium Certus.\nOne of the Iridium NEXT services is Iridium Certus, a globally available satellite broadband which is capable of up to 704 Kbps of bandwidth across maritime, aviation, land mobile, government, and IoT applications. Terminals for the service are provided by Cobham, Intellian Technologies and Thales.\nIridium STL.\nIridium is providing Satellite Time &amp; Location (STL) service. It was developed by Satelles company, which was later acquired by Iridium Communications in April 2024.\nAccording to the company, it is the only LEO satellite based commercial positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) service (as of April 2024).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53009", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53009", "title": "Conan OBrien", "text": ""}
{"id": "53011", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53011", "title": "Poet laureate", "text": "Officially appointed poet\nA poet laureate (plural: poets laureate) is a poet officially appointed by a government or conferring institution, typically expected to compose poems for special events and occasions. Albertino Mussato of Padua and Francesco Petrarca (Petrarch) of Arezzo were the first to be crowned poets laureate after the classical age, respectively in 1315 and 1342. In Britain, the term dates from the appointment of Bernard Andr\u00e9 by Henry VII of England. The royal office of Poet Laureate in England dates from the appointment of John Dryden in 1668.\nIn modern times a poet laureate title may be conferred by an organization such as the Poetry Foundation, which designates a Young People's Poet Laureate, unconnected with the National Youth Poet Laureate and the United States Poet Laureate.\nThe office is also popular with regional and community groups. Examples include the Pikes Peak Poet Laureate, which is designated by a \"Presenting Partners\" group from within the community, the Minnesota poet laureate chosen by the League of Minnesota Poets (est. 1934), the Northampton Poet Laureate chosen by the Northampton Arts Council, and the Martha's Vineyard Poet Laureate chosen by ten judges representing the Martha's Vineyard Poetry Society.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nIn ancient Greece, the laurel was used to form a crown or wreath of honour for poets and heroes. The custom derives from the ancient myth of Apollo and Daphne (\"Daphne\" signifying \"laurel\" in Greek), and was revived in Padua for Albertino Mussato, followed by Petrarch's own crowning ceremony in the audience hall of the medieval senatorial palazzo on the Campidoglio on April 8, 1341. Because the Renaissance figures who were attempting to revive the Classical tradition lacked detailed knowledge of the Roman precedent they were attempting to emulate, these ceremonies took on the character of doctoral candidatures. In Persia, the poet laureate (\"am\u012br-\" or \"malek-al-\u0161o\u02bfar\u0101\u02be\") carried artistic authority and were provided sources of income.\nSince the office of poet laureate has become widely adopted, the term \"laureate\" has come to signify recognition for preeminence or superlative achievement (cf. Nobel laureate). A royal degree in rhetoric, \"poet laureate\" was awarded at European universities in the Middle Ages. The term therefore may refer to the holder of such a degree, which recognized skill in rhetoric, grammar, and language. During England's seventeenth century, the poet laureate served as the \"court poet\" of royalty, and was often called upon to celebrate state occasions until that role was abolished during the early 1800s. The \"skald\" in ancient Scandinavia often spent their careers too serving as the court poets of Norway's kings. Just like the first English poets laureate, ministers during China's feudal era presented \"commanded poems\" at royal events and were beholden to the ruling class. In Japan, the poet laureate (\"keikanshijin\") was also imperially appointed and were often called upon to read at the annual Utakai Hajime. Comparatively, in Africa, kingdoms such as the Kuba in the Belgian Congo (modern day Democratic Republic of the Congo) appointed bards that served as both the royal historian and poet laureate. In addition to being known as poets laureate, bards were also referred to as \"praise-poets\" due to their special function of venerating the chief.\nIn the Xhosa language, \"Imbongi YeSizwethe\" can be translated to mean either \"poet laureate\" or \"national poet\". Similar to what is expressed in the Xhosa term, some poets have been dually noted as \"poet laureate\" and \"national poet\" depending upon the source: Agostinho Neto (Angola), Kazi Nazrul Islam (Bangladesh), Rabindranath Tagore (India), Jos\u00e9 Craveirinha (Mozambique), Mahmoud Darwish (Palestine), Mohamed Ibrahim Warsame 'Hadrawi' (Somalia), Edwin Thumboo (Singapore) and Taras Shevchenko (Ukraine). This contrasts with other figures such as Shamsur Rahman (Bangladesh), Thomas Moore (Bermuda), Leung Ping-kwan (Hong Kong), Francisco Borja da Costa (Timor\u2013Leste) and Haji Gora Haji (Zanzibar)\u2014who are conferred an \"unofficial poet laureate\" status due to their poetical works.\nAs of modern times, over a dozen national governments continue the poet laureate tradition. The Commonwealth of Nations even has its own position, and Selina Tusitala Marsh was appointed the inaugural Commonwealth Poet Laureate in 2025.\nBy continent.\nAfrica.\nAlgeria.\nIn Algeria, during the 11th century, Ibn Sharaf al-Qayrawani was the court poet of the Z\u012brids. Al-Thaghri Al-Tilimsani was appointed as a court poet during the Zayyanid dynasty.\nBurkina Faso.\nBo\u00fbbacar Tinguidji, a Fula \"maabo\", was appointed as the court poet of the Ruler of Dori.\nCameroon.\nPoets laureate of Cameroon include Ren\u00e9 Philomb\u00e9.\nCape Verde.\nPoets laureate of Cape Verde include Eug\u00e9nio Tavares.\nEgypt.\nAhmed Shawqi became Egypt's Poet Laureate in 1894.\nEritrea.\nPoets laureate of Eritrea include Reesom Haile.\nEthiopia.\nIn Ethiopia, the officially designated Laureate includes Tsegaye Gebre-Medhin. Tsegaye's award was granted in 1966 by His Majesty, Haile-Selasie II.\nGambia.\nPoets laureate of The Gambia include Lenrie Peters.\nGhana.\nPoets laureate of Ghana include Atukwei Okai.\nKenya.\nMuyaka bin Haji al-Ghassaniy was the Poet Laureate of Mombasa, Kenya.\nLesotho.\nPoets laureate of Lesotho include Joshua Pulumo Mohapeloa.\nLiberia.\nPoets laureate for the Republic of Liberia have included Roland T. Dempster, Melvin B. Tolson (1947), and Patricia Jabbeh Wesley.\nLibya.\nLibya-born Callimachus was appointed as an imperial court poet to Ptolemy II Philadelphus.\nMadagascar.\nPoets laureate of Madagascar include Jacques Rabemananjara.\nMalawi.\nPoets laureate of Malawi include Jack Mapanje.\nMali.\nPoets laureate of Mali include Ban Sumana Sis\u00f2k\u00f2.\nMauritania.\nMohamed Ould Taleb was appointed as the official court poet during Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz's presidency in Mauritania.\nMauritius.\nPoets laureate of Mauritius include \u00c9douard Maunick.\nMorocco.\nIn the 13th century, Abdelaziz al-Malzuzi was the court poet of Abu Yahya ibn Abd al-Haqq. During the 16th-17th centuries in Morocco's history, Abd al-Aziz al-Fishtali was appointed as the poet laureate of the Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur.\nNiger.\nBurkina Faso-born Bo\u00fbbacar Tinguidji, a Fula \"maabo\", was appointed as the court poet of the Songhai chief Mossi Gaidou in Dargol, Niger.\nNigeria.\nPoets laureate of Nigeria include Obo Aba Hisanjani and Niyi Osundare. Mamman Jiya Vatsa was the inaugural poet laureate of Abuja, Nigeria. Tanure Ojaide was the Poet Laureate of the Niger Delta.\nRwanda.\nDuring the 18th century in Rwanda's history, Semidogoro was the official court poet of Mibambwe III Mutabazi II Sentabyo. Sekarama was the official court poet during the reigns of Kigeli IV Rwabugiri and Mutara III Rudahigwa. Poets laureate of Rwanda include Edouard Bamporiki Uwayo.\nSenegal.\nPoets laureate of Senegal include L\u00e9opold S\u00e9dar Senghor and Robert Hayden (1966).\nSierra Leone.\nPoets laureate of Sierra Leone include the Italian authors Roberto Malini and Dario Picciau.\nSouth Africa.\nIn the 19th century, Magolwane kaMkhathini Jiyane was the court poet of Shaka Zulu. During the 20th century, David Livingstone Phakamile (Yali-Manisi) was the poet laureate of Kaiser Matanzima. Poets laureate of South Africa include Mazisi Kunene (2005), Keorapetse Kgositsile (2006), and Mongane Wally Serote (2018\u2013 ).\nSudan.\nDuring the 1800s in Sudan, Al U'aysir was the court poet (\"inq\u012bb\") of the Ja'alin tribe King Mek Nimr.\nTanzania.\nPoets laureate of Tanzania include Saadani Kandoro (1969).\nTunisia.\nDuring the 10th century, Muhammad ibn Hani al-Andalusi al-Azdi was appointed as the chief court poet to the Fatimid Caliph al-Mu'izz. Also, in the 10th century, Ali ibn Muhammad al-Iyadi was the court poet of Fatimid caliphs al-Qa'im, al-Mansur, and al-Mu'izz. Poets laureate of Tunisia include Qasim Shabi.\nUganda.\nPoets laureate of Uganda include Akena Adoko.\nZimbabwe.\nGinyilitshe Hlabangana was the official poet laureate (or \"Imbongi YeNkosi\") for the Ndebele Kingdom (now called Matabeleland, Zimbabwe).\nAsia.\nAfghanistan.\nDuring the 10\u201311th century, Unsuri was made poet laureate by Sultan Ma\u1e25m\u016bd of Ghazna. Modern poets laureate of Afghanistan include Abdullah \"Malik al-Shu'Ara\" Qari, Sufi Abdul Bitab, and Ustad Khalilullah Khalili.\nArmenia.\nPoets laureate of Armenia include Avetik Isahakian and Hovhannes Toumanian (1970).\nAzerbaijan.\nIn 1502, Azerbaijan-born court poet Habibi earned the title \"king of poets\" from Safavid king Ismail I. Poets laureate of Azerbaijan include Bakhtiyar Vahabzadeh.\nBahrain.\nBahrain-born Mu\u1e25ammad Shar\u012bf al-Sh\u012bb\u0101n\u012b served as the poet laureate of the court of Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (c. 1967).\nBangladesh.\nDuring the 15th century, Zainuddin was appointed the court poet of Bengal while under the patronage of Prince Yusuf Khan. Yusuf-Zulekha was the court poet of Sultan of Bengal, Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah. Sometime during the 15th-16th century, Shah Muhammad Saghir was the poet laureate of the Sultan of Bengal Ghiyasuddin Azam Shah. Daulat Qazi, born in what is now modern day Bangladesh, was officially appointed as the poet for the Arakan court in Myanmar (then ruled by King Thiri Thudhamma).\nBrunei.\nPoets laureate of Brunei include royal poet Omar Ali Saifuddien III.\nCambodia.\nPoets laureate of Cambodia include Ind (1907\u20131924).\nChina.\nIn Ancient China, Emperor Yuan of Han appointed Shi You as the poet laureate. During the Tang dynasty, He Zhichang was appointed as the poet laureate of Emperor Ho Kwei. Zhou Boqi was a court poet appointed during the Yuan Dynasty.\nCyprus.\nDuring the 19th century, after the Turks invaded Cyprus, Mufti Hilmi Efendi was appointed the poet laureate of Sultan Mahmud II. In 1980, the World Academy of Arts and Culture awarded Cyprus-born Costas Montis the title of Poet Laureate.\nGeorgia.\nHeraclius II of Georgia appointed Sayat-Nova as his poet laureate at the court of Tbilisi.\nIndia.\nIn India, poets laureate were maintained at the royal courts beginning in ancient times. For instance, in Ancient India, Harisena was designated poet laureate by Emperor Samudragupta. During the 7th century, Emperor Harsha proclaimed B\u0101\u1e47abha\u1e6d\u1e6da as the poet laureate. Jayamkondar was made poet laureate by Chola Emperor Kulottunga I. In the 10th century, Ranna was the poet laureate of Western Chalukya Kings Tailapa II and Satyashraya. Adikavi Pampa was the court poet of Vemulavada Chalukya king Arikesari II. Also, in the 10th century, Ponna received the title \"Kavichakravarthi\" (poet laureate) and \"Ubhaya-Chakravarthi\" (imperial poet in two languages) from Rashtrakuta king Krishna III. Padmagupta Parimala was a Paramama court poet. In the mid-11th century, Nannaya was the poet-laureate of Rajaraja Narendra.\nIn the 15th century, Cherusseri Namboothiri was the court poet of Udaya Varma. During the 15th-16th centuries, Allasani Peddana was the poet laureate of Emperor Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagara. In the 16th century, Shaikh Gadai Kamboh was the poet laureate in the court of Sultan of Sikandar Lodhi. In 1665, Nusrati was made a poet laureate by Sultan \u02bfAl\u012b II (r.\u20091656\u20131672) of the \u02bf\u0100dil-Sh\u0101h\u012b dynasty. During the Mughal Empire, Emperor Akbar made Birbal the poet laureate. In the aforementioned empire's later history, Taleb Amoli was Emperor Jahangir's poet laureate from 1618 to 1627, and Emperor Shah Jahan appointed Jagannatha Panditaraja as the poet laureate during his reign. In the 18th century, Bharatchandra Ray was the court poet of Maharaja Krishnachandra.\nMohammad Ibrahim Zauq was the poet laureate of the final Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar. In the 19th century, Ghalib was appointed as the poet laureate of the Mughal Court. In the 1890s, Z. Savarayalounaiker was regarded as the Poet Laureate of French India (particularly Pondicherry).\nIn the Indian subcontinent Kashmir, Mullah Nadiri was the poet laureate during the reign of Sultan Sikandar (1378\u20131416, reigned 1389\u20131413).\nAndhra Pradesh.\nSripada Krishnamurty Sastry was the first poet laureate of Andhra Pradesh, India. Dasarathi served as the court poet (\"aasthana kavi\") for the government of Andhra Pradesh.\nJaisalmer.\nAlseedan ji Ratnu was the poet laureate (\"raj-kavi\") of Jaisalmer state.\nKarnataka.\nIn what was once the Western Chalukya Empire, Nagavarma II was the poet laureate (\"Katakacharya\") by Chalukya King Jagadhekamalla.\nKerala.\nK. C. Kesava Pillai was the Poet Laureate of Travancore (located in present-day Kerala state). Vallathol Narayana Menon was the Poet Laureate of Kerala.\nMadhya Pradesh.\nDuring the 15th century, Raidhu (who was born in Gwalior) was the poet laureate for the court of Dungar Singh and Kirti Singh.\nMaharashtra.\nBhaskar Ramchandra Tambe was the poet laureate of Maharashtra.\nTamil Nadu.\nKannadasan was the poet laureate of Tamil Nadu at the time of his death.\nTelegana.\nSripada Krishna Sastry was the poet laureate during the 20th century.\nIndonesia.\nIn the 14th century, Mpu Prapanca served as the poet laureate in the royal court of Emperor Hayam Wuruk. During the 18th century, Yasadipura I served as the Poet Laureate of Surakarta Sunanate.\nIran.\nIn the 11th century, Iran-born Abu-al-Faraj Runi became a court poet during the Ghaznavid period. Manuchehri was another court poet during the aforementioned period. Qatran Tabrizi was the court poet of the dynasties of the Rawadids and Shaddadids. During the 13th century, Khwaju Kermani was the official court poet of Il-Khanid rulers Abu Sa'id Bahadur Khan and Arpa Ke'un, the Mozaffarid Mubariz al-Din Muhammad, and Abu Ishaq Inju of the Inju dynasty. Farid Isfarayini was the court poet of the Salghurids in Shiraz. In the 14th century, Salman Savaji was the court poet of the Jalayirids. Sometime during the 15th century, Baba Fighani Shirazi became the court poet of Aq Qoyunlu Ya'qub Beg.\nDuring the Safavid era, Vahshi Bafqi was the poet laureate of Ghiyat al-Din Mir Miran. Shifa'i Isfahani was the poet laureate of Shah Abbas I (r.\u20091587\u00a0\u2013\u00a01629), who highly valued him, granting him the honorific title of \"malik al-shu'ar\u0101 wa mumt\u0101z-i \u012ar\u0101n\".\nIn the 17th century, Taleb Amoli was made the poet laureate of the Mughal emperor Jahangir (1618). Also, in the 17th century, during his travels to India, the Persian poet Kalim Kashani was made poet laureate by Mogul emperor Shah Jahan in 1632. During the 18th century, Saba (Fath-Ali Khan Kashani) was the poet laureate of Fath-Ali Shah Qajar. In the 19th century, Prince Gholam-Hossein Mirza was the poet laureate of Mozaffar al-Din Mirza in Tabriz.\nMohammad-Taqi Bahar was the poet laureate of Mozaffar ad-Din Shah Qajar. He was born in Mashhad in 1884 (died 1951) and was a conservative figure among the modernists. He was appointed Poet Laureate by royal decree in 1903.\nIraq.\nIn Iraq's ancient history, Ibn 'Atiyah Jarir was the court poet of Ibn Yusuf al-Hajjaj during the Umayyad period. Abd al-Malik Burhani was the poet laureate of Sanjar under Malik Sh\u0101h I and Sult\u0101n Sanjar. Regarding cities, Aban al-Lahiqi was the court poet of the Barmakids in Baghdad. Poets laureate of Iraq include Muhammed Mahdi al-Jawahiri.\nIsrael.\nPoets laureate of Israel include Avigdor Hameiri and Haim Gouri.\nJapan.\nKakinomoto no Hitomaro serve as the court poet of Empress Jit\u014d. During the Heien period, Ariwara no Yukihira, Murasaki Shikibu, Fujiwara no Kint\u014d and Akazome Emon were court poets. Poets laureate of Japan include Baron Takasaki Masamitsu. The current Princess of Benin, Damarea Liao was named Japan's first 'National Youth Poet Laureate' in 2024. https://\nJordan.\nPoets laureate of Jordan include Haider Mahmoud.\nKazakhstan.\nPoets laureate of Kazakhstan include Abdilda Tazhibaev.\nKorea.\nDuring the 12th century, Jeong Ji-sang was appointed as a court poet of King Injong of Goryeo. During the reign of Jungjong of Joseon in the 16th century, Yun Kyung was appointed as the court poet to the king.\nBeginning around 1994, North Korea had 6 active poets laureate who worked in the epic genre. Epic poetry was the chief vehicle of political propaganda during the rule of Kim Jong-il, and the poets worked according to the requests and needs of Kim Jong-il. Some of the poets are Jang Jin-sung (pseudonym), Kim Man-young and Shin Byung-gang.\nKuwait.\nPoets laureate of Kuwait include Mulla Abdeen.\nKyrgyzstan.\nPoets laureate of Kyrgyzstan include Chinghiz Aitmatov.\nLaos.\nPoets laureate of Laos include Nhouy Abhay.\nLebanon.\nDuring the Shihab dynasty in Lebanon, Nicola al-Turk was officially appointed as a court poet of Bashir Shihab II.\nMalaysia.\nPoets laureate of Malaysia include Muhammad Haji Salleh and Datuk Zurinah Hassan (upon her becoming a Malaysian National Laureate in 2015). In the 20th century, Raja Haji Yahya was designed by the High Commissioner of the Malay States as the Poet Laureate of Perak.\nMaldives.\nPoets laureate of the Maldives include Sheikh Mohamed Jamaluddin (c. 1890), who also served as a judge.\nMongolia.\nPoets laureate of Mongolia include Ke Ming. Saichungga was the Poet Laureate of Inner Mongolia.\nMyanmar.\nIn ancient Burma, there were kings who bestowed the title of \"nawade\" to the poets laureate. However, according to Kaung (2011), two nawades are often discussed in Burmese literature: Nawadegyi (1498\u20131588; Prome Nawade) and Dutiya (1756\u20131840; Wetmasut Nawade).\nOther historical figures include U Shun, who was appointed as a court poet to King Bagyidaw during the Konbaung dynasty of Burma. During the Konbaung dynasty, Letwe Thondara served as the court poet of Mahadhammaraza Dipadi. Later, in the country's history, Soe Nyunt was appointed as the Poet Laureate of Burma.\nNepal.\nPoets laureate of Nepal include Lekhnath Paudyal and Laxmi Prasad Devkota.\nOman.\nIn Oman, Al-Sitali served as the poet laureate during the Nabhani dynasty.\nPakistan.\nDuring the 18th century, Jam Durrak was appointed as the poet laureate of the royal court of Mir Nasir Khan I. Later in Pakistan's history, Poets laureate of Pakistan would include Hafeez Jalandhari.\nPhilippines.\nPoet Laureate of the Philippines include Cecilio Ap\u00f3stol, Alberto Segismundo Cruz (1945), and Amado Yuzon (1959). For cities, Abdon Balde Jr. became the Poet Laureate of Albay in 2012.\nSaudi Arabia.\nPoets laureate of Saudi Arabia include Ahmed Ibrahim al-Ghazzawi.\nSri Lanka.\nPoets laureate of Sri Lanka include Thotagamuwe Sri Rahula Thera, who lived during the 15th century.\nSyria.\nDuring the 10th century, Al-Mutannabi was the poet laureate at the court of the Hamdanid emir Sayf al-Dawla in Aleppo. In the 12th century, during the Nizari Ismaili era in Masyaf, Mazyad al-Hilli al-Asadi was the poet laureate of Rashid ad-Din Sinan.\nTaiwan.\nIn 1963, Jun-an (Wei Qing-de) was named the poet laureate of Taiwan by the United Poets Laureate International. The organization was founded by Taiwanese poet Zhong Dingwen and Filipino poet Amado Yuzon. In 2004, Taiwanese Yu Hsi was awarded Poet Laureate by the Seoul World Academy of Arts and Culture.\nTajikistan.\nIn ancient times, Tajikistan-born Rudaki became the poet laureate in the royal court of Ahmad Samani.\nThailand.\nSi Prat serve as the court poet of King Narai during the 17th century. Poets laureate of Thailand include Sunthorn Phu.\nTurkey.\nDuring the 12th century, Nicholas Kallikles was the court poet of the Byzantine court in Constantinople during the reigns of Alexios I Komnenos. In 1302, Safi al-Din al-Hilli served as the court poet in Mardin under the Artuqids. Mehmet Akif Ersoy (b. 1873\u2013d. December 27, 1936), a famous poet, was the Poet-Laureate of Turkey. He composed the poem to be the National Anthem of the Turkish Republic that written in 1921. Original name of the poem is \"\u0130stiklal Mar\u015f\u0131\"\nTurkmenistan.\nIn the 12th century, Rashid al-Din Vatvat became the poet laurete of the court in Gurganj under Il-Arslan (in what is now Turkmenistan). Poets laureate of Turkmenistan include Gozel Shagulyeva.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nPoets laureate of the United Arab Emirates include Ousha bint Khalifa Al Suwaidi.\nUzbekistan.\nIn the 14th century, Uzbekistan-born Abu Sulayman Banakati was appointed poet laureate of Ghazan Khan court. In the 14th-15th centuries, Uzbekistan-born Khoja Fakhriddin Ismatullah ibn Masud Ismat Bukhari was the poet laureate in the royal courts of Jalal-ud-Din Khalji and Ulugh Beg. In later history, poets laureate of Uzbekistan include Muhammad Ali and \u015aukrullo.\nVietnam.\nDuring the 16th century, Nguy\u1ec5n B\u1ec9nh Khi\u00eam became the first Poet Laureate of Vietnam. T\u1ed1 H\u1eefu was the poet laureate of North Vietnam and the Communist Party of Vietnam, and remained so even after his political decline.\nYemen.\nIbn 'Aliwa-Ibn Hayyan was the court poet of the Banu Hamdan in northern Yemen. During the 15th century, Abu Bakr al-Aydarus became the patron saint and Poet Laureate of Aden, Yemen.\nEurope.\nAlbania.\nDuring the 15th-16th centuries, Albania-born Mesihi of Prishtina was appointed as the court poet of the Grand Vizier Khadim Ali Pasha. In 2021, Rudolf Marku became the first Poet Laureate of Albania. He was followed by Luljeta Lleshanaku.\nAustria.\nPoets laureate of Austria include Franz Grillparzer, Kurt Wildgans and Franz Werfel. For cities, Paulus Melissus was made Poet Laureate of Vienna in 1561.\nBelarus.\nPoets Laureate of Belarus include Maksim Tank and Pimen Panchenko.\nBelgium.\nAround 1914, several sources cited Marguerite Coppin as the Poet Laureate of Belgium. The first Poet Laureate of Belgium, Charles Ducal, was chosen in 2014. He was followed by Laurence Vielle, Els Moors, Carl Norac, and Mustafa K\u00f6r.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nRadovan Karad\u017ei\u0107 was the Poet Laureate of Yugoslavia (particularly Republika Srpska of Bosnia and Herzegovina).\nBulgaria.\nPoets laureate of Bulgaria include Venko Markovski.\nCroatia.\nDuring the 15th-16th century, Elio Lampridio Cerva (Ilija Crijevi\u0107) was appointed as the Poet Laureate of the Republic of Ragusa. Poets laureate of Croatia include Vladimir Nazor. For cities, Peter Men\u010deti\u0107 was the Poet Laureate of Dubrovnik.\nCzech Republic.\nIn 1596, Bartholomaeus Bilovius was made Poet Laureate of Prague due in part to his royal connections. Johann Christian Alois Mickl was crowned the Poet Laureate of Prague around 1730.\nDenmark.\nIn the 16th century, Hieronymus Osius was appointed the poet laureate by King Christian III of Denmark. Poets laureate of Denmark include Christian Winther.\nEstonia.\nPoets laureate of Estonia include Jaan Kaplinski.\nFinland.\nPoets laureate of Finland include Zachris Topelius.\nFrance.\nAround 1324, Arnaut Vidal de Castelnou d'Ari became the first Poet Laureate of the Consistori del Gay Saber. Poets laureate of France include Publio Fausto Andrelini (1496), Pierre Gringore, Mellin de Saint-Gelais (appointed c. 1523 by Francis I of France), Fran\u00e7ois de Malherbe (c. 1576), Giambattista Marino (1615\u20131623), Charles Dumas (1903), Andr\u00e9 Corthis (1906) and Paul Fort (1921).\nGermany.\nThe first known Poet Laureate of the German Empire is Conradus Celtes Protuccius (c. 1466). He was succeeded by Matth\u00e4us Zuber, Adam Schr\u00f6ter (1560), Johann Heermann (1608), Johannes Paulus Crusius (1616), Johann Rist (1644), Johann Georg Ahle (1680), Apostolo Zeno and Pietro Metastasio (1729) among others. Georg Christian Lehms was the court poet in Darmstadt, and Salomon Franck was a court poet during the 18th century. Regarding other cities, in the 1700s, Sidonia Hedwig Z\u00e4unemann was appointed as the Poet Laureate of G\u00f6ttingen. Poets laureate of Nazi Germany include Hanns Johst from 1935 to 1946. Rajvinder Singh was declared the Stadtschreiber of three different cities in Germany: Rheinsberg in 1999, Remscheid in 2004, and Trier in 2007.\nGreece.\nIn the 6th century, Simonides of Ceos was appointed as the poet laureate of the Scopadae and Aleuadae. In the 12th century, Theodore Prodromos was appointed as the court poet during the reigns of John II Komnenos (1118\u20131143) and Manuel I Komnenos (1143\u20131180). Greece's modern poets laureate include Spyros Matsoukas (c. 1909) and Kostis Palamas.\nHoly See.\nPopes have several times named poets laureate, but the practice has been irregular.\nHungary.\nPoets laureate of Hungary include J\u00e1nos Arany and Zs\u00f3fia Balla (2018).\nIceland.\nIn the 10th century, Hallfre\u00f0r vandr\u00e6\u00f0ask\u00e1ld was the court poet (\"skald\") first of H\u00e1kon Sigur\u00f0arson, then of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason and finally of Eir\u00edkr H\u00e1konarson. Eil\u00edfr Go\u00f0r\u00fanarson was another court poet of H\u00e1kon Sigur\u00f0arson. Also, in the 10th century, Tindr Hallkelsson was the earl H\u00e1kon Sigur\u00f0arson. In the 11th century, Sigvatr \u00de\u00f3r\u00f0arson was the court poet of King Olaf II of Norway, Canute the Great, Magnus the Good and Anund Jacob. Also, in the 11th century, \u00de\u00f3rarinn loftunga was the court poet of King Canute and Sveinn Kn\u00fatsson. Other 11th century court poets include \u00dej\u00f3\u00f0\u00f3lfr Arn\u00f3rsson and Arn\u00f3rr jarlask\u00e1ld. Poets laureate of Iceland include Einar Benediktsson and Stephan G. Stephansson.\nIreland.\nThe Kingdom of Ireland had a poet laureate; the last holder of the title was Robert Jephson, who died in 1803.\nThe closest modern equivalent in Ireland is the title \"Saoi\" [\"wise one\"] held by up to seven members at a time of Aosd\u00e1na, an official body of those engaged in fine arts, literature, and music. Poets awarded the title include M\u00e1ire Mhac an tSaoi, Anthony Cronin, and Seamus Heaney. In terms of districts, Rachael Hegarty is the Poet Laureate of Dublin 1.\nItaly.\nDuring the 13th century, France-born Raimbaut de Vaqueiras served as the court poet of Boniface I of Montferrat. Poets laureate of Italy include Albertino Mussato, Petrarch (1341), Camillo Querno (1514), Torquato Tasso (1595), Maria Maddalena Morelli Fernandez (1776) and Giovanni Prati (1849). In 1452, Niccol\u00f2 Perotti was made Poet Laureate of Bologna. In the 16th century, Bernardo Bellincioni was appointed as the court poet for Lorenzo the Magnificent in Florence and Ludovico Sforza.\nLatvia.\nJ\u0101nis Sudrabkalns was the Poet Laureate of Latvian SSR.\nLithuania.\nPoets laureate of Lithuania include Bernardas Brazdzionis and Kornelijus Platelis.\nLuxembourg.\nIn 1555, Luxembourg-born Nicolaus Mameranus was crowned poet laureate by Charles V.\nMalta.\nIn 2023, Maria Grech Ganado became the inaugural Poet Laureate of Malta.\nMoldova.\nMoldova-born Adrian P\u0103unescu was the poet laureate of Romanian politician Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu.\nMontenegro.\nPoets laureate of Montenegro include Tomo Joshov Vulkichevich.\nNetherlands.\nThe unofficial Poet Laureate of Netherlands is Tsead Bruinja as \"Dichter des Vaderlands\" (Poet of the Fatherland). The previous laureate was Ester Naomi Perquin. Gerrit Komrij was the first \"Dichter des Vaderlands\". The title was created by Dutch media. In terms of cities, Hester Knibbe served as the Poet Laureate of Rotterdam.\nNorway.\nDuring the 9th century, \u00deorbj\u01ebrn hornklofi was appointed as a court poet (\"skald\") of King Harald Fairhair. In the 11th century, Valgar\u00f0r \u00e1 Velli was the court poet of King Harald Hardrada of Norway. Poets laureate of Norway include Arnold Eidslott (1986\u20132018).\nPoland.\nPoets laureate of Poland were appointed so by Popes: Klemens Janicki (Pope Paul III; 1540), Adam Schr\u00f6ter (Pope Pius IV; 1564), and Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski (Pope Urban VIII, 1622). Italy-born Carlo Sigismondo Capece was the court poet of Queen Maria Casimira of Poland.\nPortugal.\nIn 1769, Italy-born Gaetano Martinelli was appointed as the court poet of Joseph I of Portugal and his daughter Maria I. Poets laureate of Portugal include Gil Vicente and Garcia de Resende.\nRomania.\nPoets laureate of Romania include Vasile Alecsandri (1848\u20131881) and Octavian Goga.\nRussia.\nIn the 18th century, Vasily Zhukovsky was a court poet during the Russian Empire. Poets laureate of Russia include Gavrila Derzhavin and Mikhail Sholokhov. In 1923, M\u04d3jit Nurgh\u04d3niul\u0457 Ghafuri was appointed the Poet Laureate of Bashkir Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.\nSan Marino.\nPoets laureate of San Marino include Valery Larbaud.\nSerbia.\nPoets laureate of Serbia include the following:\nSlovakia.\nPoets laureate of Slovakia include Pavol Orsz\u00e1gh Hviezdoslav.\nSlovenia.\nPoets laureate of Slovenia include France Pre\u0161eren.\nSpain.\nMu'min ibn Said was the court poet of C\u00f3rdoba under Muhammad I (d. 886) [an amir of the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba]. In the 11th century in Spain, Ibn Darraj al-Qastalli was appointed as the court poet of Almanzor. During the 13th century, Cerver\u00ed de Girona was appointed as the court poet of James the Conqueror and Peter the Great. Poets Laureate of Spain include Juan Eugenio Hartzenbusch (1869), Jos\u00e9 Zorrilla y Moral (1889), and Carolina Coronado. Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Pem\u00e1n was designated as the Poet Laureate of the Franco regime.\nSweden.\nPoets laureate of Sweden include Pehr Henrik Ling and Verner von Heidenstam (1916).\nSwitzerland.\nIn 1512, Switzerland-born Heinrich Glarean was appointed a poet laureate by Emperor Maximilian I.\nUkraine.\nStanis\u0142aw Trembecki was the poet laureate in the court of Tulchyn (a region now located in modern-day Ukraine). In the 1940s, Oleksandr Korniychuk was the Poet Laureate of Soviet-controlled Ukraine. For cities, Sofia Vladimirovna was the Poet Laureate of Henichesk.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland.\nIn England, the term \"poet laureate\" is restricted to the official office of Poet Laureate, attached to the royal household. However, no authoritative historical record exists of the office of Poet Laureate of England.\nThe office developed from earlier practice when minstrels and versifiers were members of the king's retinue. Richard C\u0153ur-de-Lion had a \"versificator regis\" (English: \"king's poet\"), Gulielmus Peregrinus (William the Pilgrim), and Henry III had a \"versificator\" named Master Henry. In the fifteenth century, John Kay, a versifier, described himself as Edward IV's \"humble poet laureate\". According to \"Notes and Queries\" (1876), King Henry I paid 10 shillings a year to a \"versificator regis\".\nGeoffrey Chaucer (1340\u20131400) was called Poet Laureate, being granted in 1389 an annual allowance of wine. W. Hamilton describes Chaucer, Gower, Kay, Andrew Bernard, John Skelton, Robert Whittington, Richard Edwards and Samuel Daniel as \"volunteer Laureates\".\nJohn Skelton studied at the University of Oxford in the early 1480s and was advanced to the degree of \"poet laureate\" in 1488, when he joined the court of King Henry VII to tutor the future Henry VIII. The title of \"laureate\" was also conferred on him by the University of Louvain in 1492 and by the University of Cambridge in 1492\u20133. He soon became famous for his rhetoric, satire and translations and was held in high esteem by the printer William Caxton, who wrote, in the preface to (Modern English: \"The Book of the Aeneid, compiled by Virgil\") (1490):\nBut I pray mayster John Skelton, late created poete laureate in the unyversite of Oxenforde, to oversee and correct this sayd booke.\nThe academic use of the term laureate became associated again with royalty when King James I created a pension for Ben Jonson in 1617, although there is no formal record extant. He was succeeded by William Davenant.\nThe royal office Poet Laureate was officially conferred by letters patent on John Dryden in 1668, after Davenant's death, and the post became a regular institution. There are other, non-official, laureate titles, such as the commercially sponsored \"Children's Laureate\" for an \"eminent writer or illustrator of children's books to celebrate outstanding achievement in their field\", and the Poetry Foundation's Young People's Poet Laureate.\nScotland.\nScotland has a long tradition of makars and poetry. Iain Lom, the Scottish Gaelic bard, was appointed poet laureate in Scotland by King Charles II of England, Scotland and Ireland on his restoration in 1660. In 2004 the Scottish Parliament appointed Professor Edwin Morgan as the first Makar or National Poet for Scotland. On his death in January 2011 he was succeeded by Liz Lochhead. Jackie Kay followed Lochhead as Makar in 2016, and was then herself succeeded by Kathleen Jamie, who became Scotland's fourth Makar in 2021. In 2024, P\u00e0draig MacAoidh (Peter Mackay) became the fifth Makar. For cities, in 2014, Jim Carruth was appointed as the Poet Laureate of Glasgow.\nWales.\nWales has had a long tradition of poets and bards under royal patronage, with extant writing from medieval royal poets and earlier. Gwalchmai ap Meilyr was the court poet of Owain Gwynedd during the 12th century. Y Prydydd Bychan was a medieval Welsh court poet in the 13th century.\nThe office of National Poet for Wales was established in April 2005. The first holder, Gwyneth Lewis, was followed by Gwyn Thomas. The role of Bardd Plant Cymru, the Welsh-language children's poet laureate was established in 2000. A corresponding English-language role, Children's Laureate Wales was established in 2019.\nTerritories.\nBritish Virgin Islands.\nDr. Richard Georges became the inaugural Poet Laureate of the British Virgin Islands in 2020.\nCayman Islands.\nPoets laureate of the Cayman Islands include Roy Bodden.\nFalkland Islands.\nPoets laureate of the Falkland Islands include Ron Reeves.\nIsle of Man.\nReferred to as the Manx Bard, the individuals that have served in the position include Zoe Cannell, Michael Manning, Jordanne Kennaugh and Boakesey Closs.\nNorth America.\nAruba.\nIn 2025, John Freddy Montoya was named Aruba\u2019s \u201cPoet of the Fatherland\u201d (\"Dichter des Vaderlands\").\nBahamas.\nPoets laureate of The Bahamas include Henry Christopher Christie.\nBarbados.\nThe first Poet Laureate of Barbados was chosen in 2018. Her name is Esther Phillips.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian Parliamentary Poet Laureate is appointed as an officer of the Library of Parliament. The position alternates between an English and French speaking laureate. Candidates must be able to write in both English and French, have a substantial publication history (including poetry) displaying literary excellence and have written work reflecting Canada, among other criteria.\nProvincial and municipal poets laureate.\nCurrently, only the provinces of Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan and Yukon have appointed a poet laureate.\nPrince Edward Island.\nPrince Edward Island appointed its first poet laureate, John Smith, in 2003.\nSaskatchewan.\nSaskatchewan appointed its first poet laureate, Glen Sorestad, in 2000.\nYukon.\nInaugural Yukon Provincial Poet Laureate PJ Yukon has held the office since 1994.\nThe Commissioner of Yukon established the Story Laureate of Yukon role in 2020. The inaugural position was held by https://.\nCosta Rica.\nPoets laureate of Costa Rica include Laureano Alb\u00e1n.\nCuba.\nNational poets are mainly celebrated in Cuba, but there are poets laureate in the country's history. In 1860, Gertrudis G\u00f3mez de Avellaneda was made the Poet Laureate of Havana. Nicol\u00e1s Guill\u00e9n, who is mainly considered a national poet, became the Poet Laureate of Havana in 1913.\nDominican Republic.\nPoets laureate of Dominican Republic include Pedro Mir (1984).\nEl Salvador.\nPoets laureate of El Salvador include Alberto Rivas Bonilla.\nGuatemala.\nPoets laureate of Guatemala include Osmundo Arriola and M\u00e1ximo Soto Hall.\nHaiti.\nPoets laureate of Haiti include Jean-Fernand Brierre.\nHonduras.\nIn 1846, Jos\u00e9 Trinidad Reyes was appointed the Poet Laureate of Honduras. His successors include Froyl\u00e1n Turcios (c. 1922).\nJamaica.\nThomas MacDermot was the first poet laureate of Jamaica during colonial times, followed by J. E. Clare McFarlane. Mervyn Morris was the first poet laureate of Jamaica upon its independence (2014\u20132017), followed by Lorna Goodison (2017\u20132020) and Olive Senior (2021\u20132024). The current poet laureate is Kwame Dawes (2024\u20132027).\nMartinique.\nPoets laureate of Martinique include Daniel Thaly.\nMexico.\nIn the 15th century, Nezahualcoyotl was the Poet Laureate of the Aztecs. Poets laureate of Mexico include Guillermo Prieto (1890), Juan de Dios Peza, and Rafael de Zayas Enriquez. Ram\u00f3n Modesto L\u00f3pez Velarde Berumen was the Poet Laureate of Jerez de Garc\u00eda Salinas, Zacatecas. Enrique Gonz\u00e1lez Mart\u00ednez was the Poet Laureate of Mexico City. F\u00e9lix Mart\u00ednez Dolz was the Poet Laureate of Oaxaca. In 2019, Gerardo de Jes\u00fas Monroy became the Poet Laureate of Torre\u00f3n, Coahuila.\nNicaragua.\nPoets laureate of Nicaragua include Agenor Arg\u00fcello and Juan de Dios Vanegas.\nPanama.\nPoets laureate of Panama include Enrique Geenzier.\nSaint Lucia.\nPoets laureate of Saint Lucia include Derek Walcott.\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nPaul-Keens Douglas became the inaugural Poet Laureate of Trinidad and Tobago in 2017. In 2002, Eintou Pearl Springer was named the Poet Laureate of Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. The inaugural Poet Laureate of the Port of Spain was Anson Gonzalez.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Library of Congress appointed a Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress from 1937 to 1984. An Act of Congress changed the name in 1985 to \"Poet Laureate Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress\".\nPoets laureate receive a US$35,000 stipend and are given the responsibility of overseeing an ongoing series of poetry readings and lectures at the library, and a charge to promote poetry. No other duties are specified, and laureates are not required to compose for government events or in praise of government officials. However, after the September 11 terrorist attacks, then poet laureate Billy Collins was asked to write a poem to be read in front of a special joint session of Congress. Collins wrote \"The Names\", which he read on September 6, 2002, and which is available in streaming audio and video. The original intent of the stipend was to provide poets laureate with a full income, so that they could devote their time entirely to writing poetry. The amount has not been adjusted for inflation and is now considered a moderate bonus intended to supplement a poet's already existing income.\nPoets laureate of the United States include Ada Lim\u00f3n, Joy Harjo, Tracy K. Smith and Juan Felipe Herrera. Amanda Gorman was the United States's first National Youth Poet Laureate appointed in 2017.\nA number of American state legislatures have also created an office of poet laureate. The holders may be locally or nationally prominent. The U.S. states of New Jersey, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania do not have positions, while South Dakota and South Carolina's positions are currently vacant.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nOn January 30, 2023, at the launch of 'Revive', Australia's new cultural policy, Prime Minister Anthony Albanese announced \"the establishment of a poet laureate for Australia\". Before 2023, Australia had not had an official poet laureate scheme, despite past suggestions. In 1818, former convict Michael Massey Robinson was paid by colony governor Lachlan Macquarie for services as poet laureate. Over the years, other poets have been nominated as worthy of such a title, including James Brunton Stephens (1835\u20131902), Andrew Barton 'Banjo' Paterson (1864\u20131941), and Les Murray (1938\u20132019).\nFiji.\nPoets laureate of Fiji include Kamla Prasad Mishra.\nKiribati.\nPoets laureate of Kiribati include Danny Wilson.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand has had an official poet laureate since 1998. Originally sponsored by Te Mata vineyards and known as the Te Mata Estate Poet Laureate, the award is now administered by the National Library of New Zealand and the holder is called New Zealand Poet Laureate. The term of office is two years. The symbol of office is a Tokotoko, a carved wooden ceremonial orator's staff.\nThe first holder was Bill Manhire, in 1998\u201399, then Hone Tuwhare (2000\u201301), Elizabeth Smither (2002\u201303), Brian Turner (2004\u201305), Jenny Bornholdt (2006\u201307), Michele Leggott (2008\u201309), Cilla McQueen (2009\u201311), Ian Wedde (2011\u201313), Vincent O'Sullivan (2013\u201315), C. K. Stead (2015\u20132017), Selina Tusitala Marsh (2017\u20132019), David Eggleton (2019\u20132021) and Chris Tse (2022\u20132024).\nPapua New Guinea.\nAllan Natachee was proclaimed the Poet Laureate of Papua New Guinea by the United Poets Laureate International.\nTonga.\nPoets laureate of Tonga include Noble Tu'ivakan\u014d (Siaosi Kiu Ngalumoetutulu Kiutau\u02bbivailahi Kao).\nSouth America.\nArgentina.\nPoets laureate of Argentina include Olegario Victor Andrade and Carlos Guido y Spano.\nBolivia.\nPoets laureate of Bolivia include Javier del Granado.\nBrazil.\nPoets laureate of Brazil include Guilherme de Almeida.\nChile.\nPoets laureate of Chile include Galvarino Merino Duarte (c. 1983).\nColombia.\nPoets laureate of Colombia include Antonio Jos\u00e9 Restrepo.\nEcuador.\nPoets laureate of Ecuador include Remigio Crespo Toral (1917), Pablo Hannibal Vela (1951), and Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Egas (1976).\nGuyana.\nPoets laureate of Guyana include A.J. Seymour.\nParaguay.\nPoets laureate of Paraguay include Alejandro Guanes.\nPeru.\nPoets laureate of Peru include Pedro Peralta y Barnuevo, Jos\u00e9 Santos Chocano (1922), and Dennis Siluk.\nSuriname.\nPoets laureate of Suriname include Robin \"Dobru\" Ravales.\nUruguay.\nIn 1929, the Palacio Legislativo of Montevideo consecrated Juana de Ibarbourou as the \"Poet Laureate of Spanish America\".\nVenezuela.\nPoets laureate of Venezuela include Heraclio Mart\u00edn de la Guardia (c. 1878).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53012", "revid": "9259119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53012", "title": "Killing of Chandra Levy", "text": "2001 homicide in the United States\nChandra Ann Levy (April 14, 1977\u00a0\u2013 c. May 1, 2001) was an American intern at the Federal Bureau of Prisons in Washington, D.C., who disappeared in May 2001. She was presumed murdered after her skeletal remains were found in Rock Creek Park in May 2002. The case attracted attention from the American news media for several years.\nDue to a miscommunication, the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia (MPD) failed to follow its own search parameters in Rock Creek Park, leaving Levy's body to decompose for a year. Further, the MPD had been informed, but soon dismissed the information that Ingmar Guandique, already arrested for attacking women in Rock Creek Park, had confessed to attacking Levy. The MPD instead put much of its focus on the revelation that Levy had been having an extramarital affair with Congressman Gary Condit, a Democrat then serving his fifth term representing California's 18th congressional district and a senior member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. Condit was never named as a suspect by police; he was eventually cleared of any involvement. Due to the cloud of suspicion raised by the intense media focus on the missing intern and the later revelation of the affair, Condit lost his bid for re-election in 2002.\nFollowing a series of investigative reports by \"The Washington Post\" in 2008, the MPD followed up and finally obtained a warrant, on March 3, 2009, to arrest Ingmar Guandique, identified and dismissed by the MPD eight years earlier. He had been convicted of assaulting two other women in Rock Creek Park around the time of Levy's disappearance and was still in prison on those convictions when the arrest warrant on Levy's death was issued. Prosecutors alleged that Guandique had attacked and tied up Levy in a remote area of the park and left her to die of dehydration or exposure. In November 2010, Guandique was convicted of murdering Levy; he was sentenced in February 2011 to 60 years in prison. In June 2015, Guandique was granted a new trial. On July 28, 2016, prosecutors announced that they would not proceed with the case against Guandique and would instead seek to have him deported. In March 2017, Guandique lost his bid to remain in the United States and was deported to his native El Salvador on May 5, 2017. Levy's murder remains unsolved.\nLife and background.\nLevy was born in Cleveland, Ohio, to Robert and Susan Levy; the family moved to Modesto, California, where she attended Grace M. Davis High School. At the time of her disappearance, her parents were members of Congregation Beth Shalom, a Conservative Jewish synagogue. She attended San Francisco State University, where she earned a degree in journalism. After interning for the California Bureau of Secondary Education and working in the office of Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan, she began attending the University of Southern California to earn a master's degree in public administration.\nAs part of her final semester of study, Levy moved to Washington, D.C., to become a paid intern with the Federal Bureau of Prisons. In October 2000, she began her internship at the bureau's headquarters, where she was assigned to the public affairs division. Her supervisor, bureau spokesperson Dan Dunne, was impressed with Levy's work, especially her handling of media inquiries regarding the upcoming execution of Timothy McVeigh, convicted of bombing the Oklahoma City Federal Building. Levy's internship was abruptly terminated in April 2001 because her academic eligibility was found to have expired in December 2000. She had already completed her master's degree requirements and was scheduled to return to California in May 2001 for graduation.\nDisappearance and search.\nLevy was last seen on May 1, 2001. The Metropolitan Police Department was first alerted on May 6, when Levy's parents called from Modesto to report that they had not heard from their daughter in five days. Police called hospitals and visited Levy's apartment in Dupont Circle that day, finding no indication of foul play. On May 7, Levy's father told the police that his daughter had been having an affair with a U.S. congressman, and the next day stated that he believed the congressman to be U.S. Representative Gary Condit. Levy's aunt also called the police and told them that Chandra had confided in her about the affair. Police obtained a warrant on May 10 to conduct a formal search of Levy's apartment. Investigators found her credit cards, identification and mobile phone left behind in her purse, along with partially packed suitcases. The answering machine was full, with messages left by her relatives and two from Condit. A police sergeant tried to examine Levy's laptop computer and inadvertently corrupted the internet search data, as he was not a trained technician.\nComputer experts took a month to reconstruct the data to determine that the laptop was used on the morning of May 1 to search for websites related to Amtrak, Baskin-Robbins, Condit, Southwest Airlines, and a weather report from \"The Washington Post\". Her final search at 12:59\u00a0p.m. was for Alsace-Lorraine, a region in France. A particular search at 11:33\u00a0a.m. was for information about Rock Creek Park in \"The Washington Post\" \"Entertainment Guide\", then at 11:34 she clicked a link to bring up a map of the park. Detectives later theorized that she might have met someone at the Pierce-Klingle Mansion which houses the park headquarters. On July 25, 2001, three D.C. police sergeants and 28 police cadets searched along Glover Road in the park but failed to find evidence related to Levy. Later, a second attempt found nothing.\nLevy's parents and friends held numerous vigils and press conferences in an attempt to \"bring Chandra home\".\nRelationship with Condit.\nControversy surrounding Levy's disappearance drew the attention of the American news media. Condit, a married man who represented the congressional district in which the Levy family resided, at first denied that he had had an affair with her. Although police stated that Condit was not a suspect, Levy's family said they felt Condit was being evasive and possibly hiding information about the matter.\nUnidentified police sources alleged that Condit had admitted to an affair with Levy during an interview with law enforcement officers on July 7, 2001. Condit described her to police as a vegetarian who avoided drinking and smoking. He thought that Levy was going to return to Washington, D.C. after her graduation and was surprised to find out that the lease on her apartment had ended. Investigators searched Condit's apartment on July 10. They questioned flight attendant Anne Marie Smith, who claimed that Condit told her she did not need to speak to the Federal Bureau of Investigation about his personal life. Federal officials began investigating Condit for possible obstruction of justice, as Smith was also involved in an affair with him (she was not acquainted with Levy). Upset by leaks to the media, Condit refused to submit to a polygraph test by the D.C. police; his attorney asserted that Condit passed a test administered by a privately hired examiner on July 13. He avoided answering direct questions during a televised interview on August 23, with news anchor Connie Chung on the ABC News program \"Primetime Thursday\". Intensive coverage continued until news of the September 11 attacks superseded the media's coverage of the Levy case.\nIn a nationwide Fox News/Opinion Dynamics poll of 900 registered voters conducted in July 2001, 44 percent of American respondents thought that Condit was involved in Levy's disappearance and 27 percent felt that he should resign. Fifty-one percent of the respondents believed that he was acting as if he were guilty; 13 percent felt that he should run again for office. A poll sample taken from Condit's congressional district held a more favorable view of Condit. On March 5, 2002, Condit lost the Democratic primary election for his Congressional seat to his former aide, then-Assemblyman Dennis Cardoza, with the Levy controversy being cited as a contributing factor. He was subpoenaed to appear on April 1, 2002, before a District of Columbia grand jury investigating the disappearance. The date was kept a carefully guarded secret to avoid further leaks. Condit left Congress at the end of his term on January 3, 2003, after failing to win his re-election bid.\nDiscovery of remains.\nOn May 22, 2002, around 9:30\u00a0am, skeletal remains which matched Levy's dental records were discovered by a man who was walking his dog and looking for turtles in Rock Creek Park, near Broad Branch Creek in Washington, D.C. Detectives found bones and personal items scattered, but not buried, in a forested area along a steep incline. A sports bra, sweat shirt, leggings and tennis shoes were among the evidence that was recovered. Although police had previously searched over half the main section of the park, the wooded slope where Levy's remains were eventually found had not been searched. Police commanders ordered the search perimeters to be within of each road and trail but due to a miscommunication, the officers only searched within 100 yards of every road. The remains were found about four miles (6\u00a0km) from Levy's apartment.\nAfter a preliminary autopsy was performed, District of Columbia police announced that there was sufficient evidence to open a homicide investigation. On May 28, D.C. medical examiner Jonathan L. Arden officially declared Levy's death a homicide, but said, \"There's less to work with here than I would like. It's possible we will never know specifically how she died.\" Arden found damage to her hyoid bone, suggesting that she was possibly strangled, but he did not deem it to be conclusive evidence of such a cause of death. On June 6, after the police completed their search, private investigators hired by the Levys found her shin bone with some twisted wire about from the other remains. Police Chief Charles H. Ramsey said, \"It is unacceptable that these items were not located.\"\nMemorial services.\nOn May 28, 2002, the Levy family organized a memorial service at the Modesto Centre Plaza that drew over 1,200 people, some from as far as Los Angeles. Speakers at the 90-minute ceremony included Levy's brother, grandmother, great-aunt and friends. In a eulogy delivered in Hebrew and English by Rabbi Paul Gordon, Levy was described as \"a good person taken from us much too soon\". About a year later, on May 27, 2003, Levy's remains were buried in Lakewood Memorial Park Cemetery at Hughson, California, near her home town of Modesto. Attended by about 40 of Levy's friends and family members, the private ceremony concluded with the release of 12 white doves.\nIdentification of the prime suspect.\nIn September 2001, Washington, D.C. police and federal prosecutors were contacted by the lawyer of an informant, held in D.C. Jail, who claimed to have knowledge of Levy's killer. The informant, whose identity was protected for his safety, said that Ingmar Guandique, a 20-year-old undocumented immigrant from El Salvador who was also being held in the jail, told him that Condit paid him $25,000 to kill Levy.\nInvestigators ruled out the story about Condit, because Guandique had already admitted to assaulting two other women in the same park where Levy's remains were found. Guandique failed to show up for work on the day of Levy's disappearance. His former landlady recalled that his face appeared scratched and bruised at around that time. The investigators on the Levy case did not interview the other Rock Creek Park victims. Police chief Ramsey avoided calling Guandique a suspect and described him as a \"person of interest\", telling reporters not to make \"too big a deal\" about him. Assistant chief Terrance W. Gainer said that if Guandique had been considered a suspect, D.C. police would have been after him \"like flies on honey\".\nGuandique denied attacking Levy. On November 28, the FBI had the informant take a polygraph test, which he failed. A polygraph test on Guandique, administered on February 4, 2002, returned inconclusive results that were officially ruled \"not deceptive\". Because neither the informant nor Guandique was fluent in English, D.C. chief detective Jack Barrett said that he would have preferred polygraph tests to have been administered by bilingual examiners, who were unavailable at the time. When Judge Noel Anketell Kramer was asked about Guandique's potential connection to the Levy homicide, she responded, \"This is such a satellite issue. To me it doesn't have anything to do with this case.\" Kramer sentenced Guandique to 10 years in prison for his attacks on two other women at Rock Creek Park. Guandique was sent to the U.S. Penitentiary, Big Sandy near Inez, Kentucky, and was later transferred to the U.S. Penitentiary at Victorville, California.\nThe Levy homicide remained listed as a \"cold case\" until 2006, when Cathy L. Lanier succeeded Ramsey as D.C. police chief. Lanier replaced the lead detective on the case with three veteran investigators who had more homicide experience. In 2007, the editors of \"The Washington Post\" assigned a new team of reporters to take a year to re-examine the Levy case. The resulting series of articles, published during the summer of 2008, focused on the past failure of the police to fully investigate Guandique's connection to the attacks in Rock Creek Park. In September 2008, investigators searched Guandique's federal prison cell in California and found a photo of Levy that he had saved from a magazine. Police interviewed acquaintances of Guandique and witnesses of the other Rock Creek Park incidents.\nOn March 3, 2009, the Superior Court of the District of Columbia issued an arrest warrant for Guandique. He was returned to the custody of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections on April 20. Two days later, Guandique was charged in D.C. with Levy's murder. He was indicted by a grand jury on six counts: kidnapping, first-degree murder committed during a kidnapping, attempted first-degree sexual abuse, first-degree murder committed during a sexual offense, attempted robbery, and first-degree murder committed during a robbery. Guandique pleaded not guilty at his arraignment, where a trial date was initially set for January 27, 2010. His lawyers unsuccessfully argued that Guandique's federal prison cell was outside the jurisdiction of a court-ordered search. After errors in processing contaminated some of the gathered evidence with DNA from employees of the prosecution, the start date of the trial at the H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse was moved to October 4, 2010.\nTrial of Guandique.\nOn October 18, 2010, jury selection commenced in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia before Judge Gerald I. Fisher. Assistant U.S. Attorney Fernando Campoamor-Sanchez presented the names of potential witnesses for the trial, including FBI agent Brad Garrett and the two women whom Guandique was convicted of assaulting. At the start of the trial, the prosecution's case was expected to take around four weeks and the defense was expected to take one day. On October 25 and 26, Halle Shilling and Christy Wiegand testified about being attacked by Guandique while independently jogging in Rock Creek Park. Wiegand recounted that Guandique grabbed her from behind, dragged her down a ravine and held a knife against her face.\nOn October 26, 2010, Levy's then-64-year-old father, Robert, took the stand and refuted statements about his past suspicions of Condit. Robert Levy testified that he told authorities during the early years of the investigation that his daughter Chandra would have been too cautious to jog in the woods alone, but said that he no longer believed this to be true. He said that he also told police that his daughter and Condit had a five-year plan between them to get married. In retrospect, Robert Levy admitted: \"I just said whatever came to mind just to point to him as the villain.\" Levy added that he had been convinced that Condit was \"guilty until we learned about this character here,\" referring to Guandique. On November 1, Condit testified at the trial and was asked on at least three occasions if he and Chandra Levy had been involved in a sexual relationship. He replied, \"I am not going to respond to that question out of privacy for myself and Chandra.\" FBI biologist Alan Giusti testified that semen found on underwear from Levy's apartment contained sperm matching Condit's DNA profile.\nProsecution witness Armando Morales, who shared a cell with Guandique at the U.S. Penitentiary in Kentucky, testified that Guandique was concerned about being transferred between prisons in 2006 because of inmate violence against suspected rapists. Morales stated that Guandique, a fellow member of the Mara Salvatrucha gang, confided to him that he had killed Levy while trying to rob her, but said that he did not rape her. The prosecution rested their case on November 10, while dropping two out of the six charges against Guandique: sexual assault and murder associated with that assault. On November 15, the defense rested its case without calling Guandique to the stand. Other prison witnesses called by the defense disputed Morales's testimony. Jose Manuel Alaniz said that Guandique made no mention of rape or murder while sharing a cell with both Alaniz and Morales at the penitentiary in Kentucky. Alaniz admitted under cross-examination that he \"didn't want to be too nosy\" and was often asleep at the prison while recovering from a gunshot wound. The prosecution dropped two more charges because the statute of limitations had passed: kidnapping and attempted robbery. During closing arguments for the remaining charges of first-degree murder committed during a kidnapping and during a robbery, prosecutor Amanda Haines contended that Guandique bound and gagged Levy after attacking her, leaving her to die of dehydration or exposure in the park. Defense attorney Santha Sonenberg countered with the lack of any DNA evidence connecting Guandique to the crime scene. Calling the prosecution's case \"fiction\", Sonenberg suggested that Levy had been murdered elsewhere, with her dead body being dumped in the park.\nThe jury began deliberations on November 17, 2010. Scheduled proceedings of the case met delays because of increased security at the courthouse. After two days of deliberations, all but one juror had voted to convict Guandique. On the third day, the jury asked Judge Gerald Fisher to clarify the definition of assault. Fisher responded that any physical injury could legally be considered an assault, regardless of how small. On November 22, 2010, the jury found Guandique guilty of both remaining counts of first-degree murder. After the trial, a juror said the testimony of Morales was decisive in reaching the verdict. The conviction was called a \"miracle\" for having been reached with only circumstantial evidence. Gladys Weatherspoon, who had previously represented Guandique in the 2001 assault cases, stated that she was troubled by the jury's verdict: \"I just think they were going to convict anyway... They felt bad for that woman, the mom. She's sitting in there every day.\" At a post-trial press conference, Susan Levy said, \"There's always going to be a feeling of sadness. I can surely tell you, it ain't closure.\" Since the conclusion of the trial, Susan Levy has acted to keep photographic evidence of her daughter's remains sealed from the news media.\nSentencing and appeals.\nOn February 1, 2011, Guandique's attorneys requested a new trial on the grounds that the verdict had been improperly attained. The 17-page filing claimed that the prosecutors had appealed to the emotions of the jury, using \"references to facts not in evidence\". The motion also alleged that one juror, who did not take notes, had breached the judge's instructions not to be \"influenced by another juror's notes\". The prosecution opposed a retrial, arguing that the issue regarding the notes was no more than a technicality that did not have a significant effect on the verdict.\nGuandique faced a minimum penalty of 30 years to a maximum of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. In seeking the maximum possible sentence, the prosecutors stated that Guandique \"is unable to control himself and thus, will always remain a danger to women\". A memo submitted by the prosecution in February 2011 cited Guandique's harassment of female staff in prison, including soliciting a nurse and masturbating in front of guards. Assistant U.S. Attorney Fernando Campoamor-Sanchez disclosed that he had traveled to El Salvador with a detective to investigate allegations that Guandique had fled his native country because of suspected attacks against local women dating back to 1999. During the sentencing hearing on February 11, Guandique said to Levy's family, \"I am sorry for what happened to your daughter\", and insisted on his innocence. Before Judge Gerald Fisher reminded Susan Levy to address the court instead of the defendant, Levy said to him, \"Did you really take her life? Look me in my eyes and tell me.\" Fisher denied Guandique's motion for retrial and handed down a sentence of 60 years in prison, stating that Guandique \"will be a danger for some time. He's a sexual predator.\"\nGuandique repeated his innocence during his sentencing. He has maintained his innocence in the years since the trial.\nOn February 25, 2011, public defender James Klein filed an appeal of Guandique's conviction with the District of Columbia Court of Appeals. In December 2012 and January 2013, a set of secret hearings were made known to the public, but the subject of the meetings was sealed by the judge. After a third hearing in February, the judge in the case unsealed transcripts from the previous hearings which revealed that Klein was seeking a new trial based on new evidence in the case. A fourth hearing was scheduled for April 2013.\nDropped charges.\nIn May 2015, prosecutors dropped their opposition to a new trial. This resulted from defense claims that the prosecution's star witness, Armando Morales, had perjured himself on the stand. The defense contended that prosecutors failed to disclose that Morales was a jailhouse informant with a reputation for being untrustworthy. Morales had denied ever being an informant. The defense also argued that Morales made up Guandique's confession in order to boost his stock with prosecutors. On June 3, the defense said that a new witness, a neighbor, called 911 at 4:37a.m. on the last day Levy was alive in order to report hearing a \"blood-curdling scream\", possibly coming from Levy's apartment. The following day, Judge Gerald Fisher granted a motion for the new trial. Judge Robert E. Morin set the retrial of Guandique for March 1, 2016, but at that time, it was moved to October 11.\nIn November 2015, prosecutors told a D.C. Superior Court judge that their office had failed to turn over documents to the defense before the defendant's first trial. In December 2015, defense attorneys argued in new court filings that the charges should be dismissed because of those errors.\nSpecifically, the defense argued that they had only received two of three pages of a memo detailing prosecutors' contacts with Morales. At trial he had testified that he had never cooperated with law enforcement prior to the Levy case. The missing first page noted that he had previously approached law enforcement to discuss gang activity, including the actions of gangs to which he belonged. The defense argued this information had been purposely withheld from them, as it might suggest that Morales had shaded his testimony to gain favor with prosecutors.\nOn July 28, 2016, prosecutors announced that they would not proceed with the case against Guandique and would, instead, seek to have him deported. According to \"The Washington Post\", prosecutors lost confidence in the case after learning that Morales, who now lives in Maryland, was secretly recorded admitting lying on the witness stand during the 2010 trial. Babs Proller, the woman who made the recording, turned it over to the police. The U.S. Attorney's Office said only that based on new information that had come to light during the previous week, there was no longer enough evidence to go forward with the retrial. In March 2017, Guandique lost his bid to remain in the United States and was deported to his native El Salvador in May.\nDisciplinary proceedings against prosecutors.\nDefense lawyers for Guandique believed that Campoamor-S\u00e1nchez and Haines had deliberately failed to turn over the first page of the Morales memo. They filed a complaint to that effect with the Justice Department's Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR). After investigating for two years, OPR found no ethical or legal violations.\nCampoamor-S\u00e1nchez left the Justice Department to work at the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Haines retired. In 2020 the District of Columbia Bar's Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC) announced it would investigate the allegations; it brought charges the following May.\nBoth of the accused attorneys testified. Haines believed that the full memo had been turned over to the defense and they had lost the first page. She did not think there would have been any reason for prosecutors to withhold it as it did not seriously damage their case, but she sometimes delayed turning over more specific information on witnesses to the defense since at some trials that had led to those witnesses getting killed. Both she and Campoamor-S\u00e1nchez testified that they had clashed over what to turn over to the defense and when, since at the time there were no clear rules in the Justice Department about it, leading to greater clashes between the two about who would question Morales at trial and handle the case's closing argument\u2014Campoamor-S\u00e1nchez had originally been scheduled to do both, but Haines reassigned those tasks to herself, leaving him feeling marginalized.\nThree months later, ODC announced its preliminary conclusion that the two had violated bar rules requiring that prosecutors disclose potentially exculpatory evidence to defense lawyers, and recommended both be suspended from practicing law for six months. Both contested that punishment, with Haines's attorney calling it \"unhinged\u2014from both reality and from any precedent in law or logic\". She and Campoamor-S\u00e1nchez have denied any wrongdoing.\nMedia coverage.\nThe disappearance of Chandra Levy became a national topic of the news media in the summer of 2001, with 63% of Americans closely following the case. The media swamped Levy's parents from the moment they decided to go to Washington, D.C., in search of their daughter. According to Condit, about a hundred reporters were camped out in front of his apartment during the morning of September 11, 2001, but they all left after news spread about that day's terrorist attacks in New York and Washington. Media critics and cable news executives later cited the Levy case, as well as the concurrent sensationalist coverage of a string of shark attacks, as a reflection of the manner of news coverage in the United States before the September 11 attacks had taken priority.\nIn 2002, D.C. newspaper \"Roll Call\" first reported Ingmar Guandique's possible connection to the case, with little effect on the news media's focus on Condit. Conservative commentator Michelle Malkin noted the lack of headlines that an illegal immigrant had been questioned in the Levy case. She said that in her review of 115 news items from the LexisNexis database, not a single mention of Guandique referred to his status as a \"criminal illegal alien\". She called the \"glaring omission\" of his status \"a newsworthy act of negligence\". She wrote that only the very conservative \"Human Events\" reported that the Immigration and Naturalization Service had approved his working legally while he was applying for temporary protected status. That application was ultimately denied, but not before he had assaulted two other women at Rock Creek Park.\nIn 2005, investigative journalist Dominick Dunne said on \"Larry King Live\" that he believed that Gary Condit had more information about the Levy case than he had been disclosing. Condit filed two lawsuits against Dunne, forcing him into an undisclosed financial settlement on one of them. In 2008, U.S. District Judge Peter Leisure dismissed the other suit that alleged slander, because \"The context in which Dunne's statements were made demonstrates that they were part of a discussion about \"speculation\" in the media and inaccurate media coverage\".\nDuring the summer of 2008, \"The Washington Post\" ran a 13-part series billed, in part, as \"a tale of the tabloid and mainstream press pack journalism that helped derail the investigation\". The two investigative reporters who were behind the \"Post\" series, Scott Higham and Sari Horwitz, wrote a book which detailed their investigation. The book, \"Finding Chandra\", was published in May 2010. Commentators, including \"The Washington Post\" Metro reporter Robert Pierre, wrote that emphasis on a glamorous white murder victim, when \"about 200 people are killed in this city every year, most of them black and male\", was \"absolutely absurd and dare I say, racist, at its core\".\nThe media was criticized for its \"rush to judgment\" in suggesting, sometimes blatantly, that Condit was guilty of the murder, especially in the early days of the investigation. Some of the reporters who were camped out in front of Condit's Washington apartment house were quoted as saying that they would remain there \"until he resigns\". When Ingmar Guandique was convicted of murdering Levy in November 2010, Condit's lawyer Bert Fields remarked, \"It's a complete vindication but that comes a little late. Who gives him his career back?\"\nOn the 17th anniversary of the homicide, Levy's mother continued to push for further investigation into her daughter's death.\nAn episode of the podcast You're Wrong About released on May 25, 2020, reviewed the events surrounding her disappearance and the search for her.\nImpact.\nLevy's death has had a lasting impact, due in part to the efforts of her family and friends. Levy's disappearance came after a number of other high-profile cases that led to the creation of resources for missing young adults. For example, Levy's parents quickly requested help from the Carole Sund/Carrington Memorial Reward Foundation, a nonprofit group that was established in Modesto after three female tourists disappeared from a 1999 trip to Yosemite National Park and were later found slain. That foundation, which offered the Levys staff support and contributed towards a cash reward for information about Chandra's disappearance, was merged into the Laci and Conner Search and Rescue Fund in 2009; Susan Levy had previously participated in the efforts to find Laci Peterson, another missing woman from Modesto.\nIn 1997, when Kristen Modafferi mysteriously disappeared from the San Francisco Bay Area just three weeks after her 18th birthday, her parents turned to their congresswoman for help, because they were ineligible to receive help from the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. As a result, Congress enacted \"Kristen's Law\" in October 2000, which established the National Center for Missing Adults (NCMA) within the U.S. Department of Justice in order to coordinate such missing persons cases. By the time Levy disappeared, institutions were in place in order to provide her family with support and assist in a nationwide search to locate her. Although the Levy family quickly moved to mobilize all such available resources, including offering a cash reward for information, hiring its own investigators, and seeking media attention, those efforts to locate Chandra Levy or find her killer were overshadowed by the speculation which surrounded her possible relationship with Condit. Susan Levy later joined forces with Donna Raley, the mother of another young woman who disappeared from Modesto in 1999, to form \"Wings of Protection\", a support group for people with missing loved ones. The Mary Ann Liebert company, the publisher of the \"Journal of Women's Health and Gender-Based Medicine\", presented its annual Criterion Award to Susan Levy for her work with \"Wings of Protection\" in May 2002.\n\"Newsweek\" magazine stated that the media may have become more skeptical of \"herd mentality\" and open to alternative suspects after the Levy case. The D.C. police claimed that it would have discovered Levy's body earlier if not for a miscommunication regarding the scope of the search. Commanders had ordered that a search be conducted within of each road and trail in Rock Creek Park, but searches were only made within 100 yards of each road, causing the body to remain undiscovered for a longer period of time.\nBoth the chief of detectives, Jack Barrett, and the chief of police, Charles H. Ramsey, have since left the force in Washington, D.C. Ramsey became head of the Philadelphia Police Department; Barrett, who became an analyst for an intelligence support firm in Arlington County, Virginia, stated in hindsight that the media had imposed \"enormous amounts of pressure\" on the Washington, D.C. police. Morales, who is serving time for conspiracy to distribute methamphetamine and crack cocaine, was scheduled to be released on August 5, 2016. Condit retired from politics and moved to Phoenix, Arizona with his wife to manage real estate and open two Baskin-Robbins franchises, which have since closed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53013", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53013", "title": "Poet Laureate Consultant in Poetry", "text": ""}
{"id": "53014", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53014", "title": "List of Spanish monarchs", "text": ""}
{"id": "53015", "revid": "31116596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53015", "title": "Sturgeon's law", "text": "\"Ninety percent of everything is crap\"\nSturgeon's law (or Sturgeon's revelation) is an adage stating \"ninety percent of everything is crap\". It was coined by Theodore Sturgeon, an American science fiction author and critic, and was inspired by his observation that, while science fiction was often derided for its low quality by critics, most work in other fields was low-quality too, and so science fiction was no different.\nDevelopment.\nSturgeon deemed Sturgeon's law to mean \"nothing is always absolutely so\". By this, he meant his observation (building on \"Sturgeon's Revelation\" that the majority of everything is of low quality) that the existence of a majority of low-quality content in every genre disproves the idea that any single genre is inherently low-quality. This adage previously appeared in his story \"The Claustrophile\" in a 1956 issue of \"Galaxy\".\nThe second adage, variously rendered as \"ninety percent of everything is crud\" or \"ninety percent of everything is crap\", was published as \"Sturgeon's Revelation\" in his book review column for \"Venture\" in 1957. However, almost all modern uses of the term Sturgeon's law refer to the second, including the definition listed in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nAccording to science fiction author William Tenn, Sturgeon first expressed his law circa 1951, at a talk at New York University attended by Tenn. The statement was subsequently included in a talk Sturgeon gave at a 1953 Labor Day weekend session of the World Science Fiction Convention in Philadelphia.\nThe first written reference to the adage is in the September 1957 issue of \"Venture\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And on that hangs Sturgeon's revelation. It came to him that [science fiction] is indeed ninety-percent crud, but that also\u00a0\u2013 Eureka!\u00a0\u2013 \"ninety-percent of everything is crud\". All things\u00a0\u2013 cars, books, cheeses, hairstyles, people, and pins are, to the expert and discerning eye, crud, except for the acceptable tithe which we each happen to like.\nThe adage appears again in the March\u00a01958 issue of \"Venture\", where Sturgeon wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is in this vein that I repeat Sturgeon's Revelation, which was wrung out of me after twenty years of wearying defense of science fiction against attacks of people who used the worst examples of the field for ammunition, and whose conclusion was that ninety percent of S.F. is crud.\nNinety percent of \"everything\" is crud.\n The existence of immense quantities of trash in science fiction is admitted and it is regrettable; but it is no more unnatural than the existence of trash anywhere.\n The best science fiction is as good as the best fiction in any field.\nPrecedents and proponents.\nIn the 1870 novel, \"Lothair\", by Benjamin Disraeli, it is asserted that:\nNine-tenths of existing books are nonsense, and the clever books are the refutation of that nonsense.\nA similar adage appears in Rudyard Kipling's \"The Light That Failed\", published in 1890.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Four-fifths of everybody's work must be bad. But the remnant is worth the trouble for its own sake.\nA 1946 essay \"Confessions of a Book Reviewer\" by George Orwell asserts about books:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2009, a paper published in \"The Lancet\" estimated that over 85% of health and medical research is wasted.\nIn 2013, philosopher Daniel Dennett championed Sturgeon's law as one of his seven tools for critical thinking.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;90% of everything is crap. That is true, whether you are talking about physics, chemistry, evolutionary psychology, sociology, medicine\u00a0\u2013 you name it\u00a0\u2013 rock music, country western. 90% of everything is crap.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53016", "revid": "42778291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53016", "title": "Screenwriter", "text": "Person who writes for films, TV shows, comics, and games\n \nA screenwriter (also called scriptwriter, scribe, or scenarist) is a person who practices the craft of writing for visual mass media, known as screenwriting. These can include short films, feature-length films, television programs, television commercials, video games, and the growing area of online web series.\nTerminology.\nIn the silent era, screenwriters were denoted by terms such as photoplaywright, photoplay writer, photoplay dramatist, and screen playwright. Screenwriting historian Steven Maras notes that these early writers were often understood as being the authors of the films as shown, and argues that they could not be precisely equated with present-day screenwriters because they were responsible for a technical product, a brief \"scenario\", \"treatment\", or \"synopsis\" that is a written synopsis of what is to be filmed.\nProfession.\nScreenwriting is typically a contracted freelance profession, not a hired position. No education is required to be a professional screenwriter, but good storytelling abilities and imagination give aspiring screenwriters an advantage. Many screenwriters start their careers doing speculative work (\"work on spec\"), practicing their screenwriting with no guaranteed financial compensation. If one of these scripts is sold, it is called a spec script. Amateur screenwriters will often pursue this work as \"writers in training,\" leading these spec scripts to often go uncredited or come from unknown screenwriters.\nFurther separating professional and amateur screenwriters is that professionals are usually represented by a talent agency. These screenwriter-specific employment agencies work to handle the business side of the screenwriting job, typically taking on legal, financial, and other important representative roles for the screenwriter. These professional screenwriters rarely work for free.\nThere are a legion of would-be screenwriters who attempt to enter the film industry, but it often takes years of trial and error, failure, and gritty persistence to achieve success. In \"Writing Screenplays that Sell\", Michael Hague writes, \"Screenplays have become, for the last half of [the twentieth] century, what the Great American Novel was for the first half. Closet writers who used to dream of the glory of getting into print now dream of seeing their story on the big or small screen.\"\nFilm industry.\nEvery screenplay and teleplay begins with a thought or idea, and screenwriters use their ideas to write scripts, with the intention of selling them and having them produced. In some cases the script is based on an existing property, such as a book or person's life story, which is adapted by the screenwriter. In most cases, a film project is initiated by a screenwriter. The initiator of the project gets the exclusive writing assignment. They are referred to as \"exclusive\" assignments or \"pitched\" assignments. Screenwriters who often pitch new projects, whether original or an adaptation, often do not have to worry about competing for assignments and are often more successful. When word is put out about a project that a film studio, production company, or producer wants done, they are referred to as \"open\" assignments. Open assignments are more competitive. If screenwriters are competing for an open assignment, more established writers usually win the assignments. A screenwriter can also be approached and personally offered a writing assignment.\nScript doctoring.\nMany screenwriters also work as full- or part-time script doctors, attempting to better a script to suit the desires of a director or studio. For instance, studio management may have a complaint that the motivations of the characters are unclear or that the dialogue is weak.\nHollywood has shifted writers onto and off projects since its earliest days, and the assignment of credits is not always straightforward or complete, which poses a problem for film study. In his book \"Talking Pictures\", Richard Corliss discussed the historian's dilemma: \"A writer may be given screen credit for work he didn't do (as with Sidney Buchman on \"Holiday\"), or be denied credit for work he did do (as with Sidney Buchman on \"The Awful Truth\").\"\nDevelopment process.\nAfter a screenwriter finishes a project, they pair with an industry-based representative, such as a producer, director, literary agent, entertainment lawyer, or entertainment executive. The partnerships often pitch their project to investors or others in a position to further a project. Once the script is sold, the writer has only the rights that were agreed with the purchaser.\nA screenwriter becomes credible by having work that is recognized, which gives the writer the opportunity to earn a higher income. As more films are produced independently (outside the studio system), many up-and-coming screenwriters are turning to pitch fests, screenplay contests, and independent development services to gain access to established and credible independent producers. Many development executives are now working independently to incubate their own pet projects.\nOnline platforms such as https:// have emerged to help screenwriters showcase their scripts, pitch projects, and receive industry feedback in digitally timestamped environments.\nProduction involvement.\nScreenwriters are rarely involved in the production of a film. Sometimes they come on as advisors, or if they are established, as a producer. Some screenwriters also direct. Although many scripts are sold each year, many do not make it into production because the number of scripts that are purchased every year exceeds the number of professional directors that are working in the film and TV industry. When a screenwriter finishes a project and sells it to a film studio, production company, TV network, or producer, they often have to continue networking, mainly with directors or executives, and push to have their projects \"chosen\" and turned into films or TV shows. If interest in a script begins to fade, a project can go dead.\nUnions.\nThe International Affiliation of Writers Guilds (IAWG) is the international federation of screenwriters' and playwrights' unions, who recognize union membership across international borders. They have 14 different affiliates across various nations who collectively work to verify original authorship, fight for fair compensation, and enforce copyright.\nMost professional screenwriters in the U.S. are unionized and are represented by the Writers Guild of America (WGA). Although membership in the WGA is recommended, it is not required of a screenwriter to join. The WGA is the final arbiter on awarding writing credit for projects under its jurisdiction. The WGA also looks upon and verifies film copyright materials.\nOther notable screenwriters' unions include the Writers' Guild of Great Britain, representing screenwriters in the UK, and La Guilde Fran\u00e7aise des Sc\u00e9naristes, representing screenwriters in France.\nSalary.\nMinimum salaries for union screenwriters in the US are set by the Writers Guild of America. The median compensation for a first draft from a first time screenwriter is $100,000, while the most experienced members have a median compensation of $450,000. The most experienced WGA members have reported up to $4,000,000 compensation for a first draft. Multi-step deals, where the writer is signed on for more than the first draft (typically including a rewrite) can earn a screenwriter more, with experienced WGA members earning up to $5,000,000 for their work.\nNon-union screenwriters can also work for a salary, but will typically earn less than a unionized screenwriter. Pay can vary dramatically for a non-unionized screenwriter.\nCurrent records.\nSome of the highest amounts paid to writers for spec screenplays:\n$5 million:\n$2\u00a0million:\n$1\u00a0million:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53017", "revid": "24841344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53017", "title": "Special effect", "text": "Illusions or tricks to change appearance\nSpecial effects (often abbreviated as F/X or simply FX) are illusions or visual tricks used in the theater, film, television, video game, amusement park and simulator industries to simulate the fictional events in a story or virtual world. It is sometimes abbreviated as SFX, but this may also refer to \"sound effects\".\nSpecial effects are traditionally divided into the categories of mechanical effects and optical effects. With the emergence of digital filmmaking a distinction between special effects and visual effects has grown, with the latter referring to digital post-production and optical effects, while \"special effects\" refers to mechanical effects.\nMechanical effects (also called practical or physical effects) are usually accomplished during the live-action shooting. This includes the use of mechanised props, scenery, scale models, animatronics, pyrotechnics and atmospheric effects: creating physical wind, rain, fog, snow, clouds, making a car appear to drive by itself and blowing up a building, etc. Mechanical effects are also often incorporated into set design and make-up. For example, prosthetic make-up can be used to make an actor look like a non-human creature.\nOptical effects (also called photographic effects) are the techniques in which images or film frames are created photographically, either \"in-camera\" using multiple exposure, mattes or the Sch\u00fcfftan process or in post-production using an optical printer. An optical effect might be used to place actors or sets against a different background.\nSince the 1990s, computer-generated imagery (CGI) has come to the forefront of special effects technologies. It gives filmmakers greater control, and allows many effects to be accomplished more safely and convincingly and\u2014as technology improves\u2014at lower costs. As a result, many optical and mechanical effects techniques have been superseded by CGI.\nDevelopmental history.\nEarly development.\nIn 1857, Oscar Rejlander created the world's first \"special effects\" image by combining different sections of 32 negatives into a single image, making a montaged combination print. In 1895, Alfred Clark created what is commonly accepted as the first-ever motion picture special effect. While filming a reenactment of the beheading of Mary, Queen of Scots, Clark instructed an actor to step up to the block in Mary's costume. As the executioner brought the axe above his head, Clark stopped the camera, had all of the actors freeze, and had the person playing Mary step off the set. He placed a Mary dummy in the actor's place, restarted filming, and allowed the executioner to bring the axe down, severing the dummy's head. Techniques like these would dominate the production of special effects for a century.\nIt wasn't only the first use of trickery in cinema, it was also the first type of photographic trickery that was only possible in a motion picture, and referred to as the \"stop trick\". Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s, an early motion picture pioneer, accidentally discovered the same \"stop trick.\" According to M\u00e9li\u00e8s, his camera jammed while filming a street scene in Paris. When he screened the film, he found that the \"stop trick\" had caused a truck to turn into a hearse, pedestrians to change direction, and men to turn into women. M\u00e9li\u00e8s, the stage manager at the Theatre Robert-Houdin, was inspired to develop a series of more than 500 short films between 1896 and 1914, in the process developing or inventing such techniques as multiple exposures, time-lapse photography, dissolves, and hand painted colour. Because of his ability to seemingly manipulate and transform reality with the cinematograph, the prolific M\u00e9li\u00e8s is sometimes referred to as the \"Cinemagician.\" His most famous film, \"Le Voyage dans la lune\" (1902), a whimsical parody of Jules Verne's \"From the Earth to the Moon\", featured a combination of live action and animation, and also incorporated extensive miniature and matte painting work.\nFrom 1910 to 1920, the main innovations in special effects were the improvements on the matte shot by Norman Dawn. With the original matte shot, pieces of cardboard were placed to block the exposure of the film, which would be exposed later. Dawn combined this technique with the \"glass shot.\" Rather than using cardboard to block certain areas of the film exposure, Dawn simply painted certain areas black to prevent any light from exposing the film. From the partially exposed film, a single frame is then projected onto an easel, where the matte is then drawn. By creating the matte from an image directly from the film, it became incredibly easy to paint an image with proper respect to scale and perspective (the main flaw of the glass shot). Dawn's technique became the textbook for matte shots due to the natural images it created.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, special effects techniques were improved and refined by the motion picture industry. Many techniques\u2014such as the Sch\u00fcfftan process\u2014were modifications of illusions from the theatre (such as pepper's ghost) and still photography (such as double exposure and matte compositing). Rear projection was a refinement of the use of painted backgrounds in the theatre, substituting moving pictures to create moving backgrounds. Lifecasting of faces was imported from traditional maskmaking. Along with make-up advances, fantastic masks could be created which fit the actor perfectly. As material science advanced, horror film maskmaking followed closely.\nMany studios established in-house \"special effects\" departments, which were responsible for nearly all optical and mechanical aspects of motion-picture trickery. Also, the challenge of simulating spectacle in motion encouraged the development of the use of miniatures. Animation, creating the illusion of motion, was accomplished with drawings (most notably by Winsor McCay in \"Gertie the Dinosaur\") and with three-dimensional models (most notably by Willis O'Brien in \"The Lost World\" and \"King Kong\"). Naval battles could be depicted with models in studio. Tanks and aeroplanes could be flown (and crashed) without risk of life and limb. Most impressively, miniatures and matte paintings could be used to depict worlds that never existed. Fritz Lang's film \"Metropolis\" was an early special effects spectacular, with innovative use of miniatures, matte paintings, the Sch\u00fcfftan process, and complex compositing.\nAn important innovation in special-effects photography was the development of the optical printer. Essentially, an optical printer is a projector aiming into a camera lens, and it was developed to make copies of films for distribution. Until Linwood G. Dunn refined the design and use of the optical printer, effects shots were accomplished as in-camera effects. Dunn demonstrating that it could be used to combine images in novel ways and create new illusions. One early showcase for Dunn was Orson Welles' \"Citizen Kane\", where such locations as Xanadu (and some of Gregg Toland's famous 'deep focus' shots) were essentially created by Dunn's optical printer.\nColor era.\nThe development of color photography required greater refinement of effects techniques. Color enabled the development of such \"travelling matte\" techniques as bluescreen and the sodium vapour process. Many films became landmarks in special-effects accomplishments: \"Forbidden Planet\" used matte paintings, animation, and miniature work to create spectacular alien environments. In \"The Ten Commandments\", Paramount's John P. Fulton, A.S.C., multiplied the crowds of extras in the Exodus scenes with careful compositing, depicted the massive constructions of Rameses with models, and split the Red Sea in a still-impressive combination of travelling mattes and water tanks. Ray Harryhausen extended the art of stop-motion animation with his special techniques of compositing to create spectacular fantasy adventures such as \"Jason and the Argonauts\" (whose climax, a sword battle with seven animated skeletons, is considered a landmark in special effects).\nThe science fiction boom.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s numerous new special effects were developed which would dramatically increase the level of realism achievable in science fiction films. Sci-fi special effects milestones in the 1950s included the \"Godzilla\" films, \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" (featuring Klaatu), and 3-D films.\nThe \"tokusatsu\" genre of Japanese science fiction film and television, which includes the \"kaiju\" sub-genre of monster films, rose to prominence in the 1950s. The special-effects director Eiji Tsuburaya and the director Ishir\u014d Honda became the driving forces behind the original \"Godzilla\" (1954). Taking inspiration from \"King Kong\" (1933), Tsuburaya formulated many of the techniques that would become staples of the \"tokusatsu\" genre, such as so-called suitmation\u2014the use of a human actor in a costume to play a giant monster\u2014combined with the use of miniatures and scaled-down city sets. \"Godzilla\" changed the landscape of Japanese cinema, science fiction and fantasy, and kickstarted the \"kaiju\" genre in Japan called the \"Monster Boom\", which remained extremely popular for several decades, with characters such as the aforementioned Godzilla, Gamera and King Ghidorah leading the market. Tokusatsu films, notably \"Warning from Space\" (1956), sparked Stanley Kubrick's interest in science fiction films; according to his biographer John Baxter, despite their \"clumsy model sequences, the films were often well-photographed in colour ... and their dismal dialogue was delivered in well-designed and well-lit sets.\"\nIn 1968, Stanley Kubrick assembled his own effects team (Douglas Trumbull, Tom Howard, Con Pederson and Wally Veevers) rather than use an in-house effects unit for \"\". In this film, the spaceship miniatures were highly detailed and carefully photographed for a realistic depth of field. The shots of spaceships were combined through hand-drawn rotoscoping and careful motion-control work, ensuring that the elements were precisely combined in the camera\u2014a surprising throwback to the silent era, but with spectacular results. Backgrounds of the African vistas in the \"Dawn of Man\" sequence were combined with soundstage photography via the then-new front projection technique. Scenes set in zero-gravity environments were staged with hidden wires, mirror shots, and large-scale rotating sets. The finale, a voyage through hallucinogenic scenery, was created by Douglas Trumbull using a new technique termed slit-scan.\nThe 1970s provided two profound changes in the special effects trade. The first was economic: during the industry's recession in the late 1960s and early 1970s, many studios closed down their in-house effects houses. Technicians became freelancers or founded their own effects companies, sometimes specialising on particular techniques (opticals, animation, etc.).\nThe second was precipitated by the blockbuster success of two science-fiction and fantasy films in 1977. George Lucas's \"Star Wars\" ushered in an era of science-fiction films with expensive and impressive special effects. Effects supervisor John Dykstra, A.S.C. and crew developed many improvements in existing effects technology. They created a computer-controlled camera rig called the \"Dykstraflex\" that allowed precise repetition of camera motion, greatly facilitating travelling-matte compositing. Degradation of film images during compositing was minimised by other innovations: the Dykstraflex used VistaVision cameras that photographed widescreen images horizontally along stock, using far more of the film per frame, and thinner-emulsion filmstocks were used in the compositing process. The effects crew assembled by Lucas was dubbed Industrial Light &amp; Magic, and since 1977 has spearheaded many effects innovations.\nThat same year, Steven Spielberg's film \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" boasted a finale with impressive special effects by \"\" veteran Douglas Trumbull. In addition to developing his own motion-control system, Trumbull also developed techniques for creating intentional \"lens flare\" (the shapes created by light reflecting in camera lenses) to provide the film's undefinable shapes of flying saucers.\nThe success of these films, and others since, has prompted massive studio investment in effects-heavy science-fiction films. This has fuelled the establishment of many independent effects houses, a tremendous degree of refinement of existing techniques, and the development of new techniques such as computer-generated imagery (CGI). It has also encouraged within the industry a greater distinction between special effects and visual effects; the latter is used to characterise post-production and optical work, while \"special effects\" refers more often to on-set and mechanical effects.\nIntroduction of computer-generated imagery (CGI).\nThe use of computer animation in film dates back to the early 1980s, with the films \"Tron\" (1982) and \"\" (1983). Since the 1990s, a profound innovation in special effects has been the development of computer-generated imagery (CGI), which has changed nearly every aspect of motion picture special effects. Digital compositing allows far more control and creative freedom than optical compositing, and does not degrade the image as with analogue (optical) processes. Digital imagery has enabled technicians to create detailed models, matte \"paintings,\" and even fully realised characters with the malleability of computer software.\nArguably the biggest and most \"spectacular\" use of CGI is in the creation of photo-realistic images of science-fiction/fantasy characters, settings and objects. Images can be created in a computer using the techniques of animated cartoons and model animation. \"The Last Starfighter\" (1984) used computer generated spaceships instead of physical scale models. In 1993, stop-motion animators working on the realistic dinosaurs of Steven Spielberg's \"Jurassic Park\" were retrained in the use of computer input devices. By 1995, films such as \"Toy Story\" underscored the fact that the distinction between live-action films and animated films was no longer clear. Other landmark examples include a character made up of broken pieces of a stained-glass window in \"Young Sherlock Holmes\", a shape-shifting character in \"Willow\", a tentacle formed from water in \"The Abyss\", the T-1000 Terminator in \"\", hordes and armies of robots and fantastic creatures in the \"Star Wars (prequel)\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogies, and the planet, Pandora, in \"Avatar\".\nIn 2025, Christian Clavier compared M\u00e9li\u00e8s\u2019 early trick effects to the current use of AI in visual effects.\nPlanning and use.\nAlthough most visual effects work is completed during post-production, it must be carefully planned and choreographed in pre-production and production. A visual effects supervisor is usually involved with the production from an early stage to work closely with the Director and all related personnel to achieve the desired effects.\nPractical effects also require significant pre-planning and co-ordination with performers and production teams. The live nature of the effects can result in situations where resetting due to an error, mistake, or safety concern incurs significant expense, or is impossible due to the destructive nature of the effect.\nLive special effects.\nLive special effects are effects that are used in front of a live audience, such as in theatre, sporting generation genre, concerts and corporate shows. Types of effects that are commonly used include: flying effects, laser lighting, theatrical smoke and fog, CO2 effects, and pyrotechnics. Other atmospheric effects can include flame, confetti, bubbles, and snow.\nOne notable example of live special effects in theatre production is in the Bregenz Festival with its use of a large, intricate stage that moves to supplement what's being acted on stage.\nMechanical effects.\nMechanical effects encompass the use of mechanical engineering to a greater degree. Cars being flipped and hauled over buildings are usually an effect built on specialised rigs and gimbals. Usually a team of engineers or freelance film companies provide these effects to producers. Camera workers, stunt artists or doubles, directors and engineers collaborate to produce the proper effect as the action is recorded against a green screen. It is then edited and reviewed before final release to the public.\nVisual special effects techniques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNoted special effects companies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53019", "revid": "29", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53019", "title": "Suevi", "text": ""}
{"id": "53027", "revid": "45839601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53027", "title": "Supergroup (music)", "text": "Band whose members were successful in prior acts\nA supergroup is a musical group formed of members who are already successful as solo artists or as members of other successful groups. The term became popular in the late 1960s when members of already successful rock groups recorded albums together, after which they normally disbanded. Charity supergroups, in which prominent musicians perform or record together in support of a particular cause, have been common since the 1980s. The term is most common in the context of rock and pop music, but it has occasionally been applied to other musical genres. For example, opera stars the Three Tenors (Jos\u00e9 Carreras, Pl\u00e1cido Domingo, and Luciano Pavarotti) and hip hop duos Kids See Ghosts (Kanye West and Kid Cudi) and Bad Meets Evil (Eminem and Royce da 5'9\") all have been called supergroups.\nA supergroup sometimes forms as a side project for a single recording project or other \"ad hoc\" purposes, with no intention that the group will remain together afterwards. In other instances, the group may become the primary focus of the members' career.\nHistory.\n\"Rolling Stone\" editor Jann Wenner credited British rock band Cream, which came together in 1966, as the first supergroup. Eric Clapton, formerly of rock band The Yardbirds and blues rock band John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers; Jack Bruce, formerly of jazz/rhythm and blues band the Graham Bond Organisation (GBO) and John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers; and Ginger Baker, formerly of the GBO, formed the band in 1966, recorded four albums, and disbanded in 1968. Guitarist Clapton and drummer Baker went on to form Blind Faith, another blues rock supergroup which recruited former Spencer Davis Group and Traffic singer, keyboardist, and guitarist Steve Winwood and Family bassist Ric Grech. The group recorded one studio album before disbanding less than a year after formation. And in 1970 bassist and vocalist Jack Bruce joined the Tony Williams Lifetime (formed the previous year), composed of three famous Miles Davis alumni: drummer Tony Williams, guitarist John McLaughlin and keyboardist Khalid Yasin (n\u00e9 Larry Young).\nThe term may have come from the 1968 album \"Super Session\" with Al Kooper, Mike Bloomfield, and Stephen Stills. The coalition of Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young (formerly Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash) in 1969 is another early example, given the success of their prior bands (the Byrds, Buffalo Springfield, and the Hollies respectively).\nWhile the practice had declined by the 80s, in 1985 country superstars Johnny Cash, Willie Nelson, Kris Kristofferson and Waylon Jennings formed the first country supergroup, Highwaymen, going on to achieve three chart singles. Perhaps the most decorated line-up, the supergroup Traveling Wilburys was formed in 1988, consisting of Bob Dylan, George Harrison, Jeff Lynne, Roy Orbison and Tom Petty.\nIn the early 2000s, supergroups such as Audioslave and Velvet Revolver made their mark. Audioslave was created in 2001, composed of ex-members of Rage Against the Machine and Chris Cornell from Soundgarden. The members of Guns N\u2019 Roses and Scott Weiland from Stone Temple Pilots came together to form Velvet Revolver in 2002. This is a time when supergroups were experiencing a revival; established musicians looked for new platforms to express themselves.\nIn 2013, pop rock bands McFly and Busted combined to form McBusted, before splitting in 2015. A 2015 example of a supergroup is FFS, a collaboration between Scottish indie rock band Franz Ferdinand and American art rock band Sparks. Other prominent examples include Atoms for Peace and Boygenius.\nCriticism of the expression.\nThe very definition of a \"supergroup\" hinges on the members already having been \"successful\". This itself is a subjective term, though metrics such as career earnings, records sold, number of commercial hit songs written and musician longevity can all be used to establish the objective success of a musical band and its individual members.\nTyler Golsen in \"Far Out\" writes that \"Today, the term 'supergroup' has something of a negative connotation. It usually signifies a short-term vanity project that attempts to profit off members' reputations with their past works\".\nIn 1974, a \"Time\" magazine article titled \"Return of a Supergroup\" quipped that the supergroup was a \"potent but short-lived rock phenomenon\" which was an \"amalgam formed by the talented malcontents of other bands\". The article acknowledged that groups such as Cream and Blind Faith \"played enormous arenas and made megabucks, and sometimes megamusic\", with the performances \"fueled by dueling egos\". However, while this \"musical infighting built up the excitement\u00a0... it also made breakups inevitable.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53029", "revid": "50505954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53029", "title": "Muammar Gaddafi", "text": "Dictator of Libya from 1969 to 2011\nMuammar Muhammad Abu Minyar al-Gaddafi (c.\u20091942\u00a0\u2013 20 October 2011) was a Libyan military officer, revolutionary, politician, and political theorist who ruled Libya from 1969 until his overthrow by Libyan rebel forces in 2011 during the first Libyan civil war. He came to power through a military coup, first becoming Revolutionary Chairman of the Libyan Arab Republic from 1969 to 1977, Secretary General of the General People's Congress from 1977 to 1979, and then the Brotherly Leader of the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya from 1979 to 2011. Initially ideologically committed to Arab nationalism and Arab socialism, Gaddafi later ruled according to his own Third International Theory.\nBorn near Sirte, Italian Libya, to a poor Bedouin Arab family, Gaddafi became an Arab nationalist while at school in Sabha, later enrolling in the Royal Military Academy, Benghazi. He founded a revolutionary group known as the Free Officers movement which deposed the Western-backed Senussi monarchy of Idris in a 1969 coup. Gaddafi converted Libya into a republic governed by his Revolutionary Command Council. Ruling by decree, he deported Libya's Italian population and ejected its Western military bases. He strengthened ties to Arab nationalist governments and unsuccessfully advocated pan-Arab political union. An Islamic modernist, he introduced \"sharia\" as the basis for the legal system and promoted Islamic socialism. He nationalized the oil industry and used the increasing state revenues to bolster the military, fund foreign revolutionaries, and implement social programs emphasizing housebuilding, healthcare and education projects. In 1973, he initiated a \"Popular Revolution\" with the formation of Basic People's Congresses, presented as a system of direct democracy, but retained personal control over major decisions. He outlined his Third International Theory that year in \"The Green Book\".\nIn 1977, Gaddafi transformed Libya into a new socialist state called a \"Jamahiriya\" (\"state of the masses\"). He officially adopted a symbolic role in governance but remained head of both the military and the Revolutionary Committees responsible for policing and suppressing dissent. During the 1970s and 1980s, Libya's unsuccessful border conflicts with Egypt and Chad, support for foreign militants, and alleged responsibility for bombings of Pan Am Flight 103 and UTA Flight 772 left it increasingly isolated on the world stage. A particularly hostile relationship developed with Israel, the United States and the United Kingdom, resulting in the 1986 U.S. bombing of Libya and United Nations\u2013imposed economic sanctions. From 1999, Gaddafi shunned pan-Arabism, and encouraged pan-Africanism and rapprochement with Western nations; he was Chairperson of the African Union from 2009 to 2010. Amid the 2011 Arab Spring, protests against widespread corruption and unemployment broke out in eastern Libya. The situation descended into civil war, in which NATO intervened militarily on the side of the anti-Gaddafist National Transitional Council (NTC). Gaddafi's government was overthrown; he retreated to Sirte only to be captured, tortured and killed by NTC militants.\nA highly divisive figure, Gaddafi dominated Libya's politics for four decades and was the subject of a pervasive cult of personality. He was decorated with various awards and praised for his anti-imperialist stance, support for Arab\u2014and then African\u2014unity, as well as for significant development to the country after the discovery of oil reserves. Conversely, many Libyans strongly opposed Gaddafi's social and economic reforms; he was accused of various human rights violations. He was condemned by many as a dictator whose authoritarian administration systematically violated human rights and financed terrorism in the region and abroad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and career.\nChildhood: 1940s to 1950.\nMuammar Mohammed Abu Minyar al-Gaddafi was born near Qasr Abu Hadi, a rural area outside the town of Sirte in the deserts of Tripolitania, Italian western Libya. His family came from a small, relatively uninfluential tribe called the Qadhadhfa, who were Arab in heritage. His mother was Aisha bint Niran, and his father, Mohammad Abdul Salam bin Hamed bin Mohammad, was known as Abu Meniar; the latter earned a meager subsistence as a goat and camel herder.\nLike other contemporary nomadic Bedouin tribes, the family were illiterate and did not keep any birth records. His birthday is not known with certainty and sources have set it in 1942 or the spring of 1943, although his biographers David Blundy and Andrew Lycett noted that it could have been pre-1940. His parents' only surviving son, he had three older sisters. Gaddafi's upbringing in Bedouin culture influenced his personal tastes; he preferred the desert over the city and would retreat there to meditate.\nFrom childhood, Gaddafi was aware of the involvement of European colonial powers in Libya; his nation was occupied by Italy, and during the North African Campaign of the Second World War it witnessed conflict between Italian and British forces. According to later claims, Gaddafi's paternal grandfather, Abdessalam Bouminyar, was killed by the Italian Army during the Italian invasion of 1911. At the end of the Second World War in 1945, Libya was occupied by British and French forces. Britain and France considered dividing the nation between their empires, but the General Assembly of the United Nations (UN) decided that the country was to be granted political independence, and in 1951 created the United Kingdom of Libya, a federal state under the leadership of a pro-Western monarch, Idris, who banned political parties and centralized power in his own hands.\nEducation and political activism: 1950\u20131963.\nGaddafi's earliest education was of a religious nature, imparted by a local Islamic teacher. Subsequently, moving to nearby Sirte to attend elementary school, he progressed through six grades in four years. Education in Libya was not free, but his father thought it would greatly benefit his son despite the financial strain. During the week Gaddafi slept in a mosque, and only at weekends and holidays walked to visit his parents. Even though Gaddafi's father was not educated, he made great sacrifices to send his son to school. As an impoverished Bedouin, he faced bullying and discrimination from his city-dwelling classmates. However, he had many Egyptian teachers who informed him of the dramatic events occurring in their homeland. From Sirte, he and his family moved to the market town of Sabha in Fezzan, south-central Libya, where his father worked as a caretaker for a tribal leader while Muammar attended secondary school, something neither parent had done. Gaddafi was popular at this school; some friends made there received significant jobs in his later administration, most notably his best friend, Abdul Salam Jalloud.\nMany teachers at Sabha were Egyptian, and for the first time, Gaddafi had access to pan-Arab newspapers and radio broadcasts, especially the Cairo-based \"Voice of the Arabs\". Growing up, Gaddafi witnessed significant events severely disturb the Arab world, including the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, the Suez Crisis of 1956, and the short-lived existence of the United Arab Republic (UAR) between 1958 and 1961. Gaddafi admired the political changes implemented in the Arab Republic of Egypt under his hero, President Gamal Abdel Nasser. Nasser argued for Arab nationalism; the rejection of Western colonialism, neo-colonialism, and Zionism; and a transition from capitalism to socialism. Gaddafi was influenced by Nasser's book, \"Philosophy of the Revolution\", which outlined how to initiate a coup. One of Gaddafi's Egyptian teachers, Mahmoud Efay, was reportedly sympathetic towards the youth's political ideas, and advised him that a successful revolution would need the support of the army.\nGaddafi organized demonstrations and distributed posters criticizing the monarchy. In October 1961, he led a demonstration protesting against Syria's secession from the UAR and raised funds to send cables of support to Nasser. Twenty students were arrested as a result of the disorder. Gaddafi and his companions also broke windows in a local hotel that was accused of serving alcohol. To punish Gaddafi, the authorities expelled him and his family from Sabha. Gaddafi moved to Misrata, there attending Misrata Secondary School. Maintaining his interest in Arab nationalist activism, he refused to join any of the banned political parties active in the city\u2014including the Arab Nationalist Movement, the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party, and the Muslim Brotherhood\u2014claiming that he rejected factionalism. He read voraciously on the subjects of Nasser and the French Revolution of 1789, as well as the works of the Syrian political theorist Michel Aflaq and biographies of Abraham Lincoln, Sun Yat-sen, and Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk.\nMilitary training: 1963\u20131966.\nGaddafi briefly studied history at the University of Libya in Benghazi before dropping out to join the military. Despite his police record, in 1963 he began training at the Royal Military Academy, Benghazi, alongside several like-minded friends from Misrata. The armed forces offered the only opportunity for upward social mobility for underprivileged Libyans, and Gaddafi recognized it as a potential instrument of political change. Under Idris, Libya's armed forces were trained by the British Armed Forces; this angered Gaddafi, who viewed the British as imperialists, and accordingly, he refused to learn English and was rude to the British officers, ultimately failing his exams. British trainers reported him for insubordination and abusive behaviour, stating their suspicion that he was involved in the assassination of the military academy's commander in 1963. Such reports were ignored, and Gaddafi quickly progressed through the course.\nWith a group of loyal cadres, in 1964, Gaddafi established the Central Committee of the Free Officers Movement, a revolutionary group named after Nasser's Egyptian predecessor. Led by Gaddafi, they met secretively and were organized into a clandestine cell system, pooling their salaries into a single fund. Gaddafi travelled around Libya collecting intelligence and developing connections with sympathizers, but the government's intelligence services ignored him, considering him little threat. Graduating in August 1965, Gaddafi became a communications officer in the army's signal corps.\nIn April 1966, he was assigned to the United Kingdom for further training; over nine months he underwent an English-language course at Wilton Park in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, an Army Air Corps signal instructors course in Bovington Camp, Dorset, and an infantry signal instructors course at Hythe, Kent. Despite later rumours to the contrary, he did not attend the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. The Bovington signal course's director reported that Gaddafi successfully overcame problems learning English, displaying a firm command of voice procedure. Noting that Gaddafi's favourite hobbies were reading and playing football, he thought of him as an \"amusing officer, always cheerful, hard-working, and conscientious\". Gaddafi disliked England, claiming British Army officers had racially insulted him and finding it difficult adjusting to the country's culture; asserting his Arab identity in London, he walked around Piccadilly wearing traditional Libyan robes. He later related that while he travelled to England believing it more advanced than Libya, he returned home \"more confident and proud of our values, ideals and social character\".\nLibyan Arab Republic.\nCoup d'\u00e9tat: 1969.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople of Libya! In response to your own will, fulfilling your most heartfelt wishes, answering your most incessant demands for change and regeneration, and your longing to strive towards these ends: listening to your incitement to rebel, your armed forces have undertaken the overthrow of the corrupt regime, the stench of which has sickened and horrified us all. At a single blow our gallant army has toppled these idols and has destroyed their images. By a single stroke it has lightened the long dark night in which the Turkish domination was followed first by Italian rule, then by this reactionary and decadent regime which was no more than a hotbed of extortion, faction, treachery and treason.\n\u2014Gaddafi's radio speech after seizing power, 1969\nIdris' government was increasingly unpopular by the latter 1960s; it had exacerbated Libya's traditional regional and tribal divisions by centralizing the country's federal system to take advantage of the country's oil wealth. Corruption and entrenched systems of patronage were widespread throughout the oil industry. Arab nationalism was increasingly popular, and protests flared up after Egypt's 1967 defeat in the Six-Day War with Israel; Idris' administration was seen as pro-Israeli due to its alliance with the Western powers. Anti-Western riots broke out in Tripoli and Benghazi, while Libyan workers shut down oil terminals in solidarity with Egypt. By 1969, the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was expecting segments of Libya's armed forces to launch a coup. Although claims have been made that they knew of Gaddafi's Free Officers Movement, they have since claimed ignorance, stating that they were instead monitoring Abdul Aziz Shalhi's Black Boots revolutionary group. Shalhi, who effectively served as Idris' chief of staff, and his brother Omar were the sons of Idris' former chief advisor Ibrahim Shalhi, who had been murdered by Queen Fatima's nephew in the fall of 1954. After their father's assassination, they became the favorites of Idris.\nIn mid-1969, Idris travelled abroad to spend the summer in Turkey and Greece amid widespread rumors of an abdication or a British-backed coup by the Shalhi brothers on 5 September. Gaddafi's Free Officers, recognizing this as their last chance to preempt the Shelhis in overthrowing the monarchy, initiated \"Operation Jerusalem\". If Gaddafi's Free Officers had not preempted the Shelhis, they would have almost certainly been defeated by the combined forces of Abdul Aziz Shelhi, the deputy commander of Libya's army, and the prominent families in Cyrenaica that supported the Shelhi family. On 1 September, Gaddafi's Free Officers occupied airports, police depots, radio stations, and government offices in Tripoli and Benghazi. Gaddafi took control of the Berka barracks in Benghazi, while Umar Muhayshi occupied Tripoli barracks and Jalloud seized the city's anti-aircraft batteries. Khweldi Hameidi took over the Tripoli radio station and was sent to arrest crown prince Sayyid Hasan ar-Rida al-Mahdi as-Sanussi and force him to relinquish his claim to the throne. They met no serious resistance and wielded little violence against the monarchists.\nOnce Gaddafi removed the monarchical government, he announced the foundation of the Libyan Arab Republic. Addressing the populace by radio, he proclaimed an end to the \"reactionary and corrupt\" regime, \"the stench of which has sickened and horrified us all\". Due to the coup's bloodless nature, it was initially labelled the \"White Revolution\", although was later renamed the \"One September Revolution\" after the date on which it occurred. Gaddafi insisted that the Free Officers' coup represented a revolution, marking the start of widespread change in the socio-economic and political nature of Libya. He proclaimed that the revolution meant \"freedom, socialism, and unity\", and over the coming years implemented measures to achieve this.\nConsolidating leadership: 1969\u20131973.\nThe 12-member central committee of the Free Officers proclaimed themselves the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), the government of the new republic. Lieutenant Gaddafi became RCC chairman, and therefore the \"de facto\" head of state, also appointing himself to the rank of colonel and becoming commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Jalloud became Prime Minister, while a civilian Council of Ministers headed by Sulaiman Maghribi was founded to implement RCC policy. Libya's administrative capital was moved from al-Beida to Tripoli.\nAlthough theoretically a collegial body operating through consensus building, Gaddafi dominated the RCC. Some of the others attempted to constrain what they saw as his excesses. Gaddafi remained the government's public face, with the identities of the other RCC members only being publicly revealed on 10 January 1970. All young men from (typically rural) working and middle-class backgrounds, none had university degrees; in this way they were distinct from the wealthy, highly educated conservatives who previously governed the country.\nThe coup completed, the RCC proceeded with their intentions of consolidating the revolutionary government and modernizing the country. They purged monarchists and members of Idris' Senussi clan from Libya's political world and armed forces; Gaddafi believed this elite were opposed to the will of the Libyan people and had to be expunged. People's Courts were founded to try various monarchist politicians and journalists, many of whom were imprisoned, although none executed. Idris was sentenced to execution \"in absentia\". Three months after Gaddafi came to power, the army minister and interior minister, both of whom were from the eastern Barqa region, tried to overthrow him in a failed coup. In 1970, Idris' great nephew Ahmed al-Senussi tried to instigate another coup against Gaddafi; the monarchist plot was foiled in August and Ahmed was sentenced to death (commuted in 1988 and pardoned by Gaddafi in 2001).\nIn May 1970, the Revolutionary Intellectuals Seminar was held to bring intellectuals in line with the revolution, while that year's Legislative Review and Amendment united secular and religious law codes, introducing \"sharia\" into the legal system. Ruling by decree, the RCC maintained the monarchy's ban on political parties, in May 1970 banned trade unions, and in 1972 outlawed workers' strikes and suspended newspapers. In September 1971, Gaddafi resigned, claiming to be dissatisfied with the pace of reform, but returned to his position within a month. In July 1972, amid widespread speculation that Gaddafi had been ousted or jailed by his political opponents, a new 18-man cabinet was formed with only two of them, Jalloud and Abdel Moneim al-Houni, being military men; the rest were civilian technocrats per Gaddafi's insistence. In February 1973, Gaddafi resigned again, once more returning the next month.\nEconomic and social reform.\nThe RCC's early economic policy has been characterized as being state capitalist in orientation. Many initiatives were established to aid entrepreneurs and develop a Libyan bourgeoisie. Seeking to expand the cultivatable acreage in Libya, in September 1969 the government launched a \"Green Revolution\" to increase agricultural productivity so that Libya could rely less on imported food. The hope was to make Libya self-sufficient in food production. All land that had either been expropriated from Italian settlers or which was not in use was repossessed and redistributed. Irrigation systems were established along the northern coastline and around various inland oases. Production costs often surpassed the value of the produce and thus Libyan agricultural production remained in deficit, relying heavily on state subsidies.\nWith crude oil as the country's primary export, Gaddafi sought to improve Libya's oil sector. In October 1969, he proclaimed the current trade terms unfair, benefiting foreign corporations more than the Libyan state, and threatened to decrease production. In December Jalloud successfully increased the price of Libyan oil. In 1970, other OPEC states followed suit, leading to a global increase in the price of crude oil. The RCC followed with the Tripoli Agreement of 20 March 1971, in which they secured income tax, back-payments and better pricing from the oil corporations; these measures brought Libya an estimated $1\u00a0billion in additional revenues in its first year.\nIncreasing state control over the oil sector, the RCC began a program of nationalization, starting with the expropriation of British Petroleum's share of the British Petroleum-N.B. Hunt Sahir Field in December 1971. In September 1973, it was announced that all foreign oil producers active in Libya were to see 51 per cent of their operation nationalized, including the stake of Nelson Bunker Hunt, son of H.L. Hunt, who had played a key role in the discovery of oil in Libya. Among the companies that were partially nationalized was Armand Hammer's Occidental Petroleum. For Gaddafi, this was an essential step towards socialism. It proved an economic success; while gross domestic product had been $3.8\u00a0billion in 1969, it had risen to $13.7\u00a0billion in 1974, and $24.5\u00a0billion in 1979. In turn, the Libyans' standard of life greatly improved over the first decade of Gaddafi's administration, and by 1979 the average per-capita income was at $8,170, up from $40 in 1951; this was above the average of many industrialized countries like Italy and the UK. In 1969, the government also declared that all foreign owned banks must either close down or convert to joint-stock operations.\nThe RCC implemented measures for social reform, adopting \"sharia\" as a basis. The consumption of alcohol was prohibited, night clubs and Christian churches were shut down, traditional Libyan dress was encouraged, and Arabic was decreed as the only language permitted in official communications and on road signs. The RCC doubled the minimum wage, introduced statutory price controls, and implemented compulsory rent reductions of between 30 and 40 per cent. Gaddafi also wanted to combat the strict social restrictions that had been imposed on women by the previous regime, establishing the Revolutionary Women's Formation to encourage reform. In 1970, a law was introduced affirming equality of the sexes and insisting on wage parity. In 1971, Gaddafi sponsored the creation of a Libyan General Women's Federation. In 1972, a law was passed criminalizing the marriage of any females under the age of sixteen and ensuring that a woman's consent was a necessary prerequisite for a marriage. Gaddafi's regime opened up a wide range of educational and employment opportunities for women, although these primarily benefited a minority in the urban middle-classes.\nFrom 1969 to 1973, it used oil money to fund social welfare programs, which led to housebuilding projects and improved healthcare and education. House building became a major social priority, designed to eliminate homelessness and to replace the shanty towns created by Libya's growing urbanization. The health sector was also expanded; by 1978, Libya had 50 per cent more hospitals than it had in 1968, while the number of doctors had increased from 700 to over 3000 in that decade. Malaria was eradicated, and trachoma and tuberculosis greatly curtailed. Compulsory education was expanded from 6 to 9 years, while adult literacy programs and free university education were introduced. Beida University was founded, while Tripoli University and Benghazi University were expanded. In doing so, the government helped to integrate the poorer strata of Libyan society into the education system. Through these measures, the RCC greatly expanded the public sector, providing employment for thousands. These early social programs proved popular within Libya. This popularity was partly due to Gaddafi's personal charisma, youth and underdog status as a Bedouin, as well as his rhetoric emphasizing his role as the successor to the anti-Italian fighter Omar Mukhtar.\nTo combat the country's strong regional and tribal divisions, the RCC promoted the idea of a unified pan-Libyan identity. In doing so, they tried discrediting tribal leaders as agents of the old regime, and in August 1971 a Sabha military court tried many of them for counter-revolutionary activity. Long-standing administrative boundaries were re-drawn, crossing tribal boundaries, while pro-revolutionary modernizers replaced traditional leaders, yet the communities they served often rejected them. Realizing the failures of the modernizers, Gaddafi created the Arab Socialist Union (ASU) in June 1971, a mass mobilization vanguard party of which he was president. The ASU recognized the RCC as its \"Supreme Leading Authority\", and was designed to further revolutionary enthusiasm throughout the country. It remained heavily bureaucratic and failed to mobilize mass support in the way Gaddafi had envisioned.\nForeign relations.\nThe influence of Nasser's Arab nationalism over the RCC was immediately apparent. The administration was instantly recognized by the neighbouring Arab nationalist regimes in Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Sudan, with Egypt sending experts to aid the inexperienced RCC. Gaddafi propounded pan-Arab ideas, proclaiming the need for a single Arab state stretching across North Africa and the Middle East. In December 1969, Libya signed the Tripoli Charter alongside Egypt and Sudan. This established the Arab Revolutionary Front, a pan-national union designed as a first step towards the eventual political unification of the three nations. In 1970 Syria declared its intention to join.\nNasser died unexpectedly in September 1970, with Gaddafi playing a prominent role at his funeral. Nasser was succeeded by Anwar Sadat, who suggested that rather than creating a unified state, the Arab states should create a political federation, implemented in April 1971; in doing so, Egypt, Syria, and Sudan received large grants of Libyan oil money. In July 1971, Gaddafi sided with Sadat against the Soviet Union in the 1971 Sudanese coup d'\u00e9tat and dispatched Libyan fighter jets to force down a British Airlines jetliner carrying the leading coup plotters, Farouk Osman Hamadallah and Babikir al-Nour. They were extradited back to Khartoum, where they were promptly executed by Sudanese leader Jaafar Nimeiry. In February 1972, Gaddafi and Sadat signed an unofficial charter of merger, but it was never implemented because relations broke down the next year. Sadat became increasingly wary of Libya's radical direction, and the September 1973 deadline for implementing the Federation passed by with no action taken.\nAfter the 1969 coup, representatives of the Four Powers\u2014France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Soviet Union\u2014were called to meet RCC representatives. The UK and the US quickly extended diplomatic recognition, hoping to secure the position of their military bases in Libya and fearing further instability. Hoping to ingratiate themselves with Gaddafi, in 1970 the US informed him of at least one planned counter-coup. Such attempts to form a working relationship with the RCC failed; Gaddafi was determined to reassert national sovereignty and expunge what he described as foreign colonial and imperialist influences. His administration insisted that the US and the UK remove their military bases from Libya, with Gaddafi proclaiming that \"the armed forces which rose to express the people's revolution [will not] tolerate living in their shacks while the bases of imperialism exist in Libyan territory.\" The British left in March and the Americans in June 1970.\nMoving to reduce Italian influence, in October 1970 all Italian-owned assets were expropriated, and the 12,000-strong Italian community was expelled from Libya alongside the smaller community of Libyan Jews. The day became a national holiday known as \"Vengeance Day\". Italy complained that this was in contravention of the 1956 Italo-Libyan Treaty, although no UN sanctions were forthcoming. Aiming to reduce NATO power in the Mediterranean, in 1971 Libya requested that Malta cease allowing NATO to use its land for a military base, in turn offering Malta foreign aid. Compromising, Malta's government continued allowing NATO to use the island, but only on the condition that NATO would not use it for launching attacks on Arab territory. Over the coming decade, Gaddafi's government developed stronger political and economic links with Dom Mintoff's Maltese administration, and under Libya's urging Malta did not renew the UK's airbases on the island in 1980. Orchestrating a military build-up, the RCC began purchasing weapons from France and the Soviet Union. The commercial relationship with the latter led to an increasingly strained relationship with the US, which was then engaged in the Cold War with the Soviets.\nGaddafi was especially critical of the US due to its support of Israel and sided with the Palestinians in the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict, viewing the 1948 creation of the State of Israel as a Western colonial occupation forced upon the Arab world. He believed that Palestinian violence against Israeli and Western targets was the justified response of an oppressed people who were fighting against the colonization of their homeland. Calling on the Arab states to wage \"continuous war\" against Israel, in 1970 he initiated a Jihad Fund to finance anti-Israeli militants. In June 1972 Gaddafi created the First Nasserite Volunteers Centre to train anti-Israeli guerrillas.\nLike Nasser, Gaddafi favoured the Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and his group, Fatah, over more militant and Marxist Palestinian groups. As the years progressed however, Gaddafi's relationship with Arafat became strained, with Gaddafi considering him too moderate and calling for more violent action. Instead, he supported militias like the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine \u2013 General Command, the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, As-Sa'iqa, the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front, and the Abu Nidal Organization. He funded the Black September Organization whose members perpetrated the 1972 Munich massacre of Israeli athletes in West Germany and had the killed militants' bodies flown to Libya for a hero's funeral.\nGaddafi financially supported other militant groups across the world, including the Black Panther Party, the Nation of Islam, the Almighty Black P. Stone Nation, the Tupamaros, the 19th of April Movement and the Sandinista National Liberation Front in Nicaragua, the ANC among other liberation movements in the fight against Apartheid in South Africa, the Provisional Irish Republican Army, ETA, Action Directe, the Red Brigades, and the Red Army Faction in Europe, and the Armenian Secret Army, the Japanese Red Army, the Free Aceh Movement, and the Moro National Liberation Front in the Philippines. Gaddafi was indiscriminate in the causes which he funded, sometimes switching from supporting one side in a conflict to the other, as in the Eritrean War of Independence. Throughout the 1970s these groups received financial support from Libya, which came to be seen as a leader in the Third World's struggle against colonialism and neocolonialism. Though many of these groups were labelled \"terrorists\" by critics of their activities, Gaddafi rejected this characterization, instead considering them to be revolutionaries who were engaged in liberation struggles.\nThe \"Popular Revolution\": 1973\u20131977.\nOn 16 April 1973, Gaddafi proclaimed the start of a \"Popular Revolution\" in a speech at Zuwarah. He initiated this with a five-point plan, the first point of which dissolved all existing laws, to be replaced by revolutionary enactments. The second point proclaimed that all opponents of the revolution had to be removed, while the third initiated an administrative revolution that Gaddafi proclaimed would remove all traces of bureaucracy and the bourgeoisie. The fourth point announced that the population must form People's Committees and be armed to defend the revolution, while the fifth proclaimed the beginning of the Cultural Revolution in Libya, to expunge the country of \"poisonous\" foreign influences. He began to lecture on this new phase of the revolution in Libya, Egypt, and France. As a process, it had many similarities with the Cultural Revolution implemented in China.\nAs part of this Popular Revolution, Gaddafi invited Libya's people to found General People's Committees as conduits for raising political consciousness. Although offering little guidance for how to set up these councils, Gaddafi claimed that they would offer a form of direct political participation that was more democratic than a traditional party-based representative system. He hoped that the councils would mobilize the people behind the RCC, erode the power of the traditional leaders and the bureaucracy, and allow for a new legal system chosen by the people. Many such committees were established in schools and colleges, where they were responsible for vetting staff, courses, and textbooks to determine if they were compatible with the country's revolutionary ideology.\nThe People's Committees led to a high percentage of public involvement in decision making, within the limits permitted by the RCC, but exacerbated tribal divisions and tensions. They also served as a surveillance system, aiding the security services in locating individuals with views critical of the RCC, leading to the arrest of Ba'athists, Marxists, and Islamists. Operating in a pyramid structure, the base form of these Committees were local working groups, who sent elected representatives to the district level, and from there to the national level, divided between the General People's Congress and the General People's Committee. Above these remained Gaddafi and the RCC, who remained responsible for all major decisions. In crossing regional and tribal identities, the committee system aided national integration and centralization and tightened Gaddafi's control over the state and administrative apparatus.\nThird International Theory and \"The Green Book\".\nIn June 1973, Gaddafi created a political ideology as a basis for the Popular Revolution: Third International Theory. This approach regarded both the US and the Soviet Union as imperialist and thus rejected Western capitalism as well as Marxist\u2013Leninist atheism. In this respect, it was similar to the Three Worlds Theory developed by China's political leader Mao Zedong. As part of this theory, Gaddafi praised nationalism as a progressive force and advocated the creation of a pan-Arab state which would lead the Islamic and Third Worlds against imperialism. Gaddafi saw Islam as having a key role in this ideology, calling for an Islamic revival that returned to the origins of the Qur'an, rejecting scholarly interpretations and the Hadith; in doing so, he angered many Libyan clerics. During 1973 and 1974, his government deepened the legal reliance on \"sharia\", for instance by introducing flogging as punishment for those convicted of adultery or homosexual activity.\nGaddafi summarized Third International Theory in three short volumes published between 1975 and 1979, collectively known as \"The Green Book\". Volume one was devoted to the issue of democracy, outlining the flaws of representative systems in favour of direct, participatory GPCs. The second dealt with Gaddafi's beliefs regarding socialism, while the third explored social issues regarding the family and the tribe. While the first two volumes advocated radical reform, the third adopted a socially conservative stance, proclaiming that while men and women were equal, they were biologically designed for different roles in life. During the years that followed, Gaddafists adopted quotes from \"The Green Book\", such as \"Representation is Fraud\", as slogans. Meanwhile, in September 1975, Gaddafi implemented further measures to increase popular mobilization, introducing objectives to improve the relationship between the Councils and the ASU.\nIn 1975, Gaddafi's government declared a state monopoly on foreign trade. Its increasingly radical reforms, coupled with the large amount of oil revenue being spent on foreign causes, generated discontent in Libya, particularly among the country's merchant class. In 1974, Libya saw its first civilian attack on Gaddafi's government when a Benghazi army building was bombed. Much of the opposition centred around RCC member Umar Muhayshi. With fellow RCC members Bashir Saghir al-Hawaadi and Awad Ali Hamza, he began plotting a coup against Gaddafi. In 1975, their plot was exposed and Muhayshi fled to Tunisia, eventually receiving asylum from Sadat's Egypt. Hawaadi, Hamza, and Omar El-Hariri were arrested. Most of the other conspirators were executed in March 1976. Another RCC member, foreign minister Abdul-Munim al-Huni, also fled to Egypt. In the aftermath, only five RCC members remained: Gaddafi, Jalloud, Abu-Bakr Yunis Jabr, Mustafa Kharubi, and Kweldi al-Hamidi. Thus, power was further concentrated in Gaddafi's hands. This ultimately led to the RCC's official abolition in March 1977.\nIn September 1975, Gaddafi purged the army, arresting around 200 senior officers, and in October he founded the clandestine Office for the Security of the Revolution. In April 1976, he called upon his supporters in universities to establish \"revolutionary student councils\" and drive out \"reactionary elements\". During that year, anti-Gaddafist student demonstrations broke out at the universities of Tripoli and Benghazi, resulting in clashes with both Gaddafist students and police. The RCC responded with mass arrests and introduced compulsory national service for young people. In January 1977, two dissenting students and a number of army officers were publicly hanged; Amnesty International condemned it as the first time in Gaddafist Libya that dissenters had been executed for purely political crimes. Dissent also arose from conservative clerics and the Muslim Brotherhood, who accused Gaddafi of moving towards Marxism and criticized his abolition of private property as being against the Islamic \"sunnah\"; these forces were then persecuted as anti-revolutionary, while all privately owned Islamic colleges and universities were shut down.\nForeign relations.\nAfter Anwar Sadat's ascension to the Egyptian presidency, Libya's relations with Egypt deteriorated. Over the coming years, the two slipped into a state of cold war. Sadat was perturbed by Gaddafi's unpredictability and insistence that Egypt required a cultural revolution akin to that being carried out in Libya. In February 1973, Israeli forces shot down Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114, which had strayed from Egyptian airspace into Israeli-held territory during a sandstorm. Gaddafi's foreign minister Salah Busir was on board and allegedly targeted by Israel in retaliation for the Munich massacre. Gaddafi was infuriated that Egypt had not done more to prevent the incident, and in retaliation planned to destroy the \"Queen Elizabeth 2\", a British ship chartered by American Jews to sail to Haifa for Israel's 25th anniversary. Gaddafi ordered an Egyptian submarine to target the ship, but Sadat cancelled the order, fearing a military escalation.\nGaddafi was later infuriated when Egypt and Syria planned the Yom Kippur War against Israel without consulting him and was angered when Egypt conceded to peace talks rather than continuing the war. Gaddafi became openly hostile to Egypt's leader, calling for Sadat's overthrow. When Sudanese President Gaafar Nimeiry took Sadat's side, Gaddafi also spoke out against him, encouraging the Sudan People's Liberation Army's attempt to overthrow Nimeiry. In 1974, Gaddafi released Abdul-Aziz Shennib, a commander under King Idris, from prison and appointed him Libyan ambassador to Jordan. Shennib had attended the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst with King Hussein of Jordan and was tasked by Gaddafi with Hussein's assassination. Shennib instead informed Hussein of the plot and defected to Jordan. Relations with Syria also soured over the events in the Lebanese Civil War. Initially, both Libya and Syria had contributed troops to the Arab League's peacekeeping force, although after the Syrian army attacked the Lebanese National Movement, Gaddafi openly accused Syrian President Hafez al-Assad of \"national treason\"; he was the only Arab leader to criticize Syria's actions. In late 1972 and early 1973, Libya invaded Chad to annex the uranium-rich Aouzou Strip.\nIntent on propagating Islam, in 1973 Gaddafi founded the Islamic Call Society, which had opened 132 centres across Africa within a decade. In 1973 he converted Gabonese President Omar Bongo, an action which he repeated three years later with Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa, president of the Central African Republic. Between 1973 and 1979, Libya provided $500\u00a0million in aid to African countries, namely to Zaire and Uganda, and founded joint-venture companies throughout the countries to aid trade and development. Gaddafi was also keen on reducing Israeli influence within Africa, using financial incentives to successfully convince eight African states to break off diplomatic relations with Israel in 1973.\nA strong relationship was also established between Gaddafi's Libya and Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's Pakistani government, with the two countries exchanging nuclear research and military assistance. In recognition of Gaddafi's support of Pakistan's right to pursue nuclear weapons and financial support for the \"Islamic bomb,\" Lahore Stadium was renamed Gaddafi Stadium. Gaddafi also provided support for Pakistan in the Bangladesh Liberation War; he reportedly deployed F-5s to Sargodha AFB and penned a strongly worded letter to Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi accusing her of aggression against Pakistan. Gaddafi's strong relationship with Pakistan ended after Bhutto was deposed by Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq in 1977 as Zia distrusted Gaddafi and rejected further Libyan financing for the Pakistani nuclear program in favor of Saudi financing.\nGaddafi sought to develop closer links in the Maghreb; in January 1974 Libya and Tunisia announced a political union, the Arab Islamic Republic. Although advocated by Gaddafi and Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba, the move was deeply unpopular in Tunisia, and it was soon abandoned. Retaliating, Gaddafi sponsored anti-government militants in Tunisia into the 1980s. Turning his attention to Algeria, in 1975 Libya signed, in Hassi Messaoud, a defensive alliance allegedly to counter alleged \"Moroccan expansionism\", also funding the Polisario Front of Western Sahara in its independence struggle against Morocco. Seeking to diversify Libya's economy, Gaddafi's government began purchasing shares in major European corporations like Fiat as well as buying real estate in Malta and Italy, which would become a valuable source of income during the 1980s oil slump.\nGreat Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.\nFoundation: 1977.\nOn 2 March 1977, the General People's Congress adopted the \"Declaration on the Establishment of the Authority of the People\" at Gaddafi's behest. Dissolving the Libyan Arab Republic, it was replaced by the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (, \")\", a \"state of the masses\" conceptualized by Gaddafi. A new, all-green banner was adopted as the country's flag. Officially, the \"Jamahiriya\" was a direct democracy in which the people ruled themselves through the 187 Basic People's Congresses (BPCs), where all adult Libyans participated and voted on national decisions. These then sent members to the annual General People's Congress, which was broadcast live on television. In principle, the People's Congresses were Libya's highest authority, with major decisions proposed by government officials or with Gaddafi himself requiring the consent of the People's Congresses. Gaddafi became General Secretary of the GPC, although he stepped down from this position in early 1979 and appointed himself \"Leader of the Revolution\".\nAlthough all political control was officially vested in the People's Congresses, in reality Libya's existing political leadership continued to exercise varying degrees of power and influence. Debate remained limited, and major decisions regarding the economy and defence were avoided or dealt with cursorily; the GPC largely remained \"a rubber stamp\" for Gaddafi's policies. On rare occasions, the GPC opposed Gaddafi's suggestions, sometimes successfully; notably, when Gaddafi called on primary schools to be abolished, believing that homeschooling was healthier for children, the GPC rejected the idea. In other instances, Gaddafi pushed through laws without the GPC's support, such as when he desired to allow women into the armed forces. At other times, he ordered snap elections when it appeared that the GPC would enact laws he opposed. Gaddafi proclaimed that the People's Congresses provided for Libya's every political need, rendering other political organizations unnecessary; all non-authorized groups, including political parties, professional associations, independent trade unions, and women's groups, were banned. Despite these restrictions, St. John noted that the \"Jamahiriya\" system still \"introduced a level of representation and participation hitherto unknown in Libya\".\nWith preceding legal institutions abolished, Gaddafi envisioned the \"Jamahiriya\" as following the Qur'an for legal guidance, adopting \"sharia\" law; he proclaimed \"man-made\" laws unnatural and dictatorial, only permitting Allah's law. Within a year he was backtracking, announcing that \"sharia\" was inappropriate for the \"Jamahiriya\" because it guaranteed the protection of private property, contravening \"The Green Book\"'s socialism. His emphasis on placing his own work on a par with the Qur'an led conservative clerics to accuse him of \"shirk\", furthering their opposition to his regime. In July 1977, a border war broke out with Egypt, in which the Egyptians defeated Libya despite their technological inferiority. The conflict lasted one week before both sides agreed to sign a peace treaty that was brokered by several Arab states. Both Egypt and Sudan had aligned themselves with the US, and this pushed Libya into a strategic, although not political, alignment with the Soviet Union. In recognition of the growing commercial relationship between Libya and the Soviets, Gaddafi was invited to visit Moscow in December 1976; there, he entered talks with Leonid Brezhnev. In August 1977, he visited Yugoslavia, where he met its leader Josip Broz Tito, with whom he had a much warmer relationship. He also enjoyed a warm relationship with Romanian leader Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu. According to Romanian spy chief Ion Mihai Pacepa, Gaddafi once exclaimed to Ceau\u0219escu, \"My brother! You are my brother for the rest of my life!\" After Pacepa defected to the US in July 1978, Gaddafi and Yasser Arafat contributed $1 million each to Ceau\u0219escu's $4 million bounty on Pacepa.\nRevolutionary Committees and furthering socialism: 1978\u20131980.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf socialism is defined as a redistribution of wealth and resources, a socialist revolution clearly occurred in Libya after 1969 and most especially in the second half of the 1970s. The management of the economy was increasingly socialist in intent and effect with wealth in housing, capital and land significantly redistributed or in the process of redistribution. Private enterprise was virtually eliminated, largely replaced by a centrally controlled economy.\n \u2014Libyan Studies scholar Ronald Bruce St. John\nIn December 1978, Gaddafi stepped down as Secretary-General of the GPC, announcing his new focus on revolutionary rather than government activities; this was part of his new emphasis on separating the apparatus of the revolution from government. Although no longer in a formal government post, he adopted the title of \"Leader of the Revolution\" and continued as commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Historian Dirk Vandewalle stated that despite the Jamahariya's claims to being a direct democracy, Libya remained \"an exclusionary political system whose decision-making process\" was \"restricted to a small cadre of advisers and confidantes\" surrounding Gaddafi.\nLibya turned towards socialism. In March 1978, the government issued guidelines for housing redistribution, attempting to ensure every adult owned their own home. Most families were banned from owning more than one house, while former rental properties were expropriated by the state and sold to the tenants at a heavily subsidized price. In September, Gaddafi called for the People's Committees to eliminate the \"bureaucracy of the public sector\" and the \"dictatorship of the private sector\"; the People's Committees took control of several hundred companies, converting them into worker cooperatives run by elected representatives.\nIn March 1979, the GPC announced the separation of government and revolution, the latter being represented by new Revolutionary Committees, who operated with the People's Committees in schools, universities, unions, the police force, and the military. Dominated by revolutionary zealots, mostly youths, the Revolutionary Committees were based in Tripoli and met with Gaddafi annually. Membership was drawn from within the BPCs. The revolutionary committee system became \"a key\u2014if not the main\u2014mechanism through which [Gaddafi] exercises political control in Libya\". Publishing a weekly magazine, \"The Green March\", starting October 1980 they took control of the press. Responsible for perpetuating the revolution, they performed ideological surveillance, adopting a significant security role, making arrests and putting people on trial according to the \"law of the revolution\". With no legal or safeguards, the administration of revolutionary justice was largely arbitrary and resulted in widespread abuse and the suppression of civil liberties: the \"Green Terror\".\nIn 1979, the committees began the redistribution of land in the Jefara plain, continuing through 1981. In May 1980, measures to redistribute and equalize wealth were implemented; anyone with over 1000 dinar in their bank account saw that extra money expropriated. The next year, the GPC announced that the government would take control of all import, export and distribution functions, with state supermarkets replacing privately owned businesses; this led to a decline in the availability of consumer goods and the development of a thriving black market. Gaddafi was frustrated by the slow pace of social reform on women's issues, and in 1979 launched a Revolutionary Women's Formation, to replace the more gradualist Libyan General Women's Federation. In 1978 he had established a Women's Military Academy in Tripoli, encouraging all women to enlist for training. The measure was hugely controversial and voted down by the GPC in February 1983. Gaddafi remained adamant, and when it was again voted down by the GPC in March 1984, he refused to abide by the decision, declaring that \"he who opposes the training and emancipation of women is an agent of imperialism, whether he likes it or not.\"\nThe Jamahiriya's radical direction earned the government many enemies. Most internal opposition came from Islamic fundamentalists, inspired by the events of the 1979 Iranian Revolution. In February 1978, Gaddafi discovered that his head of military intelligence was plotting to kill him and increasingly entrusted security to his Qadhadfa tribe. Many who had seen their wealth confiscated turned against the administration, and Western-funded opposition groups were founded by exiles. Most prominent was the National Front for the Salvation of Libya (NFSL), which orchestrated militant attacks against Libya's government. Another, al-Borkan, began killing Libyan diplomats abroad. Following Gaddafi's command to kill these \"stray dogs\", the Revolutionary Committees set up overseas branches to suppress counter-revolutionary activity, assassinating dissidents. Although Syria and Israel also employed hit squads, Gaddafi was unusual in publicly bragging about his use of them; in April 1980, he ordered all dissidents to return home by 10 June or be \"liquidated wherever you are\". Within a three months period in 1980, at least ten Libyan dissidents were murdered in Europe, including ex-diplomats, ex-army officers, businessmen, journalists, and student activists in disparate locations such as London, Greece and Austria. At least eleven more were assassinated in 1981. In 1984, Gaddafi was tricked by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak into announcing the assassination of former Libyan Prime Minister Abdul Hamid al-Bakkoush in Cairo; Bakkhoush not only turned up alive but held a press conference with Egypt's Interior Minister. In 1979, Gaddafi created the Islamic Legion, through which several thousand Africans were military trained.\nLibya had sought to improve US relations under President Jimmy Carter, for instance by courting his brother, businessman Billy Carter, and paying for the services of former CIA officers, but in 1979 the US placed Libya on its list of \"State Sponsors of Terrorism\". Relations were further damaged when a demonstration torched the US embassy in solidarity with the perpetrators of the Iran hostage crisis. Libyan fighters began intercepting US fighter jets flying over the Mediterranean, signalling the collapse of relations between the countries. Italian media have alleged that the Itavia Flight 870 was shot down during a dogfight involving Libyan, United States, French and Italian Air Force fighters in an assassination attempt by NATO members on a Libyan politician, perhaps even Gaddafi, flying in the same airspace.\nLibyan relations with Lebanon and Shi'ite communities deteriorated due to the 1978 disappearance of Imam Musa al-Sadr when visiting Libya; the Lebanese accused Gaddafi of having him killed or imprisoned, a charge he denied. Relations with Pakistan broke down in this period. Despite Gaddafi's repeated appeals to Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq to spare Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's life, Bhutto was executed in 1979. In retaliation and for Zia's refusal to share Pakistan's nuclear technology, Gaddafi began training Al-Zulfikar, an anti-Zia insurgency led by Bhutto's sons Murtaza and Shahnawaz, expelled all 150,000 Pakistanis living in Libya, and provided asylum for the Bhutto family. Relations with Syria improved, as Gaddafi and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad shared an enmity with Israel and Egypt's Sadat. In 1980, they proposed a political union, with Libya promising to pay off Syria's \u00a31-billion debt to the Soviet Union; although pressures led Assad to pull out, they remained allies. Another key ally was Uganda, and in 1979, during the Uganda\u2013Tanzania War, Gaddafi sent 2,500 troops to defend President Idi Amin from Tanzanian invaders. The mission failed; 400 Libyans were killed, and Libya was forced to retreat. Gaddafi came to regret his alliance with Amin, openly criticizing him as a \"fascist\" and a \"show-off\".\nConflict with the US and its allies: 1981\u20131986.\nThe early 80s saw economic trouble in Libya; from 1982 to 1986, annual oil revenues dropped from $21 to $5.4 billion. Focusing on irrigation projects, 1983 saw construction start on Libya's largest and most expensive infrastructure project, the Great Man-Made River; although designed to be finished by the end of the decade, it remained incomplete at the start of the 21st century. Military spending increased, while other administrative budgets were cut. Foreign debt rose, and austerity measures were introduced to promote self-reliance; in 1985 there was a mass deportation of foreign workers, mostly Egyptian and Tunisian. Domestic threats continued to plague Gaddafi; in May 1984, his Bab al-Azizia home was unsuccessfully attacked by a militia\u2014linked to the NFSL or Muslim Brotherhood\u2014and in the aftermath 5,000 dissidents were arrested. In spring 1985, members of the military tried to assassinate Gaddafi twice. The first was a plot by conservative officers to assassinate him at a villa on the outskirts of Tripoli; the second was an assault on his convoy. In November 1985, Colonel Hassan Ishkal, the third most powerful man in Libya, head of the military region of Sirte, died in a suspicious car accident. Ishkal's death was attributed to Jalloud, Khalifa Hunaysh or Gaddafi.\nLibya had long supported the FROLINAT militia in neighbouring Chad, but FROLINAT became divided over its ties to Libya in 1976. In January 1978, the anti-Libya faction within FROLINAT, led by Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9, switched sides and allied with Chadian President F\u00e9lix Malloum. Meanwhile, the pro-Libya faction within FROLINAT, led by Goukouni Oueddei, renamed itself People's Armed Forces (FAP). In December 1980, Gaddafi reinvaded Chad at the request of the FAP-controlled GUNT government to aid in the civil war; in January 1981, Gaddafi suggested a political merger. The Organisation of African Unity (OAU) rejected this and called for a Libyan withdrawal, which came in November 1981. The civil war resumed, and Libya sent troops back in.\nIn 1982, the GUNT government was overthrown by Habr\u00e9's forces and Oueddei fled to Libya, where Gaddafi provided him with arms to continue to guerrilla war against Habr\u00e9. In November 1984, Gaddafi met with French President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand; both agreed to withdraw from Chad. Oueddei broke with Gaddafi in 1985 due to the former's intentions to negotiate a truce with Habr\u00e9. Consequently, he was placed under house arrest by Gaddafi and allegedly arrested by Libyan police and shot in the stomach. Oueddei survived the shooting and fled to Algeria, but continued to claim he and Gaddafi enjoyed a good relationship. When Gaddafi ordered the remnant of GUNT to attack Habr\u00e9 in February 1986 in violation of his agreement with Mitterrand, France launched Operation \u00c9pervier, which escalated into the Toyota War. Libya suffered a humiliating defeat as it was completely expelled from Chad and its commander Khalifa Haftar captured, along with 600-700 Libyan soldiers. Gaddafi disavowed Haftar and the other prisoners; one possible contributing factor to this repudiation may have been that Gaddafi had signed an agreement to withdraw Libyan forces, and Haftar's operations had been in violation of this. An embittered Haftar then joined the anti-Gaddafi National Front for the Salvation of Libya, became a CIA asset, and was given refuge in the US.\nMany African nations were tired of Libya's interference in their affairs; by 1980, nine African states had severed diplomatic relations, while in 1982 the OAU cancelled its scheduled conference in Tripoli to prevent Gaddafi gaining chairmanship. Some African states, such as Jerry Rawlings's Ghana and Thomas Sankara's Burkina Faso, had warm relations with Libya during the 1980s.\nProposing political unity with Morocco, in August 1984, Gaddafi and Moroccan monarch Hassan II signed the Oujda Treaty, forming the Arab\u2013African Union; such a union was considered surprising due to the political differences and longstanding enmity that existed between the two. In a sign of warming relations, Gaddafi promised to stop funding the Polisario Front and Hassan II extradited former RCC member Umar Muhayshi to Libya, where he was immediately killed. But relations deteriorated, particularly due to Morocco's friendship with the US and Israel; in August 1986, Hassan abolished the union. Angered by the snub, Gaddafi plotted with Abu Nidal to assassinate Hassan in 1987, but the plot was aborted.\nIn 1981, the new US president, Ronald Reagan, pursued a hardline approach to Libya, viewing it as a puppet regime of the Soviet Union. Gaddafi played up his commercial relationship with the Soviets, revisiting Moscow in 1981 and 1985, and threatening to join the Warsaw Pact. The Soviets were nevertheless cautious of Gaddafi, seeing him as an unpredictable extremist. In August 1981, the US staged military exercises in the Gulf of Sirte \u2013 an area which Libya claimed. The US shot down two Libyan Su-22 planes which were on an intercept course. Closing down Libya's embassy in Washington, Reagan advised US companies operating in Libya to reduce Americans stationed there. In December 1981, the White House claimed Gaddafi had dispatched a hit squad to assassinate Reagan, allegedly led by Carlos the Jackal, who had been living in Libya under Gaddafi's protection after the 1975 OPEC siege. Secretary of State Alexander Haig, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, Counselor to the President Edwin Meese, chief of staff James Baker, and deputy chief of staff Michael Deaver were considered potential targets and given special security. US ambassador to Italy Maxwell M. Rabb, who was Jewish, was urgently recalled due to threats against his life. Gaddafi denied the allegations. Gaddafi was accused of having ties to the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Factions, which had murdered US military attach\u00e9 Charles R. Ray and Israeli diplomat Yacov Barsimantov in Paris. In March 1982, the US implemented an embargo of Libyan oil, and in January 1986 ordered all US companies to cease operating in the country, although several hundred workers remained when the Libyan government doubled their pay. In spring 1986, the US Navy again performed exercises in the Gulf of Sirte; the Libyan military retaliated, but failed as the US sank Libyan ships. Diplomatic relations also broke down with the UK, after Libyan diplomats were accused in the killing of Yvonne Fletcher, a British policewoman stationed outside their London embassy, in April 1984.\nIn 1980, Gaddafi hired former CIA agent Edwin P. Wilson, living in Libya as a fugitive from US justice, to plot the murder of an anti-Gaddafi Libyan graduate student at Colorado State University named Faisal Zagallai. Zagallai was shot in the head in October 1980, in Fort Collins, Colorado by a former Green Beret and associate of Wilson named Eugene Tafoya. Zagallai survived the attack and Tafoya was convicted of third-degree assault and conspiracy to commit assault. Wilson was lured back to the US and sentenced to 32 years due to his ties to Gaddafi. In 1984, Gaddafi publicly executed Al-Sadek Hamed Al-Shuwehdy, an aeronautical engineer studying in the US.\nAfter the US accused Libya of orchestrating the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing, in which two US soldiers died, Reagan decided to retaliate. The CIA was critical of the move, believing Syria was a greater threat and that an attack would strengthen Gaddafi's reputation; however, Libya was recognized as a \"soft target\". Reagan was supported by the UK, but opposed by other European allies, who argued it contravened international law. In Operation El Dorado Canyon, orchestrated on 15 April 1986, US military planes launched air-strikes, bombing military installations, killing around 100 Libyans, including civilians. One target had been Gaddafi's home. Himself unharmed, two of Gaddafi's sons were injured, and he claimed his adopted daughter Hanna was killed, although her existence has since been questioned. Gaddafi retreated to the desert to meditate. There were sporadic clashes between Gaddafists and army officers who wanted to overthrow the government. Although the US was condemned internationally, Reagan received a popularity boost at home. Publicly lambasting US imperialism, Gaddafi's reputation as an anti-imperialist was strengthened domestically and across the Arab world, and, in June 1986, he ordered the names of the months to be changed in Libya.\n\"Revolution within a Revolution\": 1987\u20131998.\nThe late 1980s saw a series of liberalizing economic reforms within Libya designed to cope with the decline in oil revenues. In May 1987, Gaddafi announced the start of the \"Revolution within a Revolution\", which began with reforms to industry and agriculture and saw the re-opening of small business. Restrictions were placed on the activities of the Revolutionary Committees; in March 1988, their role was narrowed by the newly created Ministry for Mass Mobilization and Revolutionary Leadership to restrict their violence and judicial role, while in August 1988 Gaddafi publicly criticized them.\nIn March, hundreds of political prisoners were freed, with Gaddafi falsely claiming that there were no further political prisoners in Libya. In June, Libya's government issued the Great Green Charter on Human Rights in the Era of the Masses, in which 27 articles laid out goals, rights, and guarantees to improve the situation of human rights in Libya, restricting the use of the death penalty and calling for its eventual abolition. Many of the measures suggested in the charter would be implemented the next year, although others remained inactive. Also in 1989, the government founded the Al-Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights, to be awarded to figures from the Third World who had struggled against colonialism and imperialism; the first year's winner was South African anti-apartheid activist Nelson Mandela. From 1994 through to 1997, the government initiated cleansing committees to root out corruption, particularly in the economic sector.\nIn the aftermath of the 1986 US attack, the army was purged of perceived disloyal elements, and in 1988, Gaddafi announced the creation of a popular militia to replace the army and police. In 1987, Libya began production of mustard gas at a facility in Rabta, although publicly denied it was stockpiling chemical weapons, and unsuccessfully attempted to develop nuclear weapons. The period also saw a growth in domestic Islamist opposition, formulated into groups like the Muslim Brotherhood and the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group. Several assassination attempts against Gaddafi were foiled, and in turn, 1989 saw the security forces raid mosques believed to be centres of counter-revolutionary preaching. In December 1993, former Libyan foreign minister Mansour Rashid El-Kikhia, a leader of an anti-Gaddafi coalition in exile, was abducted in Cairo. His body was not found until 2012 in a morgue that belonged to Gaddafi's intelligence chief Abdullah Senussi.\nIn October 1993, elements of the increasingly marginalized army, led by officers from the powerful Warfalla tribe, initiated a failed coup in Misrata and Bani Walid allegedly with help from the National Front for the Salvation of Libya, Khalifa Haftar, and the CIA, while in September 1995, Islamists launched an insurgency in Benghazi, and in July 1996 an anti-Gaddafist football riot broke out in Tripoli. In March 1996, Haftar again briefly returned to Libya to instigate an uprising against Gaddafi in the mountains of eastern Libya. The Revolutionary Committees experienced a resurgence to combat these Islamists.\nIn 1989, Gaddafi was overjoyed by the foundation of the Arab Maghreb Union, uniting Libya in an economic pact with Mauritania, Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria, viewing it as beginnings of a new pan-Arab union. Gaddafi was able to recover some influence in Chad after Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9 was overthrown by Idriss D\u00e9by in a Libya-sponsored coup in 1990. D\u00e9by also gave Gaddafi detailed information about CIA operations in Chad. Meanwhile, Libya stepped up its support for anti-Western militants such as the Provisional IRA, and in 1988, Pan Am Flight 103 was blown up over Lockerbie in Scotland, killing 243 passengers and 16 crew members, plus 11 people on the ground. British police investigations identified two Libyans\u00a0\u2013 Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah\u00a0\u2013 as the chief suspects, and in November 1991 issued a declaration demanding that Libya hand them over. When Gaddafi refused, citing the Montreal Convention, the United Nations (UN) imposed Resolution 748 in March 1992, initiating economic sanctions against Libya which had deep repercussions for the country's economy. The country suffered an estimated US$900\u00a0million financial loss as a result. On 5 November 1995, US President Bill Clinton declared the US would continue to induce pressure on Libya, also recognizing that Libyan terrorists were responsible for the Lockerbie bombing. Further problems arose with the West when in January 1989, two Libyan warplanes were shot down by the US off the Libyan coast and in September 1989, UTA Flight 772 was blown up over the T\u00e9n\u00e9r\u00e9 desert in Niger, killing all 170 people on board (156 passengers and 14 crew members).\nIn 1996, Gaddafi wrote a letter to the newly elected Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's daughter Sheikh Hasina, pleading with her to spare the lives of her father's assassins Syed Faruque Rahman and Khandaker Abdur Rashid. Rahman and Rashid both had business ties to Libya.\nMany Arab and African states opposed the UN sanctions, with Mandela criticizing them on a visit to Gaddafi in October 1997, when he praised Libya for its work in fighting apartheid and awarded Gaddafi the Order of Good Hope. They would only be suspended in 1998 when Libya agreed to allow the extradition of the suspects to the Scottish Court in the Netherlands, in a process overseen by Mandela. As a result of the trial, Fhimah was acquitted and al-Megrahi convicted. Privately, Gaddafi maintained that he knew nothing about who perpetrated the bombing and that Libya had nothing to do with it.\nPan-Africanism, reconciliation and privatization: 1999\u20132011.\nLinks with Africa and conflicts in the Arab League.\nDuring the final years of the 20th century, Gaddafi\u2014frustrated by the failure of his pan-Arab ideals and the refusal of the Arab world to challenge the international air embargo imposed on Libya\u2014increasingly rejected Arab nationalism in favour of pan-Africanism, emphasizing Libya's African identity. In a 1998 interview, Gaddafi claimed that \"the Arab world is finished\" and expressed his wish for Libya to become a \"black country.\" From 1997 to 2000, Libya initiated cooperative agreements or bilateral aid arrangements with 10 African states, and in 1999 joined the Community of Sahel\u2013Saharan States (CEN\u2013SAD). In June 1999, Gaddafi visited Mandela in South Africa, and the next month attended the OAU summit in Algiers, calling for greater political and economic integration across the continent and advocating the foundation of a United States of Africa. He became one of the founders of the African Union (AU), initiated in July 2002 to replace the OAU. At the opening ceremonies, he called for African states to reject conditional aid from the developed world, a direct contrast to the message of South African President Thabo Mbeki. There was speculation that Gaddafi wanted to become the AU's first chair, raising concerns within Africa that this would damage the Union's international standing, particularly with the West.\nAt the third AU summit, held in Tripoli, Libya, in July 2005, Gaddafi called for greater integration, advocating a single AU passport, a common defence system, and a single currency, using the slogan: \"The United States of Africa is the hope.\" His proposal for a Union of African States, a project originally conceived by Ghana's Kwame Nkrumah in the 1960s, was rejected at the 2001 Assembly of Heads of States and Government (AHSG) summit in Lusaka by African leaders who thought it \"unrealistic\" and \"utopian\". In June 2005, Libya joined the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). In March 2008 in Uganda, Gaddafi gave a speech once again urging Africa to reject foreign aid. In August 2008, Gaddafi was proclaimed \"King of Kings\" by a committee of traditional African leaders; they crowned him in February 2009, in a ceremony held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. That same month, Gaddafi was elected as the chairperson of the African Union, a position he retained for one year. In October 2010, Gaddafi apologized to African leaders for the historical enslavement of Africans by the Arab slave trade.\nMeanwhile, Gaddafi continued to have testy relationships with most of his fellow Arab leaders. In the 2003 Arab League summit, Gaddafi was involved in a public verbal altercation with Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, then the Crown Prince. Gaddafi accused Saudi Arabia of having made an \"alliance with the devil\" when it invited the US to intervene in the 1991 Gulf War. Abdullah responded that Gaddafi was a \"liar\" and an \"agent of colonizers\" and threatened Gaddafi that \"your grave awaits you.\" Two weeks after the summit, Gaddafi allegedly plotted with the Emir Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani of Qatar to assassinate Abdullah. The plot was overseen by Libyan intelligence chief Moussa Koussa, Mohammed Ismail (a colonel in Gaddafi's military intelligence), and Abdul Rahman al-Amoudi (an American citizen and founder of American Muslim Council). The assassination conspiracy was foiled by Saudi intelligence with the help of the FBI and CIA. Amoudi was sentenced to 23 years in prison in the US and stripped of his American citizenship. Ismail was arrested by Saudi Arabia, pardoned by Abdullah in 2005, and later acquired UAE citizenship due to his close ties with its ruler Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan. After the failure of the assassination plot, Gaddafi continued to discuss instigating a regime change in Saudi Arabia with multiple power brokers in the Persian Gulf, including Qatar's Foreign Minister Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber Al Thani, Oman's foreign minister Yusuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah, and Kuwaiti extremist preacher Hakem al-Mutairi.\nThe Gaddafi\u2013Abdullah feud came into public view again in the 2009 Arab League summit when Gaddafi accused Abdullah, who had become King of Saudi Arabia in 2005, of being created by Britain and protected by the US. Alluding to their 2003 altercation, Gaddafi taunted Abdullah for ostensibly avoiding a confrontation with him for six years and quoted Abdullah's 2003 \"grave awaits you\" threat back at him before storming out of the meeting to visit a museum. Abdullah also left the meeting hall in anger. A Saudi official later claimed that Gaddafi and Abdullah had held a 30 minutes meeting at the sideline of the summit and that the \"personal problem\" between them was \"over.\" However, Gaddafi had given weapons and money to the Houthis to attack Saudi Arabia.\nRebuilding links with the West.\nIn 1999, Libya began secret talks with the British government to normalize relations. In 2001, Gaddafi publicly condemned the September 11 attacks on the US by al-Qaeda, expressing sympathy with the victims and calling for Libyan involvement in the US-led war on terror against militant Islamism. His government continued suppressing domestic Islamism, at the same time as Gaddafi called for the wider application of \"sharia\" law. Libya also cemented connections with China and North Korea, being visited by Chinese President Jiang Zemin in April 2002. However, relations with China became strained in May 2006 due to a visit to Tripoli by Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian. Influenced by the events of the Iraq War, in December 2003, Libya renounced its possession of weapons of mass destruction, decommissioning its chemical and nuclear weapons programs. Relations with the US improved as a result. British Prime Minister Tony Blair visited Gaddafi in March 2004; the pair developed close personal ties. In 2003, Libya paid US$2.7 billion to the families of the victims of the Lockerbie bombing as it was the condition the US and UK had made for terminating the remaining UN sanctions. Libya continued to deny any role in the bombing. In 2009, Gaddafi attempted to strong-arm global energy companies operating in Libya to cover Libya's settlement with the families of the victims of Lockerbie.\nIn 2004, Gaddafi traveled to the headquarters of the European Union (EU) in Brussels\u2014signifying improved relations between Libya and the EU\u2014and the EU dropped its sanctions on Libya. As a strategic player in Europe's attempts to stem illegal migration from Africa, in October 2010, the EU paid Libya over \u20ac50\u00a0million to stop African migrants passing into Europe; Gaddafi encouraged the move, saying that it was necessary to prevent the loss of European cultural identity to a new \"Black Europe\". Gaddafi also completed agreements with the Italian government that they would invest in various infrastructure projects as reparations for past Italian colonial policies in Libya. Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi gave Libya an official apology in 2006, after which Gaddafi called him the \"iron man\" for his courage in doing so. In August 2008, Gaddafi and Berlusconi signed a historic cooperation treaty in Benghazi; under its terms, Italy would pay $5\u00a0billion to Libya as compensation for its former military occupation. In exchange, Libya would take measures to combat illegal immigration coming from its shores and boost investment in Italian companies.\nAfter the US removed Libya from its list of state sponsors of terrorism in 2006, Gaddafi nevertheless continued his anti-Western rhetoric. At the 2008 Arab League summit, held in Syria, he warned fellow Arab leaders that they could be overthrown and executed by the US like Saddam Hussein. At the Second Africa-South America Summit, held in Venezuela in September 2009, he called for a military alliance across Africa and Latin America to rival NATO. That same month he traveled to New York City and addressed the United Nations General Assembly for the first time on 23 September 2009, using it to condemn \"Western aggression,\" and spoke for just over 90 minutes instead of the allotted 15. In the Spring of 2010, Gaddafi proclaimed \"jihad\" against Switzerland after Swiss police accused two of his family members of criminal activity in the country, resulting in the breakdown of bilateral relations.\nGaddafi allegedly financed Nicolas Sarkozy in the 2007 French presidential election. He also financed Austrian far-right politician J\u00f6rg Haider starting in 2000.\nEconomic reform.\nLibya's economy witnessed increasing privatization; although rejecting the socialist policies of nationalized industry advocated in \"The Green Book\", government figures asserted that they were forging \"people's socialism\" rather than capitalism. Gaddafi welcomed these reforms, calling for wide-scale privatization in a March 2003 speech; he promised that Libya would join the World Trade Organization. These reforms encouraged private investment in Libya's economy. By 2004, there was US$40\u00a0billion of direct foreign investment in Libya, a six-fold rise over 2003. Sectors of Libya's population reacted against these reforms with public demonstrations, and in March 2006, revolutionary hard-liners took control of the GPC cabinet; although scaling back the pace of the changes, they did not halt them. In 2010, plans were announced that would have seen half the Libyan economy privatized over the next decade, these plans appear to have been soon abandoned however, as the companies that the government stated they were going to float on the stock market, among them the National Commercial Bank and the Libyan Iron and Steel Company were never floated and remained 100% state-owned. Many socialist policies remained however, with subsidiaries of logistics company HB Group being nationalized in 2007. Agriculture remained largely untouched by the reforms, with farms remaining cooperatives, the Agricultural Bank of Libya remaining wholly state-owned and state interventionist policies and price controls remaining. The oil industry remained largely state-owned, with the wholly state-owned National Oil Corporation retaining a 70% share in Libya's oil industry, the government also imposed a 93% tax on all oil that foreign companies produced in Libya. Price controls and subsidies over oil and food remained in place, and state-provided benefits such as free education, universal healthcare, free housing, free water and free electricity remained in place. Libya also changed its stance on the WTO after the removal of technocrat Shukri Ghanem, with Gaddafi condemning the WTO as a neocolonial terrorist organisation, and urging African and Third World countries not to join it.\nWhile there was no accompanying political liberalization, with Gaddafi retaining predominant control, in March 2010, the government devolved further powers to the municipal councils. Rising numbers of reformist technocrats attained positions in the country's governance; best known was Gaddafi's son and heir apparent Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, who was openly critical of Libya's human rights record. He led a group who proposed the drafting of a new constitution, although it was never adopted. Involved in encouraging tourism, Saif founded several privately run media channels in 2008, but after criticizing the government, they were nationalized in 2009.\nLibyan civil war and death.\nOrigins and development: February\u2013August 2011.\nAfter the start of the Arab Spring, in 2011, Gaddafi spoke out in favour of Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, then threatened by the Tunisian Revolution. He suggested that Tunisia's people would be satisfied if Ben Ali introduced a \"Jamahiriyah\" system there. Fearing domestic protest, Libya's government implemented preventive measures by reducing food prices, purging the army leadership of potential defectors, and releasing several Islamist prisoners. This proved ineffective, and on 17 February 2011, major protests broke out against Gaddafi's government. Unlike Tunisia or Egypt, Libya was largely religiously homogeneous and had no strong Islamist movement, but there was widespread dissatisfaction with the corruption and entrenched systems of patronage, while unemployment had reached around 30 percent.\nAccusing the rebels of being \"drugged\" and linked to al-Qaeda, Gaddafi proclaimed that he would die a martyr rather than leave Libya. As he announced that the rebels would be \"hunted down street by street, house by house and wardrobe by wardrobe\", the army opened fire on protesters in Benghazi, killing hundreds. Shocked at the government's response, a number of senior politicians resigned or defected to the protesters' side. The uprising spread quickly through Libya's less economically developed eastern half. By February's end, eastern cities such as Benghazi, Misrata, al-Bayda, and Tobruk were controlled by rebels, and the Benghazi-based National Transitional Council (NTC) formed to represent them.\nIn the conflict's early months it appeared that Gaddafi's government\u2014with its greater fire-power\u2014would be victorious. Both sides disregarded the laws of war, committing human rights abuses, including arbitrary arrests, torture, extrajudicial executions, and revenge attacks. On 26 February, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1970, suspending Libya from the UN Human Rights Council, implementing sanctions and calling for an International Criminal Court (ICC) investigation into the killing of unarmed civilians. In March, the Security Council declared a no-fly zone to protect the civilian population from aerial bombardment, calling on foreign nations to enforce it; it also specifically prohibited foreign occupation. Ignoring this, Qatar sent hundreds of troops to support the dissidents and, along with France and the United Arab Emirates, provided weaponry and military training to the NTC. NATO announced that it would enforce the no-fly zone. On 30 April a NATO airstrike killed Gaddafi's sixth son and three of his grandsons in Tripoli. This Western military intervention was criticized by various leftist governments, including those that had criticized Gaddafi's response to the protests, because they regarded it as an imperialist attempt to secure control of Libya's resources.\nIn June, the ICC issued arrest warrants for Gaddafi, his son Saif al-Islam, and his brother-in-law Abdullah Senussi, head of state security, for charges concerning crimes against humanity. That month, Amnesty International published their report, finding that Gaddafi's forces were responsible for numerous war crimes but added that a number of allegations of human rights abuses lacked credible evidence. The report added that \"much Western media coverage has from the outset presented a very one-sided view of the logic of events, portraying the protest movement as entirely peaceful and repeatedly suggesting that the regime's security forces were unaccountably massacring unarmed demonstrators\". In July, over 30 governments recognized the NTC as the legitimate government of Libya; Gaddafi called on his supporters to \"Trample on those recognitions, trample on them under your feet\u00a0... They are worthless\". In August, the Arab League recognized the NTC as \"the legitimate representative of the Libyan state\".\nAided by NATO air cover, the rebel militia pushed westward, defeating loyalist armies and securing control of the centre of the country. Gaining the support of Amazigh (Berber) communities of the Nafusa Mountains, who had long been persecuted as non-Arabic speakers under Gaddafi, the NTC armies surrounded Gaddafi loyalists in several key areas of western Libya. In August, the rebels seized Zliten and Tripoli, ending the last vestiges of Gaddafist power. It is probable that without the NATO air strikes supporting the rebels, they would not have been able to advance west and Gaddafi's forces would have ultimately retaken control of eastern Libya.\nCapture and killing.\nAfter the fall of Tripoli, only a few towns in western Libya such as Bani Walid, Sebha, and Sirte remained Gaddafist strongholds. Gaddafi was reportedly planning to catch up with his Sebha commander Ali Kanna's Tuareg forces and seek asylum in Burkina Faso. Instead, Gaddafi retreated to his hometown of Sirte, where he convened a meeting with his son Mutassim and intelligence chief Abdullah Senussi and learned that his youngest son Khamis had been killed by a NATO airstrike on 29 August. In the weeks that followed, Gaddafi continued to broadcast defiant audio messages through Syria-based Arrai TV. On 10 September, General Massoud Abdel Hafiz announced the formation of the Republic of Fezzan in Sebha, where Gaddafi would be president for life. Sebha fell on 22 September.\nSurrounding himself with bodyguards and a small entourage, including Mutassim, security chief Mansour Dhao, and defense minister Abu-Bakr Yunis Jabr, Gaddafi continually changed residences to escape NATO and NTC shelling, devoting his days to prayer and reading the Qur'an. On 20 October, Gaddafi recorded a farewell audio message for his family, later publicized by Al-Hadath, and then broke out of Sirte's District 2 in a joint civilian-military convoy. According to Dhao, it was a \"suicide mission\" as Gaddafi wanted to die in the Jarref Valley, close to where he was born. At around 08:30, NATO bombers attacked, destroying at least 14 vehicles and killing at least 53 people. The convoy scattered, and Gaddafi and those closest to him fled to a nearby villa, which was shelled by rebel militia from Misrata. Fleeing to a construction site, Gaddafi and his inner cohort hid inside drainage pipes while his bodyguards battled the rebels; in the conflict, Gaddafi suffered head injuries from a grenade blast while Jabr was killed.\nThe Misrata militia took Gaddafi prisoner, causing serious injuries as they tried to apprehend him; the events were filmed on a mobile phone. A video appears to picture Gaddafi being poked or stabbed in the anus \"with some kind of stick or knife\" or possibly a bayonet. Pulled onto the front of a pick-up truck, he fell off as it drove away. His semi-naked body was then placed into an ambulance and taken to Misrata; upon arrival, he was found to be dead. Official NTC accounts claimed that Gaddafi was caught in a crossfire and died from bullet wounds. Other eye-witness accounts claimed that rebels had fatally shot Gaddafi in the stomach.\nThat afternoon, NTC Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril publicly revealed the news of Gaddafi's death. His corpse was placed in the freezer of a local market alongside the corpses of Yunis Jabr and Mutassim; the bodies were publicly displayed for four days, with Libyans from all over the country coming to view them. Footage of Gaddafi's death was broadcast extensively across media networks internationally. In response to international calls, on 24 October Jibril announced that a commission would investigate Gaddafi's death. On 25 October, the NTC announced that Gaddafi had been buried at an unidentified location in the desert.\nPolitical ideology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe call it the Third [International] Theory to indicate that there is a new path for all those who reject both materialist capitalism and atheist communism. The path is for all the people of the world who abhor the dangerous confrontation between the Warsaw and North Atlantic military alliances. It is for all those who believe that all nations of the world are brothers under the aegis of the rule of God.\n\u2014Muammar Gaddafi, 1973\nGaddafi's ideological worldview was molded by his environment, namely his Islamic faith, his Bedouin upbringing, and his disgust at the actions of Italian colonialists in Libya. As a schoolboy, Gaddafi adopted the ideologies of Arab nationalism and Arab socialism, influenced in particular by Nasserism, the thought of the Egyptian President Nasser, whom Gaddafi regarded as his hero; Nasser privately described Gaddafi as \"a nice boy, but terribly na\u00efve\". During the early 1970s, Gaddafi formulated his own particular approach to Arab nationalism and socialism, known as Third International Theory, which \"The New York Times\" described as a combination of \"utopian socialism, Arab nationalism, and the Third World revolutionary theory that was in vogue at the time\". In addition to Nasser, Gaddafi also cited Charles de Gaulle, Sun Yat-sen, Abraham Lincoln and Josip Broz Tito as political inspirations. He regarded this system as a practical alternative to the then-dominant international models of Western capitalism and Marxism\u2013Leninism. He laid out the principles of this Theory in the three volumes of \"The Green Book\", in which he sought to \"explain the structure of the ideal society\".\nThe Libyan studies specialist Ronald Bruce St. John regarded Arab nationalism as Gaddafi's \"primordial value\", stating that during the early years of his government, Gaddafi was \"the Arab nationalist par excellence\". Gaddafi called for the Arab world to regain its dignity and assert a major place on the world stage, blaming Arab backwardness on stagnation resulting from Ottoman rule, European colonialism and imperialism, and corrupt and repressive monarchies. Gaddafi's Arab nationalist views led him to the pan-Arabist belief in the need for unity across the Arab world, combining the Arab nation under a single nation-state. To this end, he had proposed a political union with five neighbouring Arab states by 1974, although without success. In keeping with his views regarding Arabs, his political stance was described as nativist. Gaddafi also had international ambitions, wanting to export his revolutionary ideas throughout the world. Gaddafi saw his socialist \"Jamahiriyah\" as a model for the Arab, Islamic, and non-aligned worlds to follow, and in his speeches declared that his Third International Theory would eventually guide the entire planet. He nevertheless had minimal success in exporting the ideology outside of Libya.\nAlong with Arab nationalism, anti-imperialism was also a defining feature of Gaddafi's regime during its early years. He believed in opposing Western imperialism and colonialism in the Arab world, including any Western expansionism through the form of Israel. He offered support to a broad range of political groups abroad that called themselves \"anti-imperialist\", especially those that set themselves in opposition to the United States. For many years, anti-Zionism was a fundamental component of Gaddafi's ideology. He believed that the state of Israel should not exist and that any Arab compromise with the Israeli government was a betrayal of the Arab people. In large part due to their support of Israel, Gaddafi despised the United States, considering the country to be imperialist and lambasting it as \"the embodiment of evil\". He sought to distinguish \"oriental\" Jews who had lived in the Middle East for generations from the European Jews who had migrated to Palestine during the 20th century, calling the latter \"vagabonds\" and \"mercenaries\" who should return to Europe. He rallied against Jews in many of his speeches, with Blundy and Lycett claiming that his antisemitism was \"almost Hitlerian\". As Pan-Africanism increasingly became his focus in the early 21st century, Gaddafi became less interested in the Israel-Palestine issue, calling for the two communities to form a new single-state that he termed \"Isratin\". This would have led the Jewish population to become a minority within the new state.\nIslamic modernism and Islamic socialism.\nGaddafi rejected the secularist approach to Arab nationalism that had been pervasive in Syria, with his revolutionary movement placing a far stronger emphasis on Islam than previous Arab nationalist movements had done. He deemed Arabism and Islam to be inseparable, referring to them as \"one and indivisible\", and called on the Arab world's Christian minority to convert to Islam. He insisted that Islamic law should be the basis for the law of the state, blurring any distinction between the religious and secular realms. He desired unity across the Islamic world, and encouraged the propagation of the faith elsewhere; on a 2010 visit to Italy, he paid a modelling agency to find 200 young Italian women for a lecture he gave urging them to convert. According to the Gaddafi biographer Jonathan Bearman, in Islamic terms Gaddafi was a modernist rather than a fundamentalist, for he subordinated religion to the political system rather than seeking to Islamicise the state as Islamists sought to do. He was driven by a sense of \"divine mission\", believing himself a conduit of God's will, and thought that he must achieve his goals \"no matter what the cost\". His interpretation of Islam was nevertheless idiosyncratic, and he clashed with conservative Libyan clerics. Many criticized his attempts to encourage women to enter traditionally male-only sectors of society, such as the armed forces. Gaddafi was keen to improve women's status, although saw the sexes as \"separate but equal\" and therefore felt women should usually remain in traditional roles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe purpose of the socialist society is the happiness of man, which can only be realized through material and spiritual freedom. Attainment of such freedom depends on the extent of man's ownership of his needs; ownership that is personal and sacredly guaranteed, i.e. your needs must neither be owned by somebody else, nor subject to plunder by any part of society.\n\u2014Muammar Gaddafi\nGaddafi described his approach to economics as \"Islamic socialism\". For him, a socialist society could be defined as one in which men controlled their own needs, either through personal ownership or through a collective. Although the early policies pursued by his government were state capitalist in orientation, by 1978 he believed that private ownership of the means of production was exploitative and thus he sought to move Libya away from capitalism and towards socialism. Private enterprise was largely eliminated in favour of a centrally controlled economy. The extent to which Libya became socialist under Gaddafi is disputed. Bearman suggested that while Libya did undergo \"a profound social revolution\", he did not think that \"a socialist society\" was established in Libya. Conversely, St. John expressed the view that \"if socialism is defined as a redistribution of wealth and resources, a socialist revolution clearly occurred in Libya\" under Gaddafi's regime.\nGaddafi was staunchly anti-Marxist, and in 1973 declared that \"it is the duty of every Muslim to combat\" Marxism because it promotes atheism. In his view, ideologies like Marxism and Zionism were alien to the Islamic world and were a threat to the ummah, or global Islamic community. Nevertheless, Blundy and Lycett noted that Gaddafi's socialism had a \"curiously Marxist undertone\", with political scientist Sami Hajjar arguing that Gaddafi's model of socialism offered a simplification of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels's theories. While acknowledging the Marxist influence on Gaddafi's thought, Bearman stated that the Libyan leader rejected Marxism's core tenet, that of class struggle as the main engine of social development. Instead of embracing the Marxist idea that a socialist society emerged from class struggle between the proletariat and bourgeoisie, Gaddafi believed that socialism would be achieved through overturning \"unnatural\" capitalism and returning society to its \"natural equilibrium\". In this, he sought to replace a capitalist economy with one based on his own romanticized ideas of a traditional, pre-capitalist past. This owed much to the Islamic belief in God's natural law providing order to the universe.\nPersonal life.\nA very private individual, Gaddafi was given to rumination and solitude and could be reclusive. Gaddafi described himself as a \"simple revolutionary\" and \"pious Muslim\" called upon by God to continue Nasser's work. Gaddafi was an austere and devout Muslim, although, according to Vandewalle, his interpretation of Islam was \"deeply personal and idiosyncratic\". He was also a football enthusiast and enjoyed both playing that game and horse-riding as a means of recreation. He regarded himself as an intellectual; he was a fan of Beethoven and said his favourite novels were \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\", \"\", and \"The Outsider\".\nGaddafi considered personal appearance important; Blundy and Lycett described him as \"extraordinarily vain\". Gaddafi had a large wardrobe, and sometimes changed his outfit more than once a day. He favoured either a military uniform or traditional Libyan dress, tending to eschew Western-style suits. He saw himself as a fashion icon, stating \"Whatever I wear becomes a fad. I wear a certain shirt and suddenly everyone is wearing it.\" After his ascension to power, Gaddafi moved to the Bab al-Azizia barracks, a 6-square-kilometre (2.3 square miles) fortified compound, 3.2 kilometres (2 miles) from the centre of Tripoli. In the 1980s, his lifestyle was considered modest in comparison to those of many other Arab leaders.\nHe was preoccupied with his own security, regularly changing where he slept and sometimes grounding all other planes in Libya when he was flying. He made particular requests when travelling to foreign countries. During his trips to Rome, Paris, Madrid, Moscow, and New York City, he lived in a bulletproof tent, following his Bedouin traditions. Gaddafi was confrontational in his approach to foreign powers and generally shunned Western ambassadors and diplomats, believing them to be spies.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, there were reports of his making sexual advances toward female reporters and members of his entourage. Starting in the 1980s, he travelled with his all-female Amazonian Guard, who were allegedly sworn to a life of celibacy. After Gaddafi's death, a Libyan psychologist, Seham Sergewa, part of a team investigating sexual offences during the civil war, stated that five of the guards told her they had been raped by Gaddafi and senior officials. After Gaddafi's death, a French journalist, Annick Cojean, published a book alleging that Gaddafi had had sexual relations with women, some in their early teenage years, who had been specially selected for him. One of those Cojean interviewed, a woman named Soraya, claimed that Gaddafi kept her imprisoned in a basement for six years, where he repeatedly raped her; urinated on her; and forced her to watch pornography, drink alcohol, and snort cocaine. The sexual abuse was said to have been facilitated by Gaddafi's Chief of Protocol Nuri al-Mismari and Mabrouka Sherif. Gaddafi also hired several Ukrainian nurses to care for him; one described him as kind and considerate and was surprised that allegations of abuse had been made against him.\nGaddafi married his first wife, Fatiha al-Nuri, in 1969. They had one son, Muhammad Gaddafi (born 1970); their relationship was strained, and they divorced in 1970. Gaddafi's second wife was Safia Farkash, n\u00e9e el-Brasai, a former nurse from the Obeidat tribe, born in Bayda. They met in 1969, after his ascension to power, when he was hospitalized with appendicitis; he claimed that it was love at first sight. The couple remained married until his death. Together they had seven biological children: Saif al-Islam Gaddafi (born 1972), Al-Saadi Gaddafi (born 1973), Mutassim Gaddafi (1974\u20132011), Hannibal Muammar Gaddafi (born 1975), Ayesha Gaddafi (born 1976), Saif al-Arab Gaddafi (1982\u20132011), and Khamis Gaddafi (1983\u20132011). He also adopted two children, Hana Gaddafi and Milad Gaddafi. Several of his sons gained a reputation for lavish and anti-social behaviour in Libya, which proved a source of resentment toward his administration. At least three of his cousins were prominent figures in Gaddafi's regime. Ahmed Gaddaf al-Dam is Libya's former Special Envoy to Egypt and a leading figure of the Gaddafi regime. Mansour Dhao was his chief of security and led the People's Guard. Sayyid Gaddaf al-Dam was a brigadier general and described as the second most powerful person in Libya in the 1980s.\nPublic life.\nAccording to Vandewalle, Gaddafi \"dominated [Libya's] political life\" during his period in power. The sociologist Raymond A. Hinnebusch described the Libyan as \"perhaps the most exemplary contemporary case of the politics of charismatic leadership\", displaying all of the traits of charismatic authority outlined by the sociologist Max Weber. According to Hinnebusch, the foundations of Gaddafi's \"personal charismatic authority\" in Libya stemmed from the blessing he had received from Nasser coupled with \"nationalist achievements\" such as the expulsion of foreign military bases, the extraction of higher prices for Libyan oil, and his vocal support for the Palestinian and anti-imperialist causes.\nA cult of personality devoted to Gaddafi existed in Libya through most of his rule. His biographer Alison Pargeter noted that \"he filled every space, moulding the entire country around himself.\" Depictions of his face could be found throughout the country, including on postage stamps, watches, and school satchels. Quotations from \"The Green Book\" appeared on a wide variety of places, from street walls to airports and pens, and were put to pop music for public release. In private, Gaddafi often complained that he disliked this personality cult surrounding him, but that he tolerated it because the people of Libya adored him. The cult served a political purpose, with Gaddafi helping to provide a central identity for the Libyan state.\nSeveral biographers and observers characterized Gaddafi as a populist. He enjoyed attending lengthy public sessions where people were invited to question him; these were often televised. Throughout Libya, crowds of supporters would arrive at public events where he appeared. Described as \"spontaneous demonstrations\" by the government, there are recorded instances of groups being coerced or paid to attend. He was typically late to public events, and would sometimes fail to arrive. Although Bianco thought he had a \"gift for oratory\", he was considered a poor orator by Blundy and Lycett. The biographer Daniel Kawczynski noted that Gaddafi was famed for his \"lengthy, wandering\" speeches, which typically involved criticizing Israel and the US. The journalist Ruth First described his speeches as being \"an inexhaustible flow; didactic, at times incoherent; peppered with snatches of half-formed opinions; admonitions; confidences; some sound common sense, and as much prejudice\".\nReception and legacy.\nSupporters praised Gaddafi's administration for the creation of a more equal society through domestic reform. They stressed the regime's achievements in combating homelessness, ensuring access to food and safe drinking water, and to dramatic improvements in education. Supporters have also applauded achievements in medical care, praising the universal free healthcare provided under the Gaddafist administration, with diseases like cholera and typhoid being contained and life expectancy raised.\nGaddafi's government's treatment of non-Arab Libyans came in for criticism from human rights activists, with native Berbers, Italian colonists, Jews, refugees, and foreign workers all facing persecution in Gaddafist Libya. Human rights groups also criticized the treatment of migrants, including asylum seekers, who passed through Gaddafi's Libya on their way to Europe. During the Civil War, various leftist groups endorsed the anti-Gaddafist rebels\u2014but not the Western military intervention\u2014by arguing that Gaddafi had become an ally of Western imperialism by cooperating with the war on terror and efforts to block African migration to Europe. Gaddafi was widely perceived as a terrorist, especially in the US and UK.\nPosthumous assessment.\nInternational reactions to Gaddafi's death were divided. Gaddafi was mourned as a hero by many across sub-Saharan Africa but was widely condemned elsewhere.\nAfter his defeat in the civil war, Gaddafi's system of governance was dismantled and replaced by the interim government of the NTC, which legalized trade unions and freedom of the press. In January 2013, the GNC officially renamed the \"Jamahiriyah\" as the \"State of Libya\". Gaddafi loyalists then founded a new political party, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Libya. Led by Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the Popular Front was allowed to participate in the future general election.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53031", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53031", "title": "Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law", "text": "Physical law on the emissive power of black body\nThe Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law, also known as \"Stefan's law\", describes the intensity of the thermal radiation emitted by matter in terms of that matter's temperature. It is named for Josef Stefan, who empirically derived the relationship, and Ludwig Boltzmann who derived the law theoretically.\nFor an ideal absorber/emitter or black body, the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law states that the total energy radiated per unit surface area per unit time (also known as the \"radiant exitance\") is directly proportional to the fourth power of the black body's temperature, \"T\":\nformula_1\nThe constant of proportionality, formula_2, is called the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant. It has the value\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"\u03c3\"\u00a0=\u00a0.\nIn the general case, the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law for radiant exitance takes the form:\nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the emissivity of the surface emitting the radiation. The emissivity is generally between zero and one. An emissivity of one corresponds to a black body.\nDetailed explanation.\nThe \"radiant exitance\" (previously called \"radiant emittance\"), formula_5, has dimensions of energy flux (energy per unit time per unit area), and the SI units of measure are joules per second per square metre (J\u22c5s\u22121\u22c5m\u22122), or equivalently, watts per square metre (W\u22c5m\u22122). The SI unit for absolute temperature, \"T\", is the kelvin (K).\nTo find the total power, formula_6, radiated from an object, multiply the radiant exitance by the object's surface area, formula_7:\nformula_8\nMatter that does not absorb all incident radiation emits less total energy than a black body. Emissions are reduced by a factor formula_4, where the emissivity, formula_4, is a material property which, for most matter, satisfies formula_11. Emissivity can in general depend on wavelength, direction, and polarization. However, the emissivity which appears in the non-directional form of the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law is the hemispherical total emissivity, which reflects emissions as totaled over all wavelengths, directions, and polarizations.60\nThe form of the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law that includes emissivity is applicable to all matter, provided that matter is in a state of local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) so that its temperature is well-defined. (This is a trivial conclusion, since the emissivity, formula_4, is defined to be the quantity that makes this equation valid. What is non-trivial is the proposition that formula_13, which is a consequence of Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation.385)\nA so-called \"grey body\" is a body for which the spectral emissivity is independent of wavelength, so that the total emissivity, formula_4, is a constant.71 In the more general (and realistic) case, the spectral emissivity depends on wavelength. The total emissivity, as applicable to the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law, may be calculated as a weighted average of the spectral emissivity, with the blackbody emission spectrum serving as the weighting function. It follows that if the spectral emissivity depends on wavelength then the total emissivity depends on the temperature, i.e., formula_15.60 However, if the dependence on wavelength is small, then the dependence on temperature will be small as well.\nWavelength- and subwavelength-scale particles, metamaterials, and other nanostructures are not subject to ray-optical limits and may be designed to have an emissivity greater than 1.\nIn national and international standards documents, the symbol formula_5 is recommended to denote \"radiant exitance\"; a superscript circle (\u00b0) indicates a term relative to a black body. (A subscript \"e\" is added when it is important to distinguish the energetic (radiometric) quantity \"radiant exitance\", formula_17, from the analogous human vision (photometric) quantity, \"luminous exitance\", denoted formula_18.) In common usage, the symbol used for radiant exitance (often called \"radiant emittance\") varies among different texts and in different fields.\nThe \"Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law\" may be expressed as a formula for \"radiance\" as a function of temperature. Radiance is measured in watts per square metre per steradian (W\u22c5m\u22122\u22c5sr\u22121). The Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law for the radiance of a black body is:26\nformula_19\nThe \"Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law\" expressed as a formula for \"radiation energy density\" is:\nformula_20\nwhere formula_21 is the speed of light.\nHistory.\nIn 1864, John Tyndall presented measurements of the infrared emission by a platinum filament and the corresponding color of the filament.\nThe proportionality to the fourth power of the absolute temperature was deduced by Josef Stefan (1835\u20131893) in 1877 on the basis of Tyndall's experimental measurements, in the article \"\u00dcber die Beziehung zwischen der W\u00e4rmestrahlung und der Temperatur\" (\"On the relationship between thermal radiation and temperature\") in the \"Bulletins from the sessions\" of the Vienna Academy of Sciences.\nA derivation of the law from theoretical considerations was presented by Ludwig Boltzmann (1844\u20131906) in 1884, drawing upon the work of Adolfo Bartoli.\nBartoli in 1876 had derived the existence of radiation pressure from the principles of thermodynamics. Following Bartoli, Boltzmann considered an ideal heat engine using electromagnetic radiation instead of an ideal gas as working matter.\nThe law was almost immediately experimentally verified. Heinrich Weber in 1888 pointed out deviations at higher temperatures, but perfect accuracy within measurement uncertainties was confirmed up to temperatures of 1535\u00a0K by 1897.\nThe law, including the theoretical prediction of the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant as a function of the speed of light, the Boltzmann constant and the Planck constant, is a direct consequence of Planck's law as formulated in 1900.\nStefan\u2013Boltzmann constant.\nThe Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant, \"\u03c3\", is derived from other known physical constants:\nformula_22\nwhere \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant, the \"h\" is the Planck constant (with formula_23 the reduced Planck constant), and \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum.388\nAs of the 2019 revision of the SI, which establishes exact fixed values for \"k\", \"h\", and \"c\", the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant is exactly:\nformula_24\nThus,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt; \"\u03c3\" = (sequence in the OEIS).\nPrior to this, the value of formula_2 was calculated from the measured value of the gas constant.\nThe numerical value of the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant is different in other systems of units, as shown in the table below.\nExamples.\nTemperature of the Sun.\nWith his law, Stefan also determined the temperature of the Sun's surface. He inferred from the data of Jacques-Louis Soret (1827\u20131890) that the energy flux density from the Sun is 29 times greater than the energy flux density of a certain warmed metal lamella (a thin plate). A round lamella was placed at such a distance from the measuring device that it would be seen at the same angular diameter as the Sun. Soret estimated the temperature of the lamella to be approximately 1900 \u00b0C to 2000\u00a0\u00b0C. Stefan surmised that 1/3 of the energy flux from the Sun is absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere, so he took for the correct Sun's energy flux a value 3/2 times greater than Soret's value, namely 29 \u00d7 3/2 = 43.5.\nPrecise measurements of atmospheric absorption were not made until 1888 and 1904. The temperature Stefan obtained was a median value of previous ones, 1950\u00a0\u00b0C and the absolute thermodynamic one 2200\u00a0K. As 2.574 = 43.5, it follows from the law that the temperature of the Sun is 2.57 times greater than the temperature of the lamella, so Stefan got a value of 5430\u00a0\u00b0C or 5700\u00a0K. This was the first sensible value for the temperature of the Sun. Before this, values ranging from as low as 1800\u00a0\u00b0C to as high as were claimed. The lower value of 1800\u00a0\u00b0C was determined by Claude Pouillet (1790\u20131868) in 1838 using the Dulong\u2013Petit law. Pouillet also took just half the value of the Sun's correct energy flux.\nTemperature of stars.\nThe temperature of stars other than the Sun can be approximated using a similar means by treating the emitted energy as a black body radiation. So:\nformula_26\nwhere \"L\" is the luminosity, \"\u03c3\" is the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant, \"R\" is the stellar radius and \"T\" is the effective temperature. This formula can then be rearranged to calculate the temperature:\nformula_27\nor alternatively the radius:\nformula_28\nThe same formulae can also be simplified to compute the parameters relative to the Sun:\nformula_29\nwhere formula_30 is the solar radius, and so forth. They can also be rewritten in terms of the surface area \"A\" and radiant exitance formula_31:\nformula_32\nwhere formula_33 and formula_34\nWith the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law, astronomers can easily infer the radii of stars. The law is also met in the thermodynamics of black holes in so-called Hawking radiation.\nEffective temperature of the Earth.\nSimilarly we can calculate the effective temperature of the Earth \"T\"\u2295 by equating the energy received from the Sun and the energy radiated by the Earth, under the black-body approximation (Earth's own production of energy being small enough to be negligible). The luminosity of the Sun, \"L\"\u2299, is given by:\nformula_35\nAt Earth, this energy is passing through a sphere with a radius of \"a\"0, the distance between the Earth and the Sun, and the irradiance (received power per unit area) is given by\nformula_36\nThe Earth has a radius of \"R\"\u2295, and therefore has a cross-section of formula_37. The radiant flux (i.e. solar power) absorbed by the Earth is thus given by:\nformula_38\nBecause the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law uses a fourth power, it has a stabilizing effect on the exchange and the flux emitted by Earth tends to be equal to the flux absorbed, close to the steady state where:\nformula_39\n\"T\"\u2295 can then be found:\nformula_40\nwhere \"T\"\u2299 is the temperature of the Sun, \"R\"\u2299 the radius of the Sun, and \"a\"0 is the distance between the Earth and the Sun. This gives an effective temperature of 6\u00a0\u00b0C on the surface of the Earth, assuming that it perfectly absorbs all emission falling on it and has no atmosphere.\nThe Earth has an albedo of 0.3, meaning that 30% of the solar radiation that hits the planet gets scattered back into space without absorption. The effect of albedo on temperature can be approximated by assuming that the energy absorbed is multiplied by 0.7, but that the planet still radiates as a black body (the latter by definition of effective temperature, which is what we are calculating). This approximation reduces the temperature by a factor of 0.71/4, giving .\nThe above temperature is Earth's as seen from space, not ground temperature but an average over all emitting bodies of Earth from surface to high altitude. Because of the greenhouse effect, the Earth's actual average surface temperature is about , which is higher than the effective temperature, and even higher than the temperature that a black body would have.\nIn the above discussion, we have assumed that the whole surface of the earth is at one temperature. Another interesting question is to ask what the temperature of a blackbody surface on the earth would be assuming that it reaches equilibrium with the sunlight falling on it. This of course depends on the angle of the sun on the surface and on how much air the sunlight has gone through. When the sun is at the zenith and the surface is horizontal, the irradiance can be as high as 1120\u00a0W/m2. The Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law then gives a temperature of\nformula_41\nor . (Above the atmosphere, the result is even higher: .) We can think of the earth's surface as \"trying\" to reach equilibrium temperature during the day, but being cooled by the atmosphere, and \"trying\" to reach equilibrium with starlight and possibly moonlight at night, but being warmed by the atmosphere.\nOrigination.\nThermodynamic derivation of the energy density.\nThe fact that the energy density of the box containing radiation is proportional to formula_42 can be derived using thermodynamics. This derivation uses the relation between the radiation pressure \"p\" and the internal energy density formula_43, a relation that can be shown using the form of the electromagnetic stress\u2013energy tensor. This relation is:\nformula_44\nNow, from the fundamental thermodynamic relation\nformula_45\nwe obtain the following expression, after dividing by formula_46 and fixing formula_47:\nformula_48\nThe last equality comes from the following Maxwell relation:\nformula_49\nFrom the definition of energy density it follows that\nformula_50\nwhere the energy density of radiation only depends on the temperature, therefore\nformula_51\nNow, the equality is\nformula_52 after substitution of formula_53\nMeanwhile, the pressure is the rate of momentum change per unit area. Since the momentum of a photon is the same as the energy divided by the speed of light,\nformula_54\nwhere the factor 1/3 comes from the projection of the momentum transfer onto the normal to the wall of the container.\nSince the partial derivative formula_55 can be expressed as a relationship between only formula_56 and formula_47 (if one isolates it on one side of the equality), the partial derivative can be replaced by the ordinary derivative. After separating the differentials the equality becomes\nformula_58\nwhich leads immediately to formula_59, with formula_60 as some constant of integration.\nDerivation from Planck's law.\nThe law can be derived by considering a small flat black body surface radiating out into a half-sphere. This derivation uses spherical coordinates, with \"\u03b8\" as the zenith angle and \"\u03c6\" as the azimuthal angle; and the small flat blackbody surface lies on the xy-plane, where \"\u03b8\" = \u03c0/2.\nThe intensity of the light emitted from the blackbody surface is given by Planck's law,\nformula_61\nwhere\nThe quantity formula_67 is the power radiated by a surface of area A through a solid angle \"d\"\u03a9 in the frequency range between \u03bd and \"\u03bd\" + \"d\u03bd\".\nThe Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law gives the power emitted per unit area of the emitting body,\nformula_68\nNote that the cosine appears because black bodies are \"Lambertian\" (i.e. they obey Lambert's cosine law), meaning that the intensity observed along the sphere will be the actual intensity times the cosine of the zenith angle.\nTo derive the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law, we must integrate formula_69 over the half-sphere and integrate formula_70 from 0 to \u221e.\nformula_71\nThen we plug in for \"I\":\nformula_72\nTo evaluate this integral, do a substitution,\nformula_73\nwhich gives:\nformula_74\nThe integral on the right is standard and goes by many names: it is a particular case of a Bose\u2013Einstein integral, the polylogarithm, or the Riemann zeta function formula_75. The value of the integral is formula_76 (where formula_77 is the Gamma function), giving the result that, for a perfect blackbody surface:\nformula_78\nFinally, this proof started out only considering a small flat surface. However, any differentiable surface can be approximated by a collection of small flat surfaces. So long as the geometry of the surface does not cause the blackbody to reabsorb its own radiation, the total energy radiated is just the sum of the energies radiated by each surface; and the total surface area is just the sum of the areas of each surface\u2014so this law holds for all convex blackbodies, too, so long as the surface has the same temperature throughout. The law extends to radiation from non-convex bodies by using the fact that the convex hull of a black body radiates as though it were itself a black body.\nEnergy density.\nThe total energy density \"U\" can be similarly calculated, except the integration is over the whole sphere and there is no cosine, and the energy flux (U c) should be divided by the velocity \"c\" to give the energy density \"U\":\nformula_79\nThus formula_80 is replaced by formula_81, giving an extra factor of 4.\nThus, in total:\nformula_82\nThe product formula_83 is sometimes known as the radiation constant or radiation density constant.\nDecomposition in terms of photons.\nThe Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law can be expressed as\nformula_84\nwhere the flux of photons, formula_85, is given by\nformula_86\nformula_87\nand the average energy per photon,formula_88, is given by\nformula_89\nMarr and Wilkin (2012) recommend that students be taught about formula_88 instead of being taught Wien's displacement law, and that the above decomposition be taught when the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law is taught.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53032", "revid": "878749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53032", "title": "Geophagy", "text": ""}
{"id": "53033", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53033", "title": "Josef Stefan", "text": "Carinthian Slovene physicist, mathematician and poet (1835\u20131893)\nJosef Stefan (; 24 March 1835 \u2013 7 January 1893) was a Carinthian Slovene physicist, mathematician, and poet of the Austrian Empire.\nLife and work.\nStefan was born in the village of St. Peter (Slovene: ) on the outskirts of Klagenfurt) to Ale\u0161 (Aleksander) Stefan (1805-1872) and Marija Startinik (1815-1863). His parents, both ethnic Slovenes, did not marry until Josef was eleven. The Stefans were of modest means; his father was a milling assistant and his mother served as a maidservant. Josef was their only child.\nStefan attended elementary school in Klagenfurt, where he showed talent, and was recommended for enrollment at the Klagenfurt Lyceum in 1845. At thirteen, he experienced the revolutionary year of 1848, which inspired him to show sympathy toward the Slovene literary and national movement.\nAfter having graduated top of his class in high school, he briefly considered joining the Benedictine Order, but his great interest in physics prevailed. He left for Vienna in 1853 to study mathematics and physics. His professor of physics in the gymnasium was Karel Robida, who wrote the first Slovene physics textbook. Stefan then earned his habilitation in mathematical physics at the University of Vienna in 1858. During his student years, he also wrote and published a number of poems in Slovene.\nStefan taught physics at the University of Vienna, was Director of the Physical Institute from 1866, Vice-President of the Vienna Academy of Sciences, and member of several scientific institutions in Europe. He died in Vienna, Austria-Hungary. His life and work were extensively documented by the physicist Janez Strnad.\nWork.\nStefan published nearly 80 scientific articles, mostly in the Bulletins of the Vienna Academy of Sciences. He is best known for originating Stefan's law in 1879, a physical power law stating that the total radiation from a black body is proportional to the fourth power of its thermodynamic temperature \"T\":\nformula_1\nHe derived this law from the measurements of the French physicists Dulong and Petit. As both incident radiation and blackbody emission are always equal, this equation applies equally to the temperature of any ideal body subject to incident radiation across its surface. In 1884, the law was extended to apply to grey-body emissions by Stefan's student Ludwig Boltzmann and hence is known as Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law. Boltzmann treated a heat engine with light as a working matter. This law is the only physical law of nature named after a Slovene physicist. Today, the law is derived from Planck's law of black-body radiation:\nformula_2\nWith his law, Stefan determined the temperature of the Sun's surface, which he calculated to be . This was the first sensible value for the temperature of the Sun.\nStefan provided the first measurements of the thermal conductivity of gases, treated evaporation, and among others studied diffusion, heat conduction in fluids. For his treatise on optics, the University of Vienna bestowed the Lieben Prize on him. Because of his early work in calculating evaporation and diffusion rates, flow from a droplet or particle that is induced by evaporation or sublimation at the surface is now called the Stefan flow.\nVery important are also his electromagnetic equations, defined in vector notation, and works in the kinetic theory of heat. Stefan was among the first physicists in Europe who fully understood Maxwell's electromagnetic theory and one of the few outside England who expanded on it. He calculated inductivity of a coil with a quadratic cross-section, and he corrected Maxwell's miscalculation. He also researched a phenomenon called the skin effect, where high-frequency electric current is greater on the surface of a conductor than in its interior.\nIn mathematics, the Stefan problems or Stefan's tasks with movable boundary are well known. The problem was first studied by Lam\u00e9 and Clapeyron in 1831. Stefan solved the problem when he was calculating how quickly a layer of ice on water grows (Stefan's equation).\nEponymous terms.\nSeveral concepts in physics and mathematics are named after Joseph Stefan:\nThe Jo\u017eef Stefan Institute, Slovenia's premier scientific establishment, is also named after him, and also:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
