{"id": "53446", "revid": "420632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53446", "title": "San Jose, California", "text": "San Jose, officially the City of San Jos\u00e9 ( ; ), is a cultural, commercial, and political center within the San Francisco Bay Area and Silicon Valley. With a city population of 997,368 and a metropolitan area population of 1.95 million, it is the most populous city in both the Bay Area and Northern California and the 12th-most populous in the United States. Located in the center of the Santa Clara Valley on the southern shore of San Francisco Bay, San Jose covers an area of and is the county seat of Santa Clara County.\nBefore the arrival of the Spanish, the area around San Jose was long inhabited by the Tamien nation of the Ohlone people. San Jose was founded on November 29, 1777, as the \"Pueblo de San Jos\u00e9 de Guadalupe\", the first city founded in the Californias. It became a part of Mexico in 1821 after the Mexican War of Independence. Following the U.S. Conquest of California during the Mexican\u2013American War, the territory was ceded to the United States in 1848. After California achieved statehood two years later, San Jose served as the state's first capital. San Jose experienced an economic boom after World War II, with a rapid population growth and aggressive annexation of nearby communities in the 1950s and 1960s. The rapid growth of the technology industry in Silicon Valley further accelerated the city's transition from an agricultural center to an urbanized metropolitan area, prompting Mayor Tom McEnery to adopt San Jose's current motto, \"Capital of Silicon Valley\", in 1988. Results of the 1990 U.S. census indicated that San Jose had surpassed San Francisco in population. By the early 2000s, San Jose was California's fastest-growing economy.\nToday, San Jose is notable for its innovation, cultural diversity, affluence, and sunny and mild Mediterranean climate. Major companies including Cisco, eBay, Adobe, PayPal, NetApp, Cadence, and Zoom maintain their headquarters in San Jose. One of the wealthiest major cities in the world, San Jose was ranked in 2017 as having the third-highest GDP per capita (after Zurich and Oslo) and the fifth-most expensive housing market. It is home to one of the world's largest overseas Vietnamese populations, a Hispanic community that makes up over 30% of the city's residents, historic ethnic enclaves such as Japantown and Little Portugal, and the largest Sikh Gurdwara outside of India.\nEducational and cultural institutions in San Jose include San Jose State University, Children's Discovery Museum of San Jose, the Tech Interactive, the San Jose Museum of Art, Winchester Mystery House, the Japanese American Museum of San Jose, Movimiento de Arte y Cultura Latino Americana, the Viet Museum, Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum, Hayes Mansion, Lick Observatory, San Jose Municipal Rose Garden, and the San Jose Center for the Performing Arts. Two major league sports teams, the San Jose Earthquakes and the San Jose Sharks, play their home games in San Jose. San Jose International Airport is the third-busiest airport in Northern California. VTA's rail and bus networks, together with Amtrak, ACE, BART, and Caltrain services, connect San Jose to the broader region through hubs such as Diridon Station.\nName.\nSan Jose is named after , the city's predecessor, which was eventually located in the area of what is now the Plaza de C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez. In the 19th century, print publications used the spelling \"San Jos\u00e9\" for both the city and its eponymous township. On December 11, 1943, the United States Board on Geographic Names ruled that the city's name should be spelled \"San Jose\" based on local usage and the formal incorporated name.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, some residents and officials advocated for returning to the original spelling of \"San Jos\u00e9\", with the acute accent on the \"e\", to acknowledge the city's Mexican origin and Mexican-American population. On June 2, 1969, the city adopted a flag designed by historian Clyde Arbuckle that prominently featured the inscription \"SAN JOS\u00c9, CALIFORNIA\". On June 16, 1970, San Jose State College officially adopted \"San Jos\u00e9\" as the city's name, including in the college's own name. On August 20, 1974, the San Jose City Council approved a proposal by Catherine Linquist to rename the city \"San Jos\u00e9\" but reversed itself a week later under pressure from residents concerned with the cost of changing typewriters, documents, and signs. On April 3, 1979, the city council once again adopted \"San Jos\u00e9\" as the spelling of the city name on the city seal, official stationery, office titles and department names. As late as 2010, the 1965 city charter stated the name of the municipal corporation as \"City of San Jose\", without the accent mark, but later editions have added the accent mark.\nBy convention, the spelling \"San Jos\u00e9\" is only used when the name is spelled in mixed upper- and lowercase letters, but not when the name is spelled only in uppercase letters, as on the city logo. The accent reflects the Spanish version of the name, and the dropping of accents in all-capital writing was once typical in Spanish. While San Jos\u00e9 is commonly spelled both with and without the acute accent over the \"e\", the city's official guidelines indicate that it should be spelled with the accent most of the time and sets forth narrow exceptions, such as when the spelling is in URLs, when the name appears in all-capital letters, when the name is used on social media sites where the diacritical mark does not render properly, and where San Jose is part of the proper name of another organization or business, such as San Jose Chamber of Commerce, that has chosen not to use the accent-marked name.\nHistory.\nPrecolonial period.\nSan Jose, along with most of the Santa Clara Valley, has been home to the Tamien tribe of the Ohlone people since around 4,000 BC. The Tamien spoke Tamyen language of the Ohlone language family.\nDuring the era of Spanish colonization and the subsequent building of Spanish missions in California, the Tamien people's lives changed dramatically. From 1777 onward, most of the Tamien people were forcibly enslaved at Mission Santa Clara de As\u00eds or Mission San Jos\u00e9 where they were baptized and educated to be Catholic \"neophytes\", also known as Mission Indians. This continued until the mission was secularized by the Mexican Government in 1833. A large majority of the Tamien died either from disease in the missions, or as a result of the state sponsored genocide. Some surviving families remained intact, migrating to Santa Cruz after their ancestral lands were granted to Spanish and Mexican Immigrants.\nSpanish period.\nCalifornia was claimed as part of the Spanish Empire in 1542, when explorer Juan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo charted the Californian coast. During this time Alta California and the Baja California peninsula were administered together as Province of Las Californias. For nearly 200 years, the Californias remained a distant frontier region largely controlled by the numerous Native Nations and largely ignored by the government of the Viceroyalty of New Spain in Mexico City. Shifting power dynamics in North America\u2014including the British/American victory and acquisition of North America, east of the Mississippi following the 1763 Treaty of Paris, as well as the start of Russian colonization of northwestern North America\u2014 prompted Spanish/Mexican authorities to sponsor the Portol\u00e1 Expedition to survey Northern California in 1769.\nIn 1776, the Californias were included as part of the Captaincy General of the \"Provincias Internas\", a large administrative division created by Jos\u00e9 de G\u00e1lvez, Spanish Minister of the Indies, in order to provide greater autonomy for the Spanish Empire's borderlands. That year, King Carlos III of Spain approved an expedition by Juan Bautista de Anza to survey the San Francisco Bay Area, in order to choose the sites for two future settlements and their accompanying mission. De Anza initially chose the site for a military settlement in San Francisco, for the Royal Presidio of San Francisco, and Mission San Francisco de As\u00eds. On his way back to Mexico from San Francisco, de Anza chose the sites in Santa Clara Valley for a civilian settlement, San Jose, on the eastern bank of the Guadalupe River, and a mission on its western bank, Mission Santa Clara de As\u00eds.\nSan Jose was officially founded as California's first civilian settlement on November 29, 1777, as the \"Pueblo de San Jos\u00e9 de Guadalupe\" by Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn Moraga, under orders of Antonio Mar\u00eda de Bucareli y Urs\u00faa, Viceroy of New Spain. San Jose served as a strategic settlement along El Camino Real, connecting the military fortifications at the Monterey Presidio and the San Francisco Presidio, as well as the California mission network. In 1791, due to the severe flooding which characterized the pueblo, San Jose's settlement was moved approximately a mile south, centered on the Pueblo Plaza (modern-day Plaza de C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez).\nIn 1800, due to the growing population in the northern part of the Californias, Diego de Borica, Governor of the Californias, officially split the province into two parts: Alta California (\"Upper California\"), which eventually became several western U.S. states, and Baja California (\"Lower California\"), which eventually became two Mexican states.\nMexican period.\nSan Jose became part of the First Mexican Empire in 1821, after Mexico's War of Independence was won against the Spanish Crown, and in 1824, part of the First Mexican Republic. With its newfound independence, and the triumph of the republican movement, Mexico set out to diminish the Catholic Church's power within Alta California by secularizing the California missions in 1833.\nIn 1824, in order to promote settlement and economic activity within sparsely populated California, the Mexican government began an initiative, for Mexican and foreign citizens alike, to settle unoccupied lands in California. Between 1833 and 1845, thirty-eight rancho land grants were issued in the Santa Clara Valley, 15 of which were located within modern-day San Jose's borders. Numerous prominent historical figures were among those granted rancho lands in the Santa Valley, including James A. Forbes, founder of Los Gatos, California (granted Rancho Potrero de Santa Clara), Antonio Su\u00f1ol, Alcalde of San Jose (granted Rancho Los Coches), and Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Alviso, Alcalde of San Jose (granted Rancho Milpitas).\nIn 1835, San Jose's population of approximately 700 people included 40 foreigners, primarily Americans and Englishmen. By 1845, the population of the pueblo had increased to 900, primarily due to American immigration. Foreign settlement in San Jose and California was rapidly changing Californian society, bringing expanding economic opportunities and foreign culture.\nBy 1846, native Californios had long expressed their concern for the overrunning of California society by its growing and wealthy Anglo-American community. During the 1846 Bear Flag Revolt, Captain Thomas Fallon led nineteen volunteers from Santa Cruz to the pueblo of San Jose, which his forces easily captured. The raising of the flag of the California Republic ended Mexican rule in Alta California on July 14, 1846.\nAmerican period.\nBy the end of 1847, the Conquest of California by the United States was complete, as the Mexican\u2013American War came to an end. In 1848, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo formally ceded California to the United States, as part of the Mexican Cession. On December 15, 1849, San Jose became the capital of the unorganized territory of California. With California's Admission to the Union on September 9, 1850, San Jose became the state's first capital.\nOn March 27, 1850, San Jose was incorporated. It was incorporated on the same day as San Diego and Benicia; together, these three cities followed Sacramento as California's earliest incorporated cities. Josiah Belden, who had settled in California in 1842 after traversing the California Trail as part of the Bartleson Party and later acquired a fortune, was the city's first mayor. San Jose was briefly California's first state capital, and legislators met in the city from 1849 to 1851. (Monterey was the capital during the period of Spanish California and Mexican California). The first capitol no longer exists; the Plaza de C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez now lies on the site, which has two historical markers indicating where California's state legislature first met.\nIn the period 1900 through 1910, San Jose served as a center for pioneering invention, innovation, and impact in both lighter-than-air and heavier-than-air flight. These activities were led principally by John Montgomery and his peers. The City of San Jose has established Montgomery Park, a Monument at San Felipe and Yerba Buena Roads, and John J. Montgomery Elementary School in his honor. During this period, San Jose also became a center of innovation for the mechanization and industrialization of agricultural and food processing equipment.\nThough not affected as severely as San Francisco, San Jose also suffered significant damage from the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. Over 100 people died at the Agnews Asylum (later Agnews State Hospital) after its walls and roof collapsed, and San Jose High School's three-story stone-and-brick building was also destroyed. The period during World War II was tumultuous; Japanese Americans primarily from Japantown were sent to internment camps, including the future mayor Norman Mineta. Following the Los Angeles zoot suit riots, anti-Mexican violence took place during the summer of 1943. In 1940, the Census Bureau reported San Jose's population as 98% white.\nAs World War II started, the city's economy shifted from agriculture (the Del Monte cannery was the largest employer and closed in 1999) to industrial manufacturing with the contracting of the Food Machinery Corporation (later known as FMC Corporation) by the United States War Department to build 1,000 Landing Vehicle Tracked. After World War II, FMC (later United Defense, and currently BAE Systems) continued as a defense contractor, with the San Jose facilities designing and manufacturing military platforms such as the M113 Armored Personnel Carrier, the Bradley Fighting Vehicle, and various subsystems of the M1 Abrams battle tank.\nIBM established its first West Coast operations in San Jose in 1943 with a downtown punch card plant, and opened an IBM Research lab in 1952. Reynold B. Johnson and his team developed direct access storage for computers, inventing the RAMAC 305 and the hard disk drive; the technological side of San Jose's economy grew.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, City Manager A. P. \"Dutch\" Hamann led the city in a major growth campaign. The city annexed adjacent areas, such as Alviso and Cambrian Park, providing large areas for suburbs. An anti-growth reaction to the effects of rapid development emerged in the 1970s, championed by mayors Norman Mineta and Janet Gray Hayes. Despite establishing an urban growth boundary, development fees, and the incorporations of Campbell and Cupertino, development was not slowed, but rather directed into already-incorporated areas.\nSan Jose's participation in the expanding Silicon Valley tech industry triggered further economic and population growth. Results from the 1990 U.S. census indicated that San Jose surpassed San Francisco as the most populous city in the Bay Area for the first time. This growth led to the highest housing-cost increase in the nation, 936% between 1976 and 2001. Efforts to increase density continued into the 1990s when an update of the 1974 urban plan kept the urban growth boundaries intact and voters rejected a ballot measure to ease development restrictions in the foothills. As of 2006, sixty percent of the housing built in San Jose since 1980 and over three-quarters of the housing built since 2000 have been multifamily structures, reflecting a political propensity toward Smart Growth planning principles.\nGeography.\nSan Jose is located within the Santa Clara Valley, in the southern part of the Bay Area in Northern California. The northernmost portion of San Jose touches San Francisco Bay at Alviso, though most of the city lies away from the bayshore. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , making it the fourth-largest city in California by land area (after Los Angeles, San Diego, and California City).\nSan Jose lies between the San Andreas Fault, the source of the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, and the Calaveras Fault. San Jose is shaken by moderate earthquakes on average one or two times a year. These quakes originate just east of the city on the creeping section of the Calaveras Fault, which is a major source of earthquake activity in Northern California. On April 14, 1984, at 1:15\u00a0pm local time, a 6.2 magnitude earthquake struck the Calaveras Fault near San Jose's Mount Hamilton. The most serious earthquake, in 1906, damaged many buildings in San Jose as described earlier. Earlier significant quakes rocked the city in 1839, 1851, 1858, 1864, 1865, 1868, and 1891. The Daly City Earthquake of 1957 caused some damage. The Loma Prieta earthquake of 1989 also did some damage to parts of the city.\nCityscape.\nSan Jose's expansion was made by the design of \"Dutch\" Hamann, the City Manager from 1950 to 1969. During his administration, with his staff referred to as \"Dutch's Panzer Division\", the city annexed property 1,389 times, growing the city from , absorbing the communities named above, changing their status to \"neighborhoods.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They say San Jos\u00e9 is going to become another Los Angeles. Believe me, I'm going to do everything in my power to make that come true.\u2014\u200a\nSales taxes were a chief source of revenue. Hamann would determine where major shopping areas would be, and then annex narrow bands of land along major roadways leading to those locations, pushing \"tentacles\" or \"finger areas\" across the Santa Clara Valley and, in turn, walling off the expansion of adjacent communities.\nDuring his reign, it was said the City Council would vote according to Hamann's nod. In 1963, the State of California imposed Local Agency Formation Commissions statewide, but largely to try to maintain order with San Jose's aggressive growth. Eventually the political forces against growth grew as local neighborhoods bonded together to elect their own candidates, ending Hamann's influence and leading to his resignation. While the job was not complete, the trend was set. The city had defined its sphere of influence in all directions, sometimes chaotically leaving unincorporated pockets to be swallowed up by the behemoth, sometimes even at the objection of the residents.\nMajor thoroughfares in the city include Monterey Road, the Stevens Creek Boulevard and San Carlos Street corridor, Santa Clara Street and Alum Rock Avenue corridor, Almaden Expressway, Capitol Expressway, 1st Street (San Jose), and Lawrence Expressway.\nTopography.\nThe Guadalupe River runs from the Santa Cruz Mountains flowing north through San Jose, ending in the San Francisco Bay at Alviso. Along the southern part of the river is the neighborhood of Almaden Valley, originally named for the mercury mines which produced mercury needed for gold extraction from quartz during the California gold rush as well as mercury fulminate blasting caps and detonators for the U.S. military from 1870 to 1945. East of the Guadalupe River, Coyote Creek also flows to south San Francisco Bay and originates on Mount Sizer near Henry W. Coe State Park and the surrounding hills in the Diablo Range, northeast of Morgan Hill, California.\nThe lowest point in San Jose is below sea level at the San Francisco Bay in Alviso; the highest is . Because of the proximity to Lick Observatory atop Mount Hamilton, San Jose has taken several steps to reduce light pollution, including replacing all street lamps and outdoor lighting in private developments with low pressure sodium lamps. To recognize the city's efforts, the asteroid 6216 San Jose was named after the city.\nThere are four distinct valleys in the city of San Jose: Almaden Valley, situated on the southwest fringe of the city; Evergreen Valley to the southeast, which is hilly all throughout its interior; Santa Clara Valley, which includes the flat, main urban expanse of the South Bay; and the rural Coyote Valley, to the city's extreme southern fringe.\nThe extensive droughts in California, coupled with the drainage of the reservoir at Anderson Lake for seismic repairs, have strained the city's water security. San Jose has suffered from lack of precipitation and water scarcity to the extent that some residents may run out of household water by the summer of 2022.\nClimate.\nSan Jose, like most of the Bay Area, has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb\"), with warm to hot, dry summers and cool, wet winters. San Jose has an average of 298 days of sunshine and an annual mean temperature of . It lies inland, surrounded on three sides by mountains, and does not front the Pacific Ocean like San Francisco. As a result, the city is somewhat more sheltered from rain, barely avoiding a cold semi-arid (\"BSk\") climate.\nLike most of the Bay Area, San Jose is made up of dozens of microclimates. Because of a more prominent rain shadow from the Santa Cruz Mountains, Downtown San Jose experiences the lightest rainfall in the city, while South San Jose, only distant, experiences more rainfall, and somewhat more extreme temperatures.\nThe monthly daily average temperature ranges from around in December and January to around in July and August. The highest temperature ever recorded in San Jose was on September 6, 2022; the lowest was on January 6, 1894. On average, there are 2.7 mornings annually where the temperature drops to, or below, the freezing mark; and sixteen afternoons where the high reaches or exceeds . Diurnal temperature variation is far wider than along the coast or in San Francisco but still a shadow of what is seen in the Central Valley.\n\"Rain year\" precipitation has ranged from between July 1876 and June 1877 to between July 1889 and June 1890, although at the current site since 1893 the range is from in \"rain year\" 2020\u201321 to in \"rain year\" 1982\u201383. 2020\u20132021 was the lowest precipitation year ever, in 127 years of precipitation records in San Jose. The most precipitation in one month was in January 1911. The maximum 24-hour rainfall was on January 30, 1968. On August 16, 2020, one of the most widespread and strong thunderstorm events in recent Bay Area history occurred as an unstable humid air mass moved up from the south and triggered multiple dry thunderstorms which caused many fires to be ignited by 300+ lightning strikes in the surrounding hills. The CZU lightning complex fires took almost 5 months to fully be controlled. Over 86,000 acres were burned and nearly 1500 buildings were destroyed.\nThe snow level drops as low as above sea level, or lower, occasionally coating nearby Mount Hamilton and, less frequently, the Santa Cruz Mountains, with snow that normally lasts a few days. Snow will snarl traffic traveling on State Route 17 towards Santa Cruz. Snow rarely falls in San Jose; the most recent snow to remain on the ground was on February 5, 1976, when many residents around the city saw as much as on car and roof tops. The official observation station measured only of snow.\nNeighborhoods and districts.\nSince 2020/2022, the City of San Jos\u00e9 is divided into 10 different City Council Districts\nThe city is generally divided into the following areas: Central San Jose (centered on Downtown San Jose), West San Jose, North San Jose, East San Jose, and South San Jose. Many of San Jose's districts and neighborhoods were previously unincorporated communities or separate municipalities that were later annexed by the city.\nBesides those mentioned above, some well-known communities within San Jose include Japantown, Rose Garden, Midtown San Jose, Willow Glen, Naglee Park, Burbank, Winchester, Alviso, East Foothills, Alum Rock, Communications Hill, Little Portugal, Blossom Valley, Cambrian, Almaden Valley, Little Saigon, Silver Creek Valley, Evergreen Valley, Mayfair, Edenvale, Santa Teresa, Seven Trees, Coyote Valley, and Berryessa.\nA distinct ethnic enclave in San Jose is the Washington-Guadalupe neighborhood, immediately south of the SoFA District; this neighborhood is home to a community of Hispanics, centered on Willow Street.\nParks.\nSan Jose possesses about of parkland in its city limits, including a part of the expansive Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. The city's oldest park is Alum Rock Park, established in 1872.\nTrails.\nSan Jose's trail network of of recreational and active transportation trails throughout the city. The major trails in the network include:\nThis large urban trail network, recognized by Prevention Magazine as the nation's largest, is linked to trails in surrounding jurisdictions and many rural trails in surrounding open space and foothills. Several trail systems within the network are designated as part of the National Recreation Trail, as well as regional trails such as the San Francisco Bay Trail and Bay Area Ridge Trail.\nWildlife.\nEarly written documents record the local presence of migrating salmon in the Rio Guadalupe dating as far back as the 18th century. Both steelhead (\"Oncorhynchus mykiss\") and King salmon are extant in the Guadalupe River, making San Jose the southernmost major U.S. city with known salmon spawning runs, the other cities being Anchorage; Seattle; Portland and Sacramento. Runs of up to 1,000 Chinook or King Salmon (\"Oncorhynchus tshawytscha\") swam up the Guadalupe River each fall in the 1990s, but have all but vanished in the current decade apparently blocked from access to breeding grounds by impassable culverts, weirs and wide, exposed and flat concrete paved channels installed by the Santa Clara Valley Water District. In 2011 a small number of Chinook salmon were filmed spawning under the Julian Street bridge.\nConservationist Roger Castillo, who discovered the remains of a mammoth on the banks of the Guadalupe River in 2005, found that a herd of tule elk (\"Cervus canadensis\") had recolonized the hills of south San Jose east of Highway 101 in early 2019.\nAt the southern edge of San Jos\u00e9, Coyote Valley is a corridor for wildlife migration between the Santa Cruz Mountains and the Diablo Range.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2022, the US Census Bureau released its new population estimates. With a total population of 971,233, San Jose showed a 4.1% decline in population since the 2020 census. San Jose became the second US city in history (after Detroit) that used to have a population of more than one million but dropped back under one million. Some reasons for this decline are people leaving the area for more affordable cities and more remote working opportunities.\n2020.\nThe 2020 United States census reported that San Jose had a population of 1,013,240. The population density was . The racial makeup was 27.3% White, 2.9% African American, 1.4% Native American, 38.5% Asian, 0.4% Pacific Islander, 18.2% from other races, and 11.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 31.2% of the population.&lt;br&gt; The census reported that 98.5% of the population lived in households, 1.2% lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0.3% were institutionalized.\nThere were 328,622 households, out of which 36.2% included children under the age of 18, 53.4% were married-couple households, 6.2% were cohabiting couple households, 22.8% had a female householder with no partner present, and 17.6% had a male householder with no partner present. 19.0% of households were one person, and 6.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.04. There were 239,392 families (72.8% of all households).\nThe age distribution was 21.1% under the age of 18, 9.1% aged 18 to 24, 30.4% aged 25 to 44, 26.1% aged 45 to 64, and 13.3% who were 65years of age or older. The median age was 37.6years. For every 100 females, there were 101.0 males.\nThere were 342,037 housing units at an average density of , of which 328,622 (96.1%) were occupied. Of these, 54.0% were owner-occupied, and 46.0% were occupied by renters.\nIn 2023, the US Census Bureau estimated that the median household income was $141,565, and the per capita income was $63,253. About 4.9% of families and 7.8% of the population were below the poverty line.\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States census reported that San Jose had a population of 945,942. The population density was . The racial makeup of San Jose was 404,437 (42.8%) White, 303,138 (32.0%) Asian (10.4% Vietnamese, 6.7% Chinese, 5.6% Filipino, 4.6% Indian, 1.2% Korean, 1.2% Japanese, 0.3% Cambodian, 0.2% Thai, 0.2% Pakistani, 0.2% Laotian), 30,242 (3.2%) African American, 8,297 (0.9%) Native American, 4,017 (0.4%) Pacific Islander, 148,749 (15.7%) from other races, and 47,062 (5.0%) from two or more races. There were 313,636 residents of Hispanic or Latino background (33.2%). 28.2% of the city's population was of Mexican descent; the next largest Hispanic groups were those of Salvadoran (0.7%) and Puerto Rican (0.5%) heritage. Non-Hispanic Whites were 28.7% of the population in 2010, down from 75.7% in 1970.\nThe census reported that 932,620 people (98.6% of the population) lived in households, 9,542 (1.0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 3,780 (0.4%) were institutionalized. There were 301,366 households, out of which 122,958 (40.8%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 162,819 (54.0%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 37,988 (12.6%) had a female householder with no husband present, 18,702 (6.2%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 16,900 (5.6%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 2,458 (0.8%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 59,385 households (19.7%) were made up of individuals, and 18,305 (6.1%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.09. There were 219,509 families (72.8% of all households); the average family size was 3.54.\nThe age distribution of the city was as follows: 234,678 people (24.8%) were under the age of 18, 89,457 people (9.5%) aged 18 to 24, 294,399 people (31.1%) aged 25 to 44, 232,166 people (24.5%) aged 45 to 64, and 95,242 people (10.1%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.8 males.\nThere were 314,038 housing units at an average density of , of which 176,216 (58.5%) were owner-occupied, and 125,150 (41.5%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.6%; the rental vacancy rate was 4.3%. 553,436 people (58.5% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 379,184 people (40.1%) lived in rental housing units.\nEconomy.\nThe CSA San Jose shares with San Francisco was the country's third-largest urban economy as of 2018, with a GDP of $1.03 trillion. Of the 500+ primary statistical areas in the U.S., this CSA had among the highest GDP per capita in 2018, at $106,757.\nSan Jose is a United States Foreign-Trade Zone. The city received its Foreign Trade Zone grant from the U.S. Federal Government in 1974, making it the 18th foreign-trade zone established in the United States. Under its grant, the City of San Jose is granted jurisdiction to oversee and administer foreign trade in Santa Clara County, Monterey County, San Benito County, Santa Cruz County, and in the southern parts of San Mateo County and Alameda County.\nSan Jose hosts many companies with more than 1,000 employees, including the headquarters of:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSan Jose also hosts major facilities for Becton Dickinson, Ericsson, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Hitachi, IBM, Kaiser Permanente, KLA Tencor, Lockheed Martin, Nippon Sheet Glass, and Qualcomm. The North American headquarters of Samsung Semiconductor are located in San Jose. Approximately 2000 employees will work at the new Samsung campus which opened in 2015.\nOther large companies based in San Jose include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSizable government employers include the city government, Santa Clara County, and San Jose State University. Acer's United States division has its offices in San Jose. Prior to its closing, Netcom had its headquarters in San Jose.\nOn July 31, 2015, Cupertino-based Apple Inc. purchased a 40-acre site in San Jose. The site, which is bare land, will be the site of an office and research campus where it is estimated that up to 16,000 employees will be located. Apple paid $138.2 million for the site. The seller, Connecticut-based Five Mile Capital Partners, paid $40 million for the site in 2010.\nWealth.\nSan Jose is situated in the most affluent county in California and one of the most affluent counties in the United States.\nWith a median home price of $1,085,000 and the highest percentage of million-dollar (or more) homes in the United States, San Jose has the most expensive housing market in the United States and the fifth most expensive housing market in the world.\nThe cost of living in San Jose and the surrounding areas is among the highest in California and the nation, according to 2004 data. Housing costs are the primary reason for the high cost of living, although the costs in all areas tracked by the ACCRA Cost of Living Index are above the national average. Households in the city limits have the highest disposable income of any city in the U.S. with over 500,000 residents.\nSilicon Valley.\nThe large concentration of high-technology engineering, computer, and microprocessor companies beginning in nearby Sunnyvale, Palo Alto, Menlo Park and Mountain View provided impetus for the nickname Silicon Valley, coined in 1971. Area schools such as Stanford University, the University of California, Berkeley, University of California, Santa Cruz, San Jose State University, San Francisco State University, California State University, East Bay, and Santa Clara University pump thousands of engineering and computer science graduates into the local economy every year.\nSan Jose residents produce more U.S. patents than any other city. On October 15, 2015, the United States Patent and Trademark Office opened a satellite office in San Jose to serve Silicon Valley and the Western United States. By April 2018, Google was in the process of planning the \"biggest tech campus in Silicon Valley\" in San Jose. However, in April 2023, it was reported that Google paused on Google West San Jose Campus constructions due to slowing economic conditions and a decreased requirement for physical office space by tech companies, although the tech ecosystem has also recently become more geographically dispersed.\nHigh economic growth during the tech bubble of the late 1990s led to elevated employment, housing prices, and traffic congestion. As the economy slowed in the early 2000s, employment and traffic congestion was somewhat diminished. In the mid-2000s, traffic along major highways again began to worsen as the economy improved. San Jose had 405,000 jobs within its city limits in 2006, and an unemployment rate of 4.6%. San Jose has the highest median income of any U.S. city with over 280,000 people.\nOn March 14, 2013, San Jose implemented a public wireless connection in its downtown area. Wireless access points have been placed on outdoor light posts throughout the city.\nMedia.\nSan Jose is served by Greater Bay Area media. Print media outlets in San Jose include \"The Mercury News\", the weekly \"Metro Silicon Valley\", \"El Observador\" and the \"Silicon Valley / San Jose Business Journal\". The Bay Area's NBC O&amp;O, KNTV 11, is licensed to San Jose. In total, broadcasters in the Bay Area include 34 television stations, 25 AM radio stations, and 55 FM radio stations.\nIn April 1909, Charles David Herrold, an electronics instructor in San Jose, constructed a radio station to broadcast the human voice. The station, \"San Jose Calling\" (call letters FN, later FQW), was the world's first radio station with scheduled programming targeted at a general audience. The station became the first to broadcast music in 1910. Herrold's wife Sybil became the first female \"disk jockey\" in 1912. The station changed hands a number of times before becoming today's KCBS in San Francisco in 1949.\nTop employers.\nAs of June 30, 2024, the top employers in the city were:\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nBecause the downtown area is in the flight path to nearby San Jose Mineta International Airport (also evidenced in the above panoramic), there is a height limit for buildings in the downtown area, which is underneath the final approach corridor to the airport. The height limit is dictated by local ordinances, driven by the distance from the runway and a slope defined by Federal Aviation Administration regulations. Core downtown buildings are limited to approximately but can get taller farther from the airport.\nThere has been broad criticism over the past few decades of the city's architecture. Citizens have complained that San Jose is lacking in aesthetically pleasing architectural styles. Blame for this lack of architectural \"beauty\" can be assigned to the re-development of the downtown area from the 1950s onward, in which whole blocks of historic commercial and residential structures were demolished. Exceptions to this include the Downtown Historic District, the Hotel De Anza, and the Hotel Sainte Claire, both of which are listed in the National Register of Historic Places for their architectural and historical significance.\nMunicipal building projects have experimented more with architectural styles than have most private enterprises. The Children's Discovery Museum, Tech Museum of Innovation, and the San Jose Repertory Theater building have experimented with bold colors and unusual exteriors. The new City Hall, designed by Richard Meier &amp; Partners, opened in 2005 and is a notable addition to the growing collection of municipal building projects.\nSan Jose has many examples of houses with fine architecture. Late 19th century and early 20th century styles exist in neighborhoods such as Hanchett Park, Naglee Park, Rose Garden, and Willow Glen (including Palm Haven).\nStyles include Mediterranean Revival architecture, Spanish Colonial architecture, Neoclassical architecture, Craftsman, Mission Revival, Prairie style, and Queen Anne style Victorian.\nNotable architects include Frank Delos Wolfe, Theodore Lenzen, Charles McKenzie, and Julia Morgan.\nVisual arts.\nPublic art is an evolving attraction in the city. The city was one of the first to adopt a public art ordinance at 2% of capital improvement building project budgets, and as a result of this commitment, a considerable number of public art projects exist in the downtown area, and a growing collection in neighborhoods including libraries, parks, and fire stations. In particular, the Mineta Airport expansion incorporated art and technology into its development.\nEarly public art included a statue of Quetzalcoatl (the plumed serpent) downtown, controversial in its planning because some called it pagan, and controversial in its implementation because many felt that the final statue by Robert Graham did not look like a winged serpent, and was more noted for its expense than its aesthetics. Locals joked that the statue resembles a pile of feces.\nA statue of Thomas Fallon also met strong resistance from those who called him largely responsible for the decimation of early native populations. Chicano/Latino activists protested because he had captured San Jose by military force in the Mexican\u2013American War (1846). They also protested the perceived \"repression\" of historic documents detailing Fallon's orders expelling many of the city's Californio (early Spanish/Mexican/Mestizo) residents. In October 1991 protests at Columbus Day and Dia de la Raza celebrations stalled than plan, and the statue was stored in a warehouse in Oakland for more than a decade. The statue returned in 2002 to a less conspicuous location: Pellier Park, a small triangular patch at the merge of West Julian and West St. James streets.\nIn 2001, the city-sponsored SharkByte, an exhibit of decorated sharks based on the mascot of the hockey team, the San Jose Sharks, and modeled after Chicago's display of decorated cows. Large models of sharks decorated in clever, colorful, or creative ways by local artists were displayed for months at dozens of locations around the city. After the exhibition, the sharks were auctioned off for charity.\nIn 2006, Adobe Systems commissioned an art installation titled \"San Jose Semaphore\" by Ben Rubin, at the top of its headquarters building. Semaphore is composed of four LED discs which \"rotate\" to transmit a message. The content remained a mystery until it was deciphered in August 2007. The visual art installation is supplemented with an audio track, transmitted from the building on a low-power AM station. The audio track provides clues to decode the message being transmitted.\nSan Jose retains a number of murals in the Chicano history tradition of Diego Rivera and Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco of murals as public textbooks.\nAlthough intended to be permanent monuments to the city's heritage as a mission town founded in 1777, a number of murals have been painted over, notably \"Mural de la Raza\", on the side of a Story Rd shoe store, and \"Mexicatlan\" at the corner of Sunset and Alum Rock. In addition, two of three murals by Mexican artist Gustavo Bernal Navarro have disappeared. The third mural, \"La Medicina y la Comunidad\" at the Gardner clinic on East Virginia Street, depicts both modern and traditional healers.\nSurviving Chicano history murals include \"Nuestra Senora de Guadelupe\" at Our Lady of Guadalupe church and the 1970s or 1980s \"Virgen de Guadelupe Huelga Bird\" at Cal Foods east of downtown. The Guadalajara restaurant has the 1986 \"Guadalajara Market No. 2\" by Edward Earl Tarver III and a 2013 work by Jesus Rodriguez and Empire 7, \"La Gran Culture Resonance\".\nAn unknown artist painted the \"Huelga Bird and Aztec City\" mural in the 1970s or 1980s on the Clyde L. Fisher Middle School. In 1995 Antonio Nava Torres painted \"The Aztec Calendar Handball Court\" at Biebrach Park, and the unknown artist of \"Chaco's Pachuco\" painted it on the former Chaco's Restaurant in the 1990s. The \"Jerry Hernandez\" mural by Frank Torres at Pop's Mini Mart on King Road dates to 2009, and another recent mural by Carlos Rodriguez on the Sidhu Market at Locust and West Virginia depicts a stern-looking warrior.\nPerforming arts.\nThe city is home to many performing arts companies, including Opera San Jose, Symphony San Jose, Ballet San Jose Silicon Valley, sjDANCEco, The San Jose Symphonic Choir, Children's Musical Theater San Jose, the San Jose Youth Symphony, the San Jose Repertory Theatre, City Lights Theatre Company, The Tabard Theatre Company, San Jose Stage Company, and the now-defunct American Musical Theatre of San Jose which was replaced by Broadway San Jose in partnership with Team San Jose. San Jose is also home to the San Jose Museum of Art, one of the nation's premiere Modern Art museums.\nThe SAP Center at San Jose is one of the most active venues for events in the world. According to Billboard Magazine and Pollstar, the arena sold the most tickets to non-sporting events of any venue in the United States, and third in the world after the Manchester Evening News Arena in Manchester, England, and the Bell Centre in Montreal, Canada, for the period from January 1\u00a0\u2013 September 30, 2004.\nThe annual Cinequest Film Festival in downtown has grown to over 60,000 attendees per year, becoming an important festival for independent films. The San Francisco Asian American Film Festival is an annual event, which is hosted in San Francisco, Berkeley, and Downtown San Jose. Approximately 30 to 40 films are screened in San Jose each year at the Camera 12 Downtown Cinemas. The San Jose Jazz Festival is another of many events hosted throughout the year.\nThe Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies houses the largest collection of Ludwig van Beethoven in the world, outside of Europe, and is the only institution of its kind in North America.\nSports.\nSan Jose is home to the San Jose Sharks of the NHL, the San Jose Barracuda of the AHL, and the San Jose Earthquakes of Major League Soccer. The Sharks and the Barracuda play in the SAP Center at San Jose. The Earthquakes built an 18,000 seat new stadium that opened in March 2015. San Jose was a founding member of both the California League and Pacific Coast League in minor league baseball. San Jose currently fields the San Jose Giants, a Low-A affiliate of the San Francisco Giants.\nSan Jose has been host to several U.S. Olympic team trials over the years. In 2004, the San Jose Sports Authority held the trials for judo, taekwondo, trampolining and rhythmic gymnastics at the San Jose State Event Center. SAP Center hosted the Gymnastic trials in 2012 and 2016 (women's only). and the U.S. Figure Skating Championships (used in Olympic years to select the Olympians) in 1996, 2012, and 2018. It was due to host the 2021 Championship, but that was moved to Las Vegas and it will instead host 2023. In 2008, around 90 percent of the members of the United States Olympic team were processed at San Jose State University prior to traveling to the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. The 2009 Junior Olympics for trampoline were also held here.\nIn August 2004, the San Jose Seahawk Rugby Football Club hosted the USA All-Star Rugby Sevens Championships at Watson Bowl, east of Downtown.\nSan Jose State hosted the 2011 American Collegiate Hockey Association (ACHA) national tournament. The NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament is also frequently held in San Jose.\nFrom 2005 to 2007, the San Jose Grand Prix, an annual street circuit race in the Champ Car World Series, was held in the downtown area. Other races included the Trans-Am Series, the Toyota Atlantic Championship, the United States Touring Car Championship, the Historic Stock Car Racing Series, and the Formula D Drift racing competition.\nIn the 2010s, San Jose \"aggressively wooed\" the Oakland Athletics to relocate to San Jose from nearby Oakland, but the San Francisco Giants exercised a veto against this proposal. In 2013, the city of San Jose sued Major League Baseball for not allowing the Athletics to relocate to San Jose. On October 5, 2015, the United States Supreme Court rejected San Jose's bid on the Athletics, who in 2023 announced they would relocate to Las Vegas.\nLandmarks.\nNotable landmarks in San Jose include Children's Discovery Museum of San Jose, History Park at Kelley Park, Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph, Plaza de C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Library, Mexican Heritage Plaza, Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum, Lick Observatory, Hayes Mansion, SAP Center at San Jose, Hotel De Anza, San Jose Improv, Sikh Gurdwara of San Jose, Peralta Adobe, Excite Ballpark, Spartan Stadium, Japantown San Jose, Winchester Mystery House, Raging Waters, Circle of Palms Plaza, San Jose City Hall, San Jose Flea Market, Oak Hill Memorial Park, San Jose electric light tower, and The Tech Museum of Innovation.\nLaw and government.\nLocal.\nSan Jose is a charter city under California law, giving it the power to enact local ordinances that may conflict with state law, within the limits provided by the charter. The city has a council-manager government with a city manager nominated by the mayor and elected by the city council.\nThe San Jose City Council is made up of ten council members elected by district, and a mayor elected by the entire city. During city council meetings, the mayor presides, and all eleven members can vote on any issue. The mayor has no veto powers. Council members and the mayor are elected to four-year terms; the even-numbered district council members beginning in 1994; the mayor and the odd-numbered district council members beginning in 1996. Each council member represents approximately 100,000 constituents.\nCouncil members and the mayor are limited to two successive terms in office, although a council member that has reached the term limit can be elected mayor, and vice versa. The council elects a vice-mayor from the members of the council at the second meeting of the year following a council election. This council member acts as mayor during the temporary absence of the mayor, but does not succeed to the mayor's office upon a vacancy.\nThe city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city, and must present an annual budget for approval by the city council. When the office is vacant, the mayor proposes a candidate for City Manager, subject to council approval. The council appoints the manager for an indefinite term, and may at any time remove the manager, or the electorate may remove the manager through a recall election. Other city officers directly appointed by the council include the City Attorney, City Auditor, City Clerk, and Independent Police Auditor. Like all cities and counties in the state, San Jose has representation in the state legislature.\nLike all California cities except San Francisco, both the levels and the boundaries of what the city government controls are determined by the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). The goal of a LAFCO is to try to avoid uncontrolled urban sprawl. The Santa Clara County LAFCO has set boundaries of San Jose's \"Sphere of Influence\" (indicated by the blue line in the map near the top of the page) as a superset of the actual city limits (the yellow area in the map), plus parts of the surrounding unincorporated county land, where San Jose can, for example, prevent development of fringe areas to concentrate city growth closer to the city's core. The LAFCO also defines a subset of the Sphere as an 'Urban Service Area' (indicated by the red line in the map), effectively limiting development to areas where urban infrastructure (sewers, electrical service, etc.) already exists.\nSan Jose is the county seat of Santa Clara County. Accordingly, many county government facilities are located in the city, including the office of the County Executive, the Board of Supervisors, the District Attorney's Office, eight courthouses of the Superior Court, the Sheriff's Office, and the County Clerk.\nSan Jose is protected by the San Jose Police Department and San Jose Fire Department. Drinking water is supplied by the San Jos\u00e9 Municipal Water System (Muni Water) along with the privately owned San Jose Water Company and Great Oaks Water Company. The San Jos\u00e9\u2013Santa Clara Regional Wastewater Facility provides wastewater treatment and reclaimed water.\nState and federal.\nIn the California State Senate, San Jose is split between the 10th and 15th districts, represented by Democrat Aisha Wahab and Democrat Dave Cortese.\nIn the California State Assembly, San Jose is split between the 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, and 28th districts, represented by Democrat Marc Berman, Democrat Alex Lee, Democrat Ash Kalra, Democrat Patrick Ahrens, and Democrat Gail Pellerin, respectively.\nFederally, San Jose is split between California's 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th congressional districts, represented by Democrat Sam Liccardo, Democrat Ro Khanna, Democrat Zoe Lofgren, and Democrat Jimmy Panetta, respectively.\nSeveral state and federal agencies maintain offices in San Jose. The city is the location of the Sixth District of the California Courts of Appeal. It is also home to one of three courthouses of the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, the other two being in Oakland and San Francisco.\nCrime.\nLike most large cities, crime levels had fallen significantly after rising in the 1980s. From 2002 to 2006, Morgan Quitno Press named San Jose the safest city in the United States with a population over 500,000 people. Crime in San Jose had been lower than in other large American cities until 2013, when crime rates in San Jose climbed above California and U.S. averages.\nIn 2020, violent crime per 100,000 people has been the lowest the city has seen in 2017 while the homicide rate has been the highest since 2016; property crime per 100,000 people has been the lowest the city has seen in over ten years.\nOn May 26, 2021, a mass shooting occurred at a Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) rail yard in San Jose. Ten people were killed, including the gunman, 57-year-old VTA employee Samuel James Cassidy, who shot and killed himself. The shooting led to a day-long suspension of light rail services in the area. It is the deadliest mass shooting in the history of the San Francisco Bay Area.\nIn June 2021, roughly a month following the shooting, San Jose became the first city in the United States to require gun owners to carry liability insurance after a unanimous vote by the city council.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nSan Jose is home to several colleges and universities. The largest is San Jos\u00e9 State University, which was founded by the California legislature in 1862 as the California State Normal School, and is the founding campus of the California State University (CSU) system. Located in downtown San Jose since 1870, the university enrolls approximately 35,000 students in over 250 different bachelor's, master's and doctoral degree programs.\nThe school enjoys a good academic reputation, especially in the fields of engineering, business, computer science, art and design, and journalism. San Jose State is one of only three Bay Area schools that fields a Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) Division I college football team; Stanford University and U.C. Berkeley are the other two.\nCalifornia University of Management and Technology (CALMAT) offers many degree programs, including MBA, Computer Science, Information Technology. Most classes are offered both online and in the downtown campus. Many of the students are working professionals in the Silicon Valley.\nThe University of Silicon Valley is located in the Golden Triangle of North San Jose.\nLincoln Law School of San Jose and University of Silicon Valley Law School offer law degrees, catering to working professionals.\nNational University maintains a campus in San Jose.\nThe San Jose campus of Golden Gate University offers business bachelor and MBA degrees.\nIn the San Jose metropolitan area, Stanford University is in Stanford, California, Santa Clara University is in Santa Clara, California, and U.C. Santa Cruz is in Santa Cruz, California. Within the San Francisco Bay Area, other universities include U.C. Berkeley, U.C. San Francisco, U.C. Hastings College of Law, University of San Francisco, and California State University, East Bay.\nThe San Jose area's community colleges, San Jose City College, West Valley College, Mission College and Evergreen Valley College, offer associate degrees, general education units to transfer to CSU and UC schools, and adult and continuing education programs. The West campus of Palmer College of Chiropractic is also located in San Jose.\nCarrington College, a for-profit institution, maintains two campuses in San Jose serving nearly 700 students. The school offers five programs in the healthcare professions.\nThe University of California operates Lick Observatory atop Mount Hamilton.\nWestern Seminary has one of its four campuses in San Jose, which opened on the campus of Calvary Church of Los Gatos in 1985. The campus relocated in 2010 to Santa Clara. Western is an evangelical, Christian graduate school that provides theological training for students who hope to serve in a variety of ministry roles including pastors, marriage and family therapists, educators, missionaries and lay leadership. The San Jose campus offers four master's degrees, and a variety of other graduate-level programs.\nNational Hispanic University offered associate and bachelor's degrees and teaching credentials to its students, focusing on Hispanic students, until its closing in 2015.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nUntil the opening of Lincoln High School in 1943, San Jose students only attended San Jose High School. San Jose has 127 elementary, 47 middle, and 44 public high schools.\nPublic education in the city is provided by four high school districts, fourteen elementary districts, and three unified school districts (which provide both elementary and high schools).\nSJUSD declared bankruptcy in 1983; at that time, it was the largest US school district to declare bankruptcy. Observers identified the reasons as a drop of 5,000 students in the preceding years, the difficulties imposed on school finances by \"Serrano v. Priest\" in 1968, the reduction of tax monies because of 1978 California Proposition 13, and the local teachers' union contract requiring a raise in pay.\nPrivate schools in San Jose are primarily run by religious groups. The Catholic Diocese of San Jose has the second-largest student population in Santa Clara County, behind only SJUSD; the diocese and its parishes operate several schools in the city, including five high schools. Other private religious schools are Baptist, non-denominational Protestant, and Wisconsin Synod Lutheran. Secular private schools include Merryhill School, Cambrian Academy and Harker School.\nLibraries.\nThe San Jos\u00e9 Public Library system is unique in that the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Library combines the collections of the city's system with the San Jose State University main library. In 2003, construction of the library, which now holds more than 1.6\u00a0million items, was the largest single library construction project west of the Mississippi, with eight floors that result in more than of space with a capacity for 2\u00a0million volumes.\nThe city has 23 neighborhood branches including the \"Biblioteca Latinoamericana\" ('Latin American Library') which specializes in Spanish language works. The East San Jose Carnegie Branch Library, a Carnegie library opened in 1908, is the last Carnegie library in Santa Clara County still operating as a public library and is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. As the result of a bond measure passed in November 2000, a number of brand new or completely reconstructed branches have been completed and opened. The yet-to-be-named brand new Southeast Branch is also planned, bringing the bond library project to its completion.\nThe San Jose system (along with the university system) were jointly named as \"Library of the Year\" by \"Library Journal\" in 2004.\nTransportation.\nLike other American cities built mostly after World War II, San Jose is highly automobile-dependent, with 76 percent of residents driving alone to work and 12 percent carpooling in 2017. The city set an ambitious goal to shift motorized trips to walking, bicycling, and public transit in 2009 with the adoption of its Envision San Jose 2040 General Plan. In 2018, the city extended these goals to 2050 with its San Jose Climate Smart plan.\nPublic transit.\nRail service to and from San Jose is provided by Amtrak (the Sacramento\u2013San-Jose Capitol Corridor and the Seattle\u2013Los-Angeles Coast Starlight), Caltrain (commuter rail service between San Francisco and Gilroy), ACE (commuter rail service to Pleasanton and Stockton), and the local VTA light rail system connecting downtown to Mountain View, Milpitas, Campbell, and Almaden Valley, operated by the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA). Historic streetcars from History Park operate on the light rail lines in downtown during holidays.\nLong-term plans call for BART to be expanded to Santa Clara from the Berryessa/North San Jos\u00e9 station. Originally, the extension was to be built all at once, but due to the recession, sales tax revenue has dramatically decreased. Because of this, the extension will be built in two phases. Phase 1 extended service to San Jose with the completion of the Milpitas and Berryessa BART stations on June 13, 2020. In addition, San Jose will be a major stop on the future California High-Speed Rail route between Los Angeles and San Francisco. Diridon Station (formerly Cahill Depot, 65 Cahill Street) is the meeting point of all regional commuter rail service in the area. It was built in 1935 by the Southern Pacific Railroad, and was refurbished in 1994.\nVTA also operates many bus routes in San Jose and the surrounding communities, as well as offering paratransit services to local residents. Additionally, the Highway 17 Express bus line connects central San Jose with Santa Cruz. Intercity bus providers include Greyhound, BoltBus, Megabus, California Shuttle Bus, TUFESA, Intercalifornias, Hoang, and USAsia. FlixBus also services the city with a stop at 129 W San Carlos.\nAir.\nSan Jose is served by Norman Y. Mineta San Jose International Airport northwest of downtown, and by Reid-Hillview Airport of Santa Clara County, general aviation airport located in the eastern part of San Jose. San Jose residents also use San Francisco International Airport, a major international hub located to the northwest, and Oakland International Airport, another major international airport located to the north. The airport is also near the intersections of three major freeways, US 101, I-880, and SR 87.\nHighways.\nThe San Jose area is served by a freeway system that includes three Interstate Highways and one U.S. Route. It is, however, the largest city in the country not served by a primary (one- or two-digit route number) Interstate; most of the Interstate Highway System was planned by the early 1950s well before San Jose's rapid growth decades later.\nUS 101 runs south to the California Central Coast and Los Angeles, and then runs north up near the eastern shore of the San Francisco Peninsula to San Francisco. I-280 also heads to San Francisco, but goes along just to the west of the cities of the San Francisco Peninsula. I-880 heads north to Oakland, running parallel to the southeastern shore of San Francisco Bay. I-680 parallels I-880 to Fremont, but then cuts northeast to the eastern cities of the San Francisco Bay Area.\nSeveral state highways also serve San Jose: SR 17, SR 85, SR 87 and SR 237. Additionally, San Jose is served by a system of county-wide expressways, which includes the Almaden Expressway, Capitol Expressway, San Tomas Expressway, and Lawrence Expressway.\nSeveral regional transportation projects have been undertaken in recent years to manage congestion on San Jose freeways. This includes expanding State Route 87 to add more lanes near the downtown San Jose area.\nThe interchange for I-280 connecting with I-680 and U.S. 101 was named the Joe Colla Interchange.\nMajor highways:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCycling.\nCentral San Jose has seen a gradual expansion of bike lanes over the past decade, which now comprise a network of car-traffic-separated and buffered bike lanes. San Jose Bike Party is a volunteer-run monthly social cycling event that attracts up to 1,000 participants during summer months to \"build community through bicycling\". Fewer than one percent of city residents ride bicycles to work as their primary mode of transportation, a statistic unchanged in the past ten years. Typically, between three and five residents are struck and killed by car drivers while bicycling on San Jose streets each year.\nSister cities.\nSan Jose has one of the oldest Sister City programs in the nation. In 1957, when the city established a relationship with Okayama, Japan, it was only the third Sister City relationship in the nation, which had begun the prior year. The Office of Economic Development coordinates the San Jose Sister City Program which is part of Sister Cities International. As of 2014[ [update]], there are eight sister cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53447", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53447", "title": "Civil engineers", "text": ""}
{"id": "53448", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53448", "title": "Probabilistic algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "53449", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53449", "title": "Probabalistic algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "53450", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53450", "title": "APNIC", "text": "Regional Internet registry for the Asia Pacific region\nAPNIC (the Asia Pacific Network Information Centre) is the regional Internet address registry (RIR) for the Asia\u2013Pacific region. It is one of the world's five RIRs and is part of the Number Resource Organization (NRO).\nAPNIC provides numbers resource allocation and registration services that support the global operation of the internet. It is a nonprofit, membership-based organization whose members include Internet service providers, telecommunication providers, data centers, universities, banks, national Internet registries, and similar organizations that have their own networks.\nFunctions.\nAPNIC's main functions are:\nAPNIC manages Internet number resources according to policies developed through an open process of consultation and consensus called the Policy Development Process (PDP).\nAPNIC PDP.\nAPNIC's policies are developed by the membership and the broader Internet community. The forums for policy development are the face-to-face Open Policy Meetings, which are held twice each year, and the public mailing list discussions of the Special Internet Groups.\nAPNIC's open Policy Development Process (PDP) also invites stakeholders interested in Internet number resources from around the world (but mostly the Asia Pacific) to participate. These include representatives from governments, regulators, educators, media, the technical community, civil society, and other not-for-profit organizations.\nAPNIC's PDP is:\nStructure.\nElections are held at each APNIC Annual General Meeting (AGM), which is conducted during the APNIC Member Meeting (AMM) in February. Voting takes place both on-site at these meetings and prior to the meeting via online voting.\nAPNIC Executive Council.\nEach APNIC Executive Council (EC) member serves as an individual, not as a representative of any other party or Member. Therefore, they must act at all times in the best interests of APNIC. The APNIC EC meets face-to-face at four regularly scheduled meetings per year.\nAPNIC Secretariat.\nThe APNIC Secretariat operates to serve its Members and the Asia Pacific Internet community stakeholders.\nIts activities are designed to help the APNIC community achieve APNIC's objectives. The Secretariat (APNIC's staff) carries out the day-to-day work. The Secretariat is structured in five divisions: Services, Technical, Business, Communications, and Learning &amp; Development. These divisions encompass all APNIC activities, including that of acting as a central source of information for Members.\nCore services.\nInternet number resource delegation.\nAPNIC delegates IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6) and (ASNs) according to policies developed by the APNIC community. All IP and AS number delegation is subject to certain criteria, based on demonstrated need.\nAPNIC Whois Database.\nThe APNIC Whois Database details of IP addresses and AS numbers originally allocated by APNIC. It shows the organizations that hold the resources, where the allocations were made, and contact details for the networks. Users can search the whois for information pertaining to these resources, for network troubleshooting, or helping to track network abuse. The organizations that hold those resources are responsible for updating their information in the database. Internet number resources must be properly and accurately registered to fulfil the goals of addressing policy as outlined by the Public Technical Identifiers (PTI), who are responsible for the operation of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) functions.\nThis accurate registration of resource usage is a critical role APNIC plays in the operation of the Internet.\nThe database can be searched by using the web interface on the APNIC site, or by directing your whois client to whois.apnic.net (for example, whois -h whois.apnic.net 203.37.255.97).\nRDAP.\nAPNIC provides an alternative to the whois called the Registration Data Access protocol (RDAP), which was designed to address issues in the whois service, the most important of which are: standardization of queries and responses; internalization considerations to cater for languages other than English in data objects; and redirection capabilities to allow seamless referrals to other registrations.\nNetwork abuse.\nFor network abuse such as spam or (hacking), people mistakenly interpret references to apnic.net when doing a whois search to indicate that APNIC is the source of the abuse. Instead, these references to APNIC simply mean that the address space in question was delegated by APNIC to an organization within the Asia Pacific region. APNIC has no authority to prevent these kinds of network abuse.\nAPNIC also has no technical ability to 'suspend' an Internet service, no mandate to withdraw address registrations, no investigative powers, nor any authority to take action as an enforcement agency. APNIC is in the same position as any other IP address or DNS registry worldwide.\nReverse DNS delegation.\nAPNIC manages reverse DNS delegations for both IPv4 and IPv6. APNIC only delegates the authority of reverse zones to the DNS name servers provided through domain objects.\nResource Certification.\nAPNIC provides a Resource Certification service, which is a robust security framework used to verify the association between specific IP address blocks of ASNs and the holders of those Internet number resources. APNIC introduced Resource Certification to improve inter-domain security in the region and enhance the value of the data in the APNIC Whois Database with verification of the resource holder's right-of-use.\nResource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) is the validation structure for Resource Certification that enables public network users to verify the authenticity of data that has been digitally signed by the data originator.\nOther services.\nAPNIC training.\nAPNIC conducts a number of training courses in a wide variety of locations around the region. These courses are designed to educate participants to proficiently configure, manage and administer their Internet services and infrastructure and to embrace current best practices.\nTechnical conferences.\nAPNIC holds two conferences a year in various locations around the Asia Pacific region. The first one is held with the Asia Pacific Regional Internet Conference on Operational Technologies (APRICOT) and the second one is a stand-alone conference. Both events have a series of workshop sessions on topics such as routing, IPv6, and network security, and plenary and conference tracks on operational topics of current interest.\nConference schedule.\nSource:\nResearch.\nAPNIC Labs provide research, measurement, and technical reports on the use of Internet number resources within the Internet, for example, IPv6 deployment.\nAPNIC Foundation.\nThe APNIC Foundation is a charity established to raise funds independently from APNIC Member contributions to support and expand Internet development efforts in the Asia Pacific.\nPartners.\nAPNIC works closely with many other Internet organizations, including:\nThe APNIC membership.\nMajor Internet Service Providers (ISPs), National Internet Registries (NIRs) and Network Information Centres (NICs).\nOther Regional Internet Registries (RIRs).\nARIN (North America), LACNIC (Latin America and the Caribbean), RIPE NCC (Europe), and AFRINIC (Africa).\nThe Number Resource Organization.\nWith the other RIRs, APNIC is a member of the Number Resource Organization (NRO), which exists to protect the unallocated number resource pool, to promote and protect the bottom-up policy development process, and to be the focal point for input into the RIR system.\nOther leading Internet organizations.\nThese include the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Internet Engineering and Planning Group (IEPG), the Internet Society (ISOC), and others.\nThe previous registry for Australia, known as AUNIC, is now disbanded, and its responsibilities undertaken by APNIC.\nHistory.\nAPNIC was established in 1992, by the Asia Pacific Coordinating Committee for Intercontinental Research Networks (APCCIRN) and the Asia Pacific Engineering and Planning Group (APEPG). These two groups were later amalgamated and renamed the Asia Pacific Networking Group (APNG). It was established as a pilot project to administer address space as defined by RFC-1366, as well as encompassing a wider brief: \"To facilitate communication, business, and culture using Internet technologies\".\nIn 1993, APNG discovered they were unable to provide a formal umbrella or legal structure for APNIC, and so the pilot project was concluded, but APNIC continued to exist independently under the authority of IANA as an 'interim project'. At this stage, APNIC still lacked legal rights, a membership, and a fee structure.\nIn February 1995, the inaugural APNIC meeting was held in Bangkok, marking the beginning of the formalisation of APNIC. This was a two-day meeting, run by volunteers, and was free to attend. Voluntary donations were sought according to the size of the organization, ranging from US$1,500 for 'small', through to US$10,000 for 'large'. Three member types were defined by APNIC-001: ISP (local IR), Enterprise, and National.\n1996 saw a proper fee structure introduced, the establishment of a membership, and the holding of the first APRICOT meeting.\nBy the time 1997 rolled around, it was becoming increasingly clear that APNIC's local environment in Japan was restricting its growth \u2013 for example, the staff was limited to 4\u20135 members. Therefore, the consulting firm KPMG was contracted to find an ideal location in the Asia Pacific region for APNIC's new headquarters.\nFor reasons such as the stable infrastructure, the low cost of living and operation, and tax advantages for membership organizations, Brisbane, Australia was chosen as the new location, and relocation was completed between April and August 1998, while maintaining continuous operation throughout.\nBy 1999, the relocation was complete, the Asian economic crisis ended, and so began a period of consolidation for APNIC \u2013 a period of sustained growth, policy development, and the creation of documentation and internal systems.\nSince then, APNIC has continued to grow from its humble beginnings to a membership of more than 7,700 in 56 economies throughout the region and a secretariat of around 122 staff members located in the head office in Brisbane, Australia.\nEconomies.\nAPNIC represents the Asia Pacific region, comprising 56 economies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAPNIC covered Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles until AFRINIC was formed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53451", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53451", "title": "Hegemony", "text": "Political, economic or military predominance of one state over other states\nHegemony (, , ) is the political, economic, and military predominance of one state over other states, either regional or global.\nIn Ancient Greece (ca. 8th BC \u2013 AD 6th c.), hegemony denoted the politico-military dominance of the \"hegemon\" city-state over other city-states. In the 19th century, \"hegemony\" denoted the \"social or cultural predominance or ascendancy; predominance by one group within a society or milieu\" and \"a group or regime which exerts undue influence within a society\".\nIn theories of imperialism, the hegemonic order dictates the internal politics and the societal character of the subordinate states that constitute the hegemonic sphere of influence, either by an internal, sponsored government or by an external, installed government.\nThe term \"hegemonism\" denoted the geopolitical and the cultural predominance of one country over other countries, e.g., the hegemony of the Great Powers established with European colonialism in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.\nIn international relations theories, hegemony is distinguished from empire as ruling only external but not internal affairs of other states.\nEtymology.\nFrom the post-classical Latin word (1513 or earlier) from the Greek word , related to the word , , 'leader'. \"Leadership\", translated into Greek, renders \"hegemony\"; an alternative translation is \"archia\" \u2013 Greek common word for \"empire\". Many scholars use the term \"hegemony\" interchangeably or synonymously with \"empire\" or \"domination\" and they are referred in the respective articles.\nPolitical science.\nIn the historical writing of the 19th century, the denotation of \"hegemony\" extended to describe the predominance of one country upon other countries; and, by extension, \"hegemonism\" denoted the Great Power politics (c. 1880s \u2013 1914) for establishing hegemony (indirect imperial rule), that then leads to a definition of imperialism (direct foreign rule).\nIn the early 20th century, the Italian Marxist philosopher Antonio Gramsci used the idea of hegemony to talk about politics \"within\" a given society. He developed the theory of cultural hegemony, an analysis of economic class (including social class) and how the ruling class uses consent as well as force to maintain its power. Hence, the philosophic and sociologic theory of cultural hegemony analysed the social norms that established the social structures to impose their \"Weltanschauung\" (world view)\u2014justifying the social, political, and economic \"status quo\"\u2014as natural, inevitable, and beneficial to every social class, rather than as artificial social constructs beneficial solely to the ruling class.\nFrom the Gramsci analysis derived the political science denotation of hegemony as \"leadership\"; thus, the historical example of Prussia as the militarily and culturally predominant province of the German Empire (1871\u20131918); and the personal and intellectual predominance of Napoleon Bonaparte upon the French Consulate (1799\u20131804). Contemporarily, in \"Hegemony and Socialist Strategy\" (1985), Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe defined hegemony as a political relationship of power wherein a sub-ordinate society (collectivity) perform social tasks that are culturally unnatural and not beneficial to them, but that are in exclusive benefit to the imperial interests of the hegemon, the superior, ordinate power; hegemony is a military, political, and economic relationship that occurs as an articulation within political discourse. Beyer analysed the contemporary hegemony of the United States at the example of the Global War on Terrorism and presented the mechanisms and processes of American exercise of power in 'hegemonic governance'.\nInternational relations.\nIn the field of international relations, hegemony generally refers to the ability of an actor to shape the international system. Usually this actor is a state, such as Britain in the 19th century or the United States in the 20th century. A hegemon may shape the international system through coercive and non-coercive means. According to Nuno Monteiro, hegemony is distinct from unipolarity. The latter refers to a preponderance of power within an anarchic system, whereas the former refers to a hierarchical system where the most powerful state has the ability to \"control the external behavior of all other states.\"\nThe English school of international relations takes a broader view of history. The research of Adam Watson was world-historical in scope. For him, hegemony was the most common order in history (historical \"optimum\") because many provinces of \"frank\" empires were under hegemonic rather than imperial rule. Watson summarized his life-long research: There was a spectrum of political systems ranging between multiple independent states and universal empire. The further a political system evolved towards one of the extremes, the greater was the gravitational pull towards the hegemonic center of the spectrum. Paul W. Schroeder drew a similar generalization that most empires involve informal, indirect rule.\nHegemony may take different forms. Benevolent hegemons provide public goods to the countries within their sphere of influence. Coercive hegemons exert their economic or military power to discipline unruly or free-riding countries in their sphere of influence. Exploitative hegemonies extract resources from other countries. \nA prominent theory in International Relations focusing on the role of hegemonies is hegemonic stability theory. Its premise is that a hegemonic power is necessary to develop and uphold a stable international political and economic order. The theory was developed in the 1970s by Robert Gilpin and Stephen D. Krasner, among others. It has been criticized on both conceptual and empirical grounds. For example, Robert Keohane has argued that the theory is not a proper theory because it amounts to a series of allegedly redundant claims that apparently could not be used predictively.\nA number of International Relations scholars have examined the decline of hegemons and their orders. For some, such decline tends to be disruptive because the stability that the hegemon provided gives way to a power vacuum. Others have maintained that cooperation may persist in the face of hegemonic decline because of institutions or enhanced contributions from non-hegemonic powers.\nThere has been a long debate in the field about whether American hegemony is in decline. As early as in the 1970s, Robert Gilpin suggested that the global order maintained by the United States would eventually decline as benefits from the public goods provided by Washington would diffuse to other states. In the 1980s, some scholars singled out Japan's economic growth and technological sophistication as a threat to U.S. primacy. More recently, analysts have focused on the economic and military rise of China and its challenge to U.S. hegemony.\nScholars differ as to whether bipolarity or unipolarity is likely to produce the most stable and peaceful outcomes. Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer are among those who argue that bipolarity tends to generate relatively more stability, whereas John Ikenberry and William Wohlforth are among those arguing for the stabilizing impact of unipolarity. Some scholars, such as Karl Deutsch and J. David Singer argued that multipolarity was the most stable structure.\nScholars disagree about the sources and stability of U.S. unipolarity. Realist international relations scholars argue that unipolarity is rooted in the superiority of U.S. material power since the end of the Cold War. Liberal international relations scholar John Ikenberry attributes U.S. hegemony in part to what he says are commitments and self-restraint that the United States established through the creation of international institutions (such as the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization). Constructivist scholar Martha Finnemore argues that legitimation and institutionalization are key components of unipolarity.\nMedia and communications studies.\nAdopted from the work of Gramsci and Stuart Hall, in media studies and cultural studies hegemony refers to individuals or concepts that become most dominant in a culture. Building on Gramsci's ideas, Hall stated that the media is a critical institution for furthering or inhibiting hegemony.\nCommunications studies scholars have argued that in the praxis of hegemony, imperial dominance is established by means of cultural imperialism, whereby the leader state (hegemon) dictates the internal politics and the societal character of the subordinate states that constitute the hegemonic sphere of influence, either by an internal, sponsored government or by an external, installed government. The imposition of the hegemon's way of life\u2014an imperial \"lingua franca\" and bureaucracies (social, economic, educational, governing)\u2014transforms the concrete imperialism of direct military domination into the abstract power of the \"status quo\", indirect imperial domination. J. Brutt-Griffler, a critic of this view, has described it as \"deeply condescending\" and \"treats people\u00a0... as blank slates on which global capitalism's moving finger writes its message, leaving behind another cultural automaton as it moves on.\"\nCulturally, hegemony also is established by means of language, specifically the imposed \"lingua franca\" of the hegemon (leader state), which then is the official source of information for the people of the society of the sub-ordinate state. Writing on language and power, Andrea Mayr says, \"As a practice of power, hegemony operates largely through language.\" In contemporary society, an example of the use of language in this way is in the way Western countries set up educational systems in African countries mediated by Western languages.\nHistorical examples.\n30th\u201327th centuries BC.\nThe political pattern of Sumer was hegemony shifting from city to city and called King of Kish. According to the \"Sumerian King List\", Kish established the hegemony yet before the Flood. One of the earliest literary legacies of humankind, the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", is a case of anti-hegemonic resistance. Gilgamesh fights and overthrows the hegemon of his world.\n8th\u20133rd centuries BC.\nIn the Greek world of 5th century BC, the city-state of Sparta was the \"hegemon\" of the Peloponnesian League (6th to 4th centuries BC) and King Philip II of Macedon was the hegemon of the League of Corinth in 337 BC (a kingship he willed to his son, Alexander the Great). Likewise, the role of Athens within the short-lived Delian League (478\u2013404 BC) was that of a \"hegemon\". The super-regional Persian Achaemenid Empire of 550 BC\u2013330 BC dominated these sub-regional hegemonies prior to its collapse. Ancient historians such as Herodotus (c.\u2009484 BC \u2013 c.\u2009425 BC). Xenophon (c.\u2009431 BC \u2013 354 BC) and Ephorus (c.\u2009400 BC \u2013 330 BC) pioneered the use of the term \"h\u0113gemon\u00eda\" in the modern sense of \"hegemony\".\nIn Ancient East Asia, Chinese hegemony existed during the Spring and Autumn period (c. 770\u2013480 BC), when the weakened rule of the Eastern Zhou dynasty led to the relative autonomy of the Five Hegemons (\"Ba\" in Chinese []). The term is translated as \"lord protector\", or \"lord of the covenants\", or \"chief of the feudal lords\" and is described as intermediate between king of independent state and \"Emperor of All under Heaven\". The hegemons were appointed by feudal lord conferences and were nominally obliged to support the King of Zhou, whose status parallel to that of the Roman Pope in the medieval Europe.\nIn 364 BC, Qin emerged victorious from war and its Duke Xian (424\u2013362 BC) was named hegemon by the King of Zhou. Qin rulers did not preserve the official title of hegemon but in fact kept the hegemony over their world: \"For more than one hundred years [before 221 BC] Qin commanded eight lands and brought the lord of equal rank to its court.\" One of the six other great powers, Wei, was annexed as early as 324 BC. From the reign of Duke Xian on, \"Qin gradually swallowed up the six [other] states until, after hundred years or so, the First Emperor was able to bring all kings under his power.\"\nThe century preceding the Qin's wars of unification in 221 BC was dominated by confrontation between the hegemonic \"horizontal\" alliance led by Qin and the anti-hegemonic alliance called \"perpendicular\" or \"vertical\". \"The political world appears as a chaos of ever-changing coalitions, but in which each new combination could ultimately be defined by its relation to Qin\".\nThe first anti-hegemonic or \"perpendicular\" alliance was formed in 322 BC. Qin was supported by one state, Wei, which it had annexed two years previously. The remaining five great warring states of China joined in the anti-hegemonic coalition and attacked Qin in 318 BC. \"Qin, supported by one annexed state, overwhelmed the world coalition.\" The same scenario repeated itself several times.) until Qin decisively moved from hegemony to conquests and annexations in 221 BC.\n2nd century BC\u201315th century AD.\nRome established its hegemony over the entire Mediterranean after its victory over the Seleucid Empire in 189 BC. Officially, Rome's client states were outside the whole Roman imperium, and preserved their entire sovereignty and international rights and privileges. Edward Luttwak, in \"The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire\", outlined three stages, with hegemonic being the first, followed by imperial. In his view the transformation proved to be fatal and eventually led to the fall of the Roman Empire.\nWith few exceptions, the Roman treaties with client states (\"foedera\") were formulized on equal terms without any expression of clientship and the Romans almost never used the word \"client.\" The term \"client king\" is an invention of the post-Renaissance scholarship. Those who are conventionally called by modern historians of Rome \"client kings\" were referred to as \"allies and friends\" of the Roman people. \"Alliance\" and \"friendship,\" not any kind of subordination, bound them to Rome.\nNo regular or formal tribute was extracted from client states. The land of a client state could not officially be a basis for taxation. The overall fact is that, despite extensive conquests, the Romans did not settle down nor extracted revenues in any subdued territories between 200 and 148 BC. The first good evidence for regular taxation of another kingdom comes from Judea as late as 64 BC.\nThe Roman hegemony of the late Republic left to the Mediterranean kings internal autonomy and obliged them not to enter alliances hostile to Rome and not to wage offensive wars without consent of the Senate. Annexations usually followed when client kings broke this order (Macedonia in 148 BC and Pontus in 64 BC). In the course of these and other annexations, Rome gradually evolved from hegemony into empire. The last major client state of the Mediterranean\u2014the Ptolemaic Kingdom\u2014was annexed by Augustus in the very beginning of his reign in 30 BC.\nAugustus initiated an unprecedented era of peace, shortly after his reign called \"Pax Romana\". This peace however was imperial rather than hegemonic. Classic and modern scholars who call \"Pax Romana\" \"hegemonic peace,\" use the term \"hegemony\" in its broader sense which includes both hegemony and empire.\nFrom the 7th century to the 12th century, the Umayyad Caliphate and later Abbasid Caliphate dominated the vast territories they governed, with other states like the Byzantine Empire paying tribute.\nIn 7th-century India, Harsha, ruler of a large empire in northern India from AD\u00a0606 to 647, brought most of the north under his hegemony. He preferred not to rule as a central government, but left \"conquered kings on their thrones and contenting himself with tribute and homage.\"\nFrom the late 9th to the early 11th century, the empire developed by Charlemagne achieved hegemony in Europe, with dominance over France, most of Northern and Central Italy, Burgundy and Germany.\nFrom the 11th to the late 15th century the Italian maritime republics, in particular Venice and Genoa held hegemony in the Mediterranean, dominating trade between Europe and the Orient for centuries, and having naval supremacy. However, with the arrival of the Age of Discovery and the early modern period, they began to gradually lose their hegemony to other European powers.\n16th\u201319th centuries.\nEuropean powers dominated global economic system from as early as the 15th century. Some of the powers attempted to shape world order in their own images. A succession of hegemonic contenders emerged during this period, with dominance based on pre-eminence in specific areas, and often with a district primary rival contesting their dominance, or two rivals allied to resist their dominance.\nPhillip IV tried to restore the Habsburg dominance but, by the middle of the 17th century \"Spain's pretensions to hegemony (in Europe) had definitely and irremediably failed.\"\nIn late 16th- and 17th-century Holland, the Dutch Republic's mercantilist dominion was an early instance of commercial hegemony, made feasible by the development of wind power for the efficient production and delivery of goods and services. This, in turn, made possible the Amsterdam stock market and concomitant dominance of world trade.\nIn France, King Louis XIV and Emperor Napoleon I (1799\u20131815) attempted true French hegemony via economic, cultural and military domination of most of Continental Europe. However, Jeremy Black writes that, because of Britain, France \"was unable to enjoy the benefits\" of this hegemony.\nAfter the defeat and exile of Napoleon, hegemony largely passed to the British Empire, which became the largest empire in history, with Queen Victoria (1837\u20131901) ruling over one-quarter of the world's land and population at its zenith. Like the Dutch, the British Empire was primarily seaborne; many British possessions were located around the rim of the Indian Ocean, as well as numerous islands in the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. Britain also controlled the Indian subcontinent and large portions of Africa.\nIn Europe, Germany, rather than Britain, may have been the strongest power after 1871, but Samuel Newland writes:Bismarck defined the road ahead as \u2026 no expansion, no push for hegemony in Europe. Germany was to be the strongest power in Europe but without being a hegemon. \u2026 His basic axioms were first, no conflict among major powers in Central Europe; and second, German security without German hegemony.\"\nThese fluctuations form the basis for cyclical theories by George Modelski and Joshua S. Goldstein, both of whom allege that naval power is vital for hegemony.\n20th century.\nThe early 20th century, like the late 19th century, was characterized by multiple Great Powers but no global hegemon. World War I strengthened the United States and, to a lesser extent, Japan. Both of these states' governments pursued policies to expand their regional spheres of influence, the U.S. in Latin America and Japan in East Asia. France, the UK, Italy, the Soviet Union and later Nazi Germany (1933\u20131945) all either maintained imperialist policies based on spheres of influence or attempted to conquer territory but none achieved the status of a global hegemonic power.\nAfter the Second World War, the United Nations was established and the five strongest global powers (China, France, the UK, the U.S., and the USSR) were given permanent seats on the UN Security Council, the organization's most powerful decision-making body.\nFollowing the war, the U.S. and the USSR were the two strongest global powers and this created a bi-polar power dynamic in international affairs, commonly referred to as the Cold War. American hegemony during this time has been described as . The hegemonic conflict was ideological, between communism and capitalism, as well as geopolitical, between the Warsaw Pact countries (1955\u20131991) and NATO/SEATO/CENTO countries (1949\u2013present/1954\u20131977/1955\u20131979). During the Cold War both hegemons competed against each other directly (during the arms race) and indirectly (via proxy wars). The result was that many countries, no matter how remote, were drawn into the conflict when it was suspected that their government's policies might destabilize the balance of power. Reinhard Hildebrandt calls this a period of \"dual-hegemony\", where \"two dominant states have been stabilizing their European spheres of influence \"against and alongside each other\".\"\nProxy wars became battle grounds between forces supported either directly or indirectly by the hegemonic powers and included the Korean War, the Laotian Civil War, the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict, the Vietnam War, the Afghan War, the Angolan Civil War, and the Central American Civil Wars.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the United States was the world's sole hegemonic power.\n21st century.\nVarious perspectives on whether the U.S. was or continues to be a hegemon have been presented since the end of the Cold War. American political scientists John Mearsheimer and Joseph Nye have argued that the U.S. is not a genuine global hegemon because it has neither the financial nor the military resources to impose a proper, formal, global hegemony and cannot achieve many security, political and economic goals alone. This theory is contested in academic discussions of international relations.\nNye opened his 2022 book, \"The Paradox of American Power\" with: \"Not since Rome has one nation loomed so large above the others.\" Among his other titles were \"The New Rome Meets the New Barbarians,\" where \"New Rome\" means the United States, and \"Bound to Lead\", where the bound-to-lead entity is the United States.\nAccording to Mearsheimer, global hegemony is unlikely due to the difficulties in projecting power over large bodies of water. IR author Max Ostrovsky wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Disregarding recent (since 1492 AD) events, the hypothesis makes sense. In 1281, water and the \"good wind\" (kamikaze) indeed stopped the Mongols on the way to Japan. Later, however, even with all sorts of\u00a0kamikaze, water ceased to stop. In 1945, the citizens of Hamburg and Dresden, Berlin and Tokyo, Hiroshima and Nagasaki (those who survived), would not describe water power as stopping; certainly not the double habakusha\u2014those who survived in Hiroshima on August 6 and within next two days managed to reach Nagasaki. Had Mearsheimer arranged a poll of double habakushas on August 10, \"Does, in your opinion, water power stop?\" he would have collected unanimous negative, not necessarily literal, replies. Just the day before the anniversary of the original\u00a0kamikaze\u00a0(August 15), the Japanese announced the unconditional surrender. They knew: water will not stop. Not this time.\nThe French Socialist politician Hubert V\u00e9drine in 1999 described the U.S. as a hegemonic hyperpower, because of its unilateral military actions worldwide. The US role is often described as hegemonic in NATO and other US-led military alliances.\nIn 2006, author Zhu Zhiqun claimed that China is already on the way to becoming the world hegemon and that the focus should be on how a peaceful transfer of power can be achieved between the U.S. and China, but has faced opposition to this claim. In an article published in 2019, two academics from Green School of International and Public Affairs argued that a \"third\u2010way hegemony\" or Dutch\u2010style hegemony apart from a peaceful or violent hegemonic rise may be the most feasible option to describe China in its global hegemony in the future.\nThe Russo-Georgian War was interpreted as an anti-hegemonic resistance by the Russian geopolitical thinker, Alexander Dugin (the theorist of Russian neo-Eurasianism and influential on Russian ruler Vladimir Putin): \"Here is the border in the battle of civilizations. I think Americans are great. But we want to put an end to America's hegemony.\" For Fabrizio Vielmini, writing for the Italian think tank Institute for International Political Studies, the war marked a turning point from the hegemonic order the US tried to enforce for the first two post-Cold War decades. The Russo-Georgian War was seen by some analysts as a landmark event, with the Wests muted response inviting Russia to acts of ever bolder aggression. In 2014, Russia conquered and annexed Crimea, and in 2022 launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine and annexed four more Ukrainian regions. Pro-Putin analyst Glenn Diesen saw the Russian invasion as the \"graveyard of liberal hegemony.\"\nFollowing the annexations, Putin stated that the breakdown of the Western hegemony passed the point of no return, and that the post-Cold War hegemonic world order will not be back. He often justifies the ongoing war with Ukraine as an \u201canti-hegemonic\u201d struggle and calls a wider international community to join this struggle. Two days after Donald Trump was reelected US president, Putin celebrated the \"crumbling hegemonic world\u201d, saying the stream of history runs counter to the strivings of the West: \"No hegemony can be a consideration in the new international environment.\" Following the 2025 Trump\u2013Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting and the turmoil caused by Trump's tariffs policy and expansionist proposals, Russian official agencies celebrated victory over the hegemony. \"Putin quietly finished the Hegemon off,\" was one newspaper title. This geopolitical victory, it says, is underestimated as Putin has attained what earlier had seemed fantastic, when Russia launched this process to defend its sovereignty from the hegemony.\nA pamphlet published by the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 2023 states the US hegemony as existing since the end of the Cold War, and claims that the US consistent abuse of its hegemony imperils the world. The Ministry referred to a composition of US military interventions by country. This composition, the Ministry said, omits three countries (of 194 UN member states) where the United States was not militarily involved: Andorra, Liechtenstein and Bhutan. The Ministry supposed that they were \"spared because the United States did not find them on the map.\u201d Chinese official agencies frequently publish such pamphlets claiming to be against \u201chegemony\u201d.\nAccording to Michael Ignatieff in 2024, both China and Russia may believe that there will never be a more opportune moment to overthrow American hegemony. By 2025, this possibility became more relevant as Donald Trump came to power, adopted a more pro-Russian line, halted aid to Ukraine and Taiwan, and took a more aggressive attitude towards other allies including Canada. With \u201cuneasy feeling\u201d of facing \u201cAnschluss,\u201d Ignatieff found the moment opportune for designing an anti-hegemonic \u201ccommon front\u201d with Europe and Latin America.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "53452", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53452", "title": "Euler's totient function", "text": "Number of integers coprime to and less than n\nIn number theory, Euler's totient function counts the positive integers up to a given integer formula_1 that are relatively prime to formula_1. It is written using the Greek letter phi as formula_3 or formula_4, and may also be called Euler's phi function. In other words, it is the number of integers formula_5 in the range formula_6 for which the greatest common divisor formula_7 is equal to 1. The integers formula_5 of this form are sometimes referred to as totatives of formula_1.\nFor example, the totatives of formula_10 are the six numbers 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and 8. They are all relatively prime to 9, but the other three numbers in this range, 3, 6, and 9 are not, since formula_11 and formula_12. Therefore, formula_13. As another example, formula_14 since for formula_15 the only integer in the range from 1 to formula_1 is 1 itself, and formula_17.\nEuler's totient function is a multiplicative function, meaning that if two numbers formula_18 and formula_1 are relatively prime, then formula_20.\nThis function gives the order of the multiplicative group of integers modulo n (the group of units of the ring formula_21). It is also used for defining the RSA encryption system.\nHistory, terminology, and notation.\nLeonhard Euler introduced the function in 1763. However, he did not at that time choose any specific symbol to denote it. In a 1784 publication, Euler studied the function further, choosing the Greek letter formula_22 to denote it: he wrote formula_23 for \"the multitude of numbers less than formula_24, and which have no common divisor with it\". This definition varies from the current definition for the totient function at formula_25 but is otherwise the same. The now-standard notation formula_26 comes from Gauss's 1801 treatise \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\", although Gauss did not use parentheses around the argument and wrote formula_27. Thus, it is often called Euler's phi function or simply the phi function.\nIn 1879, J. J. Sylvester coined the term totient for this function, so it is also referred to as Euler's totient function, the Euler totient, or Euler's totient. Jordan's totient is a generalization of Euler's.\nThe cototient of formula_1 is defined as formula_29. It counts the number of positive integers less than or equal to formula_1 that have at least one prime factor in common with formula_1.\nComputing Euler's totient function.\nThere are several formulae for computing formula_3.\nEuler's product formula.\nIt states\nformula_33\nwhere the product is over the distinct prime numbers dividing n.\nAn equivalent formulation is\nformula_34\nwhere formula_35 is the prime factorization of formula_1 (that is, formula_37 are distinct prime numbers).\nThe proof of these formulae depends on two important facts.\nPhi is a multiplicative function.\nThis means that if gcd(\"m\", \"n\") = 1, then \"\u03c6\"(\"m\") \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") = \"\u03c6\"(\"mn\"). \"Proof outline:\" Let A, B, C be the sets of positive integers which are coprime to and less than m, n, mn, respectively, so that |\"A\"| = \"\u03c6\"(\"m\"), etc. Then there is a bijection between \"A\" \u00d7 \"B\" and C by the Chinese remainder theorem.\nValue of phi for a prime power argument.\nIf p is prime and \"k\" \u2265 1, then\nformula_38\n\"Proof\": Since p is a prime number, the only possible values of gcd(\"p\"\"k\", \"m\") are 1, \"p\", \"p\"2, ..., \"p\"\"k\", and the only way to have gcd(\"p\"\"k\", \"m\") &gt; 1 is if m is a multiple of p, that is, \"m\" \u2208 {\"p\", 2\"p\", 3\"p\", ..., \"p\"\"k\" \u2212 1\"p\" = \"p\"\"k\"}, and there are \"p\"\"k\" \u2212 1 such multiples not greater than \"p\"\"k\". Therefore, the other \"p\"\"k\" \u2212 \"p\"\"k\" \u2212 1 numbers are all relatively prime to \"p\"\"k\".\nProof of Euler's product formula.\nThe fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that if \"n\" &gt; 1 there is a unique expression formula_39 where \"p\"1 &lt; \"p\"2 &lt; ... &lt; \"p\"\"r\" are prime numbers and each \"k\"\"i\" \u2265 1. (The case \"n\" = 1 corresponds to the empty product.) Repeatedly using the multiplicative property of \u03c6 and the formula for \"\u03c6\"(\"p\"\"k\") gives\nformula_40\nThis gives both versions of Euler's product formula.\nAn alternative proof that does not require the multiplicative property instead uses the inclusion-exclusion principle applied to the set formula_41, excluding the sets of integers divisible by the prime divisors.\nformula_42\nExample.\nIn words: the distinct prime factors of 20 are 2 and 5; half of the twenty integers from 1 to 20 are divisible by 2, leaving ten; a fifth of those are divisible by 5, leaving eight numbers coprime to 20; these are: 1, 3, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17, 19.\nThe alternative formula uses only integers:formula_43\nFourier transform.\nThe totient is the discrete Fourier transform of the gcd, evaluated at 1. Let\nformula_44\nwhere \"xk\" \n gcd(\"k\",\"n\") for \"k\" \u2208 {1, ..., \"n\"}. Then\nformula_45\nThe real part of this formula is\nformula_46\nFor example, using formula_47 and formula_48:formula_49Unlike the Euler product and the divisor sum formula, this one does not require knowing the factors of n. However, it does involve the calculation of the greatest common divisor of n and every positive integer less than n, which suffices to provide the factorization anyway.\nDivisor sum.\nThe property established by Gauss, that\nformula_50\nwhere the sum is over all positive divisors d of n, can be proven in several ways. (See Arithmetical function for notational conventions.)\nOne proof is to note that \"\u03c6\"(\"d\") is also equal to the number of possible generators of the cyclic group \"C\"\"d\" ; specifically, if \"C\"\"d\" \n \u27e8\"g\"\u27e9 with \"g\"\"d\" = 1, then \"g\"\"k\" is a generator for every k coprime to d. Since every element of \"C\"\"n\" generates a cyclic subgroup, and each subgroup \"C\"\"d\" \u2286 \"C\"\"n\" is generated by precisely \"\u03c6\"(\"d\") elements of \"C\"\"n\", the formula follows. Equivalently, the formula can be derived by the same argument applied to the multiplicative group of the nth roots of unity and the primitive dth roots of unity.\nThe formula can also be derived from elementary arithmetic. For example, let \"n\" \n 20 and consider the positive fractions up to 1 with denominator 20:\nformula_51\nPut them into lowest terms:\nformula_52\nThese twenty fractions are all the positive \u2264 1 whose denominators are the divisors \"d\" \n 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 20. The fractions with 20 as denominator are those with numerators relatively prime to 20, namely , , , , , , , ; by definition this is \"\u03c6\"(20) fractions. Similarly, there are \"\u03c6\"(10) fractions with denominator 10, and \"\u03c6\"(5) fractions with denominator 5, etc. Thus the set of twenty fractions is split into subsets of size \"\u03c6\"(\"d\") for each \"d\" dividing 20. A similar argument applies for any \"n.\"\nM\u00f6bius inversion applied to the divisor sum formula gives\nformula_53\nwhere \u03bc is the M\u00f6bius function, the multiplicative function defined by formula_54 and formula_55 for each prime \"p\" and \"k\" \u2265 2. This formula may also be derived from the product formula by multiplying out formula_56 to get formula_57\nAn example:formula_58\nSome values.\nThe first 100 values (sequence in the OEIS) are shown in the table and graph below:\n\nIn the graph at right the top line \"y\" \n \"n\" \u2212 1 is an upper bound valid for all n other than one, and attained if and only if n is a prime number. A simple lower bound is formula_59, which is rather loose: in fact, the lower limit of the graph is proportional to .\nEuler's theorem.\nThis states that if a and n are relatively prime then\nformula_60\nThe special case where n is prime is known as Fermat's little theorem.\nThis follows from Lagrange's theorem and the fact that \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") is the order of the multiplicative group of integers modulo n.\nThe RSA cryptosystem is based on this theorem: it implies that the inverse of the function \"a\" \u21a6 \"ae\" mod \"n\", where e is the (public) encryption exponent, is the function \"b\" \u21a6 \"bd\" mod \"n\", where d, the (private) decryption exponent, is the multiplicative inverse of e modulo \"\u03c6\"(\"n\"). The difficulty of computing \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") without knowing the factorization of n is thus the difficulty of computing d: this is known as the RSA problem which can be solved by factoring n. The owner of the private key knows the factorization, since an RSA private key is constructed by choosing n as the product of two (randomly chosen) large primes p and q. Only n is publicly disclosed, and given the difficulty to factor large numbers we have the guarantee that no one else knows the factorization.\nCompare this to the formula formula_67 (see least common multiple).\nwhere rad(\"n\") is the radical of n (the product of all distinct primes dividing n).\nOther formulae.\nMenon's identity.\nIn 1965 P. Kesava Menon proved\nformula_76\nwhere \"d\"(\"n\") \n[[Category:Pages which use a template in place of a magic word|TEuler's totient function]] \"\u03c3\"0(\"n\") is the number of divisors of n.\nDivisibility by any fixed positive integer.\nThe following property, which is unpublished as a specific result but has long been known, has important consequences. For instance it rules out uniform distribution of the values of formula_3 in the arithmetic progressions modulo formula_78 for any integer formula_79.\nThis is an elementary consequence of the fact that the sum of the reciprocals of the primes congruent to 1 modulo formula_78 diverges, which itself is a corollary of the proof of Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions.\nGenerating functions.\nThe Dirichlet series for \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") may be written in terms of the Riemann zeta function as:\nformula_87\nwhere the left-hand side converges for formula_88.\nThe Lambert series generating function is\nformula_89\nwhich converges for .\nBoth of these are proved by elementary series manipulations and the formulae for \"\u03c6\"(\"n\").\nGrowth rate.\nIn the words of Hardy &amp; Wright, the order of \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") is \"always 'nearly n'.\"\nFirst\nformula_90\nbut as \"n\" goes to infinity, for all \"\u03b4\" &gt; 0\nformula_91\nThese two formulae can be proved by using little more than the formulae for \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") and the divisor sum function \"\u03c3\"(\"n\").\nIn fact, during the proof of the second formula, the inequality\nformula_92\ntrue for \"n\" &gt; 1, is proved.\nWe also have\nformula_93\nHere \u03b3 is Euler's constant, \"\u03b3\" \n 0.577215665..., so \"e\u03b3\" \n 1.7810724... and \"e\"\u2212\"\u03b3\" \n 0.56145948...\nProving this does not quite require the prime number theorem. Since log log \"n\" goes to infinity, this formula shows that\nformula_94\nIn fact, more is true.\nformula_95\nand\nformula_96\nThe second inequality was shown by Jean-Louis Nicolas. Ribenboim says \"The method of proof is interesting, in that the inequality is shown first under the assumption that the Riemann hypothesis is true, secondly under the contrary assumption.\"\nFor the average order, we have\nformula_97\ndue to Arnold Walfisz, its proof exploiting estimates on exponential sums due to I. M. Vinogradov and N. M. Korobov. \nBy a combination of van der Corput's and Vinogradov's methods, H.-Q. Liu (On Euler's function.Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh Sect. A 146 (2016), no. 4, 769\u2013775) \nimproved the error term to \nformula_98\n(this is currently the best known estimate of this type). The \"Big O\" stands for a quantity that is bounded by a constant times the function of n inside the parentheses (which is small compared to \"n\"2).\nThis result can be used to prove that the probability of two randomly chosen numbers being relatively prime is .\nRatio of consecutive values.\nIn 1950 Somayajulu proved\nformula_99\nIn 1954 Schinzel and Sierpi\u0144ski strengthened this, proving that the set\nformula_100\nis dense in the positive real numbers. They also proved that the set\nformula_101\nis dense in the interval (0,1).\nTotient number.\nA totient number is a value of Euler's totient function: that is, an m for which there is at least one n for which \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") \n \"m\". The \"valency\" or \"multiplicity\" of a totient number m is the number of solutions to this equation. A \"nontotient\" is a natural number which is not a totient number. Every odd integer exceeding 1 is trivially a nontotient. There are also infinitely many even nontotients, and indeed every positive integer has a multiple which is an even nontotient.\nThe first few totient numbers are formula_102, see sequence .\nThe number of totient numbers up to a given limit x is\nformula_103\nfor a constant \"C\" \n 0.8178146...\nIf counted accordingly to multiplicity, the number of totient numbers up to a given limit x is\nformula_104\nwhere the error term R is of order at most for any positive k.\nIt is known that the multiplicity of m exceeds \"m\"\"\u03b4\" infinitely often for any \"\u03b4\" &lt; 0.55655.\nFord's theorem.\n proved that for every integer \"k\" \u2265 2 there is a totient number m of multiplicity k: that is, for which the equation \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") \n \"m\" has exactly k solutions; this result had previously been conjectured by Wac\u0142aw Sierpi\u0144ski, and it had been obtained as a consequence of Schinzel's hypothesis H. Indeed, each multiplicity that occurs, does so infinitely often.\nHowever, no number m is known with multiplicity \"k\" \n 1. Carmichael's totient function conjecture is the statement that there is no such m.\nPerfect totient numbers.\nA perfect totient number is an integer that is equal to the sum of its iterated totients. That is, we apply the totient function to a number \"n\", apply it again to the resulting totient, and so on, until the number 1 is reached, and add together the resulting sequence of numbers; if the sum equals \"n\", then \"n\" is a perfect totient number.\nApplications.\nCyclotomy.\nIn the last section of the \"Disquisitiones\" Gauss proves that a regular n-gon can be constructed with straightedge and compass if \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") is a power of 2. If n is a power of an odd prime number the formula for the totient says its totient can be a power of two only if n is a first power and \"n\" \u2212 1 is a power of 2. The primes that are one more than a power of 2 are called Fermat primes, and only five are known: 3, 5, 17, 257, and 65537. Fermat and Gauss knew of these. Nobody has been able to prove whether there are any more.\nThus, a regular n-gon has a straightedge-and-compass construction if \"n\" is a product of distinct Fermat primes and any power of 2. The first few such n are\n2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20, 24, 30, 32, 34, 40... (sequence in the OEIS).\nThe RSA cryptosystem.\nSetting up an RSA system involves choosing large prime numbers p and q, computing \"n\" \n \"pq\" and \"k\" \n \"\u03c6\"(\"n\"), and finding two numbers e and d such that \"ed\" \u2261 1 (mod \"k\"). The numbers n and e (the \"encryption key\") are released to the public, and d (the \"decryption key\") is kept private.\nA message, represented by an integer m, where 0 &lt; \"m\" &lt; \"n\", is encrypted by computing \"S\" \n \"m\"\"e\" (mod \"n\").\nIt is decrypted by computing \"t\" \n \"S\"\"d\" (mod \"n\"). Euler's Theorem can be used to show that if 0 &lt; \"t\" &lt; \"n\", then \"t\" \n \"m\".\nThe security of an RSA system would be compromised if the number n could be efficiently factored or if \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") could be efficiently computed without factoring n.\nUnsolved problems.\nLehmer's conjecture.\nIf p is prime, then \"\u03c6\"(\"p\") \n \"p\" \u2212 1. In 1932 D. H. Lehmer asked if there are any composite numbers n such that \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") divides \"n\" \u2212 1. None are known.\nIn 1933 he proved that if any such n exists, it must be odd, square-free, and divisible by at least seven primes (i.e. \"\u03c9\"(\"n\") \u2265 7). In 1980 Cohen and Hagis proved that \"n\" &gt; 1020 and that \"\u03c9\"(\"n\") \u2265 14. Further, Hagis showed that if 3 divides n then \"n\" &gt; 101937042 and \"\u03c9\"(\"n\") \u2265 298848.\nCarmichael's conjecture.\nThis states that there is no number formula_1 with the property that for all other numbers formula_18, formula_107, formula_108. See Ford's theorem above.\nIf there is a single counterexample to this conjecture, there must be infinitely many counterexamples, and the smallest one has at least ten billion digits in base 10.\nRiemann hypothesis.\nThe Riemann hypothesis is true if and only if the inequality\nformula_109\nis true for all formula_110 where formula_111 is Euler's constant and formula_112 is the product of the first 120569 primes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" has been translated from Latin into English and German. The German edition includes all of Gauss's papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes.\nReferences to the \"Disquisitiones\" are of the form Gauss, DA, art. \"nnn\"."}
{"id": "53453", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53453", "title": "Fermat's little theorem", "text": "A prime p divides a^p\u2013a for any integer a\nIn number theory, Fermat's little theorem states that if p is a prime number, then for any integer a, the number \"a\"\"p\" \u2212 \"a\" is an integer multiple of p. In the notation of modular arithmetic, this is expressed as\nformula_1\nFor example, if \"a\" \n 2 and \"p\" \n 7, then 27 \n 128, and 128 \u2212 2 \n 126 \n 7 \u00d7 18 is an integer multiple of 7.\nIf a is not divisible by p, that is, if a is coprime to p, then Fermat's little theorem is equivalent to the statement that \"a\"\"p\" \u2212 1 \u2212 1 is an integer multiple of p, or in symbols:\nformula_2\nFor example, if \"a\" \n 2 and \"p\" \n 7, then 26 \n 64, and 64 \u2212 1 \n 63 \n 7 \u00d7 9 is a multiple of 7.\nFermat's little theorem is the basis for the Fermat primality test and is one of the fundamental results of elementary number theory. The theorem is named after Pierre de Fermat, who stated it in 1640. It is called the \"little theorem\" to distinguish it from Fermat's Last Theorem.\nHistory.\nPierre de Fermat first stated the theorem in a letter dated October 18, 1640, to his friend and confidant Fr\u00e9nicle de Bessy. His formulation is equivalent to the following:\nIf p is a prime and a is any integer not divisible by p, then \"a\" \"p\" \u2212 1 \u2212 1 is divisible by p.\nFermat's original statement was \nThis may be translated, with explanations and formulas added in brackets for easier understanding, as:\nEvery prime number [p] divides necessarily one of the powers minus one of any [geometric] progression [\"a\", \"a\"2, \"a\"3, \u2026] [that is, there exists t such that p divides \"at\" \u2212 1], and the exponent of this power [t] divides the given prime minus one [divides \"p\" \u2212 1]. After one has found the first power [t] that satisfies the question, all those whose exponents are multiples of the exponent of the first one satisfy similarly the question [that is, all multiples of the first t have the same property].\nFermat did not consider the case where a is a multiple of p nor prove his assertion, only stating:\nEuler provided the first published proof in 1736, in a paper titled \"Theorematum Quorundam ad Numeros Primos Spectantium Demonstratio\" (in English: \"Demonstration of Certain Theorems Concerning Prime Numbers\") in the \"Proceedings\" of the St. Petersburg Academy, but Leibniz had given virtually the same proof in an unpublished manuscript from sometime before 1683.\nThe term \"Fermat's little theorem\" was probably first used in print in 1913 in \"Zahlentheorie\" by Kurt Hensel:\nAn early use in English occurs in A.A. Albert's \"Modern Higher Algebra\" (1937), which refers to \"the so-called 'little' Fermat theorem\" on page 206.\nFurther history.\nSome mathematicians independently made the related hypothesis (sometimes incorrectly called the Chinese hypothesis) that 2\"p\" \u2261 2 (mod \"p\") if and only if p is prime. Indeed, the \"if\" part is true, and it is a special case of Fermat's little theorem. However, the \"only if\" part is false: For example, 2341 \u2261 2 (mod 341), but 341\u00a0=\u00a011\u00a0\u00d7\u00a031 is a pseudoprime to base 2. See below.\nProofs.\nSeveral proofs of Fermat's little theorem are known. It is frequently proved as a corollary of Euler's theorem.\nGeneralizations.\nEuler's theorem is a generalization of Fermat's little theorem: For any modulus n and any integer a coprime to n, one has\nformula_3\nwhere \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") denotes Euler's totient function (which counts the integers from 1 to n that are coprime to n). Fermat's little theorem is indeed a special case, because if n is a prime number, then \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") = \"n\" \u2212 1.\nA corollary of Euler's theorem is: For every positive integer n, if the integer a is coprime with n, then\nformula_4\nfor any integers x and y.\nThis follows from Euler's theorem, since, if formula_5, then \"x\" = \"y\" + \"k\u03c6\"(\"n\") for some integer k, and one has\nformula_6\nIf n is prime, this is also a corollary of Fermat's little theorem. This is widely used in modular arithmetic, because this allows reducing modular exponentiation with large exponents to exponents smaller than n.\nEuler's theorem is used with n not prime in public-key cryptography, specifically in the RSA cryptosystem, typically in the following way: if\nformula_7\nretrieving x from the values of y, e and n is easy if one knows \"\u03c6\"(\"n\"). In fact, the extended Euclidean algorithm allows computing the modular inverse of e modulo \"\u03c6\"(\"n\"), that is, the integer f such that\nformula_8\nIt follows that\nformula_9\nOn the other hand, if \"n\" = \"pq\" is the product of two distinct prime numbers, then \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") = (\"p\" \u2212 1)(\"q\" \u2212 1). In this case, finding f from n and e is as difficult as computing \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") (this has not been proven, but no algorithm is known for computing f without knowing \"\u03c6\"(\"n\")). Knowing only n, the computation of \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") has essentially the same difficulty as the factorization of n, since \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") = (\"p\" \u2212 1)(\"q\" \u2212 1), and conversely, the factors p and q are the (integer) solutions of the equation \"x\"2 \u2212 (\"n\" \u2212 \"\u03c6\"(\"n\") + 1) \"x\" + \"n\" \n 0.\nThe basic idea of RSA cryptosystem is thus: If a message x is encrypted as \"y\" = \"xe\" (mod \"n\"), using public values of n and e, then, with the current knowledge, it cannot be decrypted without finding the (secret) factors p and q of n.\nFermat's little theorem is also related to the Carmichael function and Carmichael's theorem, as well as to Lagrange's theorem in group theory.\nConverse.\nThe converse of Fermat's little theorem fails for Carmichael numbers. However, a slightly weaker variant of the converse is Lehmer's theorem:\nIf there exists an integer a such that\nformula_10\nand for all primes q dividing \"p\" \u2212 1 one has\nformula_11\nthen p is prime.\nThis theorem forms the basis for the Lucas primality test, an important primality test, and Pratt's primality certificate.\nPseudoprimes.\nIf a and p are coprime numbers such that \"a\"\"p\"\u22121 \u2212 1 is divisible by p, then p need not be prime. If it is not, then p is called a \"(Fermat) pseudoprime\" to base a. The first pseudoprime to base 2 was found in 1820 by Pierre Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Sarrus: 341 = 11\u00a0\u00d7\u00a031.\nA number p that is a Fermat pseudoprime to base a for every number a coprime to p is called a Carmichael number. Alternately, any number p satisfying the equality\nformula_12\nis either a prime or a Carmichael number.\nMiller\u2013Rabin primality test.\nThe Miller\u2013Rabin primality test uses the following extension of Fermat's little theorem: \nIf p is an odd prime and \"p\" \u2212 1 = 2\"s\"\"d\" with s &gt; 0 and d odd &gt; 0, then for every a coprime to p, either \"a\"\"d\" \u2261 1 (mod \"p\") or there exists r such that 0 \u2264 \"r\" &lt; \"s\" and \"a\"2\"r\"\"d\" \u2261 \u22121 (mod \"p\").\nThis result may be deduced from Fermat's little theorem by the fact that, if p is an odd prime, then the integers modulo p form a finite field, in which 1 modulo p has exactly two square roots, 1 and \u22121 modulo p.\nNote that \"a\"\"d\" \u2261 1 (mod \"p\") holds trivially for \"a\" \u2261 1 (mod \"p\"), because the congruence relation is compatible with exponentiation. And \"a\"\"d\" = \"a\"20\"d\" \u2261 \u22121 (mod \"p\") holds trivially for \"a\" \u2261 \u22121 (mod \"p\") since d is odd, for the same reason. That is why one usually chooses a random a in the interval 1 &lt; \"a\" &lt; \"p\" \u2212 1.\nThe Miller\u2013Rabin test uses this property in the following way: given an odd integer p for which primality has to be tested, write \"p\" \u2212 1 = 2\"s\"\"d\" with s &gt; 0 and d odd &gt; 0, and choose a random a such that 1 &lt; \"a\" &lt; \"p\" \u2212 1; then compute \"b\" = \"a\"\"d\" mod \"p\"; if b is not 1 nor \u22121, then square it repeatedly modulo p until you get \u22121 or have squared \"s\" \u2212 1 times. If \"b\" \u2260 1 and \u22121 has not been obtained by squaring, then p is a \"composite\" and a is a witness for the compositeness of p. Otherwise, p is a \"strong probable prime to base a\"; that is, it may be prime or not. If p is composite, the probability that the test declares it a strong probable prime anyway is at most &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, in which case p is a \"strong pseudoprime\", and a is a \"strong liar\". Therefore after k non-conclusive random tests, the probability that p is composite is at most 4\u2212\"k\", and may thus be made as low as desired by increasing k.\nIn summary, the test either proves that a number is composite or asserts that it is prime with a probability of error that may be chosen as low as desired. The test is very simple to implement and computationally more efficient than all known deterministic tests. Therefore, it is generally used before starting a proof of primality.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53455", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53455", "title": "Minkowski's theorem", "text": "Every symmetric convex set in R^n with volume &gt; 2^n contains a non-zero integer point\nIn mathematics, Minkowski's theorem is the statement that every convex set in formula_1 which is symmetric with respect to the origin and which has volume greater than formula_2 contains a non-zero integer point (meaning a point in formula_3 that is not the origin). The theorem was proved by Hermann Minkowski in 1889 and became the foundation of the branch of number theory called the geometry of numbers. It can be extended from the integers to any lattice formula_4 and to any symmetric convex set with volume greater than formula_5, where formula_6 denotes the covolume of the lattice (the absolute value of the determinant of any of its bases).\nFormulation.\nSuppose that \"L\" is a lattice of determinant d(\"L\") in the \"n\"-dimensional real vector space formula_1 and \"S\" is a convex subset of formula_1 that is symmetric with respect to the origin, meaning that if \"x\" is in \"S\" then \u2212\"x\" is also in \"S\". Minkowski's theorem states that if the volume of \"S\" is strictly greater than 2\"n\" d(\"L\"), then \"S\" must contain at least one lattice point other than the origin. (Since the set \"S\" is symmetric, it would then contain at least three lattice points: the origin 0 and a pair of points \u00b1&amp;hairsp;\"x\", where \"x\" \u2208 \"L\" \\ 0.)\nExample.\nThe simplest example of a lattice is the integer lattice formula_9 of all points with integer coefficients; its determinant is 1. For \"n\" \n 2, the theorem claims that a convex figure in the Euclidean plane symmetric about the origin and with area greater than 4 encloses at least one lattice point in addition to the origin. The area bound is sharp: if \"S\" is the interior of the square with vertices (\u00b11, \u00b11) then \"S\" is symmetric and convex, and has area 4, but the only lattice point it contains is the origin. This example, showing that the bound of the theorem is sharp, generalizes to hypercubes in every dimension \"n\".\nProof.\nThe following argument proves Minkowski's theorem for the specific case of formula_10\nProof of the formula_11 case: Consider the map\nformula_12\nIntuitively, this map cuts the plane into 2 by 2 squares, then stacks the squares on top of each other. Clearly \"f\"\u2009(\"S\") has area less than or equal to 4, because this set lies within a 2 by 2 square. Assume for a contradiction that \"f\" could be injective, which means the pieces of \"S\" cut out by the squares stack up in a non-overlapping way. Because \"f\" is locally area-preserving, this non-overlapping property would make it area-preserving for all of \"S\", so the area of \"f\"\u2009(\"S\") would be the same as that of \"S\", which is greater than 4. That is not the case, so the assumption must be false: \"f\" is not injective, meaning that there exist at least two distinct points \"p\"1, \"p\"2 in \"S\" that are mapped by \"f\" to the same point: \"f\"\u2009(\"p\"1) \n \"f\"\u2009(\"p\"2).\nBecause of the way \"f\" was defined, the only way that \"f\"\u2009(\"p\"1) can equal \"f\"\u2009(\"p\"2) is for \"p\"2\nto equal \"p\"1 + (2\"i\", 2\"j\") for some integers \"i\" and \"j\", not both zero.\nThat is, the coordinates of the two points differ by two even integers. \nSince \"S\" is symmetric about the origin, \u2212\"p\"1 is also a point in \"S\". Since \"S\" is convex, the line segment between \u2212\"p\"1 and \"p\"2 lies entirely in \"S\", and in particular the midpoint of that segment lies in \"S\". In other words,\nformula_13\nis a point in \"S\". This point (\"i\", \"j\") is an integer point, and is not the origin since \"i\" and \"j\" are not both zero.\nTherefore, \"S\" contains a nonzero integer point.\nRemarks: \nApplications.\nBounding the shortest vector.\nMinkowski's theorem gives an upper bound for the length of the shortest nonzero vector. This result has applications in lattice cryptography and number theory.\nTheorem (Minkowski's bound on the shortest vector): Let formula_24 be a lattice. Then there is a formula_25 with formula_26. In particular, by the standard comparison between formula_27 and formula_28 norms, formula_29.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nLet formula_30 bound can be improved, for instance by taking the open ball of radius formula_31 as formula_32 in the above argument. The optimal constant is known as the Hermite constant.\nApplications to number theory.\nPrimes that are sums of two squares.\nThe difficult implication in Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares can be proven using Minkowski's bound on the shortest vector.\nTheorem: Every prime with formula_43 can be written as a sum of two squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nAdditionally, the lattice perspective gives a computationally efficient approach to Fermat's theorem on sums of squares:\nLagrange's four-square theorem.\nMinkowski's theorem is also useful to prove Lagrange's four-square theorem, which states that every natural number can be written as the sum of the squares of four natural numbers.\nDirichlet's theorem on simultaneous rational approximation.\nMinkowski's theorem can be used to prove Dirichlet's theorem on simultaneous rational approximation.\nAlgebraic number theory.\nAnother application of Minkowski's theorem is the result that every class in the ideal class group of a number field \"K\" contains an integral ideal of norm not exceeding a certain bound, depending on \"K\", called Minkowski's bound: the finiteness of the class number of an algebraic number field follows immediately.\nComplexity theory.\nThe complexity of finding the point guaranteed by Minkowski's theorem, or the closely related Blichfeldt's theorem, have been studied from the perspective of TFNP search problems. In particular, it is known that a computational analogue of Blichfeldt's theorem, a corollary of the proof of Minkowski's theorem, is PPP-complete.&lt;ref name=\"Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report 2018/778 2018\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It is also known that the computational analogue of Minkowski's theorem is in the class PPP, and it was conjectured to be PPP complete.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53456", "revid": "34706848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53456", "title": "Goddess worship", "text": "Goddess worship may refer to:\nScholarly theories.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53457", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53457", "title": "Quinoa", "text": "Edible plant in the family Amaranthaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuinoa (Chenopodium quinoa; , from Quechua ' or ') is a flowering plant in the amaranth family. It is a herbaceous annual plant grown as a crop primarily for its edible seeds; the seeds are high in protein, dietary fiber, B vitamins and dietary minerals especially potassium and magnesium in amounts greater than in many grains. Quinoa is not a grass but rather a pseudocereal botanically related to spinach and amaranth (\"Amaranthus\" spp.), and originated in the Andean region of northwestern South America. It was first used to feed livestock 5,200\u20137,000 years ago, and for human consumption 3,000\u20134,000 years ago in the Lake Titicaca basin of Bolivia and Peru.\nThe plant thrives at high elevations and produces seeds that are rich in protein. Almost all production in the Andean region is done by small farms and associations. Its cultivation has spread to more than 70 countries, including Kenya, India, the United States, and European countries. As a result of increased consumption in North America, Europe, and Australasia, quinoa crop prices tripled between 2006 and 2014, entering a boom and bust cycle.\nThe quinoa monoculture that arose from increased production, combined with climate change effects in the native Andean region, created challenges for production and yield, and led to environmental degradation.\nDescription.\n\"Chenopodium quinoa\" is a dicotyledonous annual plant, usually about high. It has broad, generally powdery, hairy, lobed leaves, normally arranged alternately. The woody central stem is branched or unbranched depending on the variety and may be green, red or purple. The flowering panicles arise from the top of the plant or from leaf axils along the stem. Each panicle has a central axis from which a secondary axis emerges either with flowers (amaranthiform) or bearing a tertiary axis carrying the flowers (glomeruliform). These are small, incomplete, sessile flowers of the same colour as the sepals, and both pistillate and perfect forms occur. Pistillate flowers are generally located at the proximal end of the glomeruli and the perfect ones at the distal end of it. A perfect flower has five sepals, five anthers and a superior ovary, from which two to three stigmatic branches emerge.\nThe green hypogynous flowers have a simple perianth and are generally self-fertilizing, though cross-pollination occurs. In the natural environment, betalains serve to attract animals to generate a greater rate of pollination and ensure, or improve, seed dissemination. The fruits (seeds) are about in diameter and of various colors \u2014 from white to red or black, depending on the cultivar.\nIn regards to the \"newly\" developed salinity resistance of \"C.quinoa\", some studies have concluded that accumulation of organic osmolytes plays a dual role for the species. They provide osmotic adjustment, in addition to protection against oxidative stress of the photosynthetic structures in developing leaves. Studies also suggested that reduction in stomatal density in reaction to salinity levels represents an essential instrument of defence to optimize water use efficiency under the given conditions to which it may be exposed.\nTaxonomy.\nThe species \"Chenopodium quinoa\" was first described by Carl Ludwig Willdenow (1765\u20131812), a German botanist who studied plants from South America, brought back by explorers Alexander von Humboldt and Aim\u00e9 Bonpland.\nQuinoa is an allotetraploid plant, containing two full sets of chromosomes from two different species which hybridised with each other at one time. According to a 1979 study, its presumed ancestor is either \"Chenopodium berlandieri\", from North America, or the Andean species \"Ch. hircinum\". On the other hand, morphological features relate \"Ch.quinoa\" of the Andes and \"Ch. nuttalliae\" of Mexico. More recent studies indicate that Andean and Mexican quinoas were independently domesticated and that both derive from wild North American \"C. berlandieri\", carrying the genome formula AABB, and are likely derived from a hybridization several million years ago between AA and BB diploids closely related to the modern \"C. subglabrum\" and \"C. suecicum\", respectively. Quinoa's wild South American ancestor, \"C. hircinum\", may have been translocated from North to South America via zoochory. A feral-weedy quinoa, \"Ch.quinoa\" var. \"melanospermum\", is known from South America, but no equivalent closely related to \"Ch.nutalliae\" has been reported from Mexico so far.\nStudies regarding the genetic diversity of quinoa suggest that it may have passed through at least three bottleneck genetic events, with a possible fourth expected:\nEtymology.\nThe genus name \"Chenopodium\" is composed of two words coming from the Greek \u03c7\u03ae\u03bd,-\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2, \"goose\" and \u03c0\u03cc\u03b4\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd, \"podion\" \"little foot\", or \"goose foot\", because of the resemblance of the leaves with the trace of a goose's foot.\nThe specific epithet \"quinoa\" is a borrowing from the Spanish \"quinua\" or \"quinoa\", itself derived from Quechua \"kinuwa\".\nThe Incas nicknamed quinoa \"chisiya mama\", which in Quechua means \"mother of all grains\".\nDistribution.\n\"Chenopodium quinoa\" is believed to have been domesticated in the Peruvian Andes from wild or weed populations of the same species. There are non-cultivated quinoa plants (\"Chenopodium quinoa\" var. \"melanospermum\") that grow in the area it is cultivated; these may either be related to wild predecessors, or they could be descendants of cultivated plants.\nCultivation.\nOver the last 5,000years the biogeography of \"Ch. quinoa\" has changed greatly, mainly by human influence, convenience and preference. It has changed not only in the area of distribution, but also in regards to the climate this plant was originally adapted to, in contrast to the climates on which it is able to successfully grow in now. In a process started by a number of pre-Inca South American indigenous cultures, people in Chile have been adapting quinoa to salinity and other forms of stress over the last 3,000years. Quinoa is also cultivated, since an early date, near the coast of northern Chile, where it was grown by the Chinchorro culture. \"Ch.\u00a0quinoa\" was brought to the lowlands of south-central Chile at an early date from the Andean highlands. Varieties in the lowlands of south-central Chile derive directly from ancestral cultivars which then evolved in parallel to those of the highlands. It has been suggested that the introduction of \"Ch.\u00a0quinoa\" occurred before highland varieties with floury perisperm emerged. There are wide discrepancies in the suggested dates of introduction, one study suggests c. 1000 BC as the introduction date while another suggests 600\u20131100 AD. In colonial times the plant is known to have been cultivated as far south as the Chilo\u00e9 Archipelago and the shores of Nahuel Huapi Lake. The cuisine of Chilo\u00e9 included bread made of quinoa until at least the mid-19th century.\nIn Chile it had almost disappeared by the early 1940s; as of 2015 the crop is mostly grown in three areas by only some 300 smallholder farmers. Each of these areas is different: indigenous small-scale growers near the border with Bolivia who grow many types of Bolivian forms, a few farmers in the central region who exclusively grow a white-seeded variety and generally market their crops through a well-known cooperative, and in the south by women in home gardens in Mapuche reserves.\nWhen Amaranthaceae became abundant in Lake Pacucha, Peru, the lake was fresh, and the lack of Amaranthaceae taxa strongly indicates droughts which turned the lake into a saltmarsh. Based on the pollen associated with soil manipulation, this is an area of the Andes where domestication of \"C.quinoa\" became popular, although it was not the only one. It was domesticated in various geographical zones. With this, morphological adaptations began to happen until having five ecotypes today. Quinoa's genetic diversity illustrates that it was and is a vital crop.Andean agronomists and nutrition scientists began researching quinoa in the early twentieth century, and it became the subject of much interest among researchers involved in neglected and underutilized crop studies in the 1970s.\nIn 2004, the international community became increasingly interested in quinoa and it entered a boom and bust economic cycle that would last for over ten years. Between 2004 and 2011, quinoa became a more interesting commodity and global excitement for it increased. At this point, Bolivia and Peru were the only major producers of quinoa. In 2013, there was an extreme increase in imports of quinoa by the United States, Canada and various European countries. In 2016, growth began to slow. Imports were still increasing but at a slower rate and quinoa prices declined as other countries began producing it. By 2015, over 75 countries were producing quinoa, as opposed to only eight countries in the 1980s.\nParticularly for the high variety of Chilean landraces, in addition to how the plant has adapted to different latitudes, this crop is now potentially cultivable almost anywhere in the world.\nClimate requirements.\nThe plant's growth is highly variable due to the number of different subspecies, varieties and landraces (domesticated plants or animals adapted to the environment in which they originated). However, it is generally undemanding and altitude-hardy; it is grown from coastal regions to over in the Andes near the equator, with most of the cultivars being grown between and . Depending on the variety, optimal growing conditions are in cool climates with temperatures that vary between during the night to near during the day. Some cultivars can withstand lower temperatures without damage. Light frosts normally do not affect the plants at any stage of development, except during flowering. Midsummer frosts during flowering, a frequent occurrence in the Andes, lead to sterilization of the pollen. Rainfall requirements are highly variable between the different cultivars, ranging from during the growing season. Growth is optimal with well-distributed rainfall during early growth and no rain during seed maturation and harvesting.\nUnited States.\nQuinoa has been cultivated in the United States, primarily in the high elevation San Luis Valley of Colorado where it was introduced in 1983. In this high-altitude desert valley, maximum summer temperatures rarely exceed and night temperatures are about . In the 2010s, experimental production was attempted in the Palouse region of Eastern Washington, and farmers in Western Washington began producing the crop. The Washington State University Skagit River Valley research facility near Mount Vernon grew thousands of its own experimental varieties. The Puget Sound region's climate is similar to that of coastal Chile where the crop has been grown for centuries. Due to the short growing season, North American cultivation requires short-maturity varieties, typically of Bolivian origin. Quinoa is planted in Idaho where a variety developed and bred specifically for the high-altitude Snake River Plain is the largest planted variety in North America.\nEurope.\nSeveral countries within Europe have successfully grown quinoa on a commercial scale.\nSowing.\nQuinoa requires a significant amount of precipitation in order to germinate, therefore the traditional sowing date in Peru was between September and November. To increase the chance that more crops survive it would be advantageous to split up the sowing date among the plants. Traditionally quinoa was sowed by broadcast, in rows or grooves, or by broadcast and then making rows. Soil preparation should occur before sowing, and weeding should come soon after sowing the seeds.\nRotation is used in its Andean native range. Rotation is common with potato, cereals and legumes including \"Lupinus mutabilis\". Traditionally, quinoa rotation happens in plots called aynoqas. These are made up of different sized plots in different zones, and each family unit would own plots in different areas. The aynoqas allowed for better crop yield, agricultural and ecological sustainability, and food security within communities.\nSoil.\nQuinoa plants do best in sandy, well-drained soils with a low nutrient content, moderate salinity, and a soil pH of 6 to8.5. The seedbed must be well prepared and drained to avoid waterlogging.\nQuinoa has gained attention for its adaptability to contrasting environments such as saline soils, nutrient-poor soils and drought stressed marginal agroecosystems.\nGenetics.\nThe genome of quinoa was sequenced in 2017. Through traditional selective breeding and, potentially, genetic engineering, the plant is being modified to have higher crop yield, improved tolerance to heat and biotic stress, and greater sweetness through saponin inhibition.\nHarvesting.\nTraditionally, quinoa grain is harvested by hand, and only rarely by machine, because the extreme variability of the maturity period of most quinoa cultivars complicates mechanization. Harvest needs to be precisely timed to avoid high seed losses from shattering, and different panicles on the same plant mature at different times. The crop yield in the Andean region (often around 3 t/ha up to 5 t/ha) is comparable to wheat yields. In the United States, varieties have been selected for uniformity of maturity and are mechanically harvested using conventional small grain combines.\nProcessing.\nThe plants are allowed to stand until the stalks and seeds have dried out and the grain has reached a moisture content below 10%.\nHandling involves threshing the seedheads from the chaff and winnowing the seed to remove the husk. Before storage, the seeds need to be dried in order to avoid germination. This was traditionally done manually, which is labour-intensive.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, world production of quinoa was 112,251 tonnes, led by Peru with 62% of the total and Bolivia with 37% (table).\nPrice.\nSince the early 21st century when quinoa became more commonly consumed in North America, Europe, and Australasia where it was not typically grown, the crop value increased. Between 2006 and 2013, quinoa crop prices tripled. In 2011, the average price was US$3,115 per tonne with some varieties selling as high as $8,000 per tonne. This compares with wheat prices of about US$340 per tonne, making wheat about 10% of the value of quinoa. The resulting effect on traditional production regions in Peru and Bolivia also influenced new commercial quinoa production elsewhere in the world, such as the United States. By 2013, quinoa was being cultivated in some 70 countries. As a result of expanding production outside the Andean highlands native for quinoa, the price plummeted starting in early 2015 and remained low for years. From 2018 to 2019, quinoa production in Peru declined by 22%. Some refer to this as the \"quinoa bust\" because of the devastation the price fall caused for farmers and industry.\nEffects of rising demand on growers.\nRising quinoa prices over the period of 2006 to 2017 may have reduced the affordability of quinoa to traditional consumers. However, a 2016 study using Peru's Encuesta Nacional de Hogares found that rising quinoa prices during 2004\u20132013 led to net economic benefits for producers, and other commentary indicated similar conclusions, including for women specifically. It has also been suggested that as quinoa producers rise above subsistence-level income, they switch their own consumption to Western processed foods which are often less healthy than a traditional, quinoa-based diet, whether because quinoa is held to be worth too much to keep for oneself and one's family, or because processed foods have higher status despite their poorer nutritional value. Efforts are being made in some areas to distribute quinoa more widely and ensure that farming and poorer populations have access to it and have an understanding of its nutritional importance, including use in free school breakfasts and government provisions distributed to pregnant and nursing women in need.\nIn terms of wider social consequences, research on traditional producers in Bolivia has emphasised a complex picture. The degree to which individual producers benefit from the global quinoa boom depends on its mode of production, for example through producer associations and co-operatives such as the Asociaci\u00f3n Nacional de Productores de Quinua (founded in the 1970s), contracting through vertically integrated private firms, or wage labor. State regulation and enforcement may promote a shift to cash-cropping among some farmers and a shift toward subsistence production among others, while enabling many urban refugees to return to working the land, outcomes with complex and varied social effects.\nThe growth of quinoa consumption outside of its indigenous region has raised concerns over food security of the indigenous original consumers, unsustainably intensive farming of the crop, expansion of farming into otherwise marginal agricultural lands with concurrent loss of the natural environment, threatening both the sustainability of producer agriculture and the biodiversity of quinoa. Studies have found that smallholder traditional farming of quinoa, specifically in the Andean region of Peru has significantly less of an environmental impact in carbon produced, than the modern industrial quinoa production.\nWorld demand for quinoa is sometimes presented in the media particularly as being caused by rising veganism, but one academic has commented that despite the drawbacks of quinoa, meat production in most cases is still less sustainable than quinoa.\nMonoculture and climate change impacts.\nBecause of the increasing demand for quinoa, some fields in the Andean regions of Bolivia and Peru have become quinoa monocultures. Particularly in the Uyuni salt flats, soil degradation has occurred due to mechanized production and decreased vegetation cover after clearing for quinoa fields. This degradation has led to poorer quinoa yields and lower environmental health in the region.\nSigns of desertification of the landscape is amplified by the effects of climate change on quinoa fields and the salt flats. Drier and hotter weather negatively affects quinoa production, while also increasing pest populations attacking quinoa and reducing the nutrient quality of the soil.\nQuinoa became a grain of growing interest partially due to its ability to withstand many different climate conditions. Its native Andean region is prone to dry and wet spells, and to cold and hot temperatures. Research shows that quinoa prefers warmer temperatures and alternating irrigation. The randomness of weather conditions due to climate change has hindered development of quinoa crops.\nThe quinoa boom and bust cycle led to a periodic increased demand for quinoa which originally resulted in increased production in its native area. However, when other countries recognized the economic benefit of producing quinoa, its cultivation in Europe and the United States increased. Some studies indicate that it may be more productive to grow quinoa in the United States, particularly in Washington State, and in China rather than in its native regions.\nChemistry.\nIn their natural state, the seeds have a coating that contains bitter-tasting saponins, making them unpalatable. Most of the grain sold commercially has been processed to remove this coating. This bitterness has beneficial effects during cultivation, as it deters birds and, therefore, the plant requires minimal protection. The genetic control of bitterness involves quantitative inheritance. Although lowering the saponin content through selective breeding to produce sweeter, more palatable varieties is complicated by \u224810% cross-pollination, it is a major goal of quinoa breeding programs, which may include genetic engineering.\nThe toxicity category rating of the saponins in quinoa treats them as mild eye and respiratory irritants and as a low gastrointestinal irritant. In South America, these saponins have many uses, including as a detergent for clothing and washing, and as a folk medicine antiseptic for skin injuries.\nAdditionally, the leaves and stems of all species of the genus \"Chenopodium\" and related genera of the family Amaranthaceae, including quinoa, contain high levels of oxalic acid.\nUses.\nThe increasing demand for quinoa is partially due to the attention it received as a food that may help alleviate food insecurity in some world regions. Quinoa is high in protein, which makes it a possible alternative to meat for vegetarians and vegans, and for people who are lactose intolerant. It also has high concentrations of dietary minerals. Quinoa does not contain gluten. Some of these qualities may have improved the market to economically privileged people in North America, possibly increasing the price of quinoa.\nQuinoa is an important food for the Indigenous people of the Andean Altiplano, especially the Aymara and Quechua communities. Historically, it was consumed as a subsistence food, which was devalued by the Spanish when they colonized the region.\nFor the Indigenous communities, growing quinoa represented food security and well-being, and it was involved in almost every meal of the day.\nNutrition.\nRaw, uncooked quinoa is 13% water, 64% carbohydrates, 14% protein, and 6% fat. Nutritional evaluations indicate that a serving of raw quinoa seeds has a food energy of and is a rich source (20% or higher of the Daily Value, DV) of protein, dietary fiber, several B vitamins, including 46%DV for folate, and for several dietary minerals such as magnesium (55%DV), manganese (95%DV), phosphorus (65%DV), and zinc (33%DV).\nAfter boiling, which is the typical preparation for eating the seeds, many nutritional evaluations change. Although a serving of cooked quinoa increases to 72% water, most nutritional evaluations are reduced, such as, 21% carbohydrates, 4% protein, and 2% fat, and the food energy of cooked quinoa is reduced to . Although similarly reduced, cooked quinoa remains a rich source of the dietary minerals manganese (30%DV) and phosphorus (22%DV). However, cooked quinoa is reduced to being a moderate source (10\u201319%DV) of dietary fiber and folate (11%), as well as of the dietary minerals iron (11%), magnesium (18%), and zinc (11%).\nQuinoa is gluten-free. Because quinoa has a high concentration of protein and is a good source of many micronutrients, has versatility in preparation, and a potential for increased yields in controlled environments, it has been selected as an experimental crop in NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support System for long-duration human occupied space flights.\nIn culture.\nUnited Nations recognition.\nThe United Nations General Assembly declared 2013 as the \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;International Year of Quinoa\",&lt;ref name=\"UN Resolution 66/221. International Year of Quinoa, 2013\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; in recognition of the ancestral practices of the Andean people, who have preserved it as a food for present and future generations, through knowledge and practices of living in harmony with nature. The objective was to draw the world's attention to the role that quinoa could play in providing food security, nutrition and poverty eradication in support of achieving Millennium Development Goals. Some academic commentary emphasized that quinoa production could have ecological and social drawbacks in its native regions, and that these problems needed to be tackled.\nKosher certification.\nQuinoa is used in the Jewish community as a substitute for the leavened grains that are forbidden during the Passover holiday. Several kosher certification organizations refuse to certify it as being kosher for Passover, citing reasons including its resemblance to prohibited grains or fear of cross-contamination of the product from nearby fields of prohibited grain or during packaging. However, in December 2013 the Orthodox Union, the world's largest kosher certification agency, announced it would begin certifying quinoa as kosher for Passover.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53458", "revid": "44524978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53458", "title": "Count noun", "text": "Noun or noun phrase whose quantity is discrete and usually an integer\nIn linguistics, a count noun (also countable noun) is a noun that can be modified by a quantity and that occurs in both singular and plural forms, and that can co-occur with quantificational determiners like \"every\", \"each\", \"several\", etc. A mass noun has none of these properties: It cannot be modified by a number, cannot occur in plural, and cannot co-occur with quantificational determiners.\nGrammatical distinction.\nThe concept of a \"mass noun\" is a grammatical concept and is not based on the innate nature of the object to which that noun refers. For example, \"seven chairs\" and \"some furniture\" could refer to exactly the same objects, with \"seven chairs\" referring to them as a collection of individual objects but with \"some furniture\" referring to them as a single undifferentiated unit, without reference to quantity. Because of this, the choice can serve a semantic purpose. However, some abstract phenomena like \"fun\" and \"hope\" have properties that are very difficult to quantify, and thus make it very difficult to refer to them with a count noun.\nBelow are examples of all the properties of count nouns holding for the count noun \"chair\", but not for the mass noun \"furniture\". \nSome determiners can be used with both mass and count nouns, including \"all\", \"no\", and \"some\". Others cannot: \"few\", \"many\", \"those\", and numbers (\"one\") are used with count nouns; \"little\" and \"much\" with mass nouns. According to a controversial prescription, \"fewer\" and \"fewest\" is reserved for count nouns and \"less\" and \"least\" for mass nouns (see Fewer vs. less), but \"less\" has always been commonly used for count nouns. Despite this, \"more\" is uncontroversially the proper comparative for both \"many\" and \"much\". This criticism only dates back to 1770, but the criticized usage dates back to Old English.\nClassifiers are sometimes used as count nouns preceding mass nouns, in order to redirect the speaker's focus away from the mass nature. For example, \"There's some \"furniture\" in the room\" can be restated, with a change of focus, to \"There are some \"pieces\" of \"furniture\" in the room\"; and \"let's have some \"fun\"\" can be refocused as \"Let's have a \"bit\" of \"fun\"\". In English, some nouns are used frequently as both count nouns (with or without a classifier) and mass nouns. For example:\n*\"I'll have a \"cup\" of \"coffee\".\" (count noun with classifier)\n*\"I'll have two \"coffees\".\" (count noun without classifier)\n*\"I'll have \"coffee\".\" (plain mass noun)\n*\"I'll have \"some coffee\".\" (mass noun with determiner)\n*\"I'll have \"too much coffee\".\" (mass noun with modified determiner)\nTheory.\nLogicians Godehard Link and linguists like Manfred Krifka investigated the mass noun and count noun distinction and found that it can be given a precise mathematical definition in terms of notions like cumulativity and quantization. Discussed by Barry Schein in 1993, a new logical framework, called plural logic, has also been used for characterizing the semantics of count nouns and mass nouns.\nLinguistic differences.\nSome languages, such as Mandarin Chinese, treat all nouns as mass nouns, and need to make use of a noun classifier (see \"Chinese classifier\") to add numerals and other quantifiers. The following examples are of nouns which, while seemingly innately countable, are still treated as mass nouns:\nA classifier, therefore, implies that the object(s) referred to are countable in the sense that the speaker intends them to be enumerated, rather than considered as a unit (regardless of quantity). Notice that the classifier changes as the unit being counted changes.\nWords such as \"milk\" or \"rice\" are not so obviously countable entities, but they can be counted with an appropriate unit of measure in both English and Mandarin (e.g., \"\"glasses\" of milk\" or \"\"spoonfuls\" of rice\").\nThe use of a classifier is similar to, but not identical with, the use of units of measurement to count \"groups\" of objects in English. For example, in \"three shelves of books\", where \"shelves\" is used as a unit of measurement.\nOn the other hand, some languages, like Turkish, treat all the nouns (even things which are not obviously countable) as countable nouns.\nEven then, it is possible to use units of measures with numbers in Turkish, even with the very obviously countable nouns. The Turkish nouns can not take a plural suffix after the numbers and the units of measure."}
{"id": "53459", "revid": "41211452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53459", "title": "Inayat Khan", "text": "Indian singer, poet and Sufi guide (1882\u20131927)\nInayat Khan Rehmat Khan (; 5 July 1882 \u2013 5 February 1927), was an Indian professor of musicology, singer, exponent of the sarasvati vina, poet, philosopher, writer, and pioneer of the transmission of Sufism to the West. At the urging of his students, and on the basis of his ancestral Sufi tradition and four-fold training and authorisation at the hands of Sayyid Abu Hashim Madani (d. 1907) of Hyderabad, he established an order of Sufism (The Sufi Order) in London in 1914. By the time of his death in 1927, centers had been established throughout Europe and North America, and multiple volumes of his teachings had been published.\nEarly life.\nInayat Khan was born in Baroda to a noble Mughal family. His paternal ancestors, comprising y\u00fczkhans (Central Asian lords) and bakshys (shamans), were Turkmen from the Chagatai Khanate who settled in Sialkot, Punjab during the reign of Timur. Inayat Khan's maternal grandfather, Sangit Ratna Maulabakhsh Sholay Khan, was a Hindustani classical musician and educator known as \u201cthe Beethoven of India.\u201d His maternal grandmother, Qasim Bibi, was from the royal house of Tipu Sultan of Mysore.\nSufism.\nInayat Khan's Sufi sources included both the traditions of his paternal ancestors (remembered as the Mahashaikhan) and the tutelage he received from Sayyid Abu Hashim Madani. From the latter he inherited four transmissions, constituting succession in the Chishti, Suhrawardi, Qadiri, and Naqshbandi orders of Sufism. Of these, the Chishti lineage, traced through the Delhi-based legacy of Shah Kalim Allah Jahanabadi, was primary.\nTravels.\nInayat Khan toured the United States with his brother Maheboob Khan and cousin Mohammed Ali Khan between the years 1910 and 1912. Further travels took him to England, France, and Russia. During the First World War, living in London, he oversaw the founding of an order of Sufism under his guidance. Following the war he traveled widely, and numerous Sufi centers sprang up in his wake in Europe and the U.S. He ultimately settled in Suresnes, France, at the house and khanqah (Sufi lodge) known as Fazal Manzil.\nTeaching.\nInayat Khan's teaching emphasised the oneness of God (tawhid) and the underlying harmony of the revelations communicated by the prophets of all the world's great religions. His discourses treated such varied subjects as religion, art, music, ethics, philosophy, psychology, and health and healing. The primary concern of Inayat Khan's teaching was the mystical pursuit of God-realisation. To this end he established an Inner School comprising four stages of contemplative study based on the traditional Sufi disciplines of \"mujahada\", \"muraqaba\", \"mushahada\", and \"mu\u2018ayyana\", which he rendered in English as concentration, contemplation, meditation, and realisation.\nFoundational principles.\nTen principles, known as the Ten Sufi Thoughts, enunciate the universal spiritual values that are foundational to Inayat Khan's mystical philosophy.\nFamily and personal life.\nIn New York, he met the woman who would become his wife, Ameena Begum n\u00e9e Ora Ray Baker. They had four children: Vilayat Inayat Khan, Hidayat Inayat Khan, Noor Inayat Khan, and Khair-un-Nisa Inayat Khan.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn 1926 Inayat Khan returned to India; he died of pneumonia in Delhi on 5 February 1927. He is buried in the Inayat Khan Dargah in Nizamuddin, Delhi. The dargah is open to the public and hosts qawwali sessions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53460", "revid": "361257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53460", "title": "Statcoulomb", "text": "CGS unit of electric charge\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe statcoulomb (statC), franklin (Fr), or electrostatic unit of charge (esu) is the unit of measurement for electrical charge used in the centimetre\u2013gram\u2013second electrostatic units variant (CGS-ESU) and Gaussian systems of units. In terms of the Gaussian base units, it is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;1\u00a0statC = 1\u00a0dyn1/2\u22c5cm = 1\u00a0cm3/2\u22c5g1/2\u22c5s\u22121.\nThat is, it is defined so that the proportionality constant in Coulomb's law using CGS-ESU quantities is a dimensionless quantity equal to\u00a01.\nDefinition and relation to CGS base units.\nCoulomb's law in the CGS-Gaussian system takes the form\nformula_1\nwhere \"F\" is the force, \"q\" and \"q\" are the two electric charges, and \"r\" is the distance between the charges. This serves to define charge as a quantity in the Gaussian system.\nThe statcoulomb is defined such that if two electric charges of 1\u00a0statC each and have a separation of , the force of mutual electrical repulsion is 1\u00a0dyne. Substituting \"F\" = 1\u00a0dyn, \"q\" = \"q\" = 1\u00a0statC, and \"r\" = 1\u00a0cm, we get:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;1\u00a0statC = g1/2\u22c5cm3/2\u22c5s\u22121.\nFrom this it is also evident that the quantity dimension of electric charge as defined in the CGS-ESU and Gaussian systems is .\nConversion between systems.\nConversion of a quantity to the corresponding quantity of the International System of Quantities (ISQ) that underlies the International System of Units (SI) by using the defining equations of each system.\nThe SI uses the coulomb (C) as its unit of electric charge. The conversion factor between corresponding quantities with the units coulomb and statcoulomb depends on which quantity is to be converted. The most common cases are:\nThe symbol \"\u2258\" ('corresponds to') is used instead of \"=\" because the two sides cannot be equated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53461", "revid": "102477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53461", "title": "Esu", "text": "Esu or ESU may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople.\nCharacters\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53462", "revid": "41211452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53462", "title": "Vilayat Inayat Khan", "text": "Mystic of the Inayati Order (1916\u20132004)\nVilayat Inayat Khan (19 June 1916 \u00a0\u2013 17 June 2004) was a teacher of meditation and of the traditions of the East Indian Chishti Sufi Order of Sufism. His teaching derived from the tradition of his father, Inayat Khan, founder of The Sufi Order in the West (now named the In\u0101yati Order), in a form tailored to the needs of Western seekers. One of his sisters was Noor Inayat Khan GC MBE. He taught in the tradition of Universal Sufism. His parents met at the New York City ashram of American yogi, Pierre Bernard, half-brother of his mother Pirani Ameena Begum.\nPrior to his teaching career he worked in London as an assistant to Ghulam Mohammed, the Finance Minister of Pakistan in 1949, and served as a personal assistant to Pakistan Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan during his visit to England.\nIn 1975 he founded the The Abode of the Message, which serves as the central residential community of the Sufi Order International, a conference and retreat center, and a center of esoteric study.\nLegacy.\nDuring his lifetime Vilayat Inayat Khan was instrumental in the founding of several organisations that continue to operate today.\nThe Abode of the Message\nhttps://\nOmega Institute for Holistic Studies\nhttps://\nDeath.\nVilayat Inayat Khan died on 17 June 2004, two days before his 88th birthday. His son is Zia Inayat Khan. His Dargah is located in Delhi, India.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53463", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53463", "title": "Large howitzers", "text": ""}
{"id": "53464", "revid": "50923414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53464", "title": "Cinnabar", "text": "Red mercury(II) sulfide mineral, HgS\nCinnabar (; from grc \" ' ()\"), also called cinnabarite () or mercurblende, is the bright scarlet to brick-red form of mercury(II) sulfide (HgS). It is the most common source ore for refining elemental mercury and is the historic source for the brilliant red or scarlet pigment termed vermilion and associated red mercury pigments.\nCinnabar generally occurs as a vein-filling mineral associated with volcanic activity and alkaline hot springs. The mineral resembles quartz in symmetry and it exhibits birefringence. Cinnabar has a mean refractive index near 3.2, a hardness between 2.0 and 2.5, and a specific gravity of approximately 8.1. The color and properties derive from a structure that is a hexagonal crystalline lattice belonging to the trigonal crystal system, crystals that sometimes exhibit twinning.\nCinnabar has been used for its color since antiquity in the Near East, including as a rouge-type cosmetic, in the New World since the Olmec culture, and in China since as early as the Yangshao culture, where it was used in coloring stoneware. In Roman times, cinnabar was highly valued as paint for walls, especially interiors, since it darkened when used outdoors due to exposure to sunlight.\nAssociated modern precautions for the use and handling of cinnabar arise from the toxicity of the mercury component, which was recognized as early as ancient Rome.\nEtymology.\nThe name comes from Greek (), a Greek word most likely applied by Theophrastus to several distinct substances. In Latin, it was sometimes known as \"minium\", meaning also \"red cinnamon\", though both of these terms now refer specifically to lead tetroxide.\nProperties and structure.\nProperties.\nCinnabar is generally found in a massive, granular, or earthy form and is bright scarlet to brick-red in color, though it occasionally occurs in crystals with a nonmetallic adamantine luster. It resembles quartz in its symmetry. It exhibits birefringence, and it has the second-highest refractive index of any mineral. Its mean refractive index is 3.08 (sodium light wavelengths), versus the indices for diamond and the non-mineral gallium(III) arsenide (GaAs), which are 2.42 and 3.93, respectively. The hardness of cinnabar is 2.0\u20132.5 on the Mohs scale, and its specific gravity 8.1.\nStructure.\nStructurally, cinnabar belongs to the trigonal crystal system. It occurs as thick tabular or slender prismatic crystals or as granular to massive incrustations. Crystal twinning occurs as simple contact twins.\nMercury(II) sulfide, HgS, adopts the cinnabar structure described, and one additional structure, i.e. it is dimorphous. Cinnabar is the more stable form, and is a structure akin to that of HgO: each Hg center has two short Hg\u2212S bonds (each 2.36 \u00c5), and four longer Hg\u00b7\u00b7\u00b7S contacts (with 3.10, 3.10, 3.30 and 3.30\u00a0\u00c5 separations). In addition, HgS is found in a black, non-cinnabar polymorph (metacinnabar) that has the zincblende structure.\nOccurrence.\nCinnabar generally occurs as a vein-filling mineral associated with volcanic activity and alkaline hot springs. Cinnabar is deposited by epithermal ascending aqueous solutions (those near the surface and not too hot) far removed from their igneous source. It is associated with native mercury, stibnite, realgar, pyrite, marcasite, opal, quartz, chalcedony, dolomite, calcite, and barite.\nCinnabar is found in essentially all mineral extraction localities that yield mercury, notably Almad\u00e9n (Spain). This mine was exploited from Roman times until 1991, being for centuries the most important cinnabar deposit in the world. Good cinnabar crystals have also been found there. Cinnabar deposits appear in Giza (Egypt); Puerto Princesa (Philippines); Red Devil, Alaska; Murfreesboro, Arkansas; New Almaden Mine in San Jose, California; New Idria, California, the Hastings Mine and St. John's Mine both in Vallejo, California; Terlingua, Texas (United States); Idrija (Slovenia); Moschellandsberg near Obermoschel in the Palatinate; the La Ripa and Levigliani mines at the foot of the Apuan Alps and in Mount Amiata (Tuscany, Italy); Avala (Serbia); Huancavelica (Peru); the province of Guizhou in China and Western Ghats in India where fine crystals have been obtained. It has been found in Dominica near its sulfur springs at the southern end of the island along the west coast.\nCinnabar is still being deposited, such as from the hot waters of Sulphur Bank Mine in California and Steamboat Springs, Nevada (United States).\nMining and extraction of mercury.\nAs the most common source of mercury in nature, cinnabar has been mined for thousands of years, even as far back as the Neolithic Age. During the Roman Empire it was mined both as a pigment, and for its mercury content.\nTo produce liquid mercury (quicksilver), crushed cinnabar ore is roasted in rotary furnaces. Pure mercury separates from sulfur in this process and easily evaporates. A condensing column is used to collect the liquid metal, which is most often shipped in iron flasks.\nToxicity.\nAssociated modern precautions for use and handling of cinnabar arise from the toxicity of the mercury component, which was recognized as early as in ancient Rome. Because of its mercury content, cinnabar can be toxic to human beings. Overexposure to mercury, mercury poisoning (mercurialism), was seen as an occupational disease to the ancient Romans. Though people in ancient South America often used cinnabar for art, or processed it into refined mercury (as a means to gild silver and gold to objects), the toxic properties of mercury were well known. It was dangerous to those who mined and processed cinnabar; it caused shaking, loss of sense, and death. Data suggests that mercury was retorted from cinnabar and the workers were exposed to the toxic mercury fumes. \"Mining in the Spanish cinnabar mines of Almad\u00e9n, southwest of Madrid, was regarded as being akin to a death sentence due to the shortened life expectancy of the miners, who were slaves or convicts.\"\nDecorative use.\nCinnabar has been used for its color since antiquity in the Near East, including as a rouge-type cosmetic, in the New World since the Olmec culture, and in China for writing on oracle bones as early as the Zhou dynasty. Late in the Song dynasty it was used in coloring lacquerware.\nThe most popularly known use of cinnabar is in Chinese carved lacquerware, a technique that apparently originated in the Song dynasty. The danger of mercury poisoning may be reduced in ancient lacquerware by entraining the powdered pigment in lacquer, but could still pose an environmental hazard if the pieces were accidentally destroyed. In the modern jewellery industry, the toxic pigment is replaced by a resin-based polymer that approximates the appearance of pigmented lacquer.\nIn the dolmenic burial known as \"La Velilla\" in Osorno (Palencia) Spain, from 5000 years ago, the bones are carefully covered by a large amount of pulverized cinnabar.\nCinnabar's use as a color in the New World, since the Olmec culture, is exemplified by its use in royal burial chambers during the peak of Maya civilization, most dramatically in the 7th-century tomb of the Red Queen in Palenque, where the remains of a noble woman and objects belonging to her in her sarcophagus were completely covered with bright red powder made from cinnabar. Two female mummies dated AD 1399 to 1475 found in Cerro Esmeralda in Chile in 1976 had clothes colored with cinnabar.\nIn the Almad\u00e9n mines in Spain, cinnabar occasionally appeared as completely pure, very dense microcrystalline masses that were used in powdered form to color sealing wax, without any need for purification. They were also easy to carve, provided one overlooked the toxicity of mercury. This material was known as \"cinabrio de labra\" (\u201ccarving cinnabar\u201d), and from the 18th century until the 1930s some artisans in Almad\u00e9n crafted objects from it to present as gifts to distinguished visitors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53466", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53466", "title": "Hum-vee", "text": ""}
{"id": "53467", "revid": "18421420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53467", "title": "Louis Gathmann", "text": "American engineer and inventor (1843\u20131917)\nLouis Gathmann (August 11, 1843 \u2013 June 3, 1917) was a German American engineer and an inventor who is best remembered as the inventor of the Gathmann gun, a large howitzer.\nEarly life.\nGathmann was born in 1843 in Hanover. His father was a school teacher, and instilled in his son a lifelong love of astronomy.\nCareer.\nHe moved to the United States in 1864, and eventually moved to Chicago where he lived until the end of the 19th century, when he moved to Washington, D.C. He started his career designing equipment for mills and farms, and held numerous patents. By the 1880s, Gathmann's patents were in such demand that he had to form a company to help track and produce his designs. This company, known as the Garden City Mill Furnishing Company, made milling machines which were sold all over the globe.\nBy the 1880s, Gathmann had made enough money to have his family moved to the United States from Prussia. He also had four mansions built, two in Chicago, one in Washington D.C., and one in Baltimore, Maryland. Gathmann was very interested in astronomy and had three observatories built in the Chicago area during the 1880s, one of which was a domed observatory tower which he had installed on the side of his mansion on Lincoln Avenue. \nIn the 1890s, Louis had invented a \"Sectional Telescope Lens\" (US Patent 531,994, and 591,466). The design called for using individual pre-ground disks of glass mounted in a black matrix. The entire assembly would then be ground as if it were a traditional single-piece telescope lens blank. This would allow for a faster and cheaper method of producing large diameter telescope lenses for institutional observatories. He had been in negotiations with Alfred Huntington Isham to produce a 100-ft diameter telescope for the Proctor Memorial Fund, with the plan calling for an international observatory on Mt. San Miguel and renaming the mountain as Mt. Gathmann. \nLouis was also involved in 19th century weather modification projects, and in 1891 received a patent (US Patent 462,795) for a rain-making in which liquid carbon dioxide was released into the atmosphere by explosion (either from an artillery shell or by being carried aloft by a balloon). He also wrote a book on the subject, \"Rain Produced At Will\". The book included a chapter by the scientist Simon Newcomb, and another by Edwin J. Houston who would later go on to co-found General Electric. After World War II, when General Electric was experimenting with Rainmaking (now called Weather modification) Stanford Law Review stated: \"In fact, if one Gathmann were alive today, and his patent had not long since expired, he might have an action for patent infringement.\"\nFrom the 1890s on, Louis Gathmann focused on ordnance development. The largest gun designed by Gathmann was the 18-inch Gathmann Gun, which was a coastal defense gun manufactured by Bethlehem Steel under Emil Gathmann (head of Bethlehem Steel's Ordnance Section, and one of Gathmann's sons). The gun was tested at Sandy Hook, but the projectile performed far worse than traditional armor-piercing rounds. Louis was also involved with early aircraft development and had attempted to develop a helicopter, but his successes came in developing fuses for high-explosive ordnance. Newspapers reported in the spring of 1915 that Gathmann invented the German 42-cm Big Bertha howitzer, and that these plans were subsequently stolen from the U.S. Patent Office. But these rumors were false, as no such blueprints were ever filed.\nDuring World War I, Louis conceived a multi-hull naval armor design which incorporated buffer zones, shocks and deflectors.\nPersonal life.\nGathmann was married. He had three sons and two daughters, Otto, Emil, Paul, Mrs. Foley and Emma.\nGathmann died on June 3, 1917, at the home of his daughter in Washington, D.C. He was buried in Glenwood Cemetery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53468", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53468", "title": "Sufi Order International", "text": ""}
{"id": "53469", "revid": "34327716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53469", "title": "Cinnamon", "text": "Spice from Cinnamomum trees\nCinnamon is a spice obtained from the inner bark of several tree species from the genus \"Cinnamomum\". Cinnamon is used mainly as an aromatic condiment and flavouring additive in a wide variety of cuisines, in particular sweet and savoury dishes such as biscuits, breakfast cereals, snack foods, bagels, teas, hot chocolate, and traditional foods. The aroma and flavour of cinnamon derive from its essential oil and principal component, cinnamaldehyde, as well as numerous other constituents, including eugenol.\nCinnamon is the name for several species of trees and the commercial spice products that some of them produce. All are members of the genus \"Cinnamomum\" in the family Lauraceae. Only a few \"Cinnamomum\" species are grown commercially for spice. \"Cinnamomum verum\" (alternatively \"C. zeylanicum\"), known as \"Ceylon cinnamon\" after its origins in Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon), is considered to be \"true cinnamon\", but most cinnamon in international commerce is derived from four other species, usually and more correctly referred to as \"cassia\": \"C. burmanni\" (Indonesian cinnamon or Padang cassia), \"C. cassia\" (Chinese cinnamon or Chinese cassia), \"C. loureiroi\" (Saigon cinnamon or Vietnamese cassia), and the less common \"C. citriodorum\" (Malabar cinnamon). \nIn 2023, world production of cinnamon was 238,403 tonnes, led by China with 39% of the total.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"cinnamon\", attested in English since the 15th century, derives from the Ancient Greek (, later \u03ba\u03af\u03bd\u03bd\u03b1\u03bc\u03bf\u03bd: ), via Latin and medieval French intermediate forms. The Greek was borrowed from a Phoenician word, which was similar to the related Hebrew word ().\nThe name \"cassia\", first recorded in late Old English from Latin, ultimately derives from the Hebrew word , a form of the verb , \"to strip off bark\".\nEarly Modern English also used the names \"canel\" and \"canella\", similar to the current names of cinnamon in several other European languages, which are derived from the Latin word , a diminutive of , \"tube\", from the way the bark curls up as it dries.\nHistory.\nCinnamon has been known from remote antiquity. It was imported to Egypt as early as 2000 BC, but those who reported that it had come from China had confused it with \"Cinnamomum cassia\", a related species. Cinnamon was so highly prized among ancient nations that it was regarded as a gift fit for monarchs and even for a deity; an inscription records the gift of cinnamon and cassia to the temple of Apollo at Miletus. Its source was kept a trade secret in the Mediterranean world for centuries by those in the spice trade, to protect their monopoly as suppliers.\n\"Cinnamomum verum\", which translates from Latin as \"true cinnamon\", is native to India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Myanmar. \"Cinnamomum cassia\" (cassia) is native to China. Related species, all harvested and sold in the modern era as cinnamon, are native to Vietnam (\"Saigon cinnamon\"), Indonesia, and other Southeast Asian countries with warm climates.\nIn Ancient Egypt, cinnamon was used to embalm mummies. From the Ptolemaic Kingdom onward, Ancient Egyptian recipes for kyphi, an aromatic used for burning, included cinnamon and cassia. The gifts of Hellenistic rulers to temples sometimes included cassia and cinnamon.\nThe first Greek reference to is found in a poem by Sappho in the 7th century BC. According to Herodotus, both cinnamon and cassia grew in Arabia, together with incense, myrrh, and labdanum, and were guarded by winged serpents. Herodotus, Aristotle and other authors named Arabia as the source of cinnamon; they recounted that giant \"cinnamon birds\" collected the cinnamon sticks from an unknown land where the cinnamon trees grew and used them to construct their nests.111\nPliny the Elder wrote that cinnamon was brought around the Arabian Peninsula on \"rafts without rudders or sails or oars\", taking advantage of the winter trade winds. He also mentioned cassia as a flavouring agent for wine, and that the tales of cinnamon being collected from the nests of cinnamon birds was a traders' fiction made up to charge more. However, the story remained current in Byzantium as late as 1310.\nAccording to Pliny the Elder, a Roman pound () of cassia, cinnamon (), cost up to 1,500 , the wage of fifty months' labour. Diocletian's Edict on Maximum Prices from 301 AD gives a price of 125 for a pound of cassia, while an agricultural labourer earned 25 per day. Cinnamon was too expensive to be commonly used on funeral pyres in Rome, but the Emperor Nero is said to have burned a year's worth of the city's supply at the funeral for his wife Poppaea Sabina in AD 65.\nMiddle Ages.\nThrough the Middle Ages, the source of cinnamon remained a mystery to the Western world. From reading Latin writers who quoted Herodotus, Europeans had learned that cinnamon came up the Red Sea to the trading ports of Egypt, but where it came from was less than clear. When the Sieur de Joinville accompanied his king, Louis IX of France to Egypt on the Seventh Crusade in 1248, he reported\u2014and believed\u2014what he had been told: that cinnamon was fished up in nets at the source of the Nile out at the edge of the world (i.e., Ethiopia). Marco Polo avoided precision on the topic.\nThe first mention that the spice grew in the area of India was in Maimonides's Mishneh Torah, about 1180. The first mention that the spice grew specifically in Sri Lanka was in Zakariya al-Qazwini's (\"Monument of Places and History of God's Bondsmen\") about 1270. This was followed shortly thereafter by John of Montecorvino in a letter of about 1292.\nIndonesian rafts transported cinnamon directly from the Moluccas to East Africa (see also Rhapta), where local traders then carried it north to Alexandria in Egypt. Venetian traders from Italy held a monopoly on the spice trade in Europe, distributing cinnamon from Alexandria. The disruption of this trade by the rise of other Mediterranean powers, such as the Mamluk sultans and the Ottoman Empire, was one of many factors that led Europeans to search more widely for other routes to Asia.\nEarly modern period.\nDuring the 1500s, Ferdinand Magellan was searching for spices on behalf of Spain; in the Philippines, he found , which was closely related to \"C. zeylanicum\", the cinnamon found in Sri Lanka. This cinnamon eventually competed with Sri Lankan cinnamon, which was controlled by the Portuguese.\nIn 1638, Dutch traders established a trading post in Sri Lanka, took control of the manufactories by 1640, and expelled the remaining Portuguese by 1658. \"The shores of the island are full of it,\" a Dutch captain reported, \"and it is the best in all the Orient. When one is downwind of the island, one can still smell cinnamon eight leagues out to sea.\" The Dutch East India Company continued to overhaul the methods of harvesting in the wild and eventually began to cultivate its own trees.\nIn 1767, Lord Brown of the British East India Company established the Anjarakkandy Cinnamon Estate near Anjarakkandy in the Kannur district of Kerala, India. It later became Asia's largest cinnamon estate. The British took control of Ceylon from the Dutch in 1796.\nCultivation.\nCinnamon is an evergreen tree characterised by oval-shaped leaves, thick bark, and a berry fruit. When harvesting the spice, the bark and leaves are the primary parts of the plant used. However, in Japan, the more pungent roots are harvested to produce \"nikki\" (\u30cb\u30c3\u30ad), which is a product distinct from cinnamon (\u30b7\u30ca\u30e2\u30f3 \"shinamon\"). Cinnamon is cultivated by growing the tree for two years, then coppicing it, i.e., cutting the stems at ground level. The following year, about a dozen new shoots form from the roots, replacing those that were cut. A number of pests such as \"Colletotrichum gloeosporioides\", \"Diplodia\" species and \"Phytophthora cinnamomi\" (stripe canker) can affect the growing plants.\nThe stems must be processed immediately after harvesting while the inner bark is still wet. The cut stems are processed by scraping off the outer bark, then beating the branch evenly with a hammer to loosen the inner bark, which is then pried off in long rolls. Only of the inner bark is used; the outer, woody portion is discarded, leaving metre-long cinnamon strips that curl into rolls (\"quills\") on drying. The processed bark dries completely in four to six hours, provided it is in a well-ventilated and relatively warm environment. Once dry, the bark is cut into lengths for sale.\nA less-than-ideal drying environment encourages the proliferation of pests in the bark, which may then require treatment by fumigation with sulphur dioxide. In 2011, the European Union approved the use of sulphur dioxide at a concentration of up to for the treatment of \"C. verum\" bark harvested in Sri Lanka.\nSpecies.\nSeveral species are often sold as cinnamon:\nCassia induces a strong, spicy flavour and is often used in baking, especially associated with cinnamon rolls, as it handles baking conditions well. Among cassia, Chinese cinnamon is generally medium to light reddish-brown, hard and woody in texture, and thicker ( thick), as all of the layers of bark are used. Ceylon cinnamon, using only the thin inner bark, has a lighter brown colour and a finer, less dense, and more crumbly texture. It is subtle and more aromatic in flavour than cassia, and it loses much of its flavour during cooking.\nThe barks of the species are easily distinguished when whole, both in macroscopic and microscopic characteristics. Ceylon cinnamon sticks (quills) have many thin layers and can easily be made into powder using a coffee or spice grinder, whereas cassia sticks are much harder. Indonesian cinnamon is often sold in neat quills made up of one thick layer, capable of damaging a spice or coffee grinder. Saigon cinnamon (\"C. loureiroi\") and Chinese cinnamon (\"C. cassia\") are always sold as broken pieces of thick bark, as the bark is not supple enough to be rolled into quills.\nThe powdered bark is harder to distinguish, but if it is treated with tincture of iodine (a test for starch), little effect is visible with pure Ceylon cinnamon; however, when Chinese cinnamon is present, a deep-blue tint is produced.\nGrading.\nThe Sri Lankan grading system divides the cinnamon quills into four groups:\nThese groups are further divided into specific grades. For example, Mexican is divided into M00000 special, M000000 and M0000, depending on quill diameter and number of quills per kilogram. Any pieces of bark less than long are categorised as quillings. Featherings are the inner bark of twigs and twisted shoots. Chips are trimmings of quills, outer and inner bark that cannot be separated, or the bark of small twigs.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, four countries accounted for 98% of the world's cinnamon production, a total of 238,403 tonnes: China, Vietnam, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka.\nCounterfeit.\nTrue cinnamon from \"C. verum\" bark can be mixed with cassia (\"C. cassia\") as counterfeit and falsely marketed as authentic cinnamon. In one analysis, authentic Ceylon cinnamon bark contained 12\u2013143\u00a0mg/kg of coumarin \u2013 a phenolic typically low in content in true cinnamon \u2013 but market samples contained coumarin with levels as high as 3462\u00a0mg/kg, indicating probable contamination with cassia in the counterfeit cinnamon. ConsumerLab.com found the same problem in a 2020 analysis; \"a supplement that contained the highest amount of coumarin was labeled as Ceylon cinnamon\".\nFood uses.\nCinnamon bark is used as a spice. It is principally employed in cookery as a condiment and flavouring material. It is used in the preparation of chocolate, especially in Mexico. Cinnamon is often used in savoury dishes of chicken and lamb. In the United States and Europe, cinnamon and sugar are often used to flavour cereals, bread-based dishes such as toast, and fruits, especially apples; a cinnamon and sugar mixture (cinnamon sugar) is sold separately for such purposes. It is also used in Portuguese and Turkish cuisine for both sweet and savoury dishes. Cinnamon can also be used in pickling, and in Christmas drinks such as eggnog. Cinnamon powder has long been an important spice in enhancing the flavour of Persian cuisine, used in a variety of thick soups, drinks, and sweets.\nCinnamon is a common ingredient in Jewish cuisine across various communities. In Sephardic cooking, it is incorporated into vegetable stews and desserts such as \"tishpishti\" and \"travados\", both of which are soaked in honey. In Ashkenazi cuisine, cinnamon features in dishes like honey cakes, and \"kugels\". It is also one of \"four sibling spices\" (\"rempah empat beradik\") essential in Malay cuisine along with clove, star anise and cardamom.\nNutrient composition.\nGround cinnamon is 11% water, 81% carbohydrates (including 53% dietary fiber), 4% protein and 1% fat.\nCharacteristics.\nTexture.\nCeylon cinnamon may be crushed into small pieces by hand, while Indonesian cinnamon requires a powerful blender.\nFlavour, aroma and taste.\nThe flavour of cinnamon is due to the aromatic essential oils that make up 0.5 to 1% of its composition. \nCinnamon bark can be macerated, then extracted in 80% ethanol, to a tincture.\nCinnamon essential oil can be prepared by roughly pounding the bark, macerating it in sea water, and then quickly distilling the whole. It is golden-yellow, with the characteristic odour of cinnamon and a very hot aromatic taste. \n\"Cinnamon oil nanoemulsion\" can be made with polysorbate 80, cinnamon essential oil, and water, by ultrasonic emulsification.\n\"Cinnamon oil macroemulsion\" can be made with a dispersing emulsifying homogeniser.&lt;ref name=\"homogenizers/ultra-turrax-t-25\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe pungent taste and scent come from cinnamaldehyde, about 90% of the essential oil from cinnamon bark. Cinnamaldehyde decomposes, in high humidity and high temperatures, to styrene, and, by reaction with oxygen as it ages, it darkens in colour and forms resinous compounds.\nCinnamon constituents include some 80 aromatic compounds, including eugenol, found in the oil from leaves or bark of cinnamon trees.\nAlcohol flavourant.\nCinnamon is used as a flavouring in cinnamon liqueur, such as cinnamon-flavoured whiskey in the United States, and , a cinnamon brandy in Greece.\nHealth-related research.\nCinnamon has a long history of use in traditional medicine as a digestive aid. However, contemporary studies are unable to find evidence of any significant medicinal or therapeutic effect.\nReviews of clinical trials reported lowering of fasting plasma glucose and inconsistent effects on hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c, an indicator of chronically elevated plasma glucose). Four of the reviews reported a decrease in fasting plasma glucose, only two reported lower HbA1c, and one reported no change to either measure. The Cochrane review noted that trial durations were limited to 4 to 16 weeks, and that no trials reported on changes to quality of life, morbidity or mortality rate. The Cochrane authors' conclusion was: \"There is insufficient evidence to support the use of cinnamon for type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus.\" Citing the Cochrane review, the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health stated: \"Studies done in people don't support using cinnamon for any health condition.\" However, the results of the studies are difficult to interpret because it is often unclear what type of cinnamon and what part of the plant were used.\nA meta-analysis of cinnamon supplementation trials with lipid measurements reported lower total cholesterol and triglycerides, but no significant changes in LDL-cholesterol or HDL-cholesterol. Another reported no change to body weight or insulin resistance.\nToxicity.\nA systematic review of adverse events as a result of cinnamon use reported gastrointestinal disorders and allergic reactions as the most frequently reported side effects.\nIn 2008, the European Food Safety Authority considered the toxicity of coumarin, a component of cinnamon, and confirmed a maximum recommended tolerable daily intake (TDI) of 0.1\u00a0mg of coumarin per kg of body weight. Coumarin is known to cause liver and kidney damage in high concentrations and metabolic effects in humans with CYP2A6 polymorphism. Based on this assessment, the European Union set a guideline for maximum coumarin content in foodstuffs of 50\u00a0mg per kg of dough in seasonal foods, and 15\u00a0mg per kg in everyday baked foods. The maximum recommended TDI of 0.1\u00a0mg of coumarin per kg of body weight equates to 5\u00a0mg of coumarin (or 5.6 g C. verum with 0.9\u00a0mg coumarin per gram) for a body weight of 50\u00a0kg. C as shown in the table below:\nDue to the variable amount of coumarin in \"C. cassia\", usually well over 1.0\u00a0mg of coumarin per g of cinnamon and sometimes up to 12 times that, \"C. cassia\" has a low safe-intake-level upper limit to adhere to the above TDI. In contrast, \"C. verum\" has only trace amounts of coumarin.\nIn March 2024, the US Food and Drug Administration recommended a voluntary recall on six brands of cinnamon due to contamination with lead, after an investigation stemming from 500 reports of child lead poisoning across the US. The FDA determined that cinnamon was adulterated with lead chromate.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53472", "revid": "1313789923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53472", "title": "Illusion", "text": "Distortion of the perception of reality\nAn illusion is a distortion of the senses, which can reveal how the mind normally organizes and interprets sensory stimulation. Although illusions distort the human perception of reality, they are generally shared by most people.\nIllusions may occur with any of the human senses, but visual illusions (optical illusions) are the best-known and understood. The emphasis on visual illusions occurs because vision often dominates the other senses. For example, individuals watching a ventriloquist will perceive the voice as coming from the dummy since they are able to see the dummy mouth the words.\nSome illusions are based on general assumptions the brain makes during perception. These assumptions are made using organizational principles (e.g., Gestalt theory), an individual's capacity for depth perception and motion perception, and perceptual constancy. Other illusions occur due to biological sensory structures within the human body or conditions outside the body within one's physical environment.\nThe term \"illusion\" refers to a specific form of sensory distortion. Unlike a hallucination, which is a distortion in the absence of a stimulus, an illusion describes a misinterpretation of a true sensation. For example, hearing voices regardless of the environment would be a hallucination, whereas hearing voices in the sound of running water (or another auditory source) would be an illusion. So, it should not be wrong to consider that illusions are just \"misinterpretations\" of how our brain perceives something that exists (unlike a hallucination where a stimulus is absent).\nVisual.\nA visual illusion or optical illusion is characterized by visually perceived images that are deceptive or misleading. Therefore, the information gathered by the visual sense is processed to create a percept that does not tally with information from other senses or physical measurements.\nThe visual system, which includes the eyes (namely the retinas) and the central nervous system (namely the brain's visual cortex), constructs reality through both perceptual and cognitive neural pathways. Visual illusions are (at least in part) thought to be caused by excessive competing stimuli. Each stimulus follows a dedicated neural path in the early stages of visual processing, and intense/repetitive activity or interaction with active adjoining channels (perceptual neural circuits, usually at the same level) causes a physiological imbalance that alters perception. During low-level visual processing, the retinal circuit arranges the information in the photoreceptors, by creating initial visual percepts from the patterns of light which fall on the retina. The Hermann grid illusion and Mach bands are two illusions that are widely considered to be caused by a biological phenomenon named lateral inhibition, where the receptor signal in the retina's receptive fields from light and dark areas compete with one another.\nThe assembly of visual elements into a collective percept, that distinguishes objects from backgrounds, takes part during intermediate-level visual processing. Many common visual illusions are a consequence of the percept constructed during this processing stage, as the elements first captured during low-level processing might easily be interpreted to form an image that differs from objective reality. An example is when two objects of the same size are placed on a certain background which conditions us to believe that one object might be larger than the other, and when the background is removed or replaced our perception immediately changes to the correct scenario (effectively concluding that both objects have equal dimensions).\nHigh-level visual processing consolidates information gathered from various sources to apply cognitive influences that create a conscious visual experience. Thus, allowing us to recognize the complex identity of different elements, and the disparate relations between them through cognitive processes. Visual illusions are also often a product of this processing stage, and it is during this stage that we might ultimately become conscious of any optical illusion. There are two crucial properties of our visual system related mostly to high-level visual processing, referred to as selectivity and invariance (which we have consistently attempted to replicate in image recognition computer algorithms). Selectivity refers to the identification of particular features that are relevant to recognize a specific element or object, while abstracting from other features that are not fundamental to performing the same recognition (e.g. when we see the shape of a house, certain contours that are essential for us to recognize it while other contours or image properties are not, such as color). On the other hand, invariance refers to the ability to be indifferent to small variations of a given feature, effectively identifying all those variations as simply being different versions of the same feature (e.g. we can recognize a given handwritten letter of the alphabet, written by different people with distinct styles of calligraphy).\nThe whole process that constructs our visual experience is extremely complex (with multiple qualities that are unmatched by any computer or digital system). It is organized by many sequential and parallel sub-processes, each of which is essential in building our conscious image of the world. Our whole visual system seeks to simplify and categorize the unstructured low-level visual information, through both selectivity and invariance. Thus, while trying to organize an image by \"filling in the gaps\" through assumptions, we become vulnerable to misinterpretation.\nAuditory.\nAn auditory illusion is an illusion of hearing, the auditory equivalent of a visual illusion: the listener hears either sounds which are not present in the stimulus, or \"impossible\" sounds. In short, audio illusions highlight areas where the human ear and brain, as organic, makeshift tools, differ from perfect audio receptors (for better or for worse). One example of an auditory illusion is a Shepard tone.\nTactile.\nExamples of tactile illusions include phantom limb, the thermal grill illusion, the cutaneous rabbit illusion and a curious illusion that occurs when the crossed index and middle fingers are run along the bridge of the nose with one finger on each side, resulting in the perception of two separate noses. The brain areas activated during illusory tactile perception are similar to those activated during actual tactile stimulation. Tactile illusions can also be elicited through haptic technology. These \"illusory\" tactile objects can be used to create \"virtual objects\".\nTemporal.\nA temporal illusion is a distortion in the perception of time, which occurs when the time interval between two or more events is very narrow (typically less than a second). In such cases, a person may momentarily perceive time as slowing down, stopping, speeding up, or running backward.\nIntersensory.\nIllusions can occur with the other senses including those involved in food perception. Both sound and touch have been shown to modulate the perceived staleness and crispness of food products. It was also discovered that even if some portion of the taste receptor on the tongue became damaged that illusory taste could be produced by tactile stimulation. Evidence of olfactory (smell) illusions occurred when positive or negative verbal labels were given prior to olfactory stimulation. The McGurk effect shows that what we hear is influenced by what we see as we hear the person speaking; the auditory component of one sound is paired with the visual component of another sound, leading to the perception of a third sound.\nDisorders.\nSome illusions occur as a result of an illness or a disorder. While these types of illusions are not shared with everyone, they are typical of each condition. For example, people with migraines often report fortification illusions.\nNeuroscience.\nPerception is linked to specific brain activity and so can be elicited by brain stimulation. The (illusory) percepts that can be evoked range from simple phosphenes (detections of lights in the visual field) to high-level percepts. In a single-case study on a patient undergoing presurgical evaluation for epilepsy treatment, electrical stimulation at the left temporo-parietal junction evoked the percept of a nearby (illusory) person who \"closely 'shadowed' changes in the patient's body position and posture\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53473", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53473", "title": "Magical organisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "53474", "revid": "9060269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53474", "title": "Tenrikyo", "text": "Japanese new religion\n is a Japanese new religion which is neither strictly monotheistic nor pantheistic, originating from the teachings of a 19th-century woman named Nakayama Miki, known to her followers as \"Oyasama\". Followers of Tenrikyo believe that God of Origin, God in Truth, known by several names including \"Tsukihi,\" \"Tenri-\u014c-no-Mikoto\" and \"Oyagamisama\" revealed divine intent through Miki Nakayama as the Shrine of God and to a lesser extent the roles of the Honseki Izo Iburi and other leaders. Tenrikyo's worldly aim is to teach and promote the Joyous Life, which is cultivated through acts of charity and mindfulness called .\nThe primary operations of Tenrikyo today are located at Tenrikyo Church Headquarters, which supports 16,833 locally managed churches in Japan, the construction and maintenance of the and various community-focused organisations. It has 1.75 million followers in Japan and is estimated to have over 2 million worldwide.\nBeliefs.\nThe ultimate spiritual aim of Tenrikyo is the construction of the Kanrodai, a divinely ordained pillar in an \"axis mundi\" called the Jiba, and the correct performance of the Kagura ritual around the Kanrodai, which will bring about the salvation of all human beings. The idea of the Jiba as the origin of earthly creation is called , or the principle of origin. A pilgrimage to the Jiba is interpreted as a return to one's origin, and is thus also known as . As such, the greeting ( 'welcome home') can be seen at many hotels and guesthouses in Tenri City.\nOther key teachings include:\nJoyous Life.\nThe Joyous Life in Tenrikyo is defined as charity and abstention from greed, selfishness, hatred, anger, covetousness, miserliness, grudge bearing, and arrogance. Negative tendencies are not known as sins in Tenrikyo, but rather as \"dust\" that can be swept away from the mind through (\u3072\u306e\u304d\u3057\u3093 or \u65e5\u306e\u5bc4\u9032) and prayer. , voluntary effort, is performed not out of a desire to appear selfless, but out of gratitude for and .\nOntology.\nOne of the most basic teachings of Tenrikyo is (\u8cb8\u7269\u501f\u7269 or \u8cb8\u3057\u7269\u501f\u308a\u7269), meaning \"a thing lent, a thing borrowed\". The thing that is lent and borrowed is the human body. Tenrikyo followers think of their minds as things that are under their own control, but their bodies are not completely under their control.\nGod.\nThe sacred name of the single God and creator of the entire universe in Tenrikyo is . Tenri-\u014c-no-Mikoto created humankind so that humans may live joyously and to partake in that joy. The body is a thing borrowed, but the mind alone is one's own, thus it is commonly accepted that Tenri-\u014c-no-Mikoto is not omnipotent.\nOther gods are considered instruments, such as the Divine Providences, and were also created by Tenri-\u014c-no-Mikoto.\nTenrikyo's doctrine names four properties of Tenri-O-no-Mikoto: as the God who became openly revealed in the world, as the creator who created the world and humankind, as the sustainer and protector who gives existence and life to all creation, and as the savior whose intention in becoming revealed is to save all humankind.\nThrough her scriptures (the , , and ), Nakayama conveyed the concept of the divine to her followers in steps:\nThese steps have been described as an \"unfolding in the revelation of God's nature in keeping with the developing capacity of human understanding, from an all-powerful God, to a nourishing God, and finally to an intimate God.\"\nFollowers use the phrase (\u89aa\u795e\u69d8) to refer to God, and the divine name \"Tenri-O-no-Mikoto\" when praising or worshipping God through prayer or ritual.\nCausality.\nComparison to karmic belief.\nThe concept of in Tenrikyo is a unique understanding of karmic belief. Although causality resembles karmic beliefs found in religious traditions originating in ancient India, such as Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism, Tenrikyo's doctrine does not claim to inherit the concept from these traditions and differs from their explanations of karma in a few significant ways.\nBroadly speaking, karma refers to the spiritual principle of cause and effect where intent and actions of an individual (cause) influence the future of that individual (effect). In other words, a person's good intent and good deed contribute to good karma and future happiness, while bad intent and bad deed contribute to bad karma and future suffering. Causality and karma are interchangeable in this sense; throughout life a person may experience good and bad causality. In Tenrikyo, the concept is encapsulated in the farming metaphor, \"every seed sown will sprout.\" Karma is closely associated with the idea of rebirth, such that one's past deeds in the current life and in all previous lives are reflected in the present moment, and one's present deeds are reflected in the future of the current life and in all future lives. This understanding of rebirth is upheld in causality as well.\nTenrikyo's ontology, however, differs from older karmic religious traditions such as Buddhism. In Tenrikyo, the human person is believed to consist of mind, body, and soul. The mind, which is given the freedom to sense, feel, and act by God the Parent, ceases to function at death. On the other hand, the soul, through the process of , takes on a new body lent from God the Parent and is reborn into this world. Though the reborn person has no memory of the previous life, the person's thoughts and deeds leave their mark on the soul and are carried over into the new life as the person's causality. As can be seen, Tenrikyo's ontology, which rests on the existence of a single creator deity (God the Parent), differs from Buddhist ontology, which does not contain a creator deity. Also Tenrikyo's concept of salvation, which is to live the Joyous Life in this existence and therefore does not promise a liberated afterlife outside of this existence, differs from Buddhist concepts of sa\u1e43s\u0101ra and nirvana.\n\"Original causality\".\nAt the focal point of Tenrikyo's ontological understanding is the positing of , which is that God the Parent created human beings to see them live the Joyous Life (the salvific state) and to share in that joy. Tenrikyo teaches that the Joyous Life will eventually encompass all humanity, and that gradual progress towards the Joyous Life is even now being made with the guidance of divine providence. Thus the concept of original causality has a teleological element, being the gradual unfolding of that which was ordained at the beginning of time.\n\"Individual causality\".\nBelief in individual causality is related to the principle of original causality. Individual causality is divine providence acting to realize the original causality of the human race, which through the use of suffering guides individuals to realize their causality and leads them to a change of heart and active cooperation towards the establishment of the Joyous Life, the world that was ordained at the beginning of time.\nTenrikyo's doctrine explains that an individual's suffering should not be perceived as punishment or retributive justice from divine providence for past misdeeds, but rather as a sign of encouragement from divine providence for the individual to reflect on the past and to undergo a change of heart. The recognition of the divine providence at work should lead to an attitude of , a Japanese word that indicates a state of satisfaction. is a way of settling the mind \u2013 it is not to merely resign oneself to one's situation, but rather to actively \"recognize God's parental love in all events and be braced by their occurrence into an ever firmer determination to live joyously each day.\" In other words, Tenrikyo emphasizes the importance of maintaining a positive inner disposition, as opposed to a disposition easily swayed by external circumstance.\n\"Three causalities\".\nIn addition, \"The Doctrine of Tenrikyo\" names that are believed to predetermine the founding of Tenrikyo's teachings. More precisely, these causalities are the fulfillment of the promise that God made to the models and instruments of creation, which was that \"when the years equal to the number of their first born had elapsed, they would be returned to the Residence of Origin, the place of original conception, and would be adored by their posterity.\" The \"Causality of the Soul of Oyasama\" denotes that Miki Nakayama had the soul of the original mother at creation (Izanami-no-Mikoto), who conceived, gave birth to, and nurtured humankind. The \"Causality of the Residence\" means that the Nakayama Residence, where Tenrikyo Church Headquarters stands, is the place that humankind was conceived. The \"Causality of the Promised Time\" indicates that October 26, 1838 \u2013 the day when God became openly revealed through Miki Nakayama \u2013 marked the time when the years equal to the number of first-born humans (900,099,999) had elapsed since the moment humankind was conceived.\nTexts.\nScriptures.\nThe of Tenrikyo are the , , and .\nThe is the most important Tenrikyo scripture. A 17-volume collection of 1,711 poems, the was composed by the foundress of Tenrikyo, Miki Nakayama, from 1869 to 1882.\nThe is the text of the , a religious ritual that has a central place in Tenrikyo. During the Service, the text to the is sung together with dance movements and musical accompaniment, all of which was composed and taught by Nakayama.\nThe is a written record of oral revelations given by Izo Iburi. The full scripture is published in seven volumes (plus an index in three volumes) and contains around 20,000 \"divine directions\" delivered between January 4, 1887 and June 9, 1907.\nAccording to Shozen Nakayama, the second (the spiritual and administrative leader of Tenrikyo), the \"reveal[s] the most important principles of the faith,\" the Mikagura-uta \"come[s] alive through singing or as the accompaniment\" to the Service, and the Osashizu \"gives concrete precepts by which the followers should reflect on their own conduct.\"\nSupplemental texts to the scriptures.\nThe constitute three officially sanctioned texts which, along with the scriptures, are used to instruct students and adherents of Tenrikyo. They are required texts for students enrolling in Tenrikyo's seminary programs, such as the three-month .\n\"The Doctrine of Tenrikyo\" is Tenrikyo's official doctrine, which explains the basic teachings of Tenrikyo. \"The Life of Oyasama, Foundress of Tenrikyo\" is Tenrikyo's official hagiography of Miki Nakayama. The \"Anecdotes of Oyasama, Foundress of Tenrikyo\" is an official authorized anthology of anecdotes about Nakayama that were passed down orally by her first followers and later written down and verified.\nOther texts.\nThe \"k\u014dki\" (\u3053\u3075\u304d or \u5f8c\u7d00) are manuscripts of creation narratives dictated by Nakayama Miki that are not part of the official canon of Tenrikyo scriptures. Today, they are rarely read and circulated. The \"Doroumi K\u014dki\" is one such \"k\u014dki\" (\u53e4\u8a18); there are also various other \"k\u014dki\" texts that were composed from 1881 up until Nakayama Miki's death in 1887.\nOrganization.\nTenrikyo is subdivided into many different groups with common goals but differing functions. These range from the , to disaster relief corps, medical staff and hospitals, universities, museums, libraries, and various schools.\nTenri Judo is renowned as a successful competition style of Judo that has produced many champions, while there are also other sporting and arts interest groups within Tenrikyo.\nHistory.\nIn Tenrikyo tradition, Nakayama Miki was chosen as the Shrine of God in 1838, after her son and husband began suffering from serious ailments. The family called a Buddhist monk to exorcise the spirit causing the ailments. When the monk temporarily left and asked Nakayama to take over, she was possessed by the One god (Tenri-O-no-Mikoto), who demanded that Nakayama be given to God as a shrine. Nakayama's husband gave in to this request three days later.\nNakayama's statements and revelations as Shrine of God were supplemented by Izo Iburi, one of her earliest followers, who developed a position of revelatory leadership as her deputy, answering questions from followers and giving \"timely talks\". His position, which is no longer held in Tenrikyo, was called . The revelatory transmissions of the were written down and collected in large, multi-volume works called . Following Izo's death, a woman called partially carried on this role for a while, although it appears that she did not have the actual title of . Since then, Tenrikyo itself has never had a , although some Tenrikyo splinter groups believe that the revelatory leadership passed from Iburi to their particular founder or foundress.\nNakayama's eldest son obtained a license to practice branch of Shinto, but did so against his mother's wishes. Tenrikyo was designated as one of the thirteen groups included in Sect Shinto between 1908 and 1945, due to the implementation of Heian policy under State Shinto. During this time, Tenrikyo became the first new religion to do social work in Japan, opening an orphanage, a public nursery and a school for the blind.\nAlthough Tenrikyo is now completely separate from Shinto and Buddhism organizationally, it still shares many of the traditions of Japanese religious practice. For instance, many of the objects used in Tenrikyo religious services, such as and , were traditionally used in Japanese ritual, and the method of offering is also traditional.\nReligious services.\nTenrikyo utilises traditional musical instruments in its , such as (wooden clappers), (cymbals), (small gong), (large drum), (shoulder drum), (bamboo flute), , , and . These are used to play music from the , a body of music, dances and songs created by Nakayama. Most of the world's foremost authorities on music (the ancient classical Shinto music of the imperial court of Japan) are also Tenrikyo followers, and music is actively promoted by Tenrikyo, although, strictly speaking, the and are separate musical forms.\nThe , , , , and were traditionally the men's instruments but are now acceptable for women to play. The , , and were traditionally women's instruments and, although not very popular, are now acceptable for men to play as well.\nDaily services.\nThe ( or ) or daily service consists of the performance of the seated service and, optionally, the practice of a chapter or two of the 12 chapters of ( or ) or . The daily service is performed twice a day; once in the morning and then in the evening. The service times are adjusted according to the time of sunrise and sunset but may vary from church to church. Service times at the Jiba in Tenri City go by this time schedule and adjust in the changing of seasons.\nInstruments used in the daily service are the , , , , and (a counter, to count the 21 times the first section is repeated). The is always played by the head minister of the church or mission station. If the head minister is not present, anyone may take their place.\nThe daily service does not need to be performed at a church. It can be done at any time and anywhere, so long as the practitioner faces the direction of the Jiba, or \"home of the parent\".\nThe purpose of the daily service, as taught by Nakayama, is to sweep away the Eight Mental Dusts of the mind.\n ( or ) (lit.\u2009'daily service') is a spontaneous action that is an expression of gratitude and joy for being allowed to \"borrow\" his or her body from God the Parent. Such an action ideally is done as an act of religious devotion out of a wish to help or bring joy to others, without any thought of compensation. can range from helping someone to just a simple smile to brighten another person's day. Examples of common activities that are encouraged include cleaning public bathrooms and parks among other such acts of community service. Doing the work that others want to do least are considered sincere in the eyes of God.\n is a method of \"sweeping\" the \"mental dusts\" that accumulate in a person's mind. The \"mental dusts\" are referring to the Eight Mental Dusts. The official translations of these dusts are: , , , , , , , and .\nThe Tenrikyo Young Men's Association and Tenrikyo Women's Association are Tenrikyo-based groups that perform group activities as public service. To participate in such groups may be considered .\nMonthly services.\n (\u6708\u6b21\u796d) or the monthly service is a performance of the entire , the sacred songs of the service, which is the service for world salvation. Generally, mission headquarters and grand churches (churches with 100 or more others under them) have monthly services performed on the third Sunday of every month; other churches perform on any other Sunday of the month. The monthly service at the Jiba is performed on the 26th of every month, the day of the month in which Tenrikyo was first conceived \u2013 October 26, 1838.\nInstruments used in the monthly service are all of those aforementioned. Performers also include dancers \u2013 three men and three women \u2013 and a singer. Performers wear traditional kimono, which may or may not be required depending on the church.\nDivine Grant of.\nThe Divine Grant of is a healing prayer in which one may attain through attending the nine lectures. When one receives the Divine Grant of , one is considered a (). The is to be administered to those who are suffering from illness to request God's blessings for a recovery. However, recovery requires the sincere effort from both the recipient and the administrator of the to clean their minds of \"mental dust.\" Only with pure minds then can the blessings be received by the recipient through the administering the . It is taught that when God accepts the sincerity of the person administering the and the sincerity of the person to whom it is being administered, a wondrous salvation will be bestowed. This is accomplished through having the recipient be aware of the mental dusts and the teachings of Tenrikyo to remedy their dusty minds.\nTenrikyo centers outside Japan.\nIn recent years Tenrikyo has spread outside Japan, with foreign branches centered primarily in Southeast Asia and the Americas. Tenrikyo maintains centers in:\nSchisms.\nBelow is a non-exhaustive list of religious movements and organizations that are derived from Tenrikyo. They are considered to be heresies by the Tenrikyo Church Headquarters in Tenri.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, (1863\u20131947) founded her own Tenrikyo-derived religion. Asahi Jinja (\u671d\u65e5\u795e\u793e) in Miki, Hy\u014dgo is dedicated to Ide Kuniko.\nMost Tenrikyo-derived religions, including Honmichi, Honbushin, and Kami Ichijokyo, consider the Ofudesaki and Mikagura-uta to be their primary sacred scriptures, and to some extent also the Osashizu. They also typically have their own additional doctrinal texts. These religions consider Nakayama Miki to be their spiritual founder but reject the authority of the Tenrikyo church in Tenri.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53477", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53477", "title": "Dave Berg (cartoonist)", "text": "American cartoonist (1920\u20132002)\nDave Berg (June 12, 1920 in Brooklyn \u2013 May 17, 2002 in Marina del Rey, California) was an American cartoonist, most noted for his five decades of work in \"Mad\" of which \"The Lighter Side of...\" was the most famous.\nEarly life.\nBerg showed early artistic talents, attending Pratt Institute when he was 12 years old, and later studying at Cooper Union. He served a period of time in the Army Air Forces. In 1940, he joined Will Eisner's studio, where he wrote and drew for the Quality Comics line. Berg's work also appeared in Dell Comics and Fawcett Publications, typically on humorous back-up features. Beginning in the mid-1940s, he worked for several years with Stan Lee on comic books at Timely Comics (now known as Marvel Comics), ranging from \"Combat Kelly\" and \"The Ringo Kid\" to \"Tessie the Typist\". He also freelanced for a half-dozen other companies, including EC Comics. Berg retains notoriety as a contributing \u201cgood girl artist\u201d during the 50s and 60s for such publications as editor Abe Goodman's \"Humorama,\" rendering attractive women using pinup stylings generally in the form of one-panel humorous gags. Berg's body of contributions during this period rank him alongside recognized contemporaries such as Bill Ward and Bill Wenzel. Beginning in 1983, he worked for a Jewish children's magazine, \"The Moshiach Times\".\n\"Mad\".\nBerg began at \"Mad\" in 1957, early in Al Feldstein's term as editor. Berg had distinct facial features and was heavyset, so inducing Feldstein to write, \"Physically, Dave looks like he kept his nose to the grindstone a little too long, and the rest of his body in the steam room not long enough.\" For four years, he provided satirical looks at areas such as boating, babysitting, and baseball. In 1961, he started the magazine's \"Lighter Side\" feature, his most famous creation. Berg would take an omnibus topic (such as \"Noise,\" \"Spectators\" or \"Dog Owners\") and deliver approximately 15 short multi-panel cartoons on the subject. Beginning in #218 (October 1980), he abandoned the thematic approach, and thereafter covered multiple topics in each article. Berg often included caricatures of his own family\u2014headed by his cranky hypochondriac alter ego, Roger Kaputnik\u2014as well as of the \"Mad\" editorial staff. Occasionally he drew fellow artists, including Don Martin in #110 (April 1967) and Al Jaffee in #119 (June 1968).\nHis artistic style made Berg one of the more realistic \"Mad\" artists, although his characters managed to sport garish early-1970s wardrobes well into the 1990s. The art chores for a 1993 article, \"The First Day of School 30 Years Ago and Today\", were split between Berg and Rick Tulka, since Berg's old-fashioned appeal made him an ideal choice to depict the gentle nostalgia of 1963. The artist's lightweight gags and sometimes moralistic tone were roughly satirized by the \"National Lampoon\"'s 1971 \"Mad\" parody, which included a hard-hatted conservative and a longhaired hippie finding their only common ground by choking and beating Berg. However, \"The Lighter Side\" had a long run as the magazine's most popular feature. \"Mad\" editor Nick Meglin often sketched layouts of \"Lighter Side\" panels. Sixteen original collections by Berg were published as paperbacks between 1964 and 1987.\nBerg held an honorary doctorate in theology. He produced regular religious-themed work for \"Moshiach Times\" and the B'nai Brith newsletter. His interaction with \"Mad\"'s atheist publisher Bill Gaines was suitably irreverent: Berg would tell Gaines, \"God bless you,\" and Gaines would reply, \"Go to Hell.\"\nFellow \"Mad\" contributor Al Jaffee described Berg's unique personality in 2009: \"Dave had a messianic complex of some sort. He was battling ... he had good and evil inside of him, clashing all the time. It was sad, in a sense, because he wanted to be taken very seriously, and you know, the staffers at \"Mad\" just didn't take anything seriously. Most of all, ourselves ... It came out in a lot of the things he did. He had a very moralistic personality ... He wrote a book called \"My Friend God\". And of course, if you write a book like that, you just know that the \"Mad\" staff is going to make fun of you. We would ask him questions like, \"Dave, when did you and God become such good friends? Did you go to college together, or what?\"\nIn this faith connection, Berg was additionally hired to contribute content to The Magazine For Jewish Children, The Moshiach Times, by Rabbi Dr. Dovid Sholom Pape. According to Pape: \"He was a wonderful writer and humorist, and he had a great Jewish heart. I asked him to prepare a series of cartoons that would, in a humorous way, illustrate basic ideas in Torah. To do this, he invented a fat character called Schlemiel who would always misunderstand things, and then there would be a couple of boys who would correct him.\" In 2002, Berg told an interviewer, \"There was a psychiatrist who filed my \"Lighter Sides\" in categories. When a patient would tell him their troubles, he would pull out one of my sequences and say, 'See, it happens to everyone.'\"\nHis characters occasionally made their way into other artists' works, such as Kaputnik finding himself a patient in a Mort Drucker spoof of \"St. Elsewhere\", tagged \"with apologies to Dave Berg\".\nBerg contributed to \"Mad\" for 46 years until his death, appearing in 368 issues. His final hand-drawn strip appeared in Mad issue #423. His last set of \"Lighter Side\" strips, which had been written but not penciled, were illustrated after Berg's death by 18 of \"Mad\"'s other artists as a final tribute; this affectionate send-off included the magazine's final new contributions from Jack Davis and George Woodbridge. This tribute appeared in Mad issue #427.\nBetween 2008 and 2017, Berg's old \"Lighter Side\" gags were given rewritten word balloons with inappropriately \"un-Berg-like\" humor by longtime \"Mad\" writer Dick DeBartolo and other staffers, while the art was unchanged. The twelve installments of this irregular feature were called \"The Darker Side of the Lighter Side.\"\nBerg's other work included the comic strips \"Citizen Senior\" (1989\u201393), \"Roger Kaputnik\" (1992) and \"Astronuts\" (1994).\nDeath.\nAfter a long battle with cancer, he died in his home in Marina del Rey, California, shortly after midnight on May 17, 2002. Berg was survived by his wife of 52 years, Vivian, and their two children, Mitch and Nancy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53478", "revid": "617132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53478", "title": "Vulcan, Alberta", "text": "Vulcan is a town in southern Alberta, Canada that is surrounded by Vulcan County. It is on Highway 23, midway between the cities of Calgary and Lethbridge. The population of the town was 1,769 in 2021. Now known as the \"Official Star Trek Capital of Canada\", Vulcan has a tourism building made to look like a landed space station, a statue of the original series' \"USS Enterprise\", and other \"Star Trek\" themed attractions.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVulcan was named by a surveyor for the Canadian Pacific Railway after the Roman God of Fire \u2013 Vulcan. Originally, all the streets of Vulcan were named after gods and goddesses of the classical world such as Juno, Mars, and Jupiter.\nThe community was incorporated as a village on December 23, 1912, and then as a town on June 15, 1921. In July 1927, a major tornado destroyed many homes and the new curling rink in the town. That tornado was made famous when a photograph of it approaching Vulcan was used for the \"tornado\" article in \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\nThe first newspaper to serve the area was \"The Vulcan Review\", which began in 1912 and was published for one year. \"The Vulcan Review\" was followed by the \"Vulcan Advocate\" in 1913, which is still being published today as member of Sun Media Community Newspapers part of Postmedia Network.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;Vulcan once had nine grain elevators, more than any other location west of Winnipeg, making it the largest grain shipping point at that time. Due to the changing economics of the agricultural industry, the original elevators were taken down one by one. Today, Vulcan has only one of the \"prairie skyscrapers\" left that once could be seen miles away. Although not original, this last wooden elevator was built in the 1980s.\nA British Commonwealth Air Training Plan air force base, RCAF Station Vulcan, was located southwest of the town during the Second World War. Many of the old hangars still exist and the runways can still be seen. It is now operated as Vulcan/Kirkcaldy Aerodrome and some of the old runways are still in use. There is a second airport, Vulcan Airport.\nIn 2015 the town council voted to form Heritage Advisory Board Committee to manage the historical sites in Vulcan County.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the Town of Vulcan had a population of 1,769 living in 806 of its 876 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 1,917. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nIn the 2016 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the Town of Vulcan recorded a population of 1,917 living in 829 of its 879 total private dwellings, a change from its 2011 population of 1,836. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2016.\nEconomy.\nThe town's economy is mainly tourism and agriculture-based. Wheat, peas, canola and barley are the main crops grown in the Vulcan area.\nOil and gas is another industry that employs many residents of Vulcan.\nTourism.\nSince 1990, Vulcan has hosted the annual Vulcan Tinman Triathlon, which takes place at the beginning of June. This sprint-distance triathlon attracts nearly 1,000 participants. There are classes for adults of all ages and skill levels as well as for teams and children.\nThe town's name has brought some attention that has helped it become a tourist attraction. In the \"Star Trek\" television and feature film series it is the name of the homeworld of Mr. Spock and his fellow Vulcans. Capitalizing on this coincidence, the town has built a \"Star Trek\"\u2013themed tourist station (the Vulcan Tourism &amp; Trek Station), which provides tourist information and displays an extensive donated collection of \"Star Trek\" memorabilia. The Trek Station also offers unique photo opportunities and interactions with iconic Star Trek characters in their ever-evolving Cosplay Costume Collection. Nearby, a replica of the starship \"Enterprise\" from \"\" has been mounted on a pedestal which includes writing from \"Star Trek\" alien languages, Klingon and Vulcan. In 2010, Leonard Nimoy visited the town and was honoured at the town centre with a bust and handprint. A transporter, Doctor's Mural and other Star Trek attractions can be experienced throughout the town. The Vulcan Tourism &amp; Trek Station has hosted an annual Star Trek Convention (held the last weekend in July) \"VulCON\" since 1993 where celebrity guests are \"beamed\" in to spend the weekend with attendees. It is a unique convention in that celebrity guests &amp; Trekkies get to know each other during the Meet &amp; Greet, Q&amp;As and a banquet and dance. This convention attracts hundreds of \"Star Trek\" fans from around the world.\nThe town also hosts another annual event called \"Spock Days\". This is a family-friendly weekend with a parade, children's spaces, a ball tournament, fireworks and more.\nInfrastructure.\nHealthcare.\nVulcan Community Healthcare Centre.\nThe Vulcan Community Healthcare Centre offers emergency and long-term care medical services. The hospital had 5,125 visits for emergency medical services in the 2013/2014 year. It has eight medical beds with 15 long-term care beds and hosts a medical clinic.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nVulcan experiences a dry continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\") with long, cold winters and short, warm summers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53479", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53479", "title": "2060 Chiron", "text": "Ringed centaur/comet\n2060 Chiron is a ringed small Solar System body in the outer Solar System, orbiting the Sun between Saturn and Uranus. Discovered in 1977 by Charles Kowal, it was the first-identified member of a new class of objects now known as centaurs\u2014bodies orbiting between the asteroid belt and the Kuiper belt. Chiron is named after the centaur Chiron in Greek mythology.\nAlthough it was initially called an asteroid and classified only as a minor planet with the designation \"2060 Chiron\", in 1989 it was found to exhibit behavior typical of a comet. Today it is classified as both a minor planet and a comet, and is accordingly also known by the cometary designation 95P/Chiron. More recently, a series of occultation events through the 2010s and early 2020s revealed that Chiron hosts rings, making it one of four minor planets known to have rings (the three others being 10199 Chariklo, Haumea, and Quaoar) and the only known comet to do so.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nChiron was discovered on 1 November 1977 by Charles Kowal from images taken on 18 October at Palomar Observatory. It was given the temporary designation of 1977 UB. It was found near aphelion and at the time of discovery it was the most distant known minor planet. Chiron was even claimed as the tenth planet by the press. Chiron was later found on several precovery images, going back to 1895, which allowed its orbit to be accurately determined. It had been at perihelion in 1945 but was not discovered then because there were few searches being made at that time, and these were not sensitive to slow-moving objects. The Lowell Observatory's survey for distant planets would not have gone down faint enough in the 1930s and did not cover the right region of the sky in the 1940s. The April 1895 precovery image was one month after the March 1895 perihelion.\nNaming.\nThis minor planet was named after Chiron, a half-human, half-horse centaur from Greek mythology. Son of the Titan Cronus and the nymph Philyra, Chiron was the wisest and most just of all centaurs, serving as an instructor of the Greek heroes. The official was published by the Minor Planet Center on 1 April 1978 (M.P.C. 4359). It was suggested that the names of other centaurs be reserved for objects of the same type.\nChiron, along with most major and minor planetary bodies, is not generally given a symbol in astronomy. A symbol was devised for it by Al H. Morrison and is mostly used among astrologers: it resembles a key as well as an OK monogram for Object Kowal.\nOrbit.\nChiron's orbit was found to be highly eccentric (0.37), with perihelion just inside the orbit of Saturn and aphelion just outside the perihelion of Uranus (it does not reach the average distance of Uranus, however). According to the program https://, Chiron's closest approach to Saturn in modern times was around May 720, when it came within million km () of the planet. During this passage Saturn's gravity caused Chiron's semi-major axis to decrease from AU to 13.7 AU. Chiron's orbit does not intersect Uranus' orbit.\nChiron attracted considerable interest because it was the first object discovered in such an orbit, well outside the asteroid belt. Chiron is classified as a centaur, the first of a class of objects orbiting between the outer planets. Chiron is a Saturn\u2013Uranus object because its perihelion lies in Saturn's zone of control and its aphelion lies in that of Uranus. Centaurs are not in stable orbits and will be removed by gravitational perturbation by the giant planets over a period of millions of years, moving to different orbits or leaving the Solar System altogether. Chiron likely comes from the Kuiper belt and will probably become a short-period comet in about a million years. Chiron came to perihelion (closest point to the Sun) in 1996 and aphelion in May 2021.\nPhysical characteristics.\nSpectral type.\nThe visible and near-infrared spectrum of Chiron is neutral, and is similar to that of C-type asteroids and the nucleus of Halley's Comet. The near-infrared spectrum of Chiron shows absence of water ice. The infrared spectrum, however, from 0.97 to 5.27 \u03bcm, as revealed by the James Webb Space Telescope reveals the presence of gas in the coma and a diverse inventory of ices, on the surface or in the coma. Absorption bands of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, ethane, propane, and acetylene were detected, together with water ice in its amorphous state. In addition, irradiation byproducts of methane, carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide were detected under both reducing (e.g., ethane) and oxidizing (e.g., CO3) conditions; however, complex carbon-bearing molecules resulting from the combined irradiation of \u2013CH\u2013 and \u2013CO\u2013 groups (such as H2CO, CH3CHO, or CH3COOH) were not observed, which may indicate a physical or temporal segregation of the methane and carbon dioxide reservoirs. A key finding was the detection of fluorescent methane emissions, providing the first evidence of a gas coma rich in this compound. Gaseous carbon dioxide emission was also identified in the fundamental stretching band at 4.27 \u03bcm. The authors argue that the presence of methane emission is the first proof of the desorption of methane due to a density phase transition of amorphous water ice at low temperature (61 K) previously studied in the laboratory.\nRotation period.\nFour rotational light curves of Chiron were taken from photometric observations between 1989 and 1997. Lightcurve analysis gave a concurring, well-defined rotational period of 5.918 hours with a small brightness variation of 0.05 to 0.09 magnitude, which indicates that the body has a rather spheroidal shape ().\nDiameter.\nThe assumed size of an object depends on its absolute magnitude (H) and the albedo (the amount of light it reflects). In 1984 Lebofsky estimated Chiron to be about 180\u00a0km in diameter. Estimates in the 1990s were closer to 150\u00a0km in diameter. Occultation data from 1993 suggests a diameter of about 180\u00a0km. Combined data from the Spitzer Space Telescope in 2007 and the Herschel Space Observatory in 2011 suggests that Chiron is km in diameter. Therefore, Chiron may be as large as 10199 Chariklo. The diameter of Chiron is difficult to estimate in part because the true absolute magnitude of its nucleus is uncertain due to its highly variable cometary activity.\nCometary behavior.\nIn February 1988, at 12\u00a0AU from the Sun, Chiron brightened by 75 percent. This is behavior typical of comets but not asteroids. Further observations in April 1989 showed that Chiron had developed a cometary coma, A tail was detected in 1993. Chiron differs from other comets in that water is not a major component of its coma, because it is too far from the Sun for water to sublimate. In 1995 carbon monoxide was detected in Chiron in very small amounts, and the derived CO production rate was calculated to be sufficient to account for the observed coma. Cyanide was also detected in the spectrum of Chiron in 1991. At the time of its discovery, Chiron was close to aphelion, whereas the observations showing a coma were done closer to perihelion, perhaps explaining why no cometary behavior had been seen earlier. The fact that Chiron is still active probably means it has not been in its current orbit very long.\nChiron is officially designated as both a comet\u201495P/Chiron\u2014and a minor planet, an indication of the sometimes fuzzy dividing line between the two classes of object. The term proto-comet has also been used. Being about 220\u00a0km in diameter, it is unusually large for a comet nucleus. Chiron was the first member of a new family of Chiron-type comets (CTC) with (TJupiter &gt; 3; a &gt; aJupiter). Other CTCs include: 39P/Oterma, 165P/LINEAR, 166P/NEAT, and 167P/CINEOS. There are also non-centaur asteroids that are simultaneously classified as comets, such as 4015 Wilson\u2013Harrington, 7968 Elst\u2013Pizarro, and 118401 LINEAR.\nSince the discovery of Chiron, other centaurs have been discovered, and nearly all are currently classified as minor planets, but are being observed for possible cometary behavior. 60558 Echeclus has displayed a cometary coma and now also has the cometary designation 174P/Echeclus. After passing perihelion in early 2008, 52872 Okyrhoe significantly brightened.\nRings.\nChiron has rings, similar to the better-established rings of 10199 Chariklo. Based on unexpected occultation events observed in stellar-occultation data obtained on 7 November 1993, 9 March 1994, and 29 November 2011, which were initially interpreted as resulting from jets associated with Chiron's comet-like activity, Chiron's rings were proposed to be in radius and sharply defined. The rings' changing appearance at different viewing angles can largely explain the long-term variation in Chiron's brightness and hence estimates of Chiron's albedo and size. Moreover, it can, by assuming that the water ice is in Chiron's rings, explain the changing intensity of the infrared water-ice absorption bands in Chiron's spectrum, including their disappearance in 2001 (when the rings were edge-on). Also, the geometric albedo of Chiron's rings as determined by spectroscopy is consistent with that used to explain Chiron's long-term brightness variations.\nFurther evidence of the rings was provided by two independent observations of occultations on 28 November 2018 and 15 December 2022, which suggests that their structure is constantly evolving. In the 2018 event Chiron's rings were observed to have less material than in 2011, but seemed to be developing a partial third ring; by the 2022 event there was more material than either of the previous observations, and the third ring had become fully developed. J.L. Ortiz speculated that the extra material in the 2022 event could be from an outburst observed in 2021, which left more material in orbit and thus bolstered the generation of the third ring\u2013this is also expected to be cyclical, maintaining the rings.\nThe preferred pole of Chiron's rings is, in ecliptic coordinates, \"\u03bb\" = , \"\u03b2\" = . The rings' width, separation, and optical depths were observed to be nearly identical to those of Chariklo's rings until the 2018 observation, indicating that the same type of structure had been responsible for both. Moreover, both their rings are within their respective Roche limits, though Chiron's newly developed third ring may be outside of it depending on its density.\nExploration.\nThe \"Chiron Orbiter Mission\" was a mission proposed for NASA's New Frontiers program or Flagship program. It was published in May 2010 and proposed an orbiter mission to Chiron. Its launch date could have varied from as early as 2023 to as late as 2025, depending on budget and propulsion type.\nThere was another mission proposed, part of the Discovery Program known as \"Centaurus\"; if approved, it would have launched between 2026 and 2029 and made a flyby of 2060 Chiron and one other centaur sometime in the 2030s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53480", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53480", "title": "Red dog (card game)", "text": "Game of chance played with cards\nRed dog, also known as yablon and Scottish foghorn, is a game of chance played with cards, in which two cards are dealt and a player bets on whether the rank of a third card would fall between them. While found in some land casinos, its popularity has declined, although it is featured at many online casinos.\nA standard 52-card deck is used. The game may be played with anywhere from one to eight decks, with an increasing number of decks decreasing the house's edge\u2014the house's advantage begins at 3.155% with one deck but falls to 2.751% when eight decks are used. This is in contrast with some other casino card games, such as blackjack, where a higher number of decks used will increase the house edge.\nA close variant is acey deucey.\nRed dog.\nThe game only uses three cards at a time, which are ranked as in poker, with aces high. Suit is irrelevant. A wager is placed, and two cards are placed face up on the table, with three possible outcomes:\nSpread.\nThe spread table is as follows:\nThe house edge table is as follows.\nThe spread probabilities table is as follows.\nAcey deucey.\nAcey deucey, also known as in-between, sheets, between the sheets or maverick, is a simple betting card game. Two cards are dealt to a player, who then bets on whether the rank of a third card will fall between those of the first two.\nRules.\nBefore the action, each player must add their ante into the pot. Two cards are then dealt face-up to one player. That player then bets from nothing to the amount that is in the pot at the time whether or not the third card will numerically fall in between the first two. If the third card falls in between the two other cards, the bettor takes the amount they bet out of the pot; if the third card falls outside of the two other cards, the bettor must add what they bet to the pot; and if the third card matches the numerical value of one of the other two cards, the bettor must add to the pot double what they bet. If two cards of the same value come up, e.g. 2,2 the bettor picks if the next card will be higher or lower and bets. If the next card is the same as the last two, i.e. a 2, the bettor must triple their bet.\nRegionally specific rules.\nThe rules and specifics of the game often vary from region to region. For example in Liaoning province, northeast China the minimum number of players is 4 and each player is required to ante before the first card is turned. Two cards are then dealt face-up to one player. That player then bets from nothing to the amount that is in the pot at the time (during the first time around the table players are only allowed to bet up to half of the pot) whether or not the third card will numerically fall in between the first two. Other regions, such as in the United States, play the game by combining two decks of cards. This adds another dynamic to the game due to the extra number of similar type cards. Beyond that, most of the other rules followed by United States players are similar to those which are observed in the Liaoning province.\nJust about all regions play if the third card falls in between the two other cards, the bettor takes the amount they bet out of the pot; if the third card falls outside of the two other cards, the bettor must add what they bet to the pot; and if the third card matches the numerical value of one of the other two cards, this is referred to as a \"Post\" and the bettor must add to the pot double their own initial bet. If two cards of the same value come up, e.g. 2,2 the bettor picks if the next card will be higher or lower and bets. If the next card is the same as the last two, i.e. a 2, this is considered a \"Post\" and the player is required to pay triple the bet for the hand.\nAces.\nIn addition to this, there is a special rule for Aces. If the first card turned is an Ace the player may choose its value as either the high Ace or the low one. Low Ace is always lower than any other card, including the deuce. If an Ace comes up as the second card turned it is always considered the high Ace. If a player \"Posts\" on an Ace they are required to pay four times their bet for that hand. Aces also cause an automatic loss if it is the third card turned when the first two cards are a match, e.g. 6,6. The best spread in the game is considered to be a low Ace on the left and a high Ace on the right. This is also one of the worst hands to get as you run the risk of the third card being an Ace and having to pay four times your bet for the hand.\nVariations.\nA variation is to split the cards if two end cards are the same value. This requires the bettor to ante in for two hands and the dealer would draw one more card under each of the end cards. After this, the same rules apply.\nSome new rules that increase payouts and betting:\nIn popular culture.\nThe game show \"Card Sharks\" is based on acey deucey and closely resembles the rules. In the show, two players answer high-low survey questions, and guess whether the next card is higher or lower (with duplicates counting as wrong).\nAcey-deucey is often mentioned in the book series \"The Corps\" by W.E.B. Griffin, but that game is a table game, popular with the United States naval forces, and is not this game.\nIn 1978 a type-in program BASIC video game version was distributed via the book BASIC Computer Games.\nAn unsold 1985 game show pilot hosted by Jim McKrell, entitled \"Split Decision,\" had contestants playing the game acey deucey while answering general knowledge questions. Each player picked a card to share and had their own base card, and tried to fit a card in or bust the other player.\nRed dog is a playable casino minigame in the 1998 Game Boy game James Bond 007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53481", "revid": "50380569", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53481", "title": "Game of chance", "text": "Game whose outcome is determined by random events\nA game of chance is in contrast with a game of skill. It is a game whose outcome is strongly influenced by some randomizing device. Common devices used include dice, spinning tops, playing cards, roulette wheels, numbered balls, or in the case of digital games random number generators. A game of chance may be played as gambling if players wager money or anything of monetary value.\nAlternatively, a game of skill is one in which the outcome is determined mainly by mental or physical skill, rather than chance.\nWhile a game of chance may have some skill element to it, chance generally plays a greater role in determining its outcome. A game of skill may also may have elements of chance, but skill plays a greater role in determining its outcome.\nGambling is known in nearly all human societies, even though many have passed laws restricting it. Early people used the knucklebones of sheep as dice. Some people develop a psychological addiction to gambling and will risk food and shelter to continue.\nSkill.\nSome games that involve an element of luck may also require a certain level of skill. This is particularly evident when players need to make decisions based on prior knowledge or incomplete information, as seen in games like blackjack. In contrast, games such as roulette and \"punto banco\" (baccarat) rely more on chance, with players having the choice to determine their bet amount and selection, leaving the outcome largely to luck. Consequently, these games are categorized as games of chance, although a minimal skill component is still involved. \nThe distinction between 'chance' and 'skill' is relevant because in some countries, chance games are illegal or at least regulated, but skill games are not. Since there is no standardized definition, poker, for example, has been ruled a game of chance in Germany and, by at least one New York state Federal judge, a game of skill.\nAddiction.\nPeople who engage in games of chance and gambling can develop a strong dependence on them. This is called psychopathology (addiction) of \"pathological gambling\". According to psychoanalyst Edmund Bergler, there are six characteristics of pathological gamblers:\nState revenues.\nGovernments that authorize games of chance generate significant gambling revenues. \nAccording to the UK Gambling Commission, the government received a total gross gambling revenue of \u00a314.4 billion ($19 billion) in 2018. That was up 45% from a year earlier. \nThe Gambling Commission is an executive non-departmental body of the UK government. It is responsible for regulating gambling in the UK. It also oversees gambling legislation. \nThe state government of Nevada, USA, received gambling revenues totaling $262 billion in 2017. Casino contributions totaled $8522 million, 77% of the total, according to iGaming Business.\nTypes.\nThere are dozens of different types of games of chance. The most popular online casino games are video poker, roulette, craps, blackjack and sports betting. Baccarat is also popular. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53483", "revid": "42158333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53483", "title": "Languages constructed by Tolkien", "text": "Constructed languages\nThe English philologist and author J. R. R. Tolkien created several constructed languages, mostly related to his fictional world of Middle-earth. Inventing languages, something that he called \"glossopoeia\" (paralleling his idea of \"mythopoeia\" or myth-making), was a lifelong occupation for Tolkien, starting in his teens.\nTolkien's glossopoeia has two temporal dimensions: the internal (fictional) timeline of events in Middle-earth described in \"The Silmarillion\" and other writings, and the external timeline of Tolkien's own life during which he often revised and refined his languages and their fictional history. Tolkien scholars have published a substantial volume of Tolkien's linguistic material in the \"History of Middle-earth\" books, and the \"Vinyar Tengwar\" and \"Parma Eldalamberon\" journals. Scholars such as Carl F. Hostetter, David Salo and Elizabeth Solopova have published grammars and studies of the languages. \nHe created a large family of Elvish languages, the best-known and most developed being Quenya and Sindarin. In addition, he sketched in the Mannish languages of Ad\u00fbnaic and Rohirric; the Dwarvish language of Khuzdul; the Entish language; and the Black Speech, in the fiction a constructed language enforced on the Orcs by the Dark Lord Sauron. Tolkien supplemented his languages with several scripts.\nContext.\nTolkien's hobby: glossopoeia.\nTolkien was a professional philologist of ancient Germanic languages, specialising in Old English. Glossopoeia, the construction of languages, was Tolkien's hobby for most of his life. At a little over 13, he helped construct a sound substitution cypher known as \"Nevbosh\", 'new nonsense', which grew to include some elements of actual invented language. Tolkien stated that this was not his first effort in invented languages. Shortly thereafter, he developed a true invented language called Naffarin. One of his early projects was the reconstruction of an unrecorded early Germanic language which might have been spoken by the people of \"Beowulf\" in the Germanic Heroic Age.\nIn 1931, Tolkien gave a lecture about his passion for constructed languages, titled \"A Secret Vice\". Here he contrasts his project of artistic languages constructed for aesthetic pleasure with the pragmatism of international auxiliary languages. The lecture also discusses Tolkien's views on phonaesthetics, citing Greek, Finnish, and Welsh as examples of \"languages which have a very characteristic and in their different ways beautiful word-form\". Part of the lecture was published in \"The Monsters and the Critics, and Other Essays\"; in the part that was not, Tolkien gave the example of \"Fonwegian\", a language with \"no connection whatever with any other known language\". \nBeing a skilled calligrapher, Tolkien invented scripts for his languages. The scripts included Sarati, Cirth, and Tengwar.\nTolkien's theory of invented languages.\nTolkien was of the opinion that the invention of an artistic language in order to be convincing and pleasing must include not only the language's historical development, but also the history of its speakers, and especially the mythology associated with both the language and the speakers. It was this idea that an \"Elvish language\" must be associated with a complex history and mythology of the Elves that was at the core of the development of Tolkien's legendarium.\nTolkien wrote in one of his letters:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;what I think is a primary 'fact' about my work, that it is all of a piece, and fundamentally linguistic in inspiration. ... It is not a 'hobby', in the sense of something quite different from one's work, taken up as a relief-outlet. The invention of languages is the foundation. The 'stories' were made rather to provide a world for the languages than the reverse. To me a name comes first and the story follows. I should have preferred to write in 'Elvish'. But, of course, such a work as \"The Lord of the Rings\" has been edited and only as much 'language' has been left in as I thought would be stomached by readers. (I now find that many would have liked more.) ... It is to me, anyway, largely an essay in 'linguistic aesthetic', as I sometimes say to people who ask me 'what is it all about'.\nThe Tolkien scholar and folklorist Dimitra Fimi questions this claim. In particular, his September 1914 \"The Voyage of Earendel the Evening Star\", based on the Old English poem Crist 1, shows that he was starting to think about a mythology before he started to sketch his first invented Middle-earth language, Qenya, in March 1915. Further, the steps that led to his first attempt at the mythology, the 1917 draft of \"The Book of Lost Tales\", involving the character of Earendel in its first story, did not involve his invented languages. Tolkien was, rather, in Fimi's view, emphasizing that language and myth \"began to flow together when I was an undergraduate [at Oxford, 1911\u20131915]\" (as Tolkien wrote in 1954), and stayed that way for the rest of his life.\n\"Lhammas\".\nIn 1937, Tolkien wrote the \"Lhammas\", a linguistic treatise addressing the relationships of the languages spoken in Middle-earth during the First Age, principally the Elvish languages. The text purports to be a translation of an Elvish work, written by one Pengolodh, whose historical works are presented as being the main source of the narratives in \"The Silmarillion\" concerning the First Age.\nThe \"Lhammas\" exists in three versions, the shortest one being called the \"Lammasathen\". The main linguistic thesis in this text is that the languages of Middle-earth are all descended from the language of the Valar (the \"gods\"), Valarin, and divided into three branches:\nMiddle-earth languages.\nElvish languages.\nInternal and external histories.\nInternally, in the fiction, the Elvish language family is a group of languages related by descent from a common ancestor, called the proto-language.\nExternally, in Tolkien's life, he constructed the family from around 1910, working on it up to his death in 1973. He constructed the grammar and vocabulary of at least fifteen languages and dialects in roughly three periods:\nTolkien worked out much of the etymological background of his Elvish languages during the 1930s, resulting in \"The Etymologies\".\nQuenya.\nTolkien based Quenya pronunciation more on Latin than on Finnish, though it has elements derived from both languages. Thus, Quenya lacks the vowel harmony and consonant gradation present in Finnish, and accent is not always on the first syllable of a word. Typical Finnish elements like the front vowels \"\u00f6\", \"\u00e4\" and \"y\" are lacking in Quenya, but phonological similarities include the absence of aspirated unvoiced stops or the development of the syllables \"ti\" &gt; \"si\" in both languages. The combination of a Latin basis with Finnish phonological rules resulted in a product that resembles Italian in many respects, which was Tolkien's favourite modern Romance language.\nQuenya grammar is agglutinative and mostly suffixing, i.e. different word particles are joined by appending them. It has basic word classes of verbs, nouns and pronouns/determiners, adjectives and prepositions. Nouns are inflected for case and number. Verbs are inflected for tense and aspect, and for agreement with subject and object. In early Quenya, adjectives agree with the noun they modify in case and number; in later Quenya, this agreement disappears. The basic word order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object.\nSindarin.\nTolkien wrote that he gave Sindarin \"a linguistic character very like (though not identical with) British-Welsh ... because it seems to fit the rather 'Celtic' type of legends and stories told of its speakers\".\nUnlike Quenya, Sindarin is mainly a fusional language with some analytic tendencies. It can be distinguished from Quenya by the rarity of vowel endings, and the use of voiced plosives \"b d g\", rare in Quenya found only after nasals and liquids. Early Sindarin formed plurals by the addition of \"-\u012b\", which vanished but affected the preceding vowels (as in Welsh and Old English): S. , pl. , S. , pl. \"Yrch\". Sindarin forms plurals in multiple ways.\nMannish languages.\nAd\u00fbnaic and Westron.\nTolkien devised Ad\u00fbnaic (or N\u00famen\u00f3rean), the language spoken in N\u00famenor, shortly after World War II, and thus at about the time he completed \"The Lord of the Rings\", but before he wrote the linguistic background of the Appendices. Ad\u00fbnaic is intended as the language from which Westron (also called \"Ad\u00fbni\") is derived; Westron became the lingua franca for all the peoples of Middle-earth: This added a depth of historical development to the Mannish languages. Ad\u00fbnaic was intended to have a \"faintly Semitic flavour\". Its development began with \"The Notion Club Papers\" (written in 1945). It is there that the most extensive sample of the language is found, revealed to one of the (modern-day) protagonists, Lowdham, of that story in a visionary dream of Atlantis. Its grammar is sketched in the unfinished \"Lowdham's Report on the Adunaic Language\".\nTolkien remained undecided whether the language of the Men of N\u00famenor should be derived from the original Mannish language (as in Ad\u00fbnaic), or if it should be derived from \"the Elvish Noldorin\" (i.e. Quenya) instead. In \"The Lost Road and Other Writings\", it is implied that the N\u00famen\u00f3reans spoke Quenya, and that Sauron, hating all things Elvish, taught the N\u00famen\u00f3reans the old Mannish tongue they themselves had forgotten.\nRohirric.\nTolkien called the language of Rohan \"Rohanese\". He only gave a few actual Rohirric words:\nOnly one proper name is given, \"T\u00fbrac\", an old word for King, the Rohirric for Th\u00e9oden. That in turn is the Old English word \"\u00fe\u00e9oden\", meaning \"leader of a people\", \"king\" or \"prince\". As with other descriptive names in his legendarium, Tolkien uses this name to create the impression that the text is \"'historical', 'real' or 'archaic'\".\nDwarvish.\nSome samples of Khuzdul, the language of the Dwarves, are given in \"The Lord of the Rings\". The explanation here is a little different from the \"Mannish\" languages: as \"Khuzdul\" was supposedly kept secret by the Dwarves and never used in the presence of outsiders (not even Dwarvish given names), it was not \"translated\" by any real-life historical language, and such limited examples as there are in the text are given in the \"original\". \nKhuzdul was designed to resemble a Semitic language, with a system of triconsonantal roots and other parallels especially to Hebrew, just as some resemblances between the Dwarves and the Jews are intentional.\nEntish.\nThe language of the Ents is briefly described in \"The Lord of the Rings\". As the Ents were first taught to speak by Elves, Entish appears related to the Elvish languages. However, the Ents continued to develop their language. It is described as long and sonorous, a tonal language somewhat like a woodwind instrument. Only the Ents spoke Entish as no others could master it. Even the Elves, master linguists, could not learn Entish, nor did they attempt to record it because of its complex sound structure:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo illustrate these properties, Tolkien provides the word \"a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lindor-bur\u00fame\", meaning \"hill\". He described it as a \"probably very inaccurate\" sampling of the language.\nBlack Speech.\nTolkien devised little of the Black Speech beyond the Rhyme of the Rings. He intentionally made it sound harsh but with a proper grammar. He stated that it was an agglutinative language; it has been likened to the extinct Hurrian language of northern Mesopotamia. \nIn the fiction, the Black Speech was created by the Dark Lord Sauron to be the official language of all the lands and peoples under his control: it was thus both in reality and in the fiction a constructed language. The Orcs are said never to have accepted it willingly; the language mutated into many mutually unintelligible Orkish dialects, so that Orcs communicated with each other mainly in a debased Westron.\nAnalysis.\nOrigins.\nTolkien developed a particular love for the Finnish language. He described the finding of a Finnish grammar book as \"like discovering a complete wine-cellar filled with bottles of an amazing wine of a kind and flavour never tasted before\". Finnish morphology, particularly its rich system of inflection, in part gave rise to Quenya. \nAnother of Tolkien's favourites was Welsh, and features of Welsh phonology found their way into Sindarin.\nLinguistic mapping.\nWhen writing \"The Lord of the Rings\" (1954\u201355), a sequel to \"The Hobbit\" (1937), Tolkien came up with the literary device of using real languages to \"translate\" fictional languages. He pretended to have translated the original language Westron (named \"Ad\u00fbni\" in Westron) or Common Speech (\"S\u00f4val Ph\u00e2r\u00eb\", in Westron) into English. This device of rendering an \"imaginary\" language with a \"real\" one was carried further by rendering:\nFurthermore, to parallel the Celtic substratum in England, he used Old Welsh names to render the Dunlendish names of Buckland Hobbits (e.g., \"Meriadoc\" for \"Kalimac\"). The whole device of linguistic mapping was essentially a fix for the problems Tolkien had created for himself by using real Norse names for the Dwarves in \"The Hobbit\", rather than inventing new names in Khuzdul. This seemed a clever solution, as it allowed him to explain the book's use of Modern English as representing Westron. \nBecause of this, Tolkien did not need to work out the details of Westron grammar or vocabulary in any detail. He does give some examples of Westron words in Appendix F to \"The Lord of the Rings\", where he summarizes Westron's origin and role as \"lingua franca\" in Middle-earth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The language represented in this history by English was the Westron or 'Common Speech' of the West-lands of Middle-earth in the Third Age. In the course of that age it had become the native language of nearly all the speaking-peoples (save the Elves) who dwelt within the bounds of the old kingdoms of Arnor and Gondor ... At the time of the War of the Ring at the end of the age these were still its bounds as a native tongue. (Appendix F)\nRohirric is represented in \"The Lord of the Rings\" by Old English because Tolkien chose to make the relationship between Rohirric and the Common Speech similar to that of Old English and Modern English.\nTolkien stated in \"The Two Towers\" that the name Orthanc had \"by design or chance\" two meanings. In Sindarin it meant \"Mount Fang\", while in the language of Rohan he said it meant \"Cunning Mind\". The author Robert Foster notes that \"or\u00feanc\" genuinely does mean \"cunning\" in Old English, so that the homonym Tolkien had in mind was between Sindarin and Old English, that is, translated or represented Rohirric. Foster comments that since it would be unlikely for a homonym also to exist between these two languages and actual Rohirric, and for the Old English and the Rohirric to be synonyms as well, Tolkien had made an error.\nStudy.\nThe first published monograph dedicated to the Elvish languages was \"An Introduction to Elvish\" (1978) edited by Jim Allan (published by Bran's Head Books). It is composed of articles written before the publication of \"The Silmarillion\". Ruth Noel wrote a book on Middle-earth's languages in 1980.\nWith the publication of much linguistic material during the 1990s, especially in the \"History of Middle-earth\" series, and the \"Vinyar Tengwar\" and \"Parma Eldalamberon\" material published during the early 2000s from among the 3000 pages of linguistic material held by the team of editors including Carl F. Hostetter, Tolkien's constructed languages have become much more accessible.\nDavid Salo's 2007 \"A Gateway to Sindarin\" presents Sindarin's grammar concisely. Elizabeth Solopova's 2009 \"Languages, Myth and History\" gives an overview of the linguistic traits of the various languages invented by Tolkien and the history of their creation.\nA few fanzines were dedicated to the subject, like \"Tyali\u00eb Tyelelli\u00e9va\" published by Lisa Star, and \"Quettar\", the Bulletin of the Linguistic Fellowship of The Tolkien Society, published by Julian C. Bradfield. \"Tengwesti\u00eb\" is an online publication of the Elvish Linguistic Fellowship.\nInternet mailing lists and forums that have been dedicated to Tolkien's constructed languages include Tolklang, Elfling and Lambengolmor. Since 2005, there has been an International Conference on J.R.R. Tolkien's Invented Languages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53484", "revid": "30162787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53484", "title": "Narwhal", "text": "Medium-sized toothed whale species\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe narwhal (Monodon monoceros) is a species of toothed whale native to the Arctic. It is the only member of the genus Monodon and one of two living representatives of the family Monodontidae. The narwhal is a stocky cetacean with a relatively blunt snout, a large melon, and a shallow ridge in place of a dorsal fin. Males of this species have a large () long tusk, which is a protruding left canine thought to function as a weapon, a tool for feeding, in attracting mates or sensing water salinity. Specially adapted slow-twitch muscles, along with the jointed neck vertebrae and shallow dorsal ridge allow for easy movement through the Arctic environment, where the narwhal spends extended periods at great depths. The narwhal's geographic range overlaps with that of the similarly built and closely related beluga whale, and the animals are known to interbreed.\nNarwhals inhabit the Arctic waters of Canada, Greenland and Russia. Every year, they migrate to ice-free summering grounds, usually in shallow waters, and often return to the same sites in subsequent years. Their diet mainly consists of polar and Arctic cod, Greenland halibut, cuttlefish, shrimp, and armhook squid. Diving to depths of up to , the narwhal is among the deepest-diving cetaceans. The animals typically travel in groups of three to eight, with aggregations of up to 1,000 occurring in the summer months. Narwhals mate among the offshore pack ice from March to May, and the young are born between July and August of the following year. When communicating amongst themselves, narwhals use a variety of clicks, whistles and knocks.\nThere are an estimated 170,000 living narwhals, and the species is listed as being of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The population is threatened by the effects of climate change, such as reduction in ice cover and human activities such as pollution and hunting. Narwhals have been hunted for thousands of years by Inuit in northern Canada and Greenland for meat and ivory, and regulated subsistence hunting continues to this day.\nTaxonomy.\nThe narwhal was scientifically described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 publication \"Systema Naturae\". The word \"narwhal\" comes from the Old Norse , meaning 'corpse-whale', which possibly refers to the animal's grey, mottled skin and its habit of remaining motionless when at the water's surface, a behaviour known as \"logging\" that usually happens in the summer. The scientific name, \"Monodon monoceros\", is derived from Ancient Greek, meaning 'single-tooth single-horn'.\nThe narwhal is most closely related to the beluga whale (\"Delphinapterus leucas\"). Together, these two species comprise the only extant members of the family Monodontidae. Monodontids are distinguished by their pronounced melons (acoustic sensory organs), short snouts and the absence of a true dorsal fin.\nAlthough the narwhal and beluga are classified as separate genera, there is some evidence of interbreeding between the two. Most prominent are the remains of a whale, described by marine zoologists as unlike any known species, which were found in West Greenland around 1990. It had features midway between a narwhal and a beluga, indicating that the remains belonged to a hybrid between the two species (a 'narluga'); this was confirmed by a 2019 DNA analysis. Whether the hybrid itself could breed remains unknown.\nEvolution.\nResults of a genetic study reveal that porpoises and monodontids are closely related, forming a separate clade which diverged from other dolphins about 11 million years ago (mya). A 2018 molecular analysis of monodontid fossils indicates that they separated from Phocoenidae (porpoises) around 10.82 to 20.12 mya, and they are considered to be sister taxa. A later phylogenetic study conducted in 2020 suggested that the narwhal split from the beluga whale around 4.98 mya, based on data from mitochondrial DNA.\nThe fossil species \"Casatia thermophila\" of early Pliocene central Italy was described as a possible narwhal ancestor when it was discovered in 2019. \"Bohaskaia\", \"Denebola\" and \"Haborodelphis\" are other extinct genera known from the Pliocene of the United States. Fossil evidence shows that prehistoric monodontids lived in tropical waters. They may have migrated to Arctic and subarctic waters in response to changes in the marine food chain.\nThe following phylogenetic tree is based on a 2019 study of the family Monodontidae.\nDescription.\nThe narwhal has a robust body with a short, blunt snout, small upcurved flippers, and convex to concave tail flukes. Adults measure in length and weigh . Male narwhals attain sexual maturity at 12 to 20 years of age, reaching a length of . Females reach sexual maturity at a younger age, between 8 and 9 years old, when they are about long. On average, males are about longer and more than 75% heavier than females.\nThe colouration of the narwhal consists of a mottled pattern, with blackish-brown markings over a white background. At birth, the skin is light grey, and when sexually mature, white patches grow on the navel and genital slit; such whitening occurs throughout life, resulting in aged narwhals being almost purely white. Unlike most whales, the narwhal has a shallow dorsal ridge, rather than a dorsal fin, possibly an evolutionary adaptation to make swimming under ice easier or to facilitate rolling. The neck vertebrae are also jointed, instead of being fused as in most whales, which allows for a greater range of neck flexibility. These characteristics are shared by the beluga whale. Furthermore, male and female narwhals have differently shaped tail flukes; the former are bent inward, while the latter are swept back on the front margins. This is thought to be an adaptation for reducing drag caused by the tusk.\nThe skeletal muscles of narwhals are highly adapted for prolonged periods of deep-sea foraging. During such activities, oxygen is reserved in the muscles, which are typically slow-twitch, enabling greater endurance and manouverability. Narwhals also have a comparatively high amount of myoglobin in their body, which helps to facilitate deeper dives. It has a dense layer of blubber, around thick. This fat accounts for a third of the body mass and helps insulate from cold ocean temperatures.\nTusk and dentition.\nThe most conspicuous trait of male narwhals is a long, spiralled tusk, which is a canine tooth that projects from the left side of the upper jaw. Both sexes have a pair of tusks embedded in the upper jaw, which in males erupt from the lip somewhere between two and three years of age. The tusk grows throughout the animal's life, reaching lengths of . It is hollow and weighs up to . Some males may grow two tusks, occurring when the right canine also protrudes through the lip. Females rarely grow tusks: when they do, the tusks are typically smaller than those of males, with less noticeable spirals.\nCurrent scientific consensus indicates that narwhal tusks are secondary sexual characteristics which indicate social status. Further functions of the narwhal tusk are debated: while some biologists suggest that narwhals use their tusks in fights, others argue that they may be of use in feeding. The tusk is also a highly innervated sensory organ with millions of nerve endings, allowing the narwhal to sense temperature variability in its surroundings. These nerves may also be able to detect changes in particle concentration and water pressure. According to Martin Nweeia, male narwhals may rid themselves of encrustations on their tusks by rubbing them together, as opposed to posturing displays of aggressive male-to-male rivalry. Drone footage from August 2016 in Tremblay Sound, Nunavut, revealed that narwhals used their tusks to tap and stun small Arctic cod, making them easier to catch for feeding. Females, who usually do not have tusks, live longer than males, hence the tusk cannot be essential to the animal's survival. It is generally accepted that the primary function of the narwhal tusk is associated with sexual selection.\nAlongside its tusk, the narwhal has a single pair of small vestigial teeth that reside in open tooth sockets in the upper jaw. These teeth, which differ in form and composition, encircle the exposed tooth sockets laterally, posteriorly, and ventrally. Vestigial teeth in male narwhals are commonly shed in the palate. The varied morphology and anatomy of small teeth indicate a path of evolutionary obsolescence.\nDistribution.\nThe narwhal is found in the Atlantic and Russian areas of the Arctic Ocean. Individuals are commonly recorded in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, such as in the northern part of Hudson Bay, in Hudson Strait, in Baffin Bay, off the east coast of Greenland and in a strip running east from the northern end of Greenland to eastern Russia (170\u00b0 east). Land in this strip includes Svalbard, Franz Joseph Land and Severnaya Zemlya. The northernmost sightings of narwhals occurred north of Franz Joseph Land, at about 85\u00b0 north. There are an estimated 12,500 narwhals in the northern Hudson Bay, whereas around 140,000 reside in Baffin Bay.\nMigration.\nNarwhals exhibit seasonal migration, with a high fidelity of return to preferred ice-free summering grounds, usually in shallow waters. In summer months, they move closer to the coast, often in pods of 10\u2013100 individuals. In the winter, they move to deeper waters offshore, under thick pack ice, surfacing in narrow fissures or in wider fractures known as leads. As spring comes, these leads open up into channels and the narwhals return to the coastal bays. Narwhals in Baffin Bay typically travel to northern Canada and Greenland between June and September. After this period, they travel about south to the Davis Strait, and stay there until April. During winter, narwhals from Canada and West Greenland regularly visit the pack ice of the Davis Strait and Baffin Bay along the continental slope which contains less than 5% open water and hosts a high density of Greenland halibut.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nNarwhals normally congregate in groups of three to eight individuals. Groups may be \"nurseries\" with only females and young, or can contain only juveniles or adult males (\"bulls\"); mixed groups can occur at any time of year. In the summer, several groups come together, forming larger aggregations which can contain 500 to over 1,000 individuals. Male narwhals have been observed rubbing each other's tusks, a behaviour known as \"tusking\".\nWhen in their wintering waters, narwhals make some of the deepest dives recorded for cetaceans, diving to at least over 15 times per day, with many dives reaching . The greatest dive depth recorded is . Dives last up to 25 minutes, and vary in depth depending on the season and local variation between environments. For example, in the Baffin Bay wintering grounds, narwhals tend to dive deep within the steep coasts, typically south of Baffin Bay. This suggests differences in habitat structure, prey availability, or genetic adaptations between subpopulations. In the northern wintering grounds, narwhals do not dive as deep as the southern population, in spite of greater water depths in these areas. This is mainly attributed to prey being concentrated nearer to the surface, which causes narwhals to alter their foraging strategies.\nDiet.\nNarwhals have a restricted and specialised diet. Due to the lack of well-developed dentition, narwhals are believed to feed by swimming close to prey and sucking them into the mouth. A study of the stomach contents of 73 narwhals found Arctic cod (\"Boreogadus saida\") to be the most commonly consumed prey, followed by Greenland halibut (\"Reinhardtius hippoglossoides\"). Large quantities of Boreo-Atlantic armhook squid (\"Gonatus fabricii\") were also discovered. Male specimens had a higher likelihood of showing two additional prey species within their stomach contents: polar cod (\"Arctogadus glacialis\") and redfish (\"Sebastes marinus\"), both of which are found at depths of more than . The study also concluded that the size of prey did not differ between genders or age groups. Other items found within narwhal stomach contents include wolffish, capelin, skate eggs and sometimes rocks.\nNarwhal diet varies between seasons. In winter, narwhals feed on demersal prey, mostly flatfish, under dense pack ice. During the summer, they eat mostly Arctic cod and Greenland halibut, with other fish such as polar cod making up the remainder of their diet. Narwhals consume more food in the winter months than they do in summer.\nBreeding.\nMost female narwhals reproduce by the time they are six to eight years old. Courtship and mating behaviour for the species has been recorded from March to May, when they live among offshore pack ice, and is thought to involve a dominant male mating with several partners. The average gestation period lasts 15 months, and births appear to be most frequent between July and August. Female narwhals have a birth interval of around 2\u20133 years. As with most marine mammals, only a single calf is born, averaging in length with white or light grey pigmentation. Summer population surveys along different coastal inlets of Baffin Island found that calf numbers varied from 0.05% of 35,000 in Admiralty Inlet, to 5% of 10,000 total in Eclipse Sound. These findings suggest that higher calf counts may reflect calving and nursery habitats in favourable inlets.\nNewborn calves begin their lives with a thin layer of blubber. The blubber thickens as they nurse their mother's milk, which is rich in fat; calves are dependent on milk for about 20 months. This long lactation period gives calves time to learn the skills they will need to survive as they mature. Narwhals are among the few animals that undergo menopause and live for decades after they have finished breeding. Females in this phase may continue to protect calves in the pod. A 2024 study concluded that five species of toothed whale evolved menopause to acquire higher overall longevity, although their reproductive periods did not change. To explain this, scientists hypothesised that calves of these species require the assistance of (post-)menopausal females for an enhanced chance at survival, as they are extremely difficult for a single female to successfully rear.\nCommunication.\nLike most toothed whales, narwhals use sound to navigate and hunt for food. They primarily vocalise through clicks, whistles and knocks, created by air movement between chambers near the blowhole. The frequency of these sounds ranges from 0.3 to 125 hertz, while those used for echolocation typically fall between 19 and 48 hertz. Sounds are reflected off the sloping front of the skull and focused by the animal's melon: a mass of fat which can be controlled through surrounding musculature. Echolocation clicks are used for detecting prey and locating barriers at short distances. Whistles and throbs are most commonly used to communicate with other pod members. Calls recorded from the same pod are more similar than calls from different pods, suggesting the possibility of group- or individual-specific calls. Narwhals sometimes adjust the duration and pitch of their pulsed calls to maximise sound propagation in varying acoustic environments. Other sounds produced by narwhals include trumpeting and \"squeaking-door sounds\". The narwhal vocal repertoire is similar to that of the beluga whale. However, the frequency ranges, durations, and repetition rates of narwhal clicks differ from those of belugas.\nLongevity and mortality factors.\nAge determination techniques using the number of periosteum layers in the lower jaw reveal that narwhals live an average of 50 years, though techniques using amino acid dating from the lens of the eyes suggest that female narwhals can reach 115\u00b110 years and male narwhals can live to 84\u00b19 years.\nDeath by suffocation often occurs when narwhals fail to migrate before the Arctic freezes over in late autumn. This is known as \"sea-ice entrapment\". Narwhals drown if open water is no longer accessible and ice is too thick for them to break through. Breathing holes in ice may be up to apart, which limits the use of foraging grounds. These holes must be at least wide to allow an adult whale to breathe. Narwhals also die of starvation from entrapment events.\nIn 1914\u20131915, around 1,000 narwhal carcasses were discovered after entrapment events, most occurring in areas such as Disko Bay in West Greenland. Several cases of sea entrapment were recorded in 2008\u20132010, during the Arctic winter, including in some places where such events had never been recorded before. This suggests later departure dates from summering grounds. Wind and currents move sea ice from adjacent locations to Greenland, leading to fluctuations in concentration. Due to their tendency of returning to the same areas, changes in weather and ice conditions are not always associated with narwhal movement toward open water. It is currently unclear to what extent sea ice changes pose a danger to narwhals.\nNarwhals are preyed upon by polar bears and orcas. In some instances, the former have been recorded waiting at breathing holes for young narwhals, while the latter were observed surrounding and killing entire narwhal pods. To escape predators such as orcas, narwhals may use prolonged submersion to hide under ice floes rather than relying on speed.\nResearchers found bacteria of the \"Brucella\" genus in the bloodstreams of numerous narwhals throughout the course of a 19-year study. They were also recorded with whale lice species such as \"Cyamus monodontis\" and \"Cyamus nodosus\". Other pathogens that affect narwhals include \"Toxoplasma gondii\", morbillivirus, and papillomavirus. In 2018, a female narwhal was recorded with an alphaherpesvirus in her system.\nConservation.\nThe narwhal is listed as a species of least concern by the IUCN Red List. As of 2017, the global population is estimated to be 123,000 mature individuals out of a total of 170,000. There were about 12,000 narwhals in Northern Hudson Bay in 2011, and around 49,000 near Somerset Island in 2013. There are approximately 35,000 in Admiralty Inlet, 10,000 in Eclipse Sound, 17,000 in Eastern Baffin Bay, and 12,000 in Jones Sound. Population numbers in Smith Sound, Inglefield Bredning and Melville Bay are 16,000, 8,000 and 3,000, respectively. There are roughly 800 narwhals in the waters off Svalbard.\nIn the 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act, the United States banned imports of products made from narwhal parts. They are listed on Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS). These committees restrict international trading of live animals and their body parts, as well as implementing sustainable action plans. The species is classified as special concern under the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC), which aims to classify the risk levels of species in the country.\nIn 2025 the United Kingdom protected narwhals under the Ivory Act, which forbids trade in teeth and tusks except for \"artistic and cultural artifacts.\"\nThreats.\nNarwhals are hunted for their skin, meat, teeth, tusks and carved vertebrae, which are commercially traded. About 1,000 narwhals are killed per year: 600 in Canada and 400 in Greenland. Canadian catches were steady at this level in the 1970s, dropped to 300\u2013400 per year in the late 1980s and 1990s and have risen again since 1999. Greenland caught more, 700\u2013900 per year, in the 1980s and 1990s.\nIn Canada and Greenland, Narwhal tusks are sold both carved and uncarved. Per hunted narwhal, an average of one to two vertebrae and teeth are sold. In Greenland, the skin () is sold commercially to fish factories, and in Canada to other communities. Based on an analysis of 2007 narwhal hunts in Hudson Bay, a 2013 paper estimated that gross revenue per narwhal was CA$ (US$1). Hunts receive subsidies, but they continue mainly to support tradition, rather than for profit. Economic analysis noted that whale watching may be an alternate source of revenue.\nAs narwhals grow, bioaccumulation of heavy metals takes place within their bodies. It is thought that pollution in the ocean is the primary cause of bioaccumulation in marine mammals; this may lead to health problems for the narwhal population. When bioaccumulating, numerous metals appear in the blubber, liver, kidney and musculature. A study found that the blubber was nearly devoid of these metals, whereas the liver and kidneys had a dense concentration of them. Relative to the liver, the kidney has a greater concentration of zinc and cadmium, while lead, copper and mercury were not nearly as abundant. Individuals of different weight and sex showed differences in the concentration of metals in their organs.\nNarwhals are one of the Arctic marine mammals most vulnerable to climate change due to sea ice decline, especially in their northern wintering grounds such as the Baffin Bay and Davis Strait regions. Satellite data collected from these areas shows the amount of sea ice has been markedly reduced from what it was previously. It is thought that narwhals' foraging ranges reflect patterns they acquired early in life, which improves their capacity to obtain the food supplies they need for the winter. This strategy focuses on strong site fidelity rather than individual-level responses to local prey distribution, resulting in focal foraging areas during the winter. As such, despite changing conditions, narwhals will continue to return to the same areas during migration.\nReduction in sea ice has possibly led to an increased exposure to predation. In 2002, hunters in Siorapaluk experienced an increase in the number of caught narwhals, but this increase did not seem to be linked to enhanced endeavour, implying that climate change may be making the narwhal more vulnerable to hunting. Scientists recommend assessing population numbers, assigning sustainable quotas, and ensuring local acceptance of sustainable development. Seismic surveys associated with oil exploration disrupt the narwhal's normal migration patterns. These disturbed migrations may also be associated with increased sea ice entrapment.\nRelationship with humans.\nNarwhals have coexisted alongside circumpolar peoples for millennia. Their long, distinctive tusks were often held with fascination throughout human history. These tusks were prized for their supposed healing powers, and were worn on staffs and thrones. Depictions of narwhal tusks in works of art such as \"The Lady and the Unicorn\" have found a prevalent place in human arts.\nInuit.\nNarwhals have been hunted by Inuit to the same extent as other sea mammals, such as seals and whales. Almost all parts of the narwhal\u2014the meat, skin, blubber and organs\u2014are consumed. , the raw skin and attached blubber, is considered a delicacy. As a custom, one or two vertebrae per animal are used for tools and art. The skin is an important source of vitamin C, which is otherwise difficult to obtain in the Arctic Circle. In some places in Greenland, such as Qaanaaq, traditional hunting methods are used and whales are harpooned from handmade kayaks. In other parts of Greenland and Northern Canada, high-speed boats and hunting rifles are used.\nIn Inuit legend, the narwhal's tusk was created when a woman with harpoon rope tied around her waist was dragged into the ocean after the harpoon had stuck into a large narwhal. She was then transformed into a narwhal; her hair, which she was wearing in a twisted knot, became the spiralling narwhal tusk.\nTusk trade.\nIn Europe, narwhal tusks were highly sought after for centuries. This stems from a medieval belief that narwhal tusks were the horns of the legendary unicorn. Considered to have magical properties, narwhal tusks were used to counter poisoning, and all sorts of diseases such as measles and rubella. The rise of modern science towards the end of the 17th century led to a decreased belief in magic and alchemy. After the unicorn notion was scientifically refuted, narwhal tusks were rarely employed for magical purposes.\nVikings and Greenland Norse likely began the trade of narwhal tusks, which, via European channels, would later reach markets in the Middle East and East Asia. It is unclear if they hunted the narwhals themselves or mainly recovered the tusks from the corpses of animals killed by orcas. Narwhal tusks were given as state gifts to kings and queens throughout medieval Europe, with the price of narwhal tusks said to have been a couple of hundred times greater than their weight in gold during the 18th and 19th centuries. Ivan the Terrible had a jewellery-covered narwhal tusk on his deathbed, while Elizabeth I received a narwhal tusk allegedly valued at \u00a310,000 pounds sterling from the privateer Martin Frobisher. Both items were staples in cabinets of curiosities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53485", "revid": "36510957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53485", "title": "Somerset County", "text": "Somerset County may refer to:\nUnited States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "53486", "revid": "17005604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53486", "title": "Tracey Ullman", "text": "British-American actress (born 1959)\nTracey Ullman (born Trace Ullman; 30 December 1959) is a British-American actress, singer, dancer, screenwriter, producer, director, and author. Despite being frequently referred to as a comedian, Ullman considers herself a character actress. Critics have lauded her ability to shift seamlessly in and out of character and accents, with many dubbing her the \"female Peter Sellers\". \nUllman began her career as a dramatic actress on stage, as well as in the British soap opera \"Mackenzie\", playing Lisa Mackenzie. After an award-winning performance in the improvised play \"Four in a Million\" at the Royal Court Theatre, she branched out into comedy. She starred in the British television sketch comedies \"A Kick Up the Eighties\" (with Rik Mayall and Miriam Margolyes) and \"Three of a Kind\" (with Lenny Henry and David Copperfield), the latter winning her a BAFTA in 1984. After a brief singing career (which garnered three top-ten singles), she appeared as Candice Valentine in \"Girls on Top\" with Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders.\nUllman emigrated from the United Kingdom to the United States. She would go on to star in her own network television comedy series, \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", from 1987 to 1990, which also featured the first appearances of the long-running animated media franchise \"The Simpsons\". She later produced programmes for HBO, including \"Tracey Takes On...\" (1996\u201399) garnering numerous awards. She has appeared in several feature films, including \"Plenty\" (1985) which earned her a BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actress nomination.\nIn 2016, she returned to British television with the BBC sketch comedy show \"Tracey Ullman's Show\", her first project for the broadcaster in over 30 years. This led to the creation of the topical comedy series \"Tracey Breaks the News\" in 2017.\nIn 2017, Ullman was reportedly Britain's richest comedian and the second-richest British actress, with an estimated wealth of \u00a380 million. She is the recipient of numerous accolades, including twelve American Comedy Awards, seven Primetime Emmy Awards, two British Academy Film Awards, four Satellite Awards, a Golden Globe Award, and a Screen Actors Guild Award.\nEarly life.\nTracey Ullman was born in Slough, Buckinghamshire (now Berkshire), the younger of two daughters, to Doreen (n\u00e9e\u00a0Cleaver; 1929\u20132015), who was of British and Roma extraction, and Anthony John Ullman (1917\u20131966), a Roman Catholic Pole. Anthony served in the Polish Army and took part in the Battle of Dunkirk during World War II. After emigrating and marrying in England, he worked as a solicitor, a furniture salesman, and a travel agent. He also brokered marriages and translated among the \u00e9migr\u00e9 Polish community.\nWhen she was aged six, Ullman's father, who had been recovering from a heart operation, died of a heart attack in front of her. She was subsequently uprooted to Hackbridge, southwest London. Her mother struggled to make ends meet without their father's income. In an effort to cheer her family up, Ullman, along with her sister Patti, created and performed nightly shows on their mother's bedroom windowsill. After their mother remarried, the family began moving around the country, with Ullman attending numerous state schools, where she wrote and performed in school plays.\nShe eventually caught the attention of a headmaster who recommended that she attend a performing arts school. She won a full scholarship to the Italia Conti Academy at the age of twelve. At sixteen, she attended a dance audition under the impression that she was applying for summer season in Scarborough. The audition resulted in a contract with a German ballet company for a revival of \"Gigi\" in Berlin. Upon returning to England, she joined the Second Generation dance troupe, performing in London, Blackpool, and Liverpool. She branched out into musical theatre and was cast in numerous West End musicals including \"Grease\", \"Elvis The Musical\", and \"The Rocky Horror Show\".\nTelevision career.\nEarly years.\nUllman began her television career in 1980 playing Lynda Bellingham's daughter in the television series \"Mackenzie\". \"I really thought I was great when I did a quite serious soap opera for the BBC. I played a nice girl from St John's Wood. 'Mummy, I think I'm pregnant. I don't know who's done it.' Then I would fall down a hill or something. 'EEEEE! Oh, no, lost another baby.' It seemed all I ever did was have miscarriages\u2014or make yogurt.\"\nUllman appeared in Les Blair's avant-garde \"Four in a Million\", an improvised play about club acts, at London's Royal Court Theatre. She won the London Critics Circle Theatre Award as Most Promising New Actress for her performance.\nIn 1981, she was cast in the BBC Scotland sketch comedy programme \"A Kick Up the Eighties\", which in turn led to her being offered the sketch show \"Three of a Kind\", co-starring comedians Lenny Henry and David Copperfield. Ullman said, \"My first reaction was you must be joking, as women are treated so shoddily in comedy. Big busty barmaids and all those sort of clich\u00e9s just bore me rigid.\" Eventually a deal was struck with a proviso that she would have script approval and could choose her own costumes. \"Three of a Kind\" premiered in July 1981, running for three series until 1983. Throughout the series, Ullman would also sing, performing comical spoofs of well-known artists of the era such as Toyah, Bananarama, Jennifer Warnes, and Dollar. \"Three of a Kind\" led to a brief but successful singing career in 1983, as well as her winning her first BAFTA (for \"Best Light Entertainment Performance\") in 1984. By this time, she had become a household name with the British media referring to her as \"Our Trace\".\nIn 1985, she signed on to star in the ITV sitcom \"Girls on Top\". She was cast as the promiscuous golddigger Candice Valentine. The show, co-starring Dawn French, Ruby Wax, and Jennifer Saunders, continued for a second series without Ullman who bowed out after the first.\n\"The Tracey Ullman Show\".\nIn 1985, Ullman was persuaded by her husband, British independent television producer, Allan McKeown, to join him in Los Angeles, where he was already partially based. She set her sights on a film and stage career, believing that there was little in the way of television for her. Her British agent put together a videotape compilation of her work and began circulating it around Hollywood. The tape landed in the hands of Craig Kellem, vice president of comedy at Universal Television. A deal was immediately struck with CBS. \"I Love New York\", a show about a \"slightly wacky\" British woman working in New York, was written by \"Saturday Night Live\" writer Anne Beatts. Unhappy with the direction the network wanted to take the show, Ullman's agent decided to contact producer James L. Brooks. Brooks felt that a sketch show would best suit her. \"Why would you do something with Tracey playing a single character on TV when her talent requires variety? You can't categorize Tracey, so it's silly to come up with a show that attempted to.\" \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" debuted on 5 April 1987, along with \"Married... with Children\". The show also produced \"The Simpsons\" as a series of animated shorts, or \"bumpers\", which would air before and after commercial breaks. \"The Simpsons\" shorts would eventually be spun-off into their own half-hour series in 1989. \"The Tracey Ullman Show\" was awarded ten Primetime Emmy Awards, with Ullman winning three, one in the category of Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program in 1990. The show was the first Fox network primetime show to win an Emmy award. The show concluded after a four-season run in 1990.\nHBO.\nIn 1991, Ullman's husband placed a successful bid on a television franchise in the South of England. The television programming lineup agreed upon included a Tracey Ullman special. Unlike the Fox show, this programme would be shot entirely on location. \"\", a send-up of the British class system, premiered on 9 January 1993 on ITV. This led to HBO in America becoming interested in having a special made for them, with the caveat that Ullman take on a more American subject. She chose New York City. \"Tracey Ullman Takes on New York\" debuted on 9 October 1993. The programme went on to win two Emmy Awards, a CableAce Award, an American Comedy Award, and a Writers Guild of America Award. The success led to the creation of the HBO sketch comedy series \"Tracey Takes On...\" in 1996.\nUllman returned to HBO in 2003 with the television special \"Tracey Ullman in the Trailer Tales\", which she also directed. She returned to HBO again in 2005 with her one-woman stage show \"\".\nPurple Skirt and Oxygen.\nIn 2001, Ullman took a break from her multi-character-based work and created a fashion-based talk show for Oxygen Network, \"Tracey Ullman's Visible Panty Lines\". The series was spun-off from her e-commerce clothing store Purple Skirt. Interviewees included Arianna Huffington and Charlize Theron. The show ran for two seasons, concluding in 2002.\nShowtime.\nUpon her naturalisation in the United States, it was announced in April 2007 that she would be making the switch from HBO to Showtime after working fourteen years with the former. \"Tracey Ullman's State of the Union\", a new sketch comedy series, debuted on 30 March 2008. It ran for three seasons, concluding in 2010.\nReturn to British television.\nAfter an absence of over 30 years, Ullman returned to the BBC with the sketch comedy programme \"Tracey Ullman's Show\" in 2016. It aired in the United States on HBO. In 2017, the show earned a BAFTA nomination for Best Make-Up and Hair Design, and its first Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category of Outstanding Variety Sketch Series. In 2018, it garnered two additional Primetime Emmy Award nominations in the categories of Outstanding Variety Sketch Series and Outstanding Costumes for a Variety, Nonfiction, or Reality Programming. The show eventually led to the creation of the topical comedy programme \"Tracey Breaks the News\" in 2017.\nOther notable work.\nIn 1995, she became the first modern-day cartoon voice of Little Lulu. In 1999, she had a recurring role as an unconventional psychotherapist on \"Ally McBeal\". Her performance garnered her a Primetime Emmy Award, her seventh, and an American Comedy Award which was her eleventh. In 2005, she co-starred with Carol Burnett in the television adaptation of \"Once Upon a Mattress\". She played Princess Winnifred, a role originally made famous by Burnett on Broadway. This time Burnett took on the role of the overbearing Queen Aggravain.\nIn March 2014, Ullman was introduced as Genevieve Scherbatsky, the mother of character Robin Scherbatsky in \"How I Met Your Mother\". On 15 February 2017, it was announced that she would star in the Starz-BBC co-produced limited series adaptation of \"Howards End\", playing Aunt Juley Mund.\nOn 14 May 2019, it was announced that Ullman would be portraying Betty Friedan in the FX limited series \"Mrs. America\". The nine-episode series premiered 15 April 2020 on Hulu to favourable reviews. Her performance garnered her an Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Movie Primetime Emmy nomination.\nUllman played councilwoman Irma Kostroski in the eleventh and twelfth seasons of \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\".\nMusic career.\nA chance encounter with the wife of the head of Stiff Records led to Ullman getting a recording contract in 1983. Label owner Dave Robinson was taken with some of the musical parodies she had been doing on television in \"Three of a Kind\" and signed her. Ullman recounted, \"One day, I was at my hairdresser, and Dave Robinson's wife Rosemary leant over and said, 'Do you want to make a record?'... I went, 'Yeah I want to make a record.' I would have tried anything.\"\nWithin 18 months, Ullman had scored five Top 30 hits on the UK Singles Chart. Her first two singles (\"Breakaway\" and \"They Don't Know\") were certified Silver by the BPI, as was her debut album. Ullman's songs were over-the-top evocations of 1960s and 1970s pop music with a 1980s edge, \"somewhere between Minnie Mouse and the Supremes\" as \"Melody Maker\" put it.\nHer 1983 debut album \"You Broke My Heart in 17 Places\" was a Top 20 hit in the UK, and featured three UK Top 10 hit singles. Her first hit single, \"Breakaway\", reached #4 in the UK. This was followed by the international hit version of Kirsty MacColl's \"They Don't Know\", which reached #2 in the UK, and #8 in the United States. The video for \"They Don't Know\" featured a cameo appearance from Paul McCartney (at the time, Ullman was filming a minor role in McCartney's film \"Give My Regards to Broad Street).\" A third single from the album, a recording of Doris Day's \"Move Over Darling\", reached #8 in the UK.\nUllman released her second and final studio album \"You Caught Me Out\" in 1984. This included her version of Madness's \"My Girl\", which she changed to \"My Guy\", which reached #23. Its accompanying video featured a cameo from the British Labour Party politician Neil Kinnock, at the time the Leader of the Opposition. Her final Top 30 hit, \"Sunglasses\" (1984), peaked at #18 in the UK and featured comedian Adrian Edmondson in its music video. During this time she also appeared as a guest VJ on MTV in the United States.\nFilm career.\nAlong with her television work, Ullman has featured in many films throughout her career. Her first theatrical film was a small role in Paul McCartney's film \"Give My Regards to Broad Street\" (1984). This was followed by a supporting role in the drama \"Plenty\" (1985) starring Meryl Streep. She made her big screen leading role debut in \"I Love You to Death\" (1990) acting alongside Kevin Kline, River Phoenix, and Joan Plowright. She appeared in lead and supporting roles in films such as \"\" (1993), Nancy Savoca's \"Household Saints\" (1993), \"Bullets Over Broadway\" (1994), \"Small Time Crooks\" (2000), \"Panic\" (2000) and \"A Dirty Shame\" (2004). She was nominated for a Golden Globe Award in the category of Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for her work in \"Small Time Crooks\" in 2001. She played Jack's Mother in the 2014 film adaptation of the Broadway musical \"Into the Woods\" and appeared in the musical film \"The Prom\" (2020). She co-starred in the Tim Mielants-directed drama \"Steve\" (2025) based on the novela \"Sky\" by Max Porter.\nHer voice work in film includes \"Tim Burton's Corpse Bride\" and the animated films \"The Tale of Despereaux\" and \"Onward\".\nTheatre.\nUllman has an extensive stage career spanning back to the 1970s. In 1980, she appeared in Victoria Wood's \"Talent\" at the Everyman Theatre in Liverpool. In 1982, she played Kate Hardcastle in \"She Stoops to Conquer\". In 1983, she took part in the workshop for Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"Starlight Express\", playing the part of Pearl, and she performed in Snoo Wilson's \"The Grass Widow\" at the Royal Court Theatre with Alan Rickman.\nIn 1990, she starred opposite actor Morgan Freeman as Kate in Shakespeare in the Park's production of \"Taming of the Shrew\" set in the Wild West for Joe Papp. In 1991, she performed on Broadway in Jay Presson Allen's one-woman show \"The Big Love\", based on the book of the same name. Both \"Taming of the Shrew\" and \"The Big Love\" garnered her Theatre World Awards.\nIn 2011, she returned to the British stage in the Stephen Poliakoff drama \"My City\". Her performance earned her an \"Evening Standard\" Theatre Awards nomination for Best Actress. In 2012, she joined the cast of Eric Idle's \"What About Dick?\", described as a 1940s-style stand-up improv musical comedy radio play, taking on three roles. The show played for four nights in April in Los Angeles at the Orpheum Theater. She had performed the piece previously in a test run for Idle back in 2007. Cast members included Idle, Eddie Izzard, Billy Connolly, Russell Brand, Tim Curry, Jane Leeves, Jim Piddock, and Sophie Winkleman. On 6 October 2014, it was formally announced that she would star in a limited engagement of \"The Band Wagon\".\nPersonal life.\nUllman married producer Allan McKeown in 1983. The couple have two children. On 24 December 2013, McKeown died at home from prostate cancer. \nUllman's mother died in a fire at her flat on 23 March 2015. An inquest ruled the death to be accidental. She was 85 years old.\nIn September 2018, Ullman revealed that her daughter was pregnant and that she was about to become a grandmother.\nUllman acquired American citizenship in December 2006. She holds dual citizenship in the United Kingdom and the United States. In 2006, she topped the list for the \"Wealthiest British Comedians\", with an estimated wealth of \u00a375 million. In 2017, \"The Sunday Times\" estimated her wealth to be \u00a380 million.\nAn avid knitter, she co-wrote a knitting book, \"Knit 2 Together: Patterns and Stories for Serious Knitting Fun\", in 2006.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53487", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53487", "title": "Standard of living", "text": "Measure of income, comfort and services\nStandard of living is the level of income, comforts and services available to an individual, community or society. A contributing factor to an individual's quality of life, standard of living is generally concerned with objective metrics outside an individual's personal control, such as economic, societal, political, and environmental matters. Individuals or groups use the standard of living to evaluate where to live in the world, or when assessing the success of society.\nIn international law, an \"adequate standard of living\" was first described in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and further described in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. To evaluate the impact of policy for sustainable development, different disciplines have defined \"Decent Living Standards\" in order to evaluate or compare relative living experience.\nDuring much of its use in economics, improvements to standard of living were thought to be directly connected to economic growth, as well as increase amount of energy consumption and other materials. However, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report found that literature demonstrates that improvements in sustainable development practices as well as changes in technological efficiency and energy production and use, allow for a Decent Living Standard for all people without fossil fuels and ~15.3 GJ per capita by the end of the 21st century. This allows for climate change mitigation by demand reduction as well as other sustainable development practices.\nDecent living standard.\nThe standard of living varies between individuals depending on different aspects of life. The standard of living consists of the individuals having the basics such as food, shelter, social safety and interaction, which all contribute to their wellbeing and what is considered to be a decent living standard.\nCommentators use a number of different measures and approaches to establish the decent living standard (DLS). The decent living standard revolves around the idea and principle that a majority of the population demand the basics that will allow them to have shelter, food and water; however it is not always able to be maintained for a long period of time.\nFactors considered by scholars.\nStandard of living might be evaluated using a number of characteristics including as the quality and availability of employment, real income, disposable income, class disparity, poverty rate, quality and housing affordability, hours of work required to purchase necessities, gross domestic product, inflation rate, amount of leisure time, access to and quality of healthcare, quality and availability of education, literacy rates, life expectancy, occurrence of diseases, cost of goods and services, infrastructure, access to, quality and affordability of public transportation, national economic growth, economic and political stability, freedom, environmental quality, climate and safety. For the purposes of economics, politics and policy, it is usually compared across time or between groups defined by social, economic or geographical parameters.\nStandard of living is generally measured by standards such as inflation-adjusted income per person and poverty rate. Other measures such as access and quality of health care, income growth inequality, and educational standards are also used. Examples are access to certain goods (such as the number of refrigerators per 1000 people), or measurement of health such as life expectancy. It is the ease by which people living in a time or place are able to satisfy their needs and/or wants.\nThere is also the biological standard of living, which pertains to how well the human biological organism fares in its socio-economic environment. It is often measured by the height of a population.\nThe idea of a 'standard' may be contrasted with the quality of life, which takes into account not only the material standard of living but also other more intangible aspects that make up human life, such as leisure, safety, cultural resources, social life, physical health, environmental quality issues.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53490", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53490", "title": "Free speech movement", "text": ""}
{"id": "53491", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53491", "title": "Source Mage", "text": "Linux distribution\nSource Mage is a source-based Linux distribution descended from Sorcerer. Components of this operating system are downloaded as source code and compiled locally on the user's computer. \nNotable features.\nSource Mage is a source-based Linux distribution. This means that instead of delivering ready-to-use binaries to users, the source code is compiled locally on the users computer. This practice enables greater control over the software compared to systems that distribute binaries, such as Ubuntu. Individual dependencies can be selected or deselected, potentially saving hard drive space and freeing RAM and CPU cycles, which can improve overall system performance. For instance, a tool such as OpenSSH could be compiled without support for X11 sharing. One can choose to set cflags, cxxflags, and ldflags specific to the capabilities of their system, which allows the user to generate more efficient binaries for their own hardware. \nSource Mage's terminology also vastly differs compared to more common Linux distributions such as Debian. Much of this unique nomenclature is primarily based on magic-centric vocabulary. For example, When a Source Mage \"spell\", or package, is \"cast\", the latest stable release is downloaded from the developer's site rather than Source Mage's. This allows for a more up-to-date system, rather than Gentoo, another popular source-based distribution, which maintains its own customized cache of packages. Source Mage changes as little as possible in packages (only to fit to bare standards such as the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard), which can reduce risk of errors during source compilation or bugs when using the compiled binary, lacking the potentially necessary patches that projects like Gentoo and Debian apply.\nSimilarly, a collection of packages or \"spells\" is referred to as a \"grimoire\", and all \"spells\" together is referred to as the \"codex\".\nHistory.\nIn 2001, Kyle Sallee released a Linux distribution named Sorcerer GNU/Linux. Due to several issues, in 2002, Chuck S. Mead forked Sorcerer into Lunar Linux. Soon afterwards, Kyle Sallee took Sorcerer GNU/Linux offline. The remaining Sorcerer GNU/Linux development team brought it back online and continued development. A month later, Kyle Sallee brought his version of Sorcerer back online with a new license that prevented forking, dropping GNU/Linux from the name. Consequently, at the request of Sallee, the Sorcerer GNU/Linux team renamed their project Source Mage.\nCompiling.\nSource Mage's tagline is \"Linux so advanced, it may as well be magic\" (a reference to Clarke's third law), and its commands have a \"sorcerous theme\". The instructions to each package is called a \"spell\", and its package management program is called \"sorcery\". To install a package the user must \"cast\" that spell. Casting a spell consists of downloading the source code (if it is not already downloaded), checking for dependencies, casting them if necessary, compiling the program, and installing it. A set of available spells is called a \"grimoire\". To uninstall a package the user must \"dispel\" the spell.\nSocial contract.\nSource Mage has established a distribution commitment. \"Source Mage Social Contract\" establishes its basic rules, which are similar though not identical to Debian's. The first part of the contract ensures the freedom of Source Mage: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSource Mage does not restrict the user's choice of software to only free software: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We acknowledge that some of our users require the use of programs that don't conform to the strict SMGL Licensing Guidelines. While SMGL will never rely on non-free software, we do not limit a user's choice of software. We will provide the tools for a user to make their own informed decisions, via each spell's \"LICENSE\" field, and the sorcery spell filter. Thus, although non-free software isn't a part of Source Mage, we support its use, and we provide infrastructure (such as our bug-tracking system and mailing lists, as well as spells) for non-free software packages.\nInstallation.\nInstalling Source Mage involves first creating a minimal installation with a kernel (so it can run), the GCC C compiler, a network connection, and a few other basic tools to support downloading and compiling source code. This enables the system to download, compile, and install all the other components, and the compilation results can be tailored for that specific system.\nPortability.\nAll Source Mage-maintained code is designed to presume a minimal system, and the base system doesn't explicitly require a C++ compiler (Only GCC 4.x+ does, but can be replaced).\nBesides POSIX-compliant tools, core components require only bash, sed and either gawk or mawk, instead of more heavyweight languages like Perl or Python. This makes Source Mage suitable for a small installation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53492", "revid": "7646666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53492", "title": "Stanis\u0142aw Wojciechowski", "text": "President of Poland from 1922 to 1926\nStanis\u0142aw Wojciechowski (; 15 March 1869 \u2013 9 April 1953) was a Polish politician and scholar who served as President of Poland between 1922 and 1926, during the Second Polish Republic.\nHe was elected president in 1922, following the assassination of his predecessor Gabriel Narutowicz. During his presidency, Wojciechowski and his erstwhile friend J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski disagreed on the political direction of the nation. In 1926, Pi\u0142sudski staged a military coup, which resulted in Wojciechowski resigning from office.\nEarly life.\nStanis\u0142aw Wojciechowski was born on 15 March 1869 in Kalisz into a Polish noble family with strong ties to the intelligentsia. He was one of seven children of Second Lieutenant Feliks Wojciechowski (1825\u20131881), a caretaker of a prison in Kalisz who participated during the January Uprising, and his wife Florentyna Vorhoff. He was raised in a spirit of patriotism and devotion to his homeland. In 1888, he graduated in the Men's Classical Junior High School in Kalisz and began his studies at the Imperial University of Warsaw where he studied at the Faculty of Physics and Mathematics until 1891. He belonged to the circle of the most active conspirators, participant of the secret student groups for self-improvement. Wojciechowski was active during his studies, first in the conspiratorial organization Association of the Polish Youth \"Zet\", and later in the burgeoning socialist movement. By 1892, he had abandoned his studies and chose the life of an exile after his second arrest and detention by the czarist police, first going to Z\u00fcrich and then Paris. There he learned the trade of typesetter with which he supported himself.\nIn 1892, Wojciechowski co-founded the Polish Socialist Party and many nationalist and socialists met in Paris. He travelled several more times illegally to Congress Poland and the Russian Empire and smuggled printing machine components and publications into the country. Together with Pi\u0142sudski, he formed the backbone of the socialist movement in Russian Poland. In 1899, he married Maria Wojciechowska, a daughter of a wealthy landowner of szlachta descent.\nPolitical movements and early career.\nAfter 1905, he left the Polish Socialist Party over disagreements on the political future of Poland and its relations to the international class struggle. During World War I, Stanis\u0142aw Wojciechowski believed that Germany posed the biggest threat to Poland and thus decided to stay in Russia rather than side with his erstwhile friend Pi\u0142sudski. After the Russian evacuation of Congress Poland of 1915, he moved to Moscow where he remained active in Polish political circles. After the fall of the Tsarist regime was elected president of the Council of Polish Parties' Union, and heavily engaged on behalf of the Polish Army in Russia in 1918. He was forced to leave Moscow under threat of arrest once the Bolshevik regime seized power. On 15 January 1919, the Chief of State nominated him, Minister of Internal Affairs, in both the Cabinet of Ignacy Jan Paderewski and Leopold Skulski, whom Wojciechowski replaced during his numerous absences from the country. During this time, Wojciechowski also participated in the drafting of the Polish constitution.\n1922 presidential elections.\nFirst election.\nIn the legislative elections, Wojciechowski served as the candidate for the Senate though he failed to win a seat. After the legislative elections, a balance appeared between the left and right forces. This situation also preponderated in the National Assembly, which was to select a new president of Poland and produce a new presidential election. Pi\u0142sudski did not want to put up his candidacy, and Wincenty Witos was perceived as a person communicating with the right and not paying attention to the interests of rural villages. Therefore, the Polish People's Party \"Piast\" put forward and appointed Wojciechowski as the new candidate for the presidency not involved in current political games. He accepted this decision, but when the Polish People's Party \"Wyzwolenie\" informed that Gabriel Narutowicz planned to withdraw from the presidential race. Witos persuaded Narutowicz not to do that.\nWojciechowski was defeated in the fourth ballot to Count Maurycy Zamoyski who received 228 votes and Wojciechowski only reached 152 votes. At the time of the elections, the main candidates were Zamoyski and Wojciechowski. Narutowicz's good result was a surprise. Once the long voting was over, Zamoyski and Narutowicz advanced to the fifth ballot. Narutowicz finally won the election with the support of \"Piast\" (Wojciechowski was eliminated on the fourth round). Narutowicz prevailed thanks to the votes of the left, of the representatives for national minorities vote (these representatives were determined to defeat the National Democracy movement), and of the centrist Polish People's Party \"Piast\". This last group, initially inclined toward Zamoyski, unexpectedly switched its backing to Narutowicz instead. Eventually, Narutowicz won 289 votes, whereas Zamoyski won only 227 votes, and so Narutowicz was elected the first president of the Second Polish Republic.\nSecond election.\nFollowing the assassination of President Narutowicz by Eligiusz Niewiadomski on 16 December 1922, Marshal of the Sejm Maciej Rataj, who served briefly as acting head of state after the assassination, set the date of a new presidential election on 20 December 1922. The right-wing put forward the candidacy of Professor Kazimierz Morawski. Wojciechowski was nominated again as a compromise candidate. W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski was also suggested as a compromise. Originally, Wincenty Witos recommended that his own party, PSL, vote for Morawski. The left-wing of PSL opposed this however, and decided to vote for Wojciechowski, in connection with the events that led to the murder of Narutowicz. As a result of the internal party discussion, it was decided to support Wojciechowski's candidacy. In the first round, Wojciechowski secured 298 votes, with Morawski only gaining 221 votes, Wojciechowski won the election and became the second president of Poland. After the election, representatives of the National Assembly appeared in Wojciechowski's residence to notify him about his election as president. He considered that the will of the Sejm and the Senate should be followed. Alfons Erdman appeared at Wojciechowski's office and demanded he abstain from accepting his choice. It was nevertheless too late, Wojciechowski decided that delay in this matter was improper. On 20 December 1922, Wojciechowski took the presidential oath and became president.\nPresidency.\nDuring his presidency, Wojciechowski attempted to be an enthusiastic politician, who was involved in the performance of the government. He actively supported the non-parliamentary ministry of W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Grabski. The height of the president's political influence corresponded with Grabski's cabinet period of activity. Wojciechowski participated in the Political Committee of the Council of Ministers and had an impact on the content of ordinances on the currency reform, created under special powers of attorney granted to the cabinet by the Sejm. Wojciechowski attempted to shape the Polish constitutional system by introducing a constructive vote of no confidence. The mission of forming a new government was entrusted to the leader of the largest group participating in the overthrow of the previous cabinet, and when Wojciechowski failed to select a cabinet, he advocated leaving the old cabinet or establishing a non-parliamentary cabinet. Wojciechowski used this method after the fall of the second cabinet of Wincenty Witos when he committed the purpose of setting a new ministry to Stanis\u0142aw Thugutt. Another indication of Wojciechowski's constitutional system was the adoption, opposite to the provisions of the constitution that the Sejm was assembling enduringly, and not in the session system. Wojciechowski never closed the session of the Sejm, which was dictated by the constitution.\nWojciechowski tried to maintain good relations with J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, who was in perpetual dispute with the succeeding cabinets and some parliamentary groups. The reason for the conflict was the organization of military authorities. Pi\u0142sudski always saw Wojciechowski as a person who would take his side. When in June 1923, Stanis\u0142aw Szeptycki addressed to the Sejm a bill on the highest military authorities, announcing the liquidation of the powerful military council, who Pi\u0142sudski served as the chairman, flared up a sharp dispute between him and the Marshal. Wojciechowski tried to settle this dispute. Accordingly, Pi\u0142sudski sent a letter to the president in which he addressed him with the words \"You have acted as a hangover in the matter of honour, which does not respect the rights of honour and forgets that honour belongs to people personally, not officially.\" Wojciechowski tried to negotiate between the opposing parties, including took into account the Maciej Rataj's commentaries, who objected to committing the position of Minister of Military Affairs to Sikorski. Pi\u0142sudski did not want to compromise and treated Wojciechowski, as what Rataj regarded, defiantly and as a servant.\nOn 5 September 1924, Wojciechowski visited the Polish city of Lw\u00f3w (now Lviv, Ukraine). At the end of Kopernika and Legion\u00f3w Street, an explosive charge was thrown towards the car where the president was travelling. Fortuitously, the bomb did not explode.. It was believed that the assassin was Stanis\u0142aw Steiger, an employee of a commercial company and a student of Jewish law, who was immediately arrested and kept in prison throughout the subsequent trial, and was threatened by the death penalty. The first trial against Steiger took place on 15 and 16 September 1924 ere the District Court in Lviv. The prosecutor was Alfred Laniewski, and the defender was lawyer Micha\u0142 Grek. The Regional Court referred the case to ordinary proceedings with the participation of sworn judges. In the proceedings, Steiger was defended by lawyer Natan Loewenstein. The trial during which Loewenstein gave his defence speech did not take place until 16 December 1925. Steiger spent all this time in custody, but by this time, new circumstances regarding the assassination attempt were revealed. Thanks to the lawyer's speech, which Loewenstein published in Lviv a year later, the accused was cleared of the charges and acquitted. The suspect of the assassination ended up being Teofil Olszewski, from the Ukrainian Military Organization, who subsequently fled Poland by illegally crossing the German border near Bytom and was arrested by the Germans on 3 October 1924. Olszewski was convicted of crossing the border illegally for two weeks in prison, suspended for one year, and then granted political refugee status in Germany and permission to settle in Marienburg (Malbork), close to the Polish border.\nOn 7 May 1925, Wojciechowski travelled from Warsaw to Krak\u00f3w with the entire ceremonial held by the president. After receiving a report at the station from the commander of the honour company, Wojciechowski asked him if the soldiers were singing religious songs. After receiving a proof answer, Wojciechowski instructed the soldiers to sing some of them. They sang for about twenty minutes until the train left. Such behaviour of the president caused an understandable sensation in the country.\nFall from power.\nIn November 1925, the government of Prime Minister W\u0142adys\u0142aw Grabski was replaced by the government of Aleksander Skrzy\u0144ski, which had received support from the National Democrats and the Polish Socialist Party. General Lucjan \u017beligowski became the new government's minister of military affairs. However, after the PPS withdrew its support, this government also fell and was replaced by that of Prime Minister Wincenty Witos, formed by Polish People's Party \"Piast\" and Christian Union of National Unity (Chjeno-Piast). However, the new government had even less popular support than the previous ones, and pronouncements from J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, who viewed the constant power shifts in the Sejm as chaotic and damaging, set the stage for a coup d'\u00e9tat. Apart from domestic turmoil, Polish politics had been shaken by a trade war with Germany, begun in June 1925, and by the signing of the Treaty of Locarno on 1 December. Under the terms of the treaty, the World War I western European Allied powers plus Germany guaranteed the inviolability of the German border with Belgium and France as determined by the Treaty of Versailles. On 10 May 1926, a coalition government of Christian Democrats and Agrarians was formed, and that same day J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, in an interview with \"Kurier Poranny\" (the Morning Courier) newspaper, said that he was \"ready to fight the evil\" of sejmocracy and promised a \"sanation\" (restoration to health) of political life. The newspaper edition was confiscated by the authorities.\nThe night of 11 to 12 May, a state of alert was declared in the Warsaw military garrison, and some units marched to Rembert\u00f3w, where they pledged their support to Pi\u0142sudski. On 12 May, they marched on Warsaw and captured bridges over the Wis\u0142a River. Meanwhile, Wincenty Witos' government declared a state of emergency. At about 17:00 hours, Marshal Pi\u0142sudski met Wojciechowski on the Poniatowski Bridge. Major Marian Porwit who commanded one of the troops loyal to the government), reported to the president, then reported to Pi\u0142sudski and witnessed the discussion between the two dignitaries. Pi\u0142sudski demanded the resignation of Witos' cabinet, while the President demanded Pi\u0142sudski's capitulation. After the failure of negotiations and the president's departure, Major Porwit refused Pi\u0142sudski to let him cross the bridge. On 14 May, at about 13:00 hours, Witos' cabinet decided to move from Belweder to Wilan\u00f3w. Wojciechowski allowed this decision an hour later. \nAfter transferring to Wilan\u00f3w, Wojciechowski and Witos negotiated with the commanders of troops loyal to the cabinet. The military decided they should move to Pozna\u0144 and maintain the armed struggle from beyond. Eventually, to prevent the Warsaw fighting from turning into a country-wide civil war, both Wojciechowski and Witos decided to resign and issued an order to their troops to cease fratricidal fighting. A new government was formed under Prime Minister Kazimierz Bartel, with Pi\u0142sudski as the new Minister of Military Affairs. On 31 May 1926, the National Assembly nominated Pi\u0142sudski to be president, but he declined. Eventually Ignacy Mo\u015bcicki became the new president; Pi\u0142sudski, however, wielded much greater \" de facto\" power than his military ministry nominally gave him.\nLater life.\nScientific career.\nFollowing the resignation, Wojciechowski worked as a lecturer at the Warsaw School of Economics and the College of Agriculture in Warsaw. Wojciechowski served as the Director of the Cooperative Scientific Institute and later sat on the Scientific Council of the Institute. He published hermetic publications on cooperative activity, which he engaged in before he became an active politician. He wrote books such as the Organization of Agricultural Products Sales and the History of Polish Cooperatives until 1914. In 1937, he was the co-founder of the opposition Labor Party.\nSecond World War.\nOn 10 November 1939, the Gestapo arrested Wojciehowski's son, Edmund, as part of German AB-Aktion in Poland, and threatened with execution, as were other representatives of the Polish intelligentsia. Edmund was later released on 4 April 1940 because of Jerzy Antoni Potocki. He was later arrested again on 12 July 1940 because he was one of the 70 Warsaw lawyers who refused to remove Jewish associates from the Warsaw Bar Council. The Germans offered his release in exchange for Wojciechowski signing a declaration stating that the Polish government-in-exile was constitutionally illegal. Wojciechowski refused to sign the declaration and Edmund was transferred on 15 August 1940 to Auschwitz as one of the 1666 people of the first transport from Warsaw, where he soon died of typhus on 23 February 1941. The family received a telegram sent from the concentration camp informing Wojciechowski about his son's passing, and soon an urn of ashes containing the remains of Edmund was sent back to his parents. During the Warsaw Uprising, the ill Wojciechowski along with his wife Maria were rounded up by the Nazis and sent to Durchgangslager 121, a transit camp in Pruszk\u00f3w. Thanks to the efforts of the Polish sanitary staff, the German medical commission managed to release the former President from the camp.\nDeath.\nAfter the war, Wojciechowski retired to private life and died in Go\u0142\u0105bki (now Ursus) in 1953, at the age of 84. He was buried at the Pow\u0105zki Cemetery in Warsaw.\nLegacy.\nWojciechowski experienced a political life similar to that of many Central European politicians during the early 20th century. A radical in his youth, his ideology matured and grew more conservative with age. He was at the forefront of over a quarter-century of Polish political development and is considered one of the founders of the modern independent Polish state. Historians unanimously indicate that Wojciechowski remains a figure greatly underrated and believe that it should be remembered that his presidency fell on a particularly turbulent period in Polish history. He managed to make history as an outstanding politician and statesman and is remembered as a relentless defender of democratic values and a prominent patriot."}
{"id": "53493", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53493", "title": "Cgs unit", "text": ""}
{"id": "53494", "revid": "24177485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53494", "title": "Christopher Lee", "text": "English actor and singer (1922\u20132015)\nSir Christopher Frank Carandini Lee (27 May 1922 \u2013 7 June 2015) was an English actor and singer. In a career spanning more than sixty years, Lee became known as an actor with tremendous screen presence and a deep and commanding voice who often portrayed villains in horror and franchise films. Lee was knighted for services to drama and charity in June 2009 by King Charles III (when he was the Prince of Wales), received the BAFTA Fellowship in 2011 and received the BFI Fellowship in 2013.\nLee gained fame for portraying Count Dracula in seven Hammer Horror films. His other film roles include Francisco Scaramanga in the James Bond film \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" (1974), Count Dooku in three \"Star Wars\" films (2002\u20132008) and Saruman in both \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy (2001\u20132003) and \"The Hobbit\" film trilogy (2012\u20132014). He frequently appeared opposite his friend Peter Cushing in horror films, and late in his career he had roles in five Tim Burton films, including \"Sleepy Hollow\" (1999), \"Corpse Bride\" (2005), \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" (2005), \"Alice in Wonderland\" (2010) and \"Dark Shadows\" (2012). Lee's other notable roles include \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" (1957), \"Dracula\" (1958), \"A Tale of Two Cities\" (1958), \"Castle of the Living Dead\" (1964), \"The Wicker Man\", (1973), \"The Return of Captain Invincible\" (1983), \"\" (1990), \"Jinnah\" (1998), \"Glorious 39\" (2009) and \"Hugo\" (2011).\nIn addition to his prolific film career, Lee was a classically trained singer with a passion for heavy metal. He recorded several albums, including the symphonic metal concept albums ' (2010) and ' (2013), where he portrayed the title character of Charlemagne. These projects, which included his spoken word, singing, and dramatic narration, were deeply personal artistic endeavours that showcased his distinctive vocal range.\nBefore his acting career, Lee served in the Royal Air Force as an intelligence officer, attached to the No. 260 Squadron RAF during World War II as a liaison officer for the Special Operations Executive. He was discharged from the RAF in 1946 with the rank of flight lieutenant.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nLee was born on 27 May 1922 in Belgravia, London, the son of Lieutenant Colonel Geoffrey Trollope Lee (1879\u20131941) of the 60th King's Royal Rifle Corps, and his wife, Countess Estelle Marie (n\u00e9e Carandini di Sarzano; 1889\u20131981). Lee's father fought in the Boer War and First World War, and his mother was an Edwardian beauty who was painted by Sir John Lavery, Oswald Birley, and Olive Snell, and sculpted by Clare Sheridan. Lee's maternal great-grandfather, Jerome Carandini, the Marquis of Sarzano, was an Italian political refugee; his wife, Lee's great-grandmother, was the English-born opera singer Marie Carandini (\"n\u00e9e\" Burgess). He had an elder sister, Xandra Carandini Lee (1917\u20132002) as well as a younger brother, Nicholas.\nLee's parents separated when he was four and divorced two years later. During this time, his mother took his sister and him to Wengen in Switzerland. After enrolling in Miss Fisher's Academy in Territet, he played his first role, as Rumpelstiltskin. They then returned to London, where Lee attended Wagner's private school in Queen's Gate, and his mother married Harcourt George St-Croix Rose, a banker and uncle of Ian Fleming. Fleming, author of the James Bond novels, thus became Lee's step-cousin. The family moved to Fulham, living next door to the actor Eric Maturin. One night, he was introduced to Prince Yusupov and Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich, the assassins of Grigori Rasputin, whom Lee was to play many years later.\nWhen Lee was nine, he was sent to Summer Fields School, a preparatory school in Oxford, some of whose pupils later attended Eton College. He continued acting in school plays, though \"the laurels deservedly went to Patrick Macnee.\" Lee applied for a scholarship to Eton, where his interview was in the presence of the ghost story author M.R. James. His poor mathematics skills meant that he was placed eleventh, and thus missed out on being a King's Scholar by one place. His step-father was not prepared to pay the higher fees that being an Oppidan Scholar meant, so instead he attended Wellington College, where he won scholarships in the classics, studying Ancient Greek and Latin. Aside from a \"tiny part\" in a school play, he did not act while at Wellington. He was a \"passable\" racquets player and fencer and a competent cricketer but did not do well at the other sports played: hockey, football, rugby and boxing. He disliked the parades and weapons training and would always \"play dead\" as soon as possible during mock battles. Lee was frequently beaten at school, including once at Wellington for \"being beaten too often,\" though he accepted them as \"logical and therefore acceptable\" punishments for knowingly breaking the rules. At age 17, and with one year left at Wellington, the summer term of 1939 was his last. His step-father had accrued gambling debts of \u00a325,000, .\nHis mother separated from Rose and Lee had to get a job; his sister was already working as a secretary for the Church of England Pensions Board. With most employers on or preparing to go on summer holidays, there were no immediate opportunities for Lee, who was sent to the French Riviera, where his sister was on holiday with friends. On his way there he stopped briefly in Paris, where he stayed with the journalist Webb Miller, a friend of Rose, and witnessed Eugen Weidmann's execution by guillotine \u2013 the last public execution performed in France. Arriving in Menton, he stayed with the Russian Mazirov family, living among exiled princely families. It was arranged that he should remain in Menton after his sister had returned home, but with Europe on the brink of war, he returned to London instead. He worked as an office clerk for United States Lines, taking care of the mail and running errands.\nMilitary service.\nAlmost all of what is known of Lee\u2019s military service is based on a chronology of events as set out in his autobiography. When the Second World War broke out in 1939, Lee had enrolled in a military academy and volunteered to fight for the Finnish Army against the Soviet Union during the Winter War. He and other British volunteers were kept away from the fighting, but they were issued with winter gear and were posted on guard duty a safe distance from the border. After two weeks in Finland, they returned home. In a later interview, Lee said he knew how to shoot but not how to ski and that he probably would not be alive if he had been allowed to go to the front line. Lee returned to work at United States Lines and found his work more satisfying, feeling that he was contributing. In early 1940, he joined Beecham's, at first as an office clerk, then as a switchboard operator. When Beecham's moved out of London, he joined the Home Guard. In the winter, his father fell ill with bilateral pneumonia and died on 12 March 1941. Realising that he had no inclination to follow his father into the Army, Lee decided to join up while he still had some choice of service, and volunteered for the Royal Air Force.\nLee reported to RAF Uxbridge for training and was then posted to the Initial Training Wing at Paignton. After he had passed his exams in Liverpool, the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan meant that he travelled on the \"Reina del Pacifico\" to South Africa, then to his posting at Hillside, at Bulawayo in Southern Rhodesia. Training with de Havilland Tiger Moths, Lee took his penultimate training session before his first solo flight, during which he began to suffer from headaches and blurred vision. The medical officer hesitantly diagnosed a failure of his optic nerve, and he was told he would never be allowed to fly again. Lee was devastated, and the death of a fellow trainee from his former school, Summer Fields, only made him more despondent. His appeals were fruitless, and he was left with nothing to do. He was moved around to different flying stations before being posted to Southern Rhodesia's capital, Salisbury, in December 1941. He then visited the Mazowe Dam, Marandellas, the Wankie Game Reserve and the ruins of Great Zimbabwe. Thinking he should \"do something constructive for my keep\", he applied to join RAF Intelligence. His superiors praised his initiative, and he was seconded into the British South Africa Police and was posted as a warder at Salisbury Prison. He was then promoted to leading aircraftman. Leaving South Africa, he sailed from Durban to Suez on the .\nAfter \"killing time\" at RAF Kasfareet near the Great Bitter Lake in the Suez Canal Zone in 1942, he resumed intelligence work in the city of Isma\u00eflia. He was then attached to No. 205 Group RAF before being commissioned at the end of January 1943, and attached to No. 260 Squadron RAF as an intelligence officer. As the North African Campaign progressed, the squadron \"leapfrogged\" between Egyptian airstrips, from RAF El Daba to Maaten Bagush and on to Mersa Matruh; they lent air support to the ground forces and bombed strategic targets. Lee, \"broadly speaking, was expected to know everything.\" The Allied advance continued into Libya, through Tobruk and Benghazi to the Marble Arch (a triumphal arch built by Fascist Italy) and then through El Agheila, Khoms and Tripoli, with the squadron averaging five missions a day. As the advance continued into Tunisia, with the Axis forces digging themselves in at the Mareth Line, Lee was almost killed when the squadron's airfield was bombed. After the Battle of the Mareth Line, the squadron made their final base in Kairouan; following the Axis surrender in North Africa in May 1943, the squadron moved to Zuwarah in Libya in preparation for the Allied invasion of Sicily. They then moved to Malta, and, after its capture by the British Eighth Army, the Sicilian town of Pachino, before making a permanent base in Agnone Bagni. At the end of July 1943, Lee received his second promotion of the year, this time to flying officer. After the Sicilian campaign was over, Lee came down with malaria for the sixth time in under a year, and was flown to a hospital in Carthage for treatment. When he returned, the squadron was restless, frustrated with a lack of news about the Eastern Front and the Soviet Union in general, and with no mail from home and no alcohol. Unrest spread and threatened to turn into mutiny. Lee, by now an expert on Russia, talked them into resuming their duties, which much impressed his commanding officer.\nAfter the Allied invasion of Italy, the squadron was based in Foggia and Termoli during the winter of 1943, where Lee was then seconded to the Army during an officers' swap scheme. During most of the Battle of Monte Cassino he was attached to the Gurkhas of the 8th Indian Infantry Division. While spending some time on leave in Naples, Lee climbed Mount Vesuvius, which erupted three days later. During the final assault on Monte Cassino, the squadron was based in San Angelo, and Lee was nearly killed when one of the planes crashed on takeoff, and he tripped over one of its live bombs. After the battle, the squadron moved to airfields just outside Rome, and Lee visited the city, where he met his mother's cousin, Nicol\u00f2 Carandini, who had fought in the Italian resistance movement. In November 1944, Lee was promoted to flight lieutenant and left the squadron in Jesi to take up a posting at Air Force HQ. Lee took part in forward planning and liaison, in preparation for a potential assault into the rumoured German Alpine Fortress. After the war ended, Lee was invited to go hunting near Vienna and was then billeted in P\u00f6rtschach am W\u00f6rthersee. For the final few months of his service, Lee, who spoke fluent French, Italian and German, among other languages, was seconded to the Central Registry of War Criminals and Security Suspects. Here, he was tasked with helping to track down Nazi war criminals. Of his time with the organisation, Lee said: \"We were given dossiers of what they'd done and told to find them, interrogate them as much as we could and hand them over to the appropriate authority\". He completed his service with the RAF, in 1946.\nLee said that during the war he was attached to special forces, but declined to give details. Lee's stepfather served as a captain in the Intelligence Corps, but it is unlikely he had any influence over Lee's military career. Lee saw his stepfather for the last time on a bus in London in 1940, after he was divorced from Lee's mother, and Lee did not speak to him.\nPosthumous allegations of embellishment.\nSince his death, some have accused Lee of exaggerating and being intentionally misleading about his wartime service. The historian Gavin Mortimer stated that Lee \"hammed up\" details of his service, and that Lee \"never exactly lied about his creditable wartime record, but he encouraged its embellishment\". Leanne Simpson of Bangor University stated that \"Actor Christopher Lee famously encouraged the embellishment of his two-year military service during World War II. Many believed he served in a number of elite British military units, including the SAS, but in truth he had only been attached as a RAF liaison officer. Though Lee never hid this fact, he failed to clarify his role and allowed false assumptions to be circulated\".\nCareer.\n1947\u20131957: Career beginnings.\nReturning to London in 1946, Lee was offered his old job back at Beecham's with a significant raise, but he turned them down as \"I couldn't think myself back into the office frame of mind.\" The Armed Forces were sending veterans with an education in the Classics to teach at universities, but Lee felt his Latin was too rusty and didn't care for the strict curfews. During lunch with his mother's cousin Nicol\u00f2 Carandini, who had become the Italian Ambassador to Britain, Lee was detailing his war wounds when Carandini said, \"Why don't you become an actor, Christopher?\" Lee liked the idea, and after assuaging his mother's protests by pointing to the successful Carandini performers in Australia (which included his great-grandmother Marie Carandini, who had been an opera singer), he met Nicol\u00f2's friend Filippo Del Giudice, a lawyer-turned-film producer and head of Two Cities Films, part of the Rank Organisation. Lee recalled that Giudice \"looked me up and down\" and \"concluded that I was just what the industry had been looking for.\" He was sent to see Josef Somlo for a contract:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Initially, I was told [by Somlo] I was too tall to be an actor. That's a quite fatuous remark to make. It's like saying you're too short to play the piano. I thought, \"Right, I'll show you...\" At the beginning I didn't know anything about the technique of working in front of a camera, but during those 10 years, I did the one thing that's so vitally important today \u2013 I watched, I listened and I learned. So when the time came I was ready... Oddly enough, to play a character who said nothing [The Creature in \"The Curse of Frankenstein\"].\nSomlo sent him to see Rank's David Henley and Olive Dodds, who signed him on a seven-year contract. Like other students at Rank's \"Charm School,\" Lee had difficulty finding work. He finally made his film d\u00e9but in 1948, in Terence Young's Gothic romance \"Corridor of Mirrors\". He played Charles; the director got around his height by placing him at a table in a nightclub alongside Lois Maxwell, Mavis Villiers, Hugh Latimer and John Penrose. Lee had a single line, \"a satirical shaft meant to qualify the lead's bravura.\"\nIn this early period, he made an uncredited appearance in Laurence Olivier's film version of \"Hamlet\" (1948), as a spear carrier (his later co-star and close friend Peter Cushing played Osric). A few years later, he appeared in \"Captain Horatio Hornblower R.N.\" (1951) as a Spanish captain. He was cast when the director asked him if he could speak Spanish and fence, which he was able to do. Lee appeared uncredited in the American epic \"Quo Vadis\" (1951), which was shot in Rome, playing a chariot driver and was injured when he was thrown from it at one point during the shoot.\nHe recalled that his breakthrough came in 1952, when Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. began making films at the British National Studios. He said in 2006, \"I was cast in various roles in 16 of them and even appeared with Buster Keaton and it proved an excellent training ground.\" The same year, he appeared in John Huston's Oscar-nominated \"Moulin Rouge\". Throughout the next decade, he made nearly 30 films, including \"The Cockleshell Heroes\", playing mostly stock action characters.\n1957\u20131976: Work with Hammer.\nLee's first film for Hammer Film Productions was \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" (1957), in which he played Frankenstein's monster, with Peter Cushing as Baron Victor Frankenstein. It was the first film to co-star Lee and Cushing, who ultimately appeared together in over twenty films and became close friends. When he arrived at a casting session for the film, \"they asked me if I wanted the part, I said yes and that was that.\" A little later, Lee co-starred with Boris Karloff in the film \"Corridors of Blood\" (1958). Lee had previously appeared with Karloff in 1955 in the \"At Night, All Cats are Grey\" episode of the British television series \"Colonel March of Scotland Yard\". Karloff and Lee were London neighbours for a time in the mid-1960s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLee's Dracula is a force of nature: red-eyed, blood dripping from fangs, often in the grip of rage. He's hypnotic, physically powerful, well-spoken, but Lee also understood \u2013 crucially \u2013 that an important layer from Bram Stoker's novel had been missing from Lugosi's performance: sexuality. Lee's Dracula is a rampant sex fiend, using that stare to make buxom ladies everywhere come over a little faint.\n \u2014 \"Empire\" magazine's entry for Lee's portrayal of Dracula as the 7th Greatest Horror Movie Character of All Time.\nLee's own appearance as Frankenstein's monster led to his first appearance as the Transylvanian vampire Count Dracula in the film \"Dracula\" (1958, known as \"Horror of Dracula\" in the US). The film saw Lee's \"triumphant debut\" fix the image of the fanged vampire in popular culture, according to the writer Kevin Jackson. \"Dracula\" has been ranked among the best British films. Lee introduced a dark, brooding sexuality to the character, with Tim Stanley stating, \"Lee's sensuality was subversive in that it hinted that women might quite like having their neck chewed on by a stud.\" The film magazine \"Empire\" ranked Lee's portrayal as Dracula the 7th Greatest Horror Movie Character of All Time. CNN listed the performance third in their top 10 British villains, noting his \"chilling, sonorous tone.\" Lee accepted a similar role in an Italian-French horror picture called \"Uncle Was a Vampire\" (1959). The same year he starred as Kharis in the Hammer Horror film \"The Mummy\".\nLee returned to the role of Dracula in Hammer's \"\" (1965). Lee's role has no lines; he merely hisses his way through the film. Stories vary as to the reason for this: Lee states he refused to speak the poor dialogue he was given, but the screenwriter Jimmy Sangster claims that the script did not contain any lines for the character. This film set the standard for most of the Dracula sequels in the sense that half the film's running time was spent on telling the story of Dracula's resurrection and the character's appearances were brief. Lee went on record to state that he was virtually \"blackmailed\" by Hammer into starring in the subsequent films; unable or unwilling to pay him his going rate, they would resort to reminding him of how many people he would put out of work if he did not take part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The process went like this: The telephone would ring and my agent would say, \"Jimmy Carreras [President of Hammer Films] has been on the phone, they've got another Dracula for you.\" And I would say, \"Forget it! I don't want to do another one.\" I'd get a call from Jimmy Carreras, in a state of hysteria. \"What's all this about?!\" \"Jim, I don't want to do it, and I don't have to do it.\" \"No, you have to do it!\" And I said, \"Why?\" He replied, \"Because I've already sold it to the American distributor with you playing the part. Think of all the people you know so well, that you will put out of work!\" Emotional blackmail. That's the only reason I did them.\nHis roles in the films \"Dracula Has Risen from the Grave\" (1968), \"Taste the Blood of Dracula\" (1969), and \"Scars of Dracula\" (1970) all gave the Count very little to do. Lee said in an interview in 2005, \"all they do is write a story and try and fit the character in somewhere, which is very clear when you see the films. They gave me nothing to do! I pleaded with Hammer to let me use some of the lines that Bram Stoker had written. Occasionally, I sneaked one in.\" He starred in two further Dracula films for Hammer in the early 1970s, both of which attempted to bring the character into the modern-day era. These were not commercially successful: \"Dracula A.D. 1972\" (1972) and \"The Satanic Rites of Dracula\" (1973). The latter film was tentatively titled \"Dracula Is Dead... and Well and Living in London\", a parody of the stage and film musical revue \"Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris\", but Lee was not amused. Speaking at a press conference in 1973 to announce the film, Lee said, \"I'm doing it under protest. I think it is fatuous. I can think of twenty adjectives \u2013 fatuous, pointless, absurd. It's not a comedy, but it's got a comic title. I don't see the point.\" \"The Satanic Rites of Dracula\" was the last Dracula film in which Lee played the Dracula role, as he felt he had played the part too many times and that the films had deteriorated in quality.\nIn all, Lee played Dracula ten times: seven films for Hammer Productions, once for Jes\u00fas Franco's \"Count Dracula\" (1970), uncredited in Jerry Lewis's \"One More Time\" (1970) and \u00c9douard Molinaro's \"Dracula and Son\" (1976) (he also played an unnamed but Dracula-like vampire in \"The Magic Christian\" [1969]). Lee portrayed Rasputin in \"Rasputin, the Mad Monk\" (1966) and Sir Henry Baskerville (to Cushing's Sherlock Holmes) in \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" (1959). Lee later played Holmes himself in 1962's \"Sherlock Holmes and the Deadly Necklace\", and returned to Holmes films with Billy Wilder's British-made \"The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes\" (1970), in which he plays Sherlock's smarter brother, Mycroft. Lee considers this film to be the reason he stopped being typecast: \"I've never been typecast since. Sure, I've played plenty of heavies, but as Anthony Hopkins says, \"I don't play villains, I play people.\"\" Lee played a leading role in the German film \"The Puzzle of the Red Orchid\" (1962), speaking German, which he had learned during his education in Switzerland. He auditioned for a part in the film \"The Longest Day\" (1962), but was turned down because he did not \"look like a military man.\" Some film books incorrectly credit him with a role in the film, something he had to correct for the rest of his life.\nLee's friend the author Dennis Wheatley was responsible for bringing the occult to him. The company made two films from Wheatley's novels, both starring Lee. \"The New York Times\" described Lee's performance in the first, \"The Devil Rides Out\" (1967), as \"suave dignity\". However, the second film, \"To the Devil a Daughter\" (1976), was troubled by production difficulties and was disowned by its author. Although financially successful, it was Hammer's last horror film. Critic Leonard Maltin described it as \"well-made but lacking punch\".\nLike Cushing, Lee also appeared in horror films for other companies from 1957 to 1977. These included the Dr. Fu Manchu series of films made between 1965 and 1969 (beginning with \"The Face of Fu Manchu\") in which he starred as the villain in yellowface make-up; \"I, Monster\" (1971), an adaptation of Robert Louis Stevenson's 1886 novella \"Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\", with the main characters' names changed to Dr. Charles Marlowe and Mr. Edward Blake; \"The Creeping Flesh\" (1972); and his personal favourite, which he considered his best film, \"The Wicker Man\" (1973), in which he played Lord Summerisle. Lee wanted to break free of his image as Dracula and take on more interesting acting roles. He met with the screenwriter Anthony Shaffer, and they agreed to work together. The film director Robin Hardy and British Lion head Peter Snell became involved in the project. Shaffer had a series of conversations with Hardy, and the two decided that it would be fun to make a horror film centring on \"old religion,\" in sharp contrast to the popular Hammer films of the day. Shaffer read the David Pinner novel \"Ritual\", in which a devout Christian policeman is called to investigate what appears to be the ritual murder of a young girl in a rural village, and decided that it would serve well as the source material for the project. Shaffer and Lee paid Pinner \u00a315,000 () for the rights to the novel, and Schaffer set to work on the screenplay. However, he soon decided that a direct adaptation would not work well, and began to craft a new story, using only the novel's basic outline. Lee was so keen to get the film made, and the budget was so small, that he gave his services for free. He later called the film the best he had ever made.\nLee appeared as the on-screen narrator in Jess Franco's \"Eugenie\" (1970) as a favour to the producer Harry Alan Towers, unaware that it was softcore pornography, as the sex scenes were shot separately.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had no idea that was what it was when I agreed to the role. I was told it was about the Marquis de Sade. I flew out to Spain for one day's work playing the part of a narrator. I had to wear a crimson dinner jacket. There were lots of people behind me. They all had their clothes on. There didn't seem to be anything peculiar or strange. A friend said: 'Do you know you are in a film in Old Compton Street?' In those days that was where the mackintosh brigade watched their films. 'Very funny,' I said. So I crept along there heavily disguised in dark glasses and scarf, and found the cinema and there was my name. I was furious! There was a huge row. When I had left Spain that day everyone behind me had taken their clothes off!\nIn addition to making films in the United Kingdom, Lee made films in mainland Europe: he appeared in two German films, \"Count Dracula\" (1970), where he again played the vampire count, and \"The Torture Chamber of Dr. Sadism\" (1967). Other films in Europe he made include \"Castle of the Living Dead\" (1964) and \"Horror Express\" (1972). Lee was a producer of the horror film \"Nothing But the Night\" (1972), in which he starred. It was the first and last film he produced, as he did not enjoy the process.\nLee appeared as the Comte de Rochefort in Richard Lester's \"The Three Musketeers\" (1973). He injured his left knee during filming, something he still felt many years later. After the mid-1970s, Lee eschewed horror roles almost entirely. Ian Fleming, author of the James Bond spy novels and Lee's step-cousin, had offered him the role of the titular antagonist in the first Eon-produced Bond film \"Dr. No\" (1962). Lee enthusiastically accepted, but by the time Fleming told the producers, they had already chosen Joseph Wiseman for the role. Lee finally got to play a James Bond villain in \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" (1974), in which he was cast as the assassin Francisco Scaramanga. Lee said of his performance, \"In Fleming's novel he's just a West Indian thug, but in the film he's charming, elegant, amusing, lethal... I played him like the dark side of Bond.\"\nBecause of his filming schedule in Bangkok, the film-director Ken Russell was unable to sign Lee to play the Specialist in \"Tommy\" (1975). That role was eventually given to Jack Nicholson. In an AMC documentary on \"Halloween\" (1978), John Carpenter states that he offered the role of Samuel Loomis to Peter Cushing and Christopher Lee, before Donald Pleasence took the role. Years later, Lee told Carpenter that the biggest regret of his career was not taking the role of Dr. Loomis.\n1977\u20131999: Move to Hollywood.\nIn 1977, Lee left the UK for the US, concerned at being typecast in horror films, as had happened to his close friends Peter Cushing and Vincent Price. His first American appearance was in the disaster film \"Airport '77\" (1977). In 1978, Lee surprised many people with his willingness to go along with a joke, appearing as guest host on NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\". Steven Spielberg, who was in the audience for that show, cast him in \"1941\" (1979). Meanwhile, Lee co-starred with Bette Davis in the Disney film \"Return from Witch Mountain\" (1978). He turned down the role of Dr. Barry Rumack (finally played by Leslie Nielsen) in the disaster spoof \"Airplane!\" (1980), a decision he later called \"a big mistake.\" \nLee played the mad scientist Dr. Catheter in \"\" (1990). In a nod to his role as Dracula in Hammer Films, as the Bat Gremlin transforms, Dr. Catheter experiences deja-vu \u2013 the audience hears Dracula music. Lee made his last appearances as Sherlock Holmes in the television films \"Incident at Victoria Falls\" (1991) and \"Sherlock Holmes and the Leading Lady\" (1992).\nLee and Peter Cushing appeared together in more than a dozen feature films for Hammer Films, Amicus Productions, and other companies, as well as in \"Hamlet\" (1948) and \"Moulin Rouge\" (1952), albeit in separate scenes. They featured, too, in separate instalments of the \"Star Wars\" films: Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin in the original film, and Lee decades later as Count Dooku. The last project that united them in person was a documentary, \"Flesh and Blood: The Hammer Heritage of Horror\" (1994), which they jointly narrated, two months before Cushing's death.\nLee considered his best performance to be in this period, when he played Pakistan's founder Muhammad Ali Jinnah in the biopic \"Jinnah\" (1998).\n2000\u20132009: Resurgence in franchise films.\nLee had many television roles. These included the role Flay in the BBC television serial \"Gormenghast\" (2000) based on Mervyn Peake's novels. He also appeared as Lucas de Beaumanoir, the Grand Master of the Knights Templar, in the BBC/A&amp;E co-production of Sir Walter Scott's \"Ivanhoe\" (1997).\nLee portrayed Saruman in Peter Jackson's fantasy action epic \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy. In the commentary, he stated that for decades he had dreamt of playing Gandalf. He conceded that he was now too old, and that his physical limitations prevented him from being considered; Ian McKellen, who was in his early 60s, was cast in the role alongside Lee, in his mid-70s. The role of Saruman, unlike that of Gandalf, required no horse-riding and far less fighting. Lee had met J. R. R. Tolkien once, which made him the only person involved in Peter Jackson's films to have done so. He made a habit of reading the novels at least once a year. In addition, he performed for The Tolkien Ensemble's album \"At Dawn in Rivendell\" in 2003. Lee's appearance in the final film in the trilogy, ', was cut from the theatrical release, but the scene was reinstated in the extended edition. \"The Lord of the Rings\" marked the beginning of a major career revival that continued with the role of the villainous Count Dooku in the George Lucas-directed ' (2002) and \"\" (2005). Lee acted opposite Hayden Christensen, Ewan McGregor, and Natalie Portman, and did most of the swordplay himself, though a stunt double was required for the long shots with more vigorous footwork. Anthony Daniels described him as \"a real bastion of cinema history\" in his memoirs.\nIn 2005, Lee played Dr Wonka, father of Willy Wonka, in Tim Burton's film adaptation of the Roald Dahl children's classic \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.\" He also voiced Pastor Galswells in the animated film \"Corpse Bride\". In 2007, Lee collaborated with Burton again on \"\", playing the spirit of Sweeney Todd's victims, called the Gentleman Ghost, alongside Anthony Head, with both singing \"The Ballad of Sweeney Todd,\" its reprises and the Epilogue. These songs were recorded, but eventually cut since Burton felt that the songs were too theatrical for the film. Lee's appearance was completely cut from the film, but Head still had an uncredited one-line cameo. Also in 2007 he played the First High Councillor in \"The Golden Compass\". In late November 2009, Lee narrated the Science Fiction Festival in Trieste, Italy. Also in 2009, Lee starred in Stephen Poliakoff's British period drama \"Glorious 39\", Academy Award-nominated director Danis Tanovi\u0107's war film \"Triage\", and Duncan Ward's comedy \"Boogie Woogie\".\nDuring this time Lee provided voices for numerous films and video games. He spoke fluent English, Italian, French, Spanish, and German, and was moderately proficient in Swedish, Russian, and Greek. He was the original voice of Thor in the German dubs of the Danish 1986 animated film \"Valhalla\", and of King Haggard in both the English and German dubs of the 1982 animated adaptation of \"The Last Unicorn\". He provided all the voices for the English dub of \"Monsieur Hulot's Holiday\" (1953). He voiced Death in the animated versions of Terry Pratchett's \"Soul Music\" and \"Wyrd Sisters\", and reprised the role in the Sky1 live action adaptation \"The Colour of Magic\", taking over from the late Ian Richardson. He provided the voice for the role of Ansem the Wise/DiZ in video games including \"Kingdom Hearts II\".\nLee reprised his role as Saruman in the video game '. He narrated and sang for the Danish musical group The Tolkien Ensemble's 2003 studio album \"At Dawn in Rivendell\", taking the role of Treebeard, King Th\u00e9oden and others in the readings or singing of their respective poems or songs. In 2007, he voiced the transcript of \"The Children of H\u00farin\" by J. R. R. Tolkien for the audiobook version of the novel. In 2005, Lee provided the voice of Pastor Galswells in \"The Corpse Bride\", co-directed by Tim Burton and Mike Johnson. He served as the narrator on \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" poem, also written by Tim Burton as well. Lee reprised his role as Count Dooku in the animated film ' (2008).\nSome thirty years after playing Francisco Scaramanga in \"The Man with the Golden Gun\", Lee provided the voice of Scaramanga in the video game \"\". In 2013, Lee voiced The Earl of Earl's Court in the BBC Radio 4 radio play \"Neverwhere\" by Neil Gaiman. Lee recorded special dialogue, in addition to serving as the Narrator, for the \"Lego The Hobbit\" video game released in April 2014; at 91 years and 316 days old he appears in the \"Guinness Book of Records\" as the oldest video game narrator.\n2010\u20132015: Later roles.\nIn 2004, Lee lamented that Hollywood scripts were mainly spin-offs, as people were afraid of taking financial risks, commenting that he was mostly being offered spin-offs of \"Lord of the Rings\" or \"Star Wars\". In 2010, he marked his fourth collaboration with Tim Burton by voicing the Jabberwock in Burton's adaptation of Lewis Carroll's classic book \"Alice in Wonderland\", alongside Johnny Depp, Helena Bonham Carter and Anne Hathaway. Lee respected Depp as \"a fellow survivor\", describing him as \"inventive and [having] enormous versatility\". In 2010, Lee received the Steiger Award (Germany) and, in February 2011, Lee was awarded the BAFTA Fellowship.\nIn 2011, he appeared in a Hammer film, \"The Resident\", for the first time in 35 years. The film was directed by Antti Jokinen, and Lee gave a \"superbly sinister\" performance alongside Hilary Swank and Jeffrey Dean Morgan. While filming scenes for the film in New Mexico in early 2009, Lee injured his back when he tripped over power cables on set. Lee appears as the unnamed \"Old Gentleman\" who acts as Lachlan's mentor in a flashback. Also in 2011, Lee appeared in the critically acclaimed \"Hugo\", directed by Martin Scorsese.\nLee reprised the role of Saruman for the prequel film \"\". He said he would have liked to have shown Saruman's corruption by Sauron, but was too old to travel to New Zealand, so the production was adjusted to allow him to participate from London. In 2012, Lee marked his fifth and final collaboration with Tim Burton, by appearing in Burton's film adaptation of the gothic soap opera \"Dark Shadows\", in the small role of a New England fishing captain.\nIn an interview in August 2013, Lee said that he was \"saddened\" to hear his friend Johnny Depp was considering retiring from acting, observing that he himself had no intention of doing that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are frustrations \u2013 people who lie to you, people who don't know what they are doing, films that don't turn out the way you had wanted them to \u2013 so, yes, I do understand [why Depp would consider retiring]. I always ask myself, \"Well, what else could I do?\" Making films has never just been a job to me, it's my life. I have some interests outside of acting \u2013 I sing and I've written books, for instance \u2013 but acting is what keeps me going, it's what I do, it gives life purpose... I'm realistic about the amount of work I can get at my age, but I take what I can, even voice-overs and narration.\nLee narrated the feature-length documentary \"\", which was released on 25 October 2013. In 2014, he appeared in an episode of the BBC documentary series \"Timeshift\" called \"How to Be Sherlock Holmes: The Many Faces of a Master Detective\". Lee and others who had played Sherlock Holmes discussed the character and the various interpretations of him. He appeared in a web exclusive, reading an excerpt from the Sherlock Holmes short story \"The Final Problem\".\nA month before his death, Lee had signed to star with an ensemble cast in the Danish film \"The 11th\". One of his final performances was the independent \"Angels in Notting Hill\" directed by Michael Pakleppa, a fantasy film about an angel trapped in London who falls in love with a human being. Lee played The Boss / Mr. President and the film premiered in the Regent Street Cinema, London on 29 October 2016.\nMusic career.\nWith his operatic bass voice, Lee sang on \"The Wicker Man\" soundtrack, performing Paul Giovanni's composition, \"The Tinker of Rye.\" He sang the closing credits song of the 1994 horror film \"Funny Man\". In 1977, he appeared on Peter Knight and Bob Johnson's (from Steeleye Span) concept album \"The King of Elfland's Daughter\".\nLee's first contact with heavy metal music came by singing a duet with Fabio Lione, lead vocalist of the Italian symphonic power metal band Rhapsody of Fire on the single \"The Magic of the Wizard's Dream\" from their 2004 album \"Symphony of Enchanted Lands II \u2013 The Dark Secret\", although he only performs backing vocals on the album version. Later he appeared as a narrator and backing vocalist on the band's four albums \"Symphony of Enchanted Lands II \u2013 The Dark Secret\", \"Triumph or Agony\", \"The Frozen Tears of Angels\", and \"From Chaos to Eternity\", as well as on the EP \"The Cold Embrace of Fear \u2013 A Dark Romantic Symphony\", portraying the Wizard King. He worked with Manowar while they were recording a new version of their first album, \"Battle Hymns\", replacing the original voiceover of Orson Welles, who died in 1985.\nWith the song \"Jingle Hell,\" Lee entered the \"Billboard\" Hot Singles Sales chart at No. 22, thus becoming the second oldest living performer to ever enter the music charts, at 91 years and 6 months. After media attention, the song rose to No. 18. as Lee became the oldest person to have a top 20 hit.\nLee released a third EP of covers in May 2014, called \"Metal Knight,\" to celebrate his 92nd birthday; in addition to a cover of \"My Way,\" it contains \"The Toreador March,\" inspired by the opera \"Carmen\", and the songs \"The Impossible Dream\" and \"I, Don Quixote\" from the Don Quixote musical \"Man of La Mancha\". Lee was inspired to record the latter songs because, \"as far as I am concerned, Don Quixote is the most metal fictional character that I know.\" His fourth EP and third annual Christmas release came in December 2014, as he put out \"Darkest Carols, Faithful Sing,\" a playful take on \"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing.\" He explained: \"It's light-hearted, joyful and fun... At my age, the most important thing for me is to keep active by doing things that I truly enjoy. I do not know how long I am going to be around, so every day is a celebration, and I want to share it with my fans.\"\nLee is featured in the symphonic metal album ' in 2010, after having previously worked on metal projects. The heavy metal follow-up ' was released in 2013 on Lee's 91st birthday. He was honoured with the \"Spirit of Hammer\" award at the 2010 Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards ceremony; when presented the award by Tony Iommi, he jokingly apologized to Saxon for his song \"Massacre of the Saxons\", and thanked the audience for listening to \"a young man right at the beginning of his career\". On the self-titled debut album by Hollywood Vampires, a supergroup consisting of Johnny Depp, Alice Cooper and Joe Perry, Lee is featured as a narrator in the track \"The Last Vampire.\" Recorded shortly before his death, this marks Lee's final appearance on a musical record. In 2019, Rhapsody of Fire included a posthumous narration on their new album, \"The Eighth Mountain\", in which Lee narrated the concept story of the band's \"Nephilim Empire Saga\".\nPersonal life.\nFamily and relationships.\nThe Carandinis, Lee's maternal ancestors, were given the right to bear the coat of arms of the Holy Roman Empire by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. In the late 1950s, Lee was engaged to Countess Henriette Ewa Agnes von Rosen, whom he had met at a nightclub in Stockholm. Her father, Count Fritz von Rosen, proved demanding, getting them to delay the wedding for a year, asking his London-based friends to interview Lee, hiring private detectives to investigate him, and asking Lee to provide him with references, which Lee obtained from Douglas Fairbanks Jr., John Boulting, and Joe Jackson. Lee found the meeting of her extended family to be like something from a surrealist Luis Bu\u00f1uel film, and thought they were \"killing me with cream.\" Finally, Lee had to have the permission of King Gustaf VI of Sweden to marry. Lee had met him some years before while filming \"Tales of Hans Anderson\", where he received his blessing. Shortly before the wedding, Lee ended the engagement. He was concerned that his financial insecurity in his chosen profession meant that she \"deserved better\" than being \"pitched into the dishevelled world of an actor.\" She understood, and they called the wedding off.\nLee was introduced to the Danish painter and former model Birgit \"Gitte\" Kr\u00f8ncke (1935\u20132024) by a Danish friend in 1960. They were engaged soon after, and married on 17 March 1961. They had a daughter, Christina Erika Carandini Lee (b. 1963). Lee was the uncle of the British actress Harriet Walter. Lee and his daughter Christina provided spoken vocals on Rhapsody of Fire's albums \"Triumph or Agony\" and \"The Cold Embrace of Fear - A Dark Romantic Symphony\". Lee moved to Los Angeles in the 1970s after becoming disillusioned with film roles he was being offered in Britain and stated that in Hollywood, \"I was no longer a \"horror star.\" I was an actor.\" He subsequently moved back to England and lived with his family in Cadogan Square in west London until his death.\nPhysical characteristics and beliefs.\nLee was known for his imposing height of . On BBC Radio's \"Test Match Special\" \"View from the Boundary\" interview with Brian Johnston on 20 June 1987, Lee described himself as being tall. Lee and his wife Birgit were listed among the \"fifty best-dressed over 50s\" by \"The Guardian\" in March 2013.\nLee was an Anglo-Catholic Christian. Following the Second World War, he was an altar server at St Stephen's Church in South Kensington, London, during T. S. Eliot's period as a parishioner there. Politically, Lee supported the Conservative Party and favoured Michael Howard for leader following its defeat in the 2001 general election.\nLee had an interest in the occult, to which he was introduced by Dennis Wheatley. It was once erroneously reported Lee had a library of occult literature that amounted to 20,000 books. During a talk at University College Dublin, Lee confirmed he did not have such a collection and said \"Somebody wrote that I had 20,000 books. I don't\u2014I'd have to live in a bath!\" He cautioned the audience against involving themselves in occult practices, claiming \"I have met people who claim to be Satanists, who claim to be involved with black magic, who claimed that they not only knew a lot about it. But as I said, I certainly have not been involved and I warn all of you: never, never, never. You will not only lose your mind: you lose your soul.\"\nDeath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChristopher is truly a force to be reckoned with. Doing a scene with him and having him peering down at you, screaming into your face, all you can think of is 'My God, that's Dracula!'\nJohnny Depp, who worked with Lee in five Tim Burton films, from \"Sleepy Hollow\" in 1999 to \"Dark Shadows\" in 2012.\nLee died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital on 7 June 2015 at the age of 93. The cause of death was heart failure. His wife delayed the public announcement until 11 June, informing his family of the death before releasing the news to the press.\nFollowing Lee's death, fans, friends, actors, directors and others involved in the film industry publicly gave their personal tributes. Then-Prime Minister David Cameron praised Lee as a \"titan of the golden age of cinema.\" He was honoured by the academy at the 88th Academy Awards on 28 February 2016 in the annual In Memoriam section.\nHonours and legacy.\nLee was the subject of the BBC's \"This Is Your Life\" in 1974, where he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews. In 1994, for his influence on the horror genre, he received the Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement. In 1997, he was appointed a Commander of the Venerable Order of Saint John. On 16 June 2001, as part of that year's Queen's Birthday Honours, Lee was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire \"for services to Drama.\" He was made a Knight Bachelor \"For services to Drama and to Charity\" on 13 June as part of the Queen's Birthday Honours in 2009. The French government made him a Commander of Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in 2011.\nLee was named 2005's \"most marketable star in the world\" in a \"USA Today\" newspaper poll, after three of the films he appeared in grossed US$640\u00a0million. In 2010, he was identified as the IMDb member with the greatest closeness centrality, implying he was the best-connected person in the business.\nIn 2008, Lee in his role as Count Dracula featured on a commemorative UK postage stamp issued by the Royal Mail to mark 50 years since the release of \"Dracula\" (1958) by Hammer Films. In 2010, Lee received the Spirit of Hammer award at the Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards, for his contribution to the metal genre. In 2011, Lee was awarded a BAFTA Fellowship; he received a BFI Fellowship in 2013.\nIn 2011, accompanied by his wife Birgit, and on the 164th anniversary of the birth of Bram Stoker, Lee was honoured with a tribute by University College Dublin, and described his honorary life membership of the UCD Law Society as \"in some ways as special as the Oscars\". He was awarded the Bram Stoker Gold Medal by the Trinity College Philosophical Society, of which Stoker had been president, and a copy of \"Collected Ghost Stories of MR James\" by Trinity College's School of English.\nWorks.\nBooks.\nNote: Lee was a 'ghost-editor' on the above series, which was edited by the anthologist Michel Parry.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "53495", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53495", "title": "Lord Protector", "text": "Title in British constitutional law\nLord Protector (plural: \"Lords Protector\") is a title that has been used in British constitutional law for the head of state. It was also a particular title for the British heads of state in respect to the established church. It was sometimes used to refer to holders of other temporary posts; for example, a regent acting for the absent monarch.\nFeudal royal regent.\nThe title \"Lord Protector\" was originally used by royal princes or other nobles exercising a role as protector and defender of the realm, while also sitting (typically as chairman) on a regency council, governing for a monarch who was unable to do so (on account of minority, absence from the realm on Crusade, mental incapacity, etc.).\nNotable cases in England:\nand in Scotland:\nCromwellian Commonwealth.\nThe Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland was the title of the head of state and head of government during the Commonwealth (often called the Interregnum), following the first period when a Council of State held executive power. The title was held by Oliver Cromwell (December 1653 \u2013 September 1658) and subsequently his son and designated successor Richard Cromwell (September 1658 \u2013 May 1659) during what is now known as The Protectorate.\nThe 1653 Instrument of Government (republican constitution) stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oliver Cromwell, Captain-General of the forces of England, Scotland and Ireland, shall be, and is hereby declared to be, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the dominions thereto belonging, for his life.\nThe replacement constitution of 1657, the Humble Petition and Advice, gave \"His Highness the Lord Protector\" the power to nominate his successor. Cromwell chose his eldest surviving son, the politically inexperienced Richard. That was a non-representative and \"de facto\" dynastic mode of succession, with royal connotations in both styles awarded (even a double invocation 16 December 1653 \u2013 3 September 1658 \"By the Grace of God and Republic Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland\") and many other monarchic prerogatives, such as that of awarding knighthoods.\nRichard Cromwell, who succeeded after his father's death in September 1658, held the position for only eight months before he resigned in May 1659. He was followed by the second period of Commonwealth rule until the Restoration of the exiled heir to the Stuart throne, Charles II, in May 1660.\nPost-Cromwell.\nSince the Restoration the title has not been used in either of the above manners. George, Prince of Wales, appointed to the regency in 1811, was referred to as \"His Royal Highness the Prince Regent\". George exercised the powers of the monarchy, just as Lords Protector had, but the title's republican associations had rendered it distasteful.\nProtector of the church.\n'Lord Protector' has also been used as a rendering of Latin \"Advocatus\" in the sense of a temporal Lord (such as a monarch) who acted as the protector of the mainly secular interests of a part of the church; compare the French title of \"vidame\".\nIn fiction.\nIn the novel \"The Last Man\" by Mary Shelley, Britain becomes a republic with its elected head of state styled as Lord Protector. The title is held by Lord Raymond, and Ryland. In the 1987 television series \"The New Statesman\"'s finale episode, \"The Irresistible Rise of Alan B'Stard\", after B'Stard's New Patriotic Party wins a landslide majority in a special general election called over British membership of the European Economic Community but with himself not having contested a seat, he briefly considered adopting the title of Lord Protector before being permitted to serve as an extra-parliamentary prime minister. In of C. S. Lewis' children's novel \"Prince Caspian\", the antagonist Miraz begins as Lord Protector of Narnia before being proclaimed King (a change from the novel). In the 2020 film \"Wolfwalkers\" the Lord Protector serves as its primary antagonist.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53497", "revid": "29596807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53497", "title": "Optical illusion", "text": "Visually perceived images that differ from objective reality\nIn visual perception, an optical illusion (also called a visual illusion) is an illusion caused by the visual system and characterized by a visual percept that arguably appears to differ from reality. Illusions come in a wide variety; their categorization is difficult because the underlying cause is often not clear but a classification proposed by Richard Gregory is useful as an orientation. According to that, there are three main classes: physical, physiological, and cognitive illusions, and in each class there are four kinds: Ambiguities, distortions, paradoxes, and fictions. A classical example for a physical distortion would be the apparent bending of a stick half immersed in water; an example for a physiological paradox is the motion aftereffect (where, despite movement, position remains unchanged). An example for a physiological fiction is an afterimage. Three typical cognitive distortions are the Ponzo, Poggendorff, and M\u00fcller-Lyer illusion. Cognitive visual illusions are the result of unconscious inferences and are perhaps those most widely known.\nPathological visual illusions arise from pathological changes in the physiological visual perception mechanisms causing the aforementioned types of illusions; they are discussed e.g. under visual hallucinations.\nOptical illusions, as well as multi-sensory illusions involving visual perception, can also be used in the monitoring and rehabilitation of some psychological disorders, including phantom limb syndrome and schizophrenia.\nPhysical visual illusions.\nA familiar phenomenon and example for a physical visual illusion is when mountains appear to be much nearer in clear weather with low humidity (Foehn) than they are. This is because haze is a cue for depth perception, signalling the distance of far-away objects (Aerial perspective).\nThe classical example of a physical illusion is when a stick that is half immersed in water appears bent. This phenomenon was discussed by Ptolemy (c.\u2009150) and was often a prototypical example for an illusion.\nPhysiological visual illusions.\nPhysiological illusions, such as the afterimages following bright lights, or adapting stimuli of excessively longer alternating patterns (contingent perceptual aftereffect), are presumed to be the effects on the eyes or brain of excessive stimulation or interaction with contextual or competing stimuli of a specific type\u2014brightness, color, position, tile, size, movement, etc. The theory is that a stimulus follows its individual dedicated neural path in the early stages of visual processing and that intense or repetitive activity in that or interaction with active adjoining channels causes a physiological imbalance that alters perception.\nThe Hermann grid illusion and Mach bands are two illusions that are often explained using a biological approach. Lateral inhibition, where in receptive fields of the retina receptor signals from light and dark areas compete with one another, has been used to explain why we see bands of increased brightness at the edge of a color difference when viewing Mach bands. Once a receptor is active, it inhibits adjacent receptors. This inhibition creates contrast, highlighting edges. In the Hermann grid illusion, the gray spots that appear at the intersections at peripheral locations are often explained to occur because of lateral inhibition by the surround in larger receptive fields. However, lateral inhibition as an explanation of the Hermann grid illusion has been disproved.\nMore recent empirical approaches to optical illusions have had some success in explaining optical phenomena with which theories based on lateral inhibition have struggled.\nCognitive illusions.\nCognitive illusions are assumed to arise by interaction with assumptions about the world, leading to \"unconscious inferences\", an idea first suggested in the 19th century by the German physicist and physician Hermann Helmholtz. Cognitive illusions are commonly divided into ambiguous illusions, distorting illusions, paradox illusions, or fiction illusions.\nSpecific examples of typical cognitive illusions include:\nExplanation of cognitive illusions.\nPerceptual organization.\nTo make sense of the world it is necessary to organize incoming sensations into information which is meaningful. Gestalt psychologists believe one way this is done is by perceiving individual sensory stimuli as a meaningful whole. Gestalt organization can be used to explain many illusions including the rabbit\u2013duck illusion where the image as a whole switches back and forth from being a duck then being a rabbit and why in the figure\u2013ground illusion the figure and ground are reversible.\nIn addition, gestalt theory can be used to explain the illusory contours in the Kanizsa's triangle. A floating white triangle, which does not exist, is seen. The brain has a need to see familiar simple objects and has a tendency to create a \"whole\" image from individual elements. \"Gestalt\" means \"form\" or \"shape\" in German. However, another explanation of the Kanizsa's triangle is based in evolutionary psychology and the fact that in order to survive it was important to see form and edges. The use of perceptual organization to create meaning out of stimuli is the principle behind other well-known illusions including impossible objects. The brain makes sense of shapes and symbols putting them together like a jigsaw puzzle, formulating that which is not there to that which is believable.\nThe gestalt principles of perception govern the way different objects are grouped. Good form is where the perceptual system tries to fill in the blanks in order to see simple objects rather than complex objects. Continuity is where the perceptual system tries to disambiguate which segments fit together into continuous lines. Proximity is where objects that are close together are associated. Similarity is where objects that are similar are seen as associated. Some of these elements have been successfully incorporated into quantitative models involving optimal estimation or Bayesian inference.\nThe double-anchoring theory, a popular but recent theory of lightness illusions, states that any region belongs to one or more frameworks, created by gestalt grouping principles, and within each frame is independently anchored to both the highest luminance and the surround luminance. A spot's lightness is determined by the average of the values computed in each framework.\nMonocular depth and motion perception.\nIllusions can be based on an individual's ability to see in three dimensions even though the image hitting the retina is only two dimensional. The Ponzo illusion is an example of an illusion which uses monocular cues of depth perception to fool the eye. But even with two-dimensional images, the brain exaggerates vertical distances when compared with horizontal distances, as in the vertical\u2013horizontal illusion where the two lines are exactly the same length.\nIn the Ponzo illusion the converging parallel lines tell the brain that the image higher in the visual field is farther away, therefore, the brain perceives the image to be larger, although the two images hitting the retina are the same size. The optical illusion seen in a diorama/false perspective also exploits assumptions based on monocular cues of depth perception. The M.C. Escher painting \"Waterfall\" exploits rules of depth and proximity and our understanding of the physical world to create an illusion. Like depth perception, motion perception is responsible for a number of sensory illusions. Film animation is based on the illusion that the brain perceives a series of slightly varied images produced in rapid succession as a moving picture. Likewise, when we are moving, as we would be while riding in a vehicle, stable surrounding objects may appear to move. We may also perceive a large object, like an airplane, to move more slowly than smaller objects, like a car, although the larger object is actually moving faster. The phi phenomenon is yet another example of how the brain perceives motion, which is most often created by blinking lights in close succession.\nThe ambiguity of direction of motion due to lack of visual references for depth is shown in the spinning dancer illusion. The spinning dancer appears to be moving clockwise or counterclockwise depending on spontaneous activity in the brain where perception is subjective. Recent studies show on the fMRI that there are spontaneous fluctuations in cortical activity while watching this illusion, particularly the parietal lobe because it is involved in perceiving movement.\nBinocular illusions.\nIllusions in binocular vision refer to situations which are exclusive for binocular viewing.\nIllusory disparities.\nBinocular depth information is abstracted from binocular disparities. In general this information is more trustworthy than monocular depth information. \nTwo identical objects behind each other have the same retinal images as two similar objects next to each other. At a small distance between A and B the brain chooses to see option C,D. This results in an illusion if the real objects are present at positions A,B and not at C,D (double-nail illusion).\nThis illusion illustrates binocular ghost images and has many Variants and conflicts with tactile, motor and monocular cues (multi-modal illusion).\nEdge detection.\nWhen a thin object like a razor blade is held in the midsagittal plane, then it is seen at a right angle to the viewing direction (Midsagittal-strip illusion). \nThis illusion suggests that the visual system detects the disparity of edges (rims) with equal contrast sign only.\nDepth of surfaces.\nWhen a black disc is present hovering in front of a white disc, then this can be perceived as it physically is, or as a truncated white cone. If a physical white cone with a black top is presented, then this can be perceived as it physically is, or as a black disc hovering above a white disc. In other words, the observer cannot distinguish between seeing a disc on a pin above a white background, and a white truncated cone with a black top-plane (Ambiguous 3D-surfaces).\nThis illusion suggests that the visual system detects the disparity (depth) of equal-sign edges and fills in the orientation of surfaces in between.\nDelayed signals.\nWhen viewing the swinging movement of the rain wiper of a car, and holding a grey filter or dark sunglass in front of one of the eyes, the pendulum appears to make an elliptical movement in depth. It even appears to move through the glass. (Pulfrich illusion).\nThis is suggests that the signals of the covered eye are processed with a delay.\nInteraction with monocular depth cues.\nWhen stereoimages are swapped (pseudoscopy) binocular depth is inversed and conflicts with monocular depth cues. Perceived depth appears to correspond with the inversed disparity, but the apparent size of objects looks different. Nearby objects appear bigger and far objects appear smaller than normal.\nColor and brightness constancies.\nPerceptual constancies are sources of illusions. Color constancy and brightness constancy are responsible for the fact that a familiar object will appear the same color regardless of the amount of light or color of light reflecting from it. An illusion of color difference or luminosity difference can be created when the luminosity or color of the area surrounding an unfamiliar object is changed. The luminosity of the object will appear brighter against a black field (that reflects less light) than against a white field, even though the object itself did not change in luminosity. Similarly, the eye will compensate for color contrast depending on the color cast of the surrounding area.\nIn addition to the gestalt principles of perception, water-color illusions contribute to the formation of optical illusions. Water-color illusions consist of object-hole effects and coloration. Object-hole effects occur when boundaries are prominent where there is a figure and background with a hole that is 3D volumetric in appearance. Coloration consists of an assimilation of color radiating from a thin-colored edge lining a darker chromatic contour. The water-color illusion describes how the human mind perceives the wholeness of an object such as top-down processing. Thus, contextual factors play into perceiving the brightness of an object.\nObject.\nJust as it perceives color and brightness constancies, the brain has the ability to understand familiar objects as having a consistent shape or size. For example, a door is perceived as a rectangle regardless of how the image may change on the retina as the door is opened and closed. Unfamiliar objects, however, do not always follow the rules of shape constancy and may change when the perspective is changed. The Shepard tables illusion is an example of an illusion based on distortions in shape constancy.\nFuture perception.\nResearcher Mark Changizi of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in New York has a more imaginative take on optical illusions, saying that they are due to a neural lag which most humans experience while awake. When light hits the retina, about one-tenth of a second goes by before the brain translates the signal into a visual perception of the world. Scientists have known of the lag, yet they have debated how humans compensate, with some proposing that our motor system somehow modifies our movements to offset the delay.\nChangizi asserts that the human visual system has evolved to compensate for neural delays by generating images of what will occur one-tenth of a second into the future. This foresight enables humans to react to events in the present, enabling humans to perform reflexive acts like catching a fly ball and to maneuver smoothly through a crowd. In an interview with ABC Changizi said, \"Illusions occur when our brains attempt to perceive the future, and those perceptions don't match reality.\" For example, an illusion called the Hering illusion looks like bicycle spokes around a central point, with vertical lines on either side of this central, so-called vanishing point.\nThe illusion tricks us into thinking we are looking at a perspective picture, and thus according to Changizi, switches on our future-seeing abilities. Since we are not actually moving and the figure is static, we misperceive the straight lines as curved ones.\nChangizi said:\nEvolution has seen to it that geometric drawings like this elicit in us premonitions of the near future. The converging lines toward a vanishing point (the spokes) are cues that trick our brains into thinking we are moving forward\u2014as we would in the real world, where the door frame (a pair of vertical lines) seems to bow out as we move through it\u2014and we try to perceive what that world will look like in the next instant.\nPathological visual illusions (distortions).\nA pathological visual illusion is a distortion of a real external stimulus and is often diffuse and persistent. Pathological visual illusions usually occur throughout the visual field, suggesting global excitability or sensitivity alterations. Alternatively visual hallucination is the perception of an external visual stimulus where none exists. Visual hallucinations are often from focal dysfunction and are usually transient.\nTypes of visual illusions include oscillopsia, halos around objects, illusory palinopsia (visual trailing, light streaking, prolonged indistinct afterimages), akinetopsia, visual snow, micropsia, macropsia, teleopsia, pelopsia, metamorphopsia, dyschromatopsia, intense glare, blue field entoptic phenomenon, and purkinje trees.\nThese symptoms may indicate an underlying disease state and necessitate seeing a medical practitioner. Etiologies associated with pathological visual illusions include multiple types of ocular disease, migraines, hallucinogen persisting perception disorder, head trauma, and prescription drugs. If a medical work-up does not reveal a cause of the pathological visual illusions, the idiopathic visual disturbances could be analogous to the altered excitability state seen in visual aura with no migraine headache. If the visual illusions are diffuse and persistent, they often affect the patient's quality of life. These symptoms are often refractory to treatment and may be caused by any of the aforementioned etiologies, but are often idiopathic. There is no standard treatment for these visual disturbances.\nConnections to psychological disorders.\nThe rubber hand illusion (RHI).\nThe rubber hand illusion (RHI), a multi-sensory illusion involving both visual perception and touch, has been used to study how phantom limb syndrome affects amputees over time. Amputees with the syndrome actually responded to RHI more strongly than controls, an effect that was often consistent for both the sides of the intact and the amputated arm. However, in some studies, amputees actually had stronger responses to RHI on their intact arm, and more recent amputees responded to the illusion better than amputees who had been missing an arm for years or more. Researchers believe this is a sign that the body schema, or an individual's sense of their own body and its parts, progressively adapts to the post-amputation state. Essentially, the amputees were learning to no longer respond to sensations near what had once been their arm. As a result, many have suggested the use of RHI as a tool for monitoring an amputee's progress in reducing their phantom limb sensations and adjusting to the new state of their body.\nOther research used RHI in the rehabilitation of amputees with prosthetic limbs. After prolonged exposure to RHI, the amputees gradually stopped feeling a dissociation between the prosthetic (which resembled the rubber hand) and the rest of their body. This was thought to be because they adjusted to responding to and moving a limb that did not feel as connected to the rest of their body or senses.\nRHI may also be used to diagnose certain disorders related to impaired proprioception or impaired sense of touch in non-amputees.\nIllusions and schizophrenia.\nSchizophrenia, a mental disorder often marked by hallucinations, also decreases a person's ability to perceive high-order optical illusions. This is because schizophrenia impairs one's capacity to perform top-down processing and a higher-level integration of visual information beyond the primary visual cortex, V1. Understanding how this specifically occurs in the brain may help in understanding how visual distortions, beyond imaginary hallucinations, affect schizophrenic patients. Additionally, evaluating the differences between how schizophrenic patients and unaffected individuals see illusions may enable researchers to better identify where specific illusions are processed in the visual streams.\nOne study on schizophrenic patients found that they were extremely unlikely to be fooled by a three dimensional optical illusion, the hollow face illusion, unlike non-affected volunteers. Based on fMRI data, researchers concluded that this resulted from a disconnection between their systems for bottom-up processing of visual cues and top-down interpretations of those cues in the parietal cortex. In another study on the motion-induced blindness (MIB) illusion (pictured right), schizophrenic patients continued to perceive stationary visual targets even when observing distracting motion stimuli, unlike non schizophrenic controls, who experienced motion induced blindness. The schizophrenic test subjects demonstrated impaired cognitive organization, meaning they were less able to coordinate their processing of motion cues and stationary image cues.\nIn art.\nArtists who have worked with optical illusions include M. C. Escher, Bridget Riley, Salvador Dal\u00ed, Giuseppe Arcimboldo, Patrick Bokanowski, Marcel Duchamp, Jasper Johns, Oscar Reutersv\u00e4rd, Victor Vasarely and Charles Allan Gilbert. Contemporary artists who have experimented with illusions include Jonty Hurwitz, Sandro del Prete, Octavio Ocampo, Dick Termes, Shigeo Fukuda, Patrick Hughes, Istv\u00e1n Orosz, Rob Gonsalves, Gianni A. Sarcone, Ben Heine and Akiyoshi Kitaoka. Optical illusion is also used in film by the technique of forced perspective.\nOp art is a style of art that uses optical illusions to create an impression of movement, or hidden images and patterns. \"Trompe-l'\u0153il\"\nuses realistic imagery to create the optical illusion that depicted objects exist in three dimensions.\nTourists attractions employing large-scale illusory art allowing visitors to photograph themselves in fantastic scenes have opened in several Asian countries, such as the Trickeye Museum and Hong Kong 3D Museum.\nCognitive processes hypothesis.\nThe hypothesis claims that visual illusions occur because the neural circuitry in our visual system evolves, by neural learning, to a system that makes very efficient interpretations of usual 3D scenes based in the emergence of simplified models in our brain that speed up the interpretation process but give rise to optical illusions in unusual situations. In this sense, the cognitive processes hypothesis can be considered a framework for an understanding of optical illusions as the signature of the empirical statistical way vision has evolved to solve the inverse problem.\nResearch indicates that 3D vision capabilities emerge and are learned jointly with the planning of movements. That is, as depth cues are better perceived, individuals can develop more efficient patterns of movement and interaction within the 3D environment around them. After a long process of learning, an internal representation of the world emerges that is well-adjusted to the perceived data coming from closer objects. The representation of distant objects near the horizon is less \"adequate\". In fact, it is not only the Moon that seems larger when we perceive it near the horizon. In a photo of a distant scene, all distant objects are perceived as smaller than when we observe them directly using our vision.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53499", "revid": "38207151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53499", "title": "Beryl/Aquamarine", "text": ""}
{"id": "53500", "revid": "839108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53500", "title": "Non-proportional font", "text": ""}
{"id": "53501", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53501", "title": "Monospaced font", "text": "Font whose characters occupy the same amount of horizontal space\nA monospaced font, also called a fixed-pitch, fixed-width, or non-proportional font, is a font whose letters and characters each occupy the same amount of horizontal space. This contrasts with variable-width fonts, where the letters and spacings have different widths.\nMonospaced fonts are customary on typewriters and for typesetting computer code.\nMonospaced fonts were widely used in early computers and computer terminals, which had limited graphical capabilities. Hardware implementation was simplified by using a text mode where the screen layout was addressed as a regular grid of tiles, each of which could be set to display a character by indexing into the hardware's character map. Some systems allowed colored text to be displayed by varying the foreground and background color for each tile. Other effects included reverse video and blinking text. Nevertheless, these early systems were typically limited to a single console font.\nEven though computers can now display a wide variety of fonts, the majority of IDEs and software text editors employ a monospaced font as the default typeface. This increases the readability of source code, which is often heavily reliant on distinctions involving individual symbols, and makes differences between letters more unambiguous in situations like password entry boxes where typing mistakes are unacceptable. Monospaced fonts are also used in terminal emulation and for laying out tabulated data in plain text documents. In technical manuals and resources for programming languages, a monospaced font is often used to distinguish code from natural-language text. Monospaced fonts are also used by disassembler output, causing the information to align in vertical columns.\nOptical character recognition has better accuracy with monospaced fonts. Examples are OCR-A and OCR-B.\nThe term \"modern\" is sometimes used as a synonym for \"monospace\" generic font family. The term \"modern\" can be used for a fixed-pitch generic font family name, which is used in OpenDocument format (ISO/IEC 26300:2006) and Rich Text Format.\nExamples of monospaced fonts include Courier, Lucida Console, Menlo, Monaco, Consolas, Inconsolata, PragmataPro and Source Code Pro.\nUse in art.\nMultiple art forms have developed within computers' and typewriters' monospaced typographic settings in which the \"n\"th character of every line align vertically with each other. (Such a group of characters is sometimes called a column.) A proportional and monospaced font's reproduction of an element of ANSI art, line drawing, is illustrated below.\nThe failure of a proportional font to reproduce the desired boxes above motivates monospaced fonts' use in the creation and viewing of ASCII and ANSI art. Some poetry composed monospaced on typewriters or computers also depends on the vertical alignment of character columns. E. E. Cummings' poetry is often set in monospaced type for this reason. Some classic video games (e.g. Rogue and NetHack) and those imitating their style (e.g. Dwarf Fortress) use a monospaced grid of characters to render their state for the player. \"Quiz Show\" (1976) is believed to be the first video game to use 8\u00d78 monospaced \"arcade font\", which got widely adopted by computer games of the time.\nTabular figures.\nMany fonts that generally are not monospaced have numerals that are known as tabular figures. As tabular spacing makes all numbers with the same number of digits the same width, it is used for typesetting documents such as price lists, stock listings and sums in mathematics textbooks, all of which require columns of numbers to line up on top of each other for easier comparison. Tabular spacing is also a common feature of simple printing devices such as cash registers and date-stamps. Fonts intended for professional use in documents such as business reports may also make the bold numbers take up the same width as the numbers in regular style; the consistency between styles is called \"duplexing\".\nThe alternative to tabular spacing is proportional spacing, which places the numbers closely together, reducing empty space in a document, and is thought to allow the numbers to blend into the text more effectively. With modern fonts using the TrueType or OpenType formats, it is possible to include both proportional and tabular figures in the same font file, and choose between them using font options settings in applications such as word processors or web browsers.\nOther uses.\nIn biochemistry, monospaced fonts are preferred for displaying nucleic acid and protein sequences, as they ensure that the representation of every nucleotide or amino acid occupies the same amount of space. Alignment of the letters makes it easier to compare different sequences visually.\nBoth screenplays and stage play scripts frequently use monospaced fonts, to make it easier to judge the time a script will last for from the number of pages. The industry standard is 12 point Courier. A tradition holds that, on this format, one page of script will take one minute of screen or stage time.\nMonospaced fonts are frequently used in tablature music for guitar and bass guitar. Each line in a tabulature represents a guitar string, which requires that chords played across multiple strings be tabbed in vertical sequence, a feat accomplished only with the predictability of fixed width.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53503", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53503", "title": "Charles Rolls", "text": "British motoring and aviation pioneer (1877\u20131910)\nCharles Stewart Rolls (27 August 1877 \u2013 12 July 1910) was a British motoring and aviation pioneer. With Henry Royce, he co-founded the Rolls-Royce car manufacturing firm. He was the first Briton to be killed in an aeronautical accident with a powered aircraft, when the tail of his Wright Flyer broke off during a flying display in Bournemouth. He was aged 32.\nEarly life.\nRolls was born in Berkeley Square, London, third son of the 1st Baron Llangattock of the Rolls family and Lady Llangattock. Despite his London birth, he retained a strong family connection with his ancestral home, The Hendre, a country house near Monmouth in Monmouthshire in the south-east of Wales. After attending Mortimer Vicarage Preparatory School in Berkshire, he was educated at Eton College where his developing interest in engines earned him the nickname \"dirty Rolls\" While his own father hated his choice of education, he still believed and went on.\nIn 1894, he attended a private crammer in Cambridge which helped him gain entry to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1895, where he studied mechanical and applied science. In 1896, at the age of 18, he travelled to Paris to buy his first car, a Peugeot Phaeton, and joined the Automobile Club of France. His Peugeot is believed to have been the first car based in Cambridge, and one of the first three cars owned in Wales. An early motoring enthusiast, he joined the Self-Propelled Traffic Association, which campaigned against the restrictions imposed on motor vehicles by the Locomotive Acts, and became a founder member of the Automobile Club of Great Britain, with which the Association merged in 1897.\nRolls was a keen cyclist and spent time at Cambridge bicycle racing. In 1896, he won a Half Blue and the following year became captain of the Cambridge University Bicycle Club.\nRolls graduated from Cambridge in 1898 and began working on the steam yacht \"Santa Maria\" followed by a position at the London and North Western Railway in Crewe. However, his talents lay more in salesmanship and motoring pioneering than practical engineering; in January 1903, with the help of \u00a36,600 provided by his father, he started one of Britain's first car dealerships, C. S. Rolls &amp; Co. based in Lillie Hall, Fulham, to import and sell French Peugeot and Belgian Minerva vehicles.\nPartnership with Royce.\nRolls was introduced to Henry Royce by a friend at the Royal Automobile Club, Henry Edmunds, who was also a director of Royce Ltd. Edmunds showed him Royce's car and arranged the historic meeting between Rolls and Royce at the Midland Hotel, Manchester, on 4 May 1904. In spite of his preference for three or four cylinder cars, Rolls was impressed with the two-cylinder Royce 10 and in a subsequent agreement of 23 December 1904 agreed to take all the cars Royce could make. These would be of two, three, four and six cylinders and would be badged as Rolls-Royces.\nThe first Rolls-Royce car, the Rolls-Royce 10 hp, was unveiled at the Paris Salon in December 1904, although in the early advertising it was the name of Rolls that was emphasised over that of Royce. In 1906 Rolls and Royce formalised their partnership by creating Rolls-Royce Limited, with Rolls appointed Technical Managing Director on a salary of \u00a3750 per annum plus 4% of the profits in excess of \u00a310,000. Rolls provided the financial backing and business acumen to complement Royce's technical expertise. In 1907 Rolls-Royce Limited bought out C. S. Rolls &amp; Co.\nRolls put much effort into publicising the quietness and smoothness of the Rolls-Royce, and at the end of 1906 travelled to the US to promote the new cars. The company was winning awards for the quality and reliability of its cars by 1907. But by 1909 Rolls' interest in the business was waning, and at the end of the year he resigned as Technical managing director and became a non-executive director.\nPioneer aviator.\nRolls was a pioneer aviator and initially, balloonist, making over 170 balloon ascents. In 1903 he won the Gordon Bennett Gold Medal for the longest single flight time.\nBy 1907 Rolls' interest turned increasingly to flying and he tried to persuade Royce to design an aero engine. He became the second Briton to go up in an aeroplane. Piloted by Wilbur Wright their flight on 8 October 1908 from Camp d'Auvours, eleven kilometres east of Le Mans, lasted four minutes and twenty seconds. He bought one of six Wright Flyer aircraft built by Short Brothers under licence from the Wright Brothers and from early October 1909 made more than 200 flights. He co-founded a ballooning club in 1901 with Frank Hedges Butler that later became the Royal Aero Club. In March 1910, he became the second person the club licensed to fly an aeroplane.\nRolls became the first man to make a non-stop double crossing of the English Channel by plane, taking 95 minutes on 2 June 1910. For this feat, which included the first eastbound aerial crossing of the English Channel, he was awarded the Gold Medal of the Royal Aero Club. There is a statue in Monmouth to commemorate the flight and another, by Kathleen Scott, in Dover.\nDeath.\nOn 12 July 1910, at the age of 32, Rolls was killed in an air crash at Hengistbury Airfield, Southbourne, Bournemouth when the tail of his Wright Flyer broke off during a flying display. He was the first Briton to be killed in an aeronautical accident with a powered aircraft, and the eleventh person internationally. His was also the first powered aviation fatality in the United Kingdom.\nHis grave lies at the churchyard of St Cadoc's Church, Llangattock-Vibon-Avel, where many of the Rolls family lie buried in various family tombs. His grave is just below Llangattock Manor and bears the inscription:\n\"Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God.\"\nA statue in his memory, in which he is seen holding a biplane model, was erected in Agincourt Square, Monmouth. A further memorial to him was unveiled in 1981 in the bottom playing field of St Peter's Catholic School, Bournemouth, which was developed on the site of Hengistbury Airfield. There is a stained-glass window in All Saints' Church, Eastchurch on the Isle of Sheppey, dedicated jointly to Rolls and to fellow pioneer aviator Cecil Grace.\nA memorial to Charles Rolls was dedicated 12 July 2022, at Hengistbury Head, Southbourne, Dorset, between the car park and the Hiker cafe.\nThis was the same day, date and time as it was in 1910 at the time of his crash at Southbourne, Hampshire [as it was at the time] when the tail came off of his Wright Flyer during a flying display on the airfield at what is now St Peters School.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCharles Rolls Heritage Trust https://crht1910.org.uk/"}
{"id": "53504", "revid": "28830889", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53504", "title": "Augustus John", "text": "Welsh painter (1878\u20131961)\nAugustus Edwin John (4 January 1878 \u2013 31 October 1961) was a Welsh painter, draughtsman, and etcher. For a time he was considered the most important artist at work in Britain: Virginia Woolf remarked that by 1908 the era of John Singer Sargent and Charles Wellington Furse \"... was over. The age of Augustus John was dawning.\" In the second volume of BLAST, Percy Wyndham Lewis wrote, referring to John, that the ten years up to 1914 had been \"the Augustan decade.\" He was the younger brother of the painter Gwen John.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Tenby, at 11, 12 or 13 The Esplanade, now known as The Belgrave Hotel, Pembrokeshire, John was the younger son and third of four children. His father was Edwin William John, a Welsh solicitor; his mother, Augusta Smith (1848\u20131884), from a long line of Sussex master plumbers, died when he was six, but not before inculcating a love of drawing in both Augustus and his older sister Gwen. At the age of seventeen he briefly attended the Tenby School of Art, then left Wales for London, studying at the Slade School of Art, University College London. He became the star pupil of drawing teacher Henry Tonks and even before his graduation he was considered the most talented draughtsman of his generation. His sister, Gwen was with him at the Slade and became an important artist in her own right. In the 1890s, John lodged in studios at Tite Street, Chelsea.\nIn 1897, John hit submerged rocks diving into the sea at Tenby, suffering a serious head injury; the lengthy convalescence that followed seems to have stimulated his adventurous spirit and accelerated his artistic growth. In 1898, he won the Slade Prize with \"Moses and the Brazen Serpent.\" John afterward studied independently in Paris where he seems to have been influenced by Pierre Puvis de Chavannes.\n The need for a regular income following his marriage in 1901 to Ida Nettleship (1877\u20131907), who had been a fellow scholarship student at the Slade, led him to accept a post teaching art at the University of Liverpool.\nNorth Wales.\nOver a period of two years from around 1910 Augustus John and his friends James Dickson Innes and Derwent Lees painted in the Arenig valley, and one of Innes's favourite subjects was the mountain Arenig Fawr. In 2011 this period was made the subject of a BBC documentary titled \"The Mountain That Had to Be Painted\".\nAlderney Manor.\nAlderney Manor, Dorset, was sited on the Poole to Ringwood road between Knighton Bottom and Howe Corner from the early 19th century. John established an artists' colony there in 1911. Faye Hammill relates how he lived there with \"his five legitimate children, his mistress Dorelia McNeill, and his two children by her; and they remained there until 1927, in the company of numerous long-term guests\". One frequent visitor was fellow artist Henry Lamb. Aspects of John's life during this period were used as background by Margaret Kennedy in her novel \"The Constant Nymph\" (1924). A housing estate now occupies the site.\nProvence.\nIn February 1910, John visited and fell in love with the town of Martigues, in Provence, located halfway between Arles and Marseilles, and first seen from a train en route to Italy. John wrote that Provence \"had been for years the goal of my dreams\" and Martigues was the town for which he felt the greatest affection. \"With a feeling that I was going to find what I was seeking, an anchorage at last, I returned from Marseilles, and, changing at Pas des Lanciers, took the little railway which leads to Martigues. On arriving my premonition proved correct: there was no need to seek further.\" The connection with Provence continued until 1928, by which time John felt the town had lost its simple charm, and he sold his home there.\nJohn was, throughout his life, particularly interested in the Romani people (whom he referred to as \"Gypsies\"), and sought them out on his frequent travels around the United Kingdom and Europe, learning to speak various versions of their language. For a time, shortly after his marriage, he and his family, which included his wife Ida, mistress Dorothy (Dorelia) McNeill, and John's children by both women, travelled in a caravan, in gypsy fashion. Later on he became the President of the Gypsy Lore Society, a position he held from 1937 until his death in 1961.\nBy 1913, John was successful enough to commission a new home and studio at Mallord Street, Chelsea, from architect Robert van 't Hoff.\nWar.\nIn December 1917 John was attached to the Canadian forces as a war artist and made a number of memorable portraits of Canadian infantrymen. The result was to have been a huge mural for Lord Beaverbrook and the sketches and cartoon for this suggest that it might have become his greatest large-scale work. However, like so many of his monumental conceptions, it was never completed. As a war artist, John was allowed to keep his beard; according to Wyndham Lewis, John was \"the only officer in the British Army, except the King, who wore a beard.\" After two months in France he was sent home in disgrace after taking part in a brawl. Lord Beaverbrook, whose intervention saved John from a court-martial, sent him back to France where he produced studies for a proposed Canadian War Memorial picture, although the only major work to result from the experience was \"Fraternity\". In 2011, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge finally unveiled this mural at the Canadian War Museum in Ottawa. This unfinished painting, \"The Canadians Opposite Lens\", is 12 feet high by 40 feet long.\nPortraits.\nAlthough known early in the century for his drawings and etchings, the bulk of John's later work consisted of portraits. Those of his two wives and his children were regarded as among his best. He was known for the psychological insight of his portraits, many of which were considered \"cruel\" for the truth of the depiction. Lord Leverhulme was so upset with his portrait that he cut out the head (since only that part of the image could easily be hidden in his vault) but when the remainder of the picture was returned by error to John there was an international outcry over the desecration.\nBy the 1920s John was Britain's leading portrait painter. John painted many distinguished contemporaries, including T. E. Lawrence, Thomas Hardy, W. B. Yeats, Aleister Crowley, Lady Gregory, Tallulah Bankhead, George Bernard Shaw, the cellist Guilhermina Suggia, the Marchesa Casati and Elizabeth Bibesco. Perhaps his most famous portrait is of his fellow-countryman, Dylan Thomas, whom he introduced to Caitlin Macnamara, his sometime lover who later became Thomas's wife. Portraits of Dylan Thomas by John are held at National Museum Cardiff and the National Portrait Gallery. A commissioned copy of the portrait of T. E. Lawrence was made by Alix Jennings at the request of Jesus College to be its memorial to Lawrence.\nIt was said that after the war his powers diminished as his bravura technique became sketchier. One critic has claimed that \"the painterly brilliance of his early work degenerated into flashiness and bombast, and the second half of his long career added little to his achievement.\" However, from time to time his inspiration returned, as it did on a trip to Jamaica in 1937. The works done in Jamaica between March and May 1937 evidence a resurgence of his powers, and amounted to \"the St. Martin's summer of his creative genius\". In 1944, Sir Bernard Montgomery commissioned a portrait of himself, but rejected the completed work \"because it was not like me\"; it was subsequently purchased by the Hunterian Art Gallery in Glasgow.\nOf his method for painting portraits John explained:\nFamily.\nOn 24 January 1901, John married Ida Nettleship (1877\u20131907), daughter of the artist John Trivett Nettleship, and a fellow student at the Slade. The couple had five sons: David John (1902\u20131974), Sir Caspar John (1903\u20131984, prominent British Admiral and First Sea Lord), Robin John (1904\u20131988), Edwin John (1905\u20131978), and Henry John (1907\u20131935). From 1905 until her death in 1907, Ida lived in Paris with John's mistress Dorothy \"Dorelia\" McNeill. A Bohemian style icon, Dorothy lived with John for the rest of their lives, though they never married.\nWith her, he had four children (two of which were born before the death of Ida in 1907):\nBy Ian Fleming's widowed mother, Evelyn Ste Croix Fleming, n\u00e9e Rose, he had a daughter, Amaryllis Fleming (1925\u20131999), who became a noted cellist. Another of his sons, by Mavis de Vere Cole, wife of the prankster Horace de Vere Cole, is the television director Tristan de Vere Cole. His daughter Gwyneth Johnstone (1915\u20132010), by musician Nora Brownsword, was an artist. Augustus John's promiscuity gave rise to rumours that he had fathered as many as 100 children.\nIn a 1977 interview, Caitlin Thomas was asked about her family's friendship with Augustus John and the rumors surrounding his promiscuity. When asked if John \"pounced on\" her, she replied, \"Oh yes, constantly, and on his daughters.\"\nLater life.\nIn later life, John wrote two volumes of autobiography, \"Chiaroscuro\" (1952) and \"Finishing Touches\" (1964). In old age, although John had ceased to be a moving force in British art, he was still greatly revered, as was demonstrated by the huge show of his work mounted by the Royal Academy in 1954. He continued to work up until his death in Fordingbridge, Hampshire in 1961, his last work being a studio mural in three parts, the left hand of which showed a Falstaffian figure of a French peasant in a yellow waistcoat playing a hurdy-gurdy while coming down a village street. It was Augustus John's final wave goodbye.\nHe joined the Peace Pledge Union as a pacifist in the 1950s, and was a founder member of the Committee of 100. On 17 September 1961, just over a month before his death, he joined the Committee of 100's's anti-nuclear weapons demonstration in Trafalgar Square, London. At the time, his son, Admiral Sir Caspar John was First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff. He died at Fordingbridge, aged 83.\nHe is said to have been the model for the bohemian painter depicted in Joyce Cary's novel \"The Horse's Mouth\", which was later made into a 1958 film of the same name with Alec Guinness in the lead role.\nMichael Holroyd published a biography of John in 1975 and it is a mark of the public's continued interest in the painter that Holroyd published a new version of the biography in 1996. A major exhibition, 'Gwen John and Augustus John,' was held at Tate Britain over the winter of 2004/5. According to the gallery's publicity, this exhibition revealed 'that although Augustus described himself and his sister as \"the same thing, really,\" their art developed in different directions. Augustus' work seems wildly exuberant against Gwen's more introverted approach, but both artists indicate a similar flight from the modern world into a realm of fantasy. The exhibition went on to the National Museum of Wales in Cardiff later in 2005. In 2018 Poole Museum in Dorset hosted the exhibition 'Augustus John: Drawn from Life,' which then went on to Salisbury Museum in 2019.\nHonours and reputation.\nEarly in his career John became a leading figure in the New English Art Club, where he frequently exhibited in the years up to the First World War. With his vivid manner of portraiture and his ability to catch unerringly some striking and usually unfamiliar aspect of his subject, he superseded Sargent as England's fashionable portrait painter. In 1921, he was elected an Associate of the Royal Academy and elected a full R.A. in 1928. He was named to the Order of Merit by George VI in 1942. He was a trustee of the Tate Gallery from 1933 to 1941, and President of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters from 1948 to 1953. He was awarded the Freedom of the Town of Tenby on 30 October 1959. On his death in 1961, an obituary in \"The New York Times\" observed, 'He was regarded as the grand old man of British painting, and as one of the greatest in British history.'\nJohn's granddaughter Rebecca John, the leading authority on her grandfather, said in 2024, while praising his earlier work, that \"most [paintings since the 1930s] should have been burned. My grandfather went down the drain from the 1930s onwards, drank too much, lost his judgment, and took every opportunity to earn money from portraits of society ladies and the wives of notable men\".\nCollections.\nHis work is held in the permanent collections of many museums worldwide, including the Museum of New Zealand, the Santa Barbara Museum of Art, the British Museum, the Museum of Modern Art, the University of Michigan Museum of Art, the Brooklyn Museum, Amgueddfa Cymru \u2013 Museum Wales, the Detroit Institute of Arts, and the Philadelphia Museum of Art.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nhttps://m.youtube.com/watch?v=HTbdQpasheY\nLyric: Remember this oil by Augustus John?"}
{"id": "53505", "revid": "50761856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53505", "title": "Ray Milland", "text": "Welsh-American actor and film director (1907\u20131986)\nRay Milland (born Alfred Reginald Jones; 3 January 1907 \u2013 10 March 1986) was a Welsh-American actor and film director. He is often remembered for his portrayal of an alcoholic writer in Billy Wilder's \"The Lost Weekend\" (1945), which won him Best Actor at Cannes, a Golden Globe Award, and ultimately an Academy Award\u2014the first such accolades for any Welsh actor.\nBefore becoming an actor, Milland served in the Household Cavalry of the British Army, becoming a proficient marksman, horseman and aeroplane pilot. He left the army to pursue a career in acting and appeared as an extra in several British productions before getting his first major role in \"The Flying Scotsman\" (1929). This led to a nine-month contract with MGM, and he moved to the United States, where he worked as a stock actor. After his MGM contract ended, Milland was picked up by Paramount, which used him in a range of lesser speaking parts, usually as an English character. He was lent to Universal for the Deanna Durbin musical \"Three Smart Girls\" (1936), and its success led to Milland's playing the lead role in \"The Jungle Princess\" (also 1936) alongside new starlet Dorothy Lamour. The film was quite successful and raised both to stardom. Milland remained with Paramount for almost 20 years.\nMilland appeared in many other notable films, including \"Easy Living\" (1937), \"Beau Geste\" (1939), Billy Wilder's \"The Major and the Minor\" (1942), opposite a corrupt John Wayne in \"Reap the Wild Wind\" (1942), \"The Uninvited\" (1944), Fritz Lang's \"Ministry of Fear\" (1944), \"The Big Clock\" (1948), and \"The Thief\" (1952)\u2014for which he was nominated for his second Golden Globe. Two standout films later in his career include Alfred Hitchcock's \"Dial M for Murder\" (1954) and \"Love Story\" (1970). After leaving Paramount, he began directing and moved into television acting. Once Paramount Pictures' highest-paid actor, Milland co-starred alongside many of the most popular actresses of the time, including Gene Tierney, Jean Arthur, Grace Kelly, Lana Turner, Marlene Dietrich, Maureen O'Hara, Ginger Rogers, Jane Wyman, Loretta Young, and Veronica Lake.\nEarly life.\nMilland was born Alfred Reginald Jones on 3 January 1907 in Neath, Wales, the son of Elizabeth Annie (n\u00e9e Truscott) and steel mill superintendent Alfred Jones. He attended local elementary school at Neath and later at Radyr, following his parents' separation. Milland spent a short time at sea prior to one year's attendance at King's College school in Cardiff. Milland was an accomplished rider and undertook work at his uncle's horse-breeding farm. At the age of eighteen, Milland passed the entrance examination to University College Cardiff but did not pursue studies there. Of his parents, he wrote in his 1974 autobiography:\nHousehold Cavalry.\nPrior to becoming an actor, Milland served in the Royal Horse Guards of the Household Cavalry, in 1925. An expert shot, he became a member of his squadron's rifle team, winning many prestigious competitions, including the Bisley Match in England. He won the British Army Championship in both pistol and rifle marksmanship.\nWhile he was stationed in London, Milland met a dancer, Margot St Leger, and through her was introduced to the American actress Estelle Brody. Brody queried Milland's commitment to his army career, which led him into buying himself out of the army in 1928 with the hope of becoming an actor. (According to one account, he was able to support himself with a \u00a317,000 inheritance from his aunt. Another said that he was forced to drop out when his father refused to continue subsidising him.)\nCareer.\nName.\nIt is suggested that Milland's adopted name is derived as a fusion of that of his step father Mullane and a locality in his home town of Neath known as 'The Millands' (The Mill Lands). In his early acting career he was billed both as Spike Milland and Raymond Milland.\nEarly acting appearances.\nHis first appearance on film was as an uncredited extra on the E.A. Dupont film \"Piccadilly\" (1929). After some unproductive extra work, which never reached the screen, he signed with a talent agent named Frank Zeitlin on the recommendation of fellow actor Jack Raine.\nHis prowess as a marksman earned him work as an extra at the British International Pictures studio in Arthur Robison's production of \"The Informer\" (1929), the first screen version of the Liam O'Flaherty novel. While he was working on \"The Informer\", he was asked to test for a production being shot on a neighbouring stage. Milland made a favourable impression on director Castleton Knight, and was hired for his first acting role as Jim Edwards in \"The Flying Scotsman\" (also 1929). In his autobiography, Milland recalls that on this film set, it was suggested that he adopt a stage name; he chose Milland from the \"mill lands\" area of his Welsh hometown of Neath.\nHis work on \"The Flying Scotsman\" resulted in him being granted a six-month contract over the course of which Milland starred in two more Knight-directed films, \"The Lady from the Sea\" and \"The Plaything\" (both 1929). Believing that his acting was poor, and that he had won his film roles through his looks alone, Milland decided to gain some stage experience to improve his ability. After hearing that club owner Bobby Page was financing a touring company, Milland approached him in hopes of work. He was given the role of second lead in a production of Sam Shipman and Max Marcin's \"The Woman in Room 13\". Despite being released from the play after five weeks, Milland felt that he had gained valuable acting experience.\nMove to the US, 1930\u20131932.\nIn between plays, Milland was approached by MGM vice-president Robert Rubin, who had seen the film \"The Flying Scotsman\". MGM offered Milland a nine-month contract at $175 a week, based in Hollywood. He accepted, leaving the United Kingdom in August 1930. MGM used Milland as a 'stock' player, selecting him for small speaking parts in mainstream productions.\nMilland's first experience in making a Hollywood film resulted in a humiliating scene on the set of \"Son of India\" (1931), when the film's director Jacques Feyder berated Milland and criticized his acting in front of the entire crew. Despite this setback, the studio executives talked Milland into staying in Hollywood, and in 1930, he appeared in his first US film \"Passion Flower\". Over the next two years, Milland appeared in minor parts for MGM and a few films for which he was lent to Warner Bros; he was often uncredited. His largest role during this period was as Charles Laughton's nephew in \"Payment Deferred\" (1932).\nWhile in this first period working in the United States, Milland met Muriel Frances Weber, whom he always called \"Mal\", a student at the University of Southern California. Within eight months of first meeting, the two were married. The ceremony took place on 30 September 1932 at the Riverside Mission Inn. The couple had a son, Daniel, and adopted a daughter, Victoria.\nShortly after making \"Payment Deferred\", Milland found himself out of work when MGM failed to renew his contract. He spent five months in the US attempting to find further acting work, but after little success and a strained relationship with his father-in-law he decided to head back to Britain, hoping that two years spent in Hollywood would lead to roles in British films. Milland cashed in his contracted first-class return ticket to Britain and found an alternative, cheaper way back home. Muriel remained in the States to finish her studies, and Milland found temporary accommodation in Earl's Court in London.\nReturn to Britain.\nMilland found life in Britain difficult, receiving little regular work, although he finally found parts in two British films, \"This Is the Life\" and \"Orders Is Orders\" (both 1933). Neither was a breakthrough role.\nBack in the US and \"Bolero\".\nThen, in 1933, Roosevelt's reforms to the U.S. banking sector led to a temporary weakness in the dollar, allowing Milland to afford a return to the United States. He returned to California, and found a small flat on Sunset Boulevard, promising Muriel that he would buy a home once he was financially stable.\nWith little prospect of finding acting work, Milland took on menial jobs, including working for a bookie. He decided to find regular employment and through connections made during his time in the UK, he was offered the job of assistant manager of a Shell gas station on Sunset and Clark.\nOn his return from his successful Shell interview, he passed by the gates of Paramount Pictures, where he was approached by casting director Joe Egli. Paramount was filming the George Raft picture \"Bolero\" (released in February 1934), but an injury to another British actor had left the studio looking for an urgent replacement. Egli offered Milland a two-week contract, at ten times the salary the assistant job would pay. Milland took the acting role.\nAfter completing \"Bolero\", Milland was offered a five-week guarantee by Benjamin Glazer to work on an upcoming screwball comedy starring Bing Crosby and Carole Lombard entitled \"We're Not Dressing\" (also 1934). During filming, he appeared in a scene with George Burns and Gracie Allen, which Milland recalls as falling into an \"ad-libbed shambles\" that he felt was better than the original script. The film's director Norman Taurog was so impressed, he rang the chief production executive and suggested that Milland be placed on a long-term contract. After a short meeting, Milland was offered a seven-year deal with Paramount starting at $175 a week. The contract gave Milland a secure income, enabling him with Muriel to move into an apartment on Fountain Avenue.\nMilland later said \"It all happened by luck and I was just there at the right place at the right time.\"\nParamount and \"The Jungle Princess\".\nDuring his first contract with Paramount, Milland was used as part of the speaking cast, but never as a top-of-the-bill actor. He had a supporting role, for instance, in the original \"The Glass Key\" (1935) with George Raft.\nMilland was lent to Universal for \"Next Time We Love\" (1936), with Margaret Sullavan and James Stewart. Back at Paramount he was in \"The Return of Sophie Lang \" (1936) and \"The Big Broadcast of 1937\" (1936).\nHe was contacted by Joe Pasternak, who was looking for an 'English' actor for the lead in his new picture, \"Three Smart Girls\" (1936). Although Pasternak worked for Universal Studios, Paramount had agreed to lend Milland out for the film.\nOn returning to Paramount after \"Three Smart Girls\" was wrapped, Milland was used as a test actor to find a new starlet for \"The Jungle Princess\" (1936). When the studio chose Dorothy Lamour for the lead, Milland wrote in his autobiography that Lamour was confused to find that he was not to be her male lead and she requested Milland to be her co-star. Paramount was not keen, but when \"Three Smart Girls\" was pre-released to rave reviews, they gave Milland the role. By the end of 1936, Milland was being considered for leading roles, and Paramount rewrote his contract, resulting in the tripling of his salary.\nAs leading man 1937\u20131939.\nAfter taking a break in Europe, Milland was cast as Captain Hugh \"Bulldog\" Drummond in \"Bulldog Drummond Escapes\" (1937).\nMilland was then in \"Wings over Honolulu\" (1937) with Wendy Barrie, and then in \"Easy Living\" (1937), a classic comedy with Jean Arthur directed by Mitchell Leisen.\nMilland did \"Ebb Tide\" (1937) with Frances Farmer and was then loaned to RKO for \"Wise Girl\" (1937) with Miriam Hopkins.\nBack at Paramount, Milland was reunited with Lamour in \"Her Jungle Love\" (1938) and \"Tropic Holiday\" (1938). He then did a military drama for William Wellman, \"Men with Wings\" (1938), co-starring Fred MacMurray.\nMilland did a comedy, \"Say It in French\" (1938), and then \"Hotel Imperial\" (1939) with Marlene Dietrich, during the production of which Milland suffered a near-fatal accident on the set. One scene called for him to lead a cavalry charge through a small village. An accomplished horseman, Milland insisted upon doing this scene himself. As he was making a scripted jump on the horse, his saddle came loose, sending him flying straight into a pile of broken masonry. Milland awoke in hospital, where he remained for a week with a badly damaged left hand, a three-inch gash to his head, and a concussion.\nAfter recovering, he appeared as John Geste in \"Beau Geste\" (1939), alongside Gary Cooper and Robert Preston and directed by Wellman. The film was a huge hit. 20th Century Fox then borrowed him for \"Everything Happens at Night\" (1939) opposite Sonja Henie.\nAccording to Milland, a second injury to his left hand occurred in 1939. As well as horse-riding, Milland enjoyed piloting aircraft and in his early career would lease single-seater planes. As a contracted starring actor, Paramount had insisted he give up this hobby. Instead, Milland took up woodworking and outfitted a machine shop at the back of his newly built house. While operating a circular saw, he slipped, catching one of his hands on the saw. The injury resulted in Milland losing a part of his thumb and severely damaging his tendons.\nMilland believed that the injury left him with only 50% usage of his hand, but within weeks of the incident, he flew to Britain to star in \"French Without Tears\". By the time he returned to America, war was declared in Europe. The year finished with the news that Muriel was pregnant with their son Daniel.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1940, Milland appeared in a selection of romantic comedies and dramas alongside some of the leading ladies of the time. These included \"Irene\" opposite Anna Neagle, \"The Doctor Takes a Wife\" opposite Loretta Young at Columbia, \"Arise, My Love\" opposite Claudette Colbert, and \"Untamed\" opposite Patricia Morison. He was a last minute replacement for Joel McCrea on \"Arise\" which meant he had to drop out of another film, \"Virginia\".\nWhen the United States entered World War II, Milland tried to enlist in the U.S. Army Air Forces, but was rejected because of his impaired left hand. He worked as a civilian flight instructor for the Army, and toured with a United Service Organisation South Pacific troupe in 1944.\nAs the Second World War continued, Milland found himself now appearing in more action pictures. He starred as a wannabe pilot in \"I Wanted Wings\" (1941) with Brian Donlevy, Veronica Lake, and William Holden. This was followed by \"Skylark\" (1942) with Claudette Colbert, and two films with Paulette Goddard: \"The Lady Has Plans\" (1942) and Cecil B. DeMille's \"Reap the Wild Wind\" (1942) alongside John Wayne, in which he was top billed above Wayne.\nMilland starred in \"Are Husbands Necessary?\" (1942) and subsequently Billy Wilder's directorial debut, \"The Major and the Minor\" (1942) opposite Ginger Rogers.\nMilland appeared in the all-star musical \"Star Spangled Rhythm\" (1943), in which he appeared as himself, singing \"If Men Played Cards as Women Do\", alongside Fred MacMurray, Franchot Tone, and Lynne Overman. He also made an appearance in the collaborative drama, \"Forever and a Day\" (1943).\nHe and Goddard then made \"The Crystal Ball\" (1943); thereafter, he was Ginger Rogers' leading man in \"Lady in the Dark\" (1944).\nIn 1944, Milland starred in the supernatural horror film, \"The Uninvited\", which was notable for its serious treatment of ghosts and haunting main theme, and for making a star of Gail Russell. He then starred in Fritz Lang's film noir production of Graham Greene's \"Ministry of Fear\" (also 1944).\nHe also toured war theatres with USO Shows. At one performance a soldier heckled him, asking why he was not in the army. Milland replied, \"With a war on? Are you crazy?\"\n\"The Lost Weekend\", 1945.\nThe pinnacle of Milland's career and acknowledgment of his serious dramatic abilities came when he starred in \"The Lost Weekend\" (1945). Milland recalled how after returning from an emcee engagement in Peru, he found a book delivered to his home, with a note from Paramount's head of production Buddy DeSylva that read, \"Read it. Study it. You're going to play it.\" Milland found the book unsettling and felt its subject matter, that of an alcoholic writer, to be challenging and alien to him. He was also concerned that it would require 'serious acting', something that he believed he had not undertaken up to that point in his career. The film was to be produced by Charles Brackett and directed by Billy Wilder; the pair were also collaborating to write the screenplay. Milland had already worked with both men, having starred in the comedy \"The Major and the Minor\" (1942), and he was excited by their involvement.\nMilland's main concern with taking on the role of Don Birnam in \"The Lost Weekend\" was that he might overact and look amateurish. After a shambolic attempt to act parts of the script while actually drunk, Milland quickly realized that he needed to understand alcoholism. After the cast and crew had arrived on location in New York, Milland was allowed to spend a night in a psychiatric ward of Bellevue Hospital, where the patients were suffering from alcoholism and delirium tremens. He found the experience extremely disturbing and left at three in the morning. Milland lost eight pounds for the role and spoke with the book's author, Charles R. Jackson, to gain insight into the illness. After the external shots in New York were complete, in which hidden cameras were used to capture Milland walking the streets, the crew returned to Hollywood. Milland found the set work far more challenging, knowing that the close-ups would give his acting no place to hide. Between the strain of acting and the morbidity of the subject, Milland's home life deteriorated and he left for a period of two weeks. When the shoot was over, Muriel and he left for a vacation in Canada. He later said that his role in \"The Lost Weekend\" \"was the only part [he was] really proud of.\"\nReturning to filming, Milland was assigned to a Mitchell Leisen-directed historical drama called \"Kitty\" (1945), opposite Paulette Goddard. He was meant to follow it with \"Olympia\".\nInstead, he did a romantic comedy, \"The Well-Groomed Bride\" opposite Olivia de Havilland. Many of the crew members on \"The Well-Groomed Bride\" had also worked on \"The Lost Weekend\", and Milland recalled an encounter with a sound mixer, who told him that he had seen a rough cut of \"Weekend\" and thought Milland was not only sure to be nominated for an Academy Award, but that he would probably win. Milland had not considered himself worthy of an award, but over the next few months, he thought of little else, and was desperate to be nominated. After the first preview, reaction was mixed, but Brackett stated that they had produced \"something really worthwhile\". Milland found the initial feedback to his role congratulatory but hushed, leading him to feel that the film would bomb as a piece of cinema and would be seen as a social document. When the film was released in New York, the favourable reviews took both Milland and the studio by surprise. Milland was lauded, and he not only won that year's Academy Award for Best Actor, but also the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor\u2013Drama, the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor, the National Board of Review Award for Best Actor, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor. He was the first Welsh actor to win an Oscar, and when he collected the award from Ingrid Bergman, he gave one of the shortest acceptance speeches of any Oscar winner. His performance was so convincing, Milland was beleaguered for years by rumours that he actually was an alcoholic. He steadfastly asserted that he was not.\nMilland's success in \"The Lost Weekend\" resulted in his contract being rewritten, and he became Paramount's highest-salaried actor. When the film was premiered across Europe, Milland was sent to attend each opening. When he appeared in Cardiff, the capital city of Wales, he was given the keys to the city.\n1945\u20131950.\nMilland continued working as a leading man after his Oscar win, and stayed contracted to Paramount until the early 1950s. He was teamed with Teresa Wright in \"The Imperfect Lady\" (1946), directed by Lewis Allen. He replaced Alan Ladd in a Western with Barbara Stanwyck, \"California\" (1947), directed by John Farrow, which was a big hit.\nMilland was reunited with Wright in \"The Trouble with Women\" (1947) and then starred opposite Marlene Dietrich in \"Golden Earrings\" (1947). He was one of many Paramount stars who made a cameo in \"Variety Girl\" (1947) then went to England to make \"So Evil My Love\" (1948), produced by Hal Wallis for director Lewis Allen.\nMilland made a second film for Farrow, \"The Big Clock\" (1948), which has become one of his most highly regarded films. He then did his third film with Allen, \"Sealed Verdict\" (1948), and a third with Farrow, \"Alias Nick Beal\" (1949), which Milland later said was his favourite film.\nIn July 1948, Paramount suspended him for refusing a part in \"The Mark of Lucretia\" (which became \"The Bride of Vengeance\"). Milland commented, \"it is a part that is out of my normal natural range as an actor.\"\nMilland then went to Fox for the comedy, \"It Happens Every Spring\" (1949), and then made a fourth film with Farrow, \"Copper Canyon\" (1950). After this, Milland increasingly freelanced.\nOther studios.\nAt Columbia, Milland starred opposite Rosalind Russell in \"A Woman of Distinction\" (1950). Then, at MGM, he was directed by George Cukor in \"A Life of Her Own\" (1950) alongside Lana Turner, replacing Wendell Corey, who had quit the film just three days into filming.\nMilland was directed by Jacques Tourneur in RKO's \"Circle of Danger\" (1951); set in the United Kingdom, it was the only time he filmed in his home country of Wales. At MGM he was in \"Night Into Morning\" (1951) and then a comedy, \"Rhubarb\" (1951).\nMilland gave a strong performance in \"Close to My Heart\" (1951) at Warner Bros, in which he and Gene Tierney starred as a couple trying to adopt a child. His next film, \"Bugles in the Afternoon\" (1952), also at Warners, was a Western. He played in \"Something to Live For\" (1952), another study of alcoholism at Paramount, with Joan Fontaine.\nMilland had a contract to make one film a year with Paramount (who released Pine-Thomas films). He was wanted by producer Harold Popkin to make \"The Thief\" but Paramount insisted he make \"Jamaica Run\" under their contract instead. The impasse was resolved by the intervention of Milland's agents at MCA and filming for \"Jamaica Run\" was pushed back. For \"The Thief\" (1952), his role was without dialogue, and he was nominated for a second Golden Globe. He later remarked that he was proud of the film.\nAfter \"Jamaica Run\" (1953), Milland went to Columbia for \"Let's Do It Again\" (1953) with Jane Wyman.\nHe then starred opposite Grace Kelly and Robert Cummings in Alfred Hitchcock's \"Dial M for Murder\" (1954), originally shot in three dimensions. Although never admitted by either, rumours were rife at the time that Kelly and Milland were engaged in an affair, fuelled by notorious gossip columnist Hedda Hopper.\nHe starred with Phyllis Avery and Lloyd Corrigan in the CBS sitcom, \"Meet Mr. McNutley\", from 1953 to 1955. He appeared in the role of an English and Drama professor at the fictitious Lynnhaven College. The sitcom was renamed \"The Ray Milland Show\" in its second season. Milland directed some episodes, and he soon had ambitions to direct features.\nAt Fox, Milland starred in \"The Girl in the Red Velvet Swing\" (1955). then starred in a TV adaptation of \"Markheim\" (1956) directed by Fred Zinnemann.\nDirecting.\nAfter leaving Paramount, Milland concentrated on directing. In his first directorial effort, a Western entitled \"A Man Alone\" (1955), Milland cast himself in the leading role. His co-stars included Mary Murphy and Ward Bond. The story depicts the aftermath of a stagecoach robbery. He did the film for a lesser fee in exchange for a chance to direct and a percentage of the profits\nHe then starred in and directed \"Lisbon\" (1956), alongside Maureen O'Hara and Claude Rains. Like \"A Man Alone\", it was distributed by Republic Pictures and filmed in Trucolor.\nHe directed episodes of \"The Ford Television Theatre\" and \"Schlitz Playhouse\" and starred in the features \"Three Brave Men\" (1956), \"The River's Edge\" (1957), a Western directed by Allan Dwan for Benedict Bogeaus, and \"High Flight\" (1957), an air force melodrama for Warwick Pictures in England.\nHe appeared in episodes of \"Suspicion\" and \"General Electric Theater\", directing episodes of both. His third feature as director was \"The Safecracker\" (1958), which was shot in England.\nRetirement and \"Markham\".\nMilland then retired for six months before deciding to go back to work, commenting, \"my wife told me I'd better get a job of some kind because I was making her a nervous wreck ... hanging around the house.\"\nFrom 1958 to 1960, Milland starred in the CBS detective series, \"Markham\", originally called \"Crisis\".\nDuring the making of the show Milland remarked, \"it's becoming more and more of an effort to go on acting. I know it's a wonderful way to make a living but any job you don't like becomes difficult and I just don't like acting. I never have. I do it because I can't make a living any other way. Standing in front of a crew playing love scenes embarasses me. I'm as self conscious as hell and I want to get it over with. You get up too early and you finish too late and you feel like a lackey.\"\nThe show failed to capture the expected significant audience, even though it followed the western \"Gunsmoke\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDo what you can with what you've got. I know actors from my generation who sit at home and cry, 'Why don't they send me any scripts?' I tell them, 'Because you still think of yourself as a leading man. You're 68, not 28. Face it.'\nHe retired again, this time to the French Riviera in 1960. However, he soon became bored and started acting again.\nAIP.\nMilland appeared in two Roger Corman AIP pictures. The first was \"The Premature Burial\" (1962) \u2013 the third of Corman's 'Poe Cycle'. He then portrayed Dr. Xavier in the well-received \"\" (1963).\nAlso for AIP, he starred in the self-directed, apocalyptic science-fiction drama, \"Panic in Year Zero!\" (1962).\nHe continued to guest star on shows like \"The Alfred Hitchcock Hour\", and he appeared in \"Quick, Let's Get Married \" (1964).\nBroadway.\nMilland decided to return to the stage and in 1964 appeared as Higgins in a touring version of \"My Fair Lady\", with mezzo-soprano Marilyn Savage as Eliza Doolittle. He enjoyed the experience and in 1966 took the lead role as Simon Crawford QC in the Broadway play, \"Hostile Witness\", directed by Reginald Denham.\nThe play ran in New York from February until July of that year, after which Milland took the play on the road. In 1968, he reprised the role in a film of the same title, which he also directed. It was the last feature film he directed.\nCharacter actor.\nHe returned as a character actor in the late 1960s and the 1970s, appearing in such films as \"Daughter of the Mind\" (1969), a television film that reunited him with Gene Tierney.\nIn the late 1960s, Milland hosted rebroadcasts of certain episodes of the syndicated Western anthology series, \"Death Valley Days\", under the title \"Trails West\"; the series' original host had been Ronald Reagan. He also guest-starred on \"Bracken's World\" and \"The Name of the Game\" as well as in TV movies like \"Company of Killers\" (1970), \"River of Gold\" (1971) and \"Black Noon\" (1971).\nMilland had his biggest box office success in many years when he played Oliver Barrett III in \"Love Story\" (1970). In 1978 Milland reprised his role as Oliver Barrett III in \"Oliver's Story\", also written by Erich Segal.\nHe was then in \"Embassy\" (1972), a British spy thriller.\nIn 1970, he said he worked only two to three months a year acting and spent the rest of the year relaxing, although he admitted that he had suffered some financial troubles since the sale of his yacht in 1964.\nHorror and action movies; focus on television.\nIn 1972, Milland starred in two horror films. One was \"Frogs\", co-starring Sam Elliott and Joan Van Ark, in which Milland played a wealthy, cantankerous plantation owner who dumps waste materials in a swamp, causing an enormous disruption of nature. The second, \"The Thing with Two Heads\", a blaxploitation film directed by Lee Frost, is considered a cult classic; Milland plays a brain surgeon with a terminal illness who transplants his head onto the healthy body of an African-American prisoner. The following year he was in \"The House in Nightmare Park\" (1973), a comedy chiller, and had the lead in the TV movie, \"Terror in the Wax Museum\" (1973).\nHe also turned in an appearance as a hand surgeon in the \"Night Gallery\" episode, \"The Hand of Borgus Weems\". He guest-starred in two episodes of \"Columbo\", as a grieving widower in \"Death Lends a Hand\" (1971) and as a suspect in \"The Greenhouse Jungle\" (1972).\nMilland was in such action films as \"The Big Game\" (1974), \"The Student Connection\" (1974), and \"Gold\" opposite Roger Moore (1974). Then he did another TV horror film, \"The Dead Don't Die\" (1975). He appeared in \"Escape to Witch Mountain\" (1975) for Disney and guest starred on shows like \"Cool Million\" and \"Ellery Queen\".\nAround this time, Milland said that he planned on moving to Europe and that he accepted \"the parts I figure I can get some enjoyment out of.\"\nIn 1975, Milland was the subject of an episode of the British biographical TV series, \"This Is Your Life\".\nMilland had a significant success with the TV miniseries, \"Rich Man, Poor Man\" (1976), receiving an Emmy nomination for Best Supporting Actor.\nHe also had roles in \"The Swiss Conspiracy\" (1976), \"Aces High\" (1976), \"Look What's Happened to Rosemary's Baby\" (1976), \"Mayday at 40,000 Feet!\" (1976), \"The Last Tycoon\" (1976), \"Seventh Avenue\" (1976), \"Oil\" (1977), \"Testimony of Two Men\" (1977), \"The Uncanny\" (1977), \"Slavers\" (1977), and \"The Pyjama Girl Case\" (1978), an Italian giallo set in Australia.\nHe starred in \"Cruise Into Terror\" (1978), \"The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries\", \"Blackout\" (1978), and \"The Darker Side of Terror\" (1979).\nHe guest-starred as Sire Uri in \"Saga of a Star World\" (1978\")\", the pilot episode of the original \"Battlestar Galactica\" television series. He reprised his role as Ryan O'Neal's father in \"Oliver's Story\" (1978) and appeared in some action films, including \"Spree\" (1979) and \"Game for Vultures\" (1979).\nMilland guest-starred on several Aaron Spelling-produced shows such as \"Fantasy Island\", \"The Love Boat\", \"Charlie's Angels\" and \"Hart to Hart\". In the latter, he appeared twice as Jennifer Hart's father.\nHe was top billed in \"The Attic\" (1980), but usually had supporting roles in TV movies like \"The Dream Merchants\" (1980), \"Our Family Business\" (1981), \"The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana\" (1982), \"\" (1983), \"Cave In!\" (1983), and \"The Masks of Death\" (1984), a Sherlock Holmes adventure starring Peter Cushing and John Mills.\nHis last appearances were in \"The Sea Serpent\" (1985) and \"The Gold Key\" (1985). The latter was a mystery made specifically for video.\nPersonal life.\nMilland was married to Muriel Frances Weber (31 December 1908 \u2013 6 October 1992) from 30 September 1932 until his death on 10 March 1986. They had one biological son and one adopted daughter. Their son, Daniel, appeared in several minor acting roles in the 1960s and died of an apparent suicide in March 1981, at the age of 41.\nMilland became a naturalised American citizen in the 1940s. He supported the Republican Party and publicly backed Thomas E. Dewey in the 1944 United States presidential election\nas well as Richard Nixon in the 1968 presidential election.\nDeath.\nMilland died of lung cancer at the Torrance Memorial Medical Center in Torrance, California, on 10 March 1986. He was 79 years old. In line with his instructions, no funeral was held. His body was cremated, and his ashes were scattered into the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Redondo Beach, California.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nMonder, Eric. \"Dashing to the End: The Ray Milland Story.\" University Press of Mississippi, 2025. ."}
{"id": "53506", "revid": "1313362564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53506", "title": "Edmond Rostand", "text": "French poet and dramatist (1868\u20131918)\nEdmond Eug\u00e8ne Alexis Rostand (, , ; 1 April 1868 \u2013 2 December 1918) was a French poet and dramatist. He is associated with neo-romanticism and is known best for his 1897 play \"Cyrano de Bergerac\". Rostand's romantic plays contrasted with the naturalistic theatre popular during the late nineteenth century. Another of Rostand's works, \"Les Romanesques\" (1894), was adapted to the 1960 musical comedy \"The Fantasticks\".\nEarly life.\nRostand was born in Marseille, France, into a wealthy and cultured Proven\u00e7al family. His father was an economist, a poet who translated and edited the works of Catullus, and a member of the Marseille Academy and the Institut de France. Rostand studied literature, history, and philosophy at the Coll\u00e8ge Stanislas in Paris, France.\nCareer.\nWhen Rostand was twenty years old, his first play, a one-act comedy, \"Le Gant rouge\", was performed at the Cluny Theatre, 24 August 1888, but it was almost unnoticed.\nHe and his fianc\u00e9e Rosemonde G\u00e9rard became friends with Emmanuel Chabrier in 1889, and the composer quickly set three of his poems (and two of hers) to music; the following year the two collaborated on \"\u00c0 la musique\" for the house-warming of a mutual friend. In 1890, Rostand published a volume of poems called \"Les Musardises\". The same year he offered a one-act Pierrot play in verse to the director of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Fran\u00e7ois. This gave him the opportunity to write for the state theatre a three-act play, also in verse, as are all Rostand's plays. He considered himself a poet, whether writing plays or poetry.\nThe resulting play, \"Les Romanesques\", was produced at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Fran\u00e7ois on 21 May 1894. It was a great success and was the start of his career as a dramatist. This play would be adapted in 1960 by Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt into the long-running American musical \"The Fantasticks\".\nRostand's next play was written for Sarah Bernhardt. \"La Princesse Lointaine\" was based on the story of the 12th-century troubadour Jaufre Rudel and his love for Hodierna of Jerusalem (who is the archetypal princesse lointaine character). This idealistic play opened on 5 April 1895, at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance. The part of Melisandre (based on Hodierna's daughter Melisende of Tripoli) was created by Sarah Bernhardt but the play was not particularly successful. When Bernhardt performed it in London later the same year, it received a bad review from George Bernard Shaw but this was not surprising considering Shaw's bias for realism. \"Rambaldo di Vaqueiras: I Monferrato\", 1922 1922 verse drama by Nino Berrini is based on \"La Princesse Lointaine\".\nBernhardt, undeterred, asked Rostand to write another play for her. She created the role of Photine in \"La Samaritaine\" (Theatre de la Renaissance, 14 April 1897), a Biblical drama in three scenes adapted from the gospel story of the woman of Samaria. This play was more successful and became part of Sarah Bernhardt's repertoire. Rostand felt satisfied that he had proven to the public that he was something more than a writer of comedies.\n The production of his heroic comedy \"Cyrano de Bergerac\" (28 December 1897, Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Porte Saint-Martin), with Beno\u00eet-Constant Coquelin in the title role, was a triumph. The first production lasted for more than 300 consecutive nights. No such enthusiasm for a drama in verse had been known since the time of Hugo's \"Hernani\". The play was quickly translated into English, German, Russian and other European languages. Cyrano de Bergerac had been a boyhood hero of Rostand, who loved his idealism and courage. He had also thoroughly researched French 17th-century history.\nThe play \"L'Aiglon\" was written for Sarah Bernhardt to perform during the Exposition Universelle in Paris. A patriotic subject was required, and Rostand chose a subject from Napoleonic history, suggested probably by Henri Welschinger's \"Roi de Rome, 1811\u201332\" (1897), which contained much new information about the unhappy life of the Duke of Reichstadt, son of Napoleon I, and Marie Louise, surveilled by agents of Metternich at the Sch\u00f6nbrunn Palace. \"L'Aiglon\", a verse drama in six acts, was produced (15 March 1900) by Sarah Bernhardt at her own theatre, she herself performing the trouser role of the Duke of Reichstadt.\nIn 1901, Rostand became the youngest writer ever to be elected to the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise. He relocated to Cambo-les-bains, in the Basque Pyrenees, in 1903 for health reasons. Here he built himself a villa, Arnaga (now a Rostand museum) and worked on his next play, one for Constant Coquelin this time, \"Chantecler\". Produced in February 1910, it was awaited with an interest, enhanced by considerable delay in the production, which affected the enthusiasm of its reception. Nor did the Parisian audience enjoy the caricature of salon life in the third act. Since Constant Coquelin had died during rehearsals, Lucien Guitry was in the title role and Mme. Simone played the part of the pheasant. Chantecler is a cockerel and the characters are birds and animals. \"Chantecler\" is the great play of Rostand's maturity, expressing Rostand's own deepest feelings as a poet and idealist.\nThe Romancers one act play is one of Edmond Rostand's most famous plays. This play is found to be read for study in the courses of many universities of the world.\nWhen he died prematurely at fifty years old, Rostand was still writing plays. \"La Derni\u00e8re Nuit de Don Juan\" was performed posthumously in 1922. There were two unfinished and unpublished plays \u2013 \"Yorick\" and \"Les Petites Manies\".\nPersonal life.\nRostand was married to the poet and playwright Rosemonde-\u00c9tiennette G\u00e9rard who, in 1890, published \"Les Pipeaux\": a volume of verse commended by the Academy. The couple had two sons, Jean and Maurice.\nDuring the 1900s, Rostand came to live in the Villa Arnaga in Cambo-les-Bains in the French Basque Country, seeking a cure for his pleurisy. The house is now a heritage site and a museum of Rostand's life and Basque architecture and crafts. Rostand died in 1918, a victim of the flu pandemic, and is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Marseille.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53507", "revid": "6707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53507", "title": "Group object", "text": "In category theory, a branch of mathematics, group objects are certain generalizations of groups that are built on more complicated structures than sets. A typical example of a group object is a topological group, a group whose underlying set is a topological space such that the group operations are continuous.\nDefinition.\nFormally, we start with a category \"C\" with finite products (i.e. \"C\" has a terminal object 1 and any two objects of \"C\" have a product). A group object in \"C\" is an object \"G\" of \"C\" together with morphisms\nsuch that the following properties (modeled on the group axioms \u2013 more precisely, on the definition of a group used in universal algebra) are satisfied\nNote that this is stated in terms of maps \u2013 product and inverse must be maps in the category \u2013 and without any reference to underlying \"elements\" of the group object \u2013 categories in general do not have elements of their objects.\nAnother way to state the above is to say \"G\" is a group object in a category \"C\" if for every object \"X\" in \"C\", there is a group structure on the morphisms Hom(\"X\", \"G\") from \"X\" to \"G\" such that the association of \"X\" to Hom(\"X\", \"G\") is a (contravariant) functor from \"C\" to the category of groups.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53509", "revid": "31111023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53509", "title": "Village", "text": "Human settlement smaller than a town\nA village is a human settlement or a residential community, larger than a hamlet but smaller than a town with a population typically ranging from a few hundred to a few thousand. Although villages are often located in rural areas, the term urban village is also applied to certain urban neighborhoods. Villages are normally permanent, with fixed dwellings; however, transient villages can occur. Further, the dwellings of a village are fairly close to one another, not scattered broadly over the landscape, as a dispersed settlement. In the past, villages were a usual form of community for societies that practiced subsistence agriculture and also for some non-agricultural societies. In Great Britain, a hamlet earned the right to be called a village when it built a church. In many cultures, towns and cities were few, with only a small proportion of the population living in them. The Industrial Revolution attracted people in larger numbers to work in mills and factories; the concentration of people caused many villages to grow into towns and cities. This also enabled specialization of labor and crafts and the development of many trades. The trend of urbanization continues but not always in connection with industrialization. Historically, homes were situated together for sociability and defence, and land surrounding the living quarters was farmed. Traditional fishing villages were based on artisan fishing and located adjacent to fishing grounds.\nIn toponomastic terminology, the names of individual villages are called \"Comonyms\" (from Ancient Greek \u03ba\u03ce\u03bc\u03b7 / village and \u1f44\u03bd\u03c5\u03bc\u03b1 / name, [cf. \u1f44\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1]).\nEtymology.\nFrom Middle English \"village\", from Old French \"village\", from Latin \"vill\u0101ticus\", ultimately from Latin \"villa\" (English \"villa\").\nCentral and South Asia.\nAfghanistan.\nIn Afghanistan, the village, or \"deh\" (Dari/Pashto: \u062f\u0647) is the mid-size settlement type in Afghan society, trumping the United States hamlet or \"qala\" (Dari: \u0642\u0644\u0639\u0647, Pashto: \u06a9\u0644\u064a), though smaller than the town, or \"sh\u0101r\" (Dari: \u0634\u0647\u0631, Pashto: \u069a\u0627\u0631). In contrast to the \"qala\", the \"deh\" is generally a bigger settlement which includes a commercial area, while the yet larger \"sh\u0101r\" includes governmental buildings and services such as schools of higher education, basic health care, police stations etc.\nIndia.\n\"The soul of India lives in its villages,\" declared Mahatma Gandhi at the beginning of 20th century. According to the 2011 census of India, 69% of Indians (around 833 million people) live in villages. As per 2011 census of India, there are a total of 649,481 villages in India. The size of these villages varies considerably. 236,004 Indian villages have a population of fewer than 500, while 3,976 villages have a population of 10,000+. Most of the villages have their own temple, mosque, or church, depending on the local religious following.\nPakistan.\nThe majority of Pakistanis live in rural areas. According to the 2017 census, about 64% of the Pakistani population lives in rural areas. Most rural areas in Pakistan tend to be near cities, and are peri-urban areas. This is due to the definition of a rural area in Pakistan being an area that does not fall within an urban boundary. A village is called deh or gaaon in Urdu. Pakistani village life is marked by kinship and exchange relations.\nKazakhstan.\nAuyl () is a Kazakh word meaning \"village\" in Kazakhstan. According to the 2009 census of Kazakhstan, 42.7% of Kazakhstani citizens (7.5 million people) live in 8172 different villages. To refer to this concept along with the word \"auyl\" often used the Slavic word \"selo\" in Northern Kazakhstan.\nEast Asia.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nIn mainland China, villages are divisions under township or town .\nRepublic of China (Taiwan).\nIn the Republic of China (Taiwan), villages are divisions under townships or county-administered cities. The village is called a \"tsuen\" or \"c\u016bn\" (\u6751) under a rural township (\u9109) and a \"li\" (\u91cc) under an urban township (\u93ae) or a county-controlled city. See also Li (unit).\nSoutheast Asia.\nBrunei.\nIn Brunei, villages are officially the third- and lowest-level subdivisions of Brunei below districts and mukims. A village is locally known by the Malay word (also spelt as ). They may be villages in the traditional or anthropological sense but may also comprise delineated residential settlements, both rural and urban. The community of a village is headed by a village head (). Communal infrastructure for the villagers may include a primary school, a religious school providing or Islamic religious primary education which is compulsory for the Muslim pupils in the country, a mosque, and a community centre ( or ).\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, depending on the principles they are administered, villages are called \"kampung\" or \"desa\" (or \"kelurahan\" for those with urban functions). A \"desa\" (a term that derives from a Sanskrit word meaning \"country\" that is found in the name \"Bangladesh\"=\"bangla\" and \"desh/desha\") is administered according to traditions and customary law (\"adat\"), while a \"kelurahan\" is administered along more \"modern\" principles. \"Desa\" are generally located in rural areas while \"kelurahan\" are generally urban subdivisions. A village head is respectively called \"kepala desa\" or \"lurah\". Both are elected by the local community. A \"desa\" or \"kelurahan\" is the subdivision of a \"kecamatan\" (district), in turn the subdivision of a (regency) or \"kota\" (city).\nThe same general concept applies all over Indonesia. However, there is some variation among the vast numbers of Austronesian ethnic groups. For instance, in Bali villages have been created by grouping traditional hamlets or \"banjar\", which constitute the basis of Balinese social life. In the Minangkabau area in West Sumatra province, traditional villages are called \"nagari\" (a term deriving from another Sanskrit word meaning \"city\", which can be found in the name like \"Srinagar\"=\"sri\" and \"nagar/nagari\"). In some areas such as Tanah Toraja, elders take turns watching over the village at a command post. As a general rule, \"desa\" and \"kelurahan\" are groupings of hamlets (\"kampung\" in Indonesian, \"dusun\" in Javanese, \"banjar\" in Bali). a \"kampung\" is defined today as a village in Brunei and Indonesia.\nMalaysia and Singapore.\n\"Kampung\" is a term used in Malaysia, (sometimes spelling \"kampong\" or \"kompong\" in the English language) for \"a Malay hamlet or village in a Malay-speaking country\". In Malaysia, a \"kampung\" is determined as a locality with 10,000 or fewer people. Since historical times, every Malay village came under the leadership of a \"penghulu\" (village chief), who has the power to hear civil matters in his village (see Courts of Malaysia for more details).\nA Malay village typically contains a mosque or surau, paddy fields and Malay houses on stilts. Malay and Indonesian villagers practice the culture of helping one another as a community, which is better known as \"joint bearing of burdens\" (\"gotong royong\"). They are family-oriented (especially the concept of respecting one's family [particularly the parents and elders]), courtesy and practice belief in God as paramount to everything else. It is common to see a cemetery near the mosque. In Sarawak and East Kalimantan, some villages are called 'long', primarily inhabited by the Orang Ulu.\nMalaysian \"kampung\" were once aplenty in Singapore but there are almost no remaining \"kampung\" villages; the very few to have survived until today are mostly on outlying islands surrounding mainland Singapore, such as Pulau Ubin. Mainland Singapore used to have many \"kampung\" villages but modern developments and rapid urbanisation works have seen them bulldozed away; Kampong Lorong Buangkok is the last surviving village on the country's mainland.\nThe term \"kampung\", sometimes spelled \"kampong\", is one of many Malay words to have entered common usage in Malaysia and Singapore. Locally, the term is frequently used to refer to either one's hometown or a rural village, depending on the intended context.\nPhilippines.\nIn urban areas of the Philippines, the term \"village\" most commonly refers to private subdivisions, especially gated communities. These villages emerged in the mid-20th century and were initially the domain of elite urban dwellers. Those are common in major cities in the country and their residents have a wide range of income levels.\nSuch villages may or may not correspond to a barangay (the country's basic unit of government, also glossed as village), or be privately administered. Barangays correspond more to precolonial villages; the chairman (formerly the village datu) now settles administrative, intrapersonal, and political matters or polices the area though with much less authority and respect than in Indonesia or Malaysia.\nVietnam.\nVillages (l\u00e0ng) made up the basis of Vietnamese society. Vietnamese village is considered one of the typical symbol of Asian agricultural production. Villages in Vietnam typically contains: a village gate, bamboo hedges (l\u0169y tre), a communal house where the tutelary deity (Th\u00e0nh ho\u00e0ng) is worshiped, a well shared by the whole village, paddy fields (\u0111\u1ed3ng l\u00faa), temples (\u0111\u1ec1n, ch\u00f9a) and houses of all families in the village. Villagers share the same bloodline and are usually rice farmers, and may also share the same crafts. Village have an important role in Vietnamese society (Vietnamese saying: \"Custom rules the law\" -\"Ph\u00e9p vua thua l\u1ec7 l\u00e0ng\" [literally: the king's law yields to village customs]). It is common for Vietnamese villagers to prefer to be buried in their village upon death.\nCentral and Eastern Europe.\nSlavic-speaking countries.\n\"Selo\" (Cyrillic: \u0441\u0435\u043b\u043e) is a Slavic word meaning \"village\" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, North Macedonia, Russia, Serbia, and Ukraine. For example, there are numerous \"sela\" (\u0441\u0435\u043b\u0430; plural of \"selo\") called \"Novo Selo\" (\u041d\u043e\u0432\u043e \u0421\u0435\u043b\u043e, \"New Village\") in Bulgaria, Croatia, Montenegro, Serbia, and North Macedonia.\nAnother Slavic word for a village is \"ves\" (; ; ; ; ). In Slovenia, the word \"selo\" is used for very small villages (fewer than 100 people) and in dialects; the Slovene word \"vas\" is used all over Slovenia. In Russia and Bulgaria, the word \"ves\" is archaic, but remains in idioms and locality names, such as Vesyegonsk and Belevehchevo.\nThe most commonly used word for village in Slovak is \"dedina\" (dialectical also \"dzedzina\"). The word's etymology may be (or may not be) rooted in the verb \"dedi\u0165\" (\"to inherit\"), referencing the inheriting of whole villages or properties within villages by noblemen or wealthy landowners. Another etymology could be related to the Sanskrit word \"de\u015b\u00e1\" (\u0926\u0947\u0936) similar to the Afghan \"deh\", Bengal \"desh\" and Indonesian \"desa\". The term \"ves\" appears in settlement names (mostly villages, but also some towns that evolved over time from villages). The dialect term for village in east Slovakia is also \"valal\" (or \"valala\"). \"Dedina\" is unrelated to the rarer east Slavic term \"derevna\", which refers to a village with wooden (\"derevo\") housing.\nBulgaria.\nIn Bulgaria, the different types of \"sela\" vary from a small selo of 5 to 30 families to one of several thousand people. According to a 2002 census, in that year there were 2,385,000 Bulgarian citizens living in settlements classified as \"villages\". A 2004 Human Settlement Profile on Bulgaria conducted by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs stated that:\nThe most intensive is the migration \"city\u00a0\u2013 city\". Approximately 46% of all migrated people have changed their residence from one city to another. The share of the migration processes \"village\u00a0\u2013 city\" is significantly less\u00a0\u2013 23% and \"city\u00a0\u2013 village\"\u00a0\u2013 20%. The migration \"village\u00a0\u2013 village\" in 2002 is 11%.\nIt also stated that\nthe state of the environment in the small towns and villages is good apart from the low level of infrastructure.\nIn Bulgaria, it is popular to visit villages for the atmosphere, culture, crafts, hospitality of the people and the surrounding nature. This is called \"selski turizam\" (), meaning \"village tourism\".\nRussia.\nIn Russia, as of the 2010 Census, 26.3% of the country's population lives in rural localities; down from 26.7% recorded in the 2002 Census. Multiple types of rural localities exist, but the two most common are \"derevnya\" () and \"selo\" (). Historically, the formal indication of status was religious: a city (\"gorod\", ) had a cathedral, a \"selo\" had a church, while a \"derevnya\" had neither.\nThe lowest administrative unit of the Russian Empire, a \"volost\", or its Soviet or modern Russian successor, a \"selsoviet\", was typically headquartered in a \"selo\" and embraced a few neighboring villages.\nIn the 1960s\u20131970s, the depopulation of the smaller villages was driven by the central planners' drive in order to get the farm workers out of smaller, \"prospectless\" hamlets and into the collective or state farms' main villages or even larger towns and cities, with more amenities.\nMost Russian rural residents are involved in agricultural work, and it is very common for villagers to produce their own food. As prosperous urbanites purchase village houses for their second homes, Russian villages sometimes are transformed into dacha settlements, used mostly for seasonal residence.\nThe historically Cossack regions of Southern Russia and parts of Ukraine, with their fertile soil and absence of serfdom, had a rather different pattern of settlement from central and northern Russia. While peasants of central Russia lived in a village around the lord's manor, a Cossack family often lived on its own farm, called \"khutor\". A number of such \"khutors\" plus a central village made up the administrative unit with a center in a \"stanitsa\" (; ). Such \"stanitsas\", often with a few thousand residents, were usually larger than a typical \"selo\" in central Russia.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, a village (, ) is considered the lowest administrative unit. Villages are under the jurisdiction of a hromada administration.\nThere is another smaller type of rural settlement which is designated in Ukrainian as a \"selyshche\" (). This type of community is often referred to in English as a \"settlement\". In the new law about populated places in Ukraine the term \"selyshche\", has a specific meaning. In the past the word \"selyshche\" was more ambiguous and there were distinction between rural \"selyshche\" and \"selyshche miskoho typu\" (urban-type settlement), abbreviated \"smt\" in Ukrainian. There we also \"dacha\", fisherman, etc. \"selyshches\"\nThe \"khutir\" () and \"stanytsia\" () are not part of the administrative division any longer, primarily due to collectivization. \"Khutirs\" were very small rural localities consisting of just few housing units and were sort of individual farms. They became really popular during the Stolypin reform in the early 20th century. During the collectivization, however, residents of such settlements were usually declared to be kulaks and had all their property confiscated and distributed to others (nationalized) without any compensation. The \"stanitsa\" likewise has not survived as an administrative term. The \"stanitsa\" was a type of a collective community that could include one or more settlements such as villages, \"khutirs\", and others. Today, \"stanitsa\"-type formations have only survived in Kuban (Russian Federation) where Ukrainians were resettled during the time of the Russian Empire.\nAshkenazi Jewish culture.\nA \"shtetl\" (plural \"shtetlekh\") was a small market town or village with a majority Jewish population in central and eastern Europe. The word \"shtetl\" is Yiddish, derived from the word \"shtot\" (town) with the suffix \"-l\", a diminutive. Shtetlekh first began to appear in the 13th century, and were characteristic aspects of Jewish life in central and Eastern Europe until the 1940s. The shtetl occupies an important place in Jewish collective memory (particularly the history of Ashkenazi Jews) and has been depicted extensively in literature, visual art, theatre, and film, including such examples as the writing of Mendele Mocher Sforim, Isaac Bashevis Singer, and Sholem Aleichem. Sholem Aleichem's Tevye the Dairyman stories, set in the fictional shtetl of Anatevka, were eventually adapted into the Fiddler on the Roof stage play (which itself was later adapted for film).\nDuring the Holocaust, most shtetlekh were depopulated of their Jewish communities through mass deportations or liquidations. Many are memorialized in yizkor books, written testimonies that describe the histories of Jewish communities destroyed during the Holocaust.\nWestern and Southern Europe.\nFrance.\nThe Insee classifies French communes into four groups according to population density:\nA commune in Group 3 or 4 is considered as a village (\"commune rurale\").\nAn independent association named (affiliated to the international association The Most Beautiful Villages in the World), was created in 1982 to promote assets of small and picturesque French villages of quality heritage. As of July 2023, 172 villages in France have been listed in \"The Most Beautiful Villages of France\".\nGermany.\nIn Germany a \"Dorf\" (village) usually consists of at least a few houses but can have up to a few thousand inhabitants. Larger villages can also be referred to as a \"Flecken\" or \"Markt\" depending on the region and the settlement's market rights. Smaller villages usually do not have their own government. Instead, they are part () of the municipality of a nearby town.\nIn the settlement geography typology in Germany, a distinction is made between individual settlements and group settlements. Only group settlements of a certain size (\"large group settlement\") are referred to as villages. The size that a settlement must have in order to be considered a village varies from region to region. Only settlements in rural areas are referred to as villages. Ideal villages were traditionally characterized by agriculture, most of the inhabitants were farmers or agricultural workers, the settlement form was determined by the farmhouses and was closely connected to the surrounding farmland, the meadow and the traditional land forms. In addition, the majority of the population used to live in rural settlements, whereas today only a small proportion still does. Whereas in the German Reich in 1900, almost half (46%) of the population lived in rural areas, the proportion in the Federal Republic of Germany had fallen to around a quarter (23%) by 2015.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, villages are spread throughout the country. No legal definition of village exists in Italian law; nonetheless, a settlement inhabited by less than 2000 people is usually described as \"village\". More often, Italian villages that are a part of a municipality are called \"frazione\", whereas the village that hosts the municipal seat is called \"paese\" (town) or \"capoluogo\".\nA non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest named \"I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia\" () and affiliated to the international association The Most Beautiful Villages in the World, was created in 2001 on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities with the aim of preserving and maintaining villages of quality heritage. Founded to contribute to safeguarding, conserving and revitalizing small villages and municipalities, but sometimes even individual hamlets, which, being outside the main tourist circuits, they risk, despite their great value, being forgotten with consequent degradation, depopulation and abandonment. Its motto is (\"The charm of hidden Italy\"). As of November 2023, 361 villages in Italy have been listed in \"The Most Beautiful Villages of Italy\".\nThe criteria for admission to the association meet the following requirements: integrity of the urban fabric, architectural harmony, livability of the village, artistic-historical quality of the public and private building heritage, services to the citizen as well as the payment of an annual membership fee.\nThe association organizes initiatives within the villages, such as festivals, exhibitions, fetes, conferences and concerts that highlight the cultural, historical, gastronomic and linguistic heritage, involving residents, schools, and local artists. The club promotes numerous initiatives on the international market. In 2016, the association signed a global agreement with ENIT, to promote tourism in the most beautiful villages in the world. In 2017, the club signed an agreement with Costa Cruises for the enhancement of some villages, which are offered to cruise passengers arriving in Italian ports aboard the operator's ships.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, a village (\"pueblo\") refers to a small population unit, smaller than a town (\"villa\" [an archaic term that survives only in official uses, such as the official name of Spain's capital, \"la Villa de Madrid\"]) and a city (\"ciudad\"), typically located in a rural environment. While commonly it is the smallest administrative unit (\"municipio\"), it is possible for a village to be legally composed of smaller population units in its territory. There is not a clear-cut distinction between villages, towns and cities in Spain, since they had been traditionally categorized according to their religious importance and their relationship with surrounding population units.\nPortugal.\nVillages (\"aldeias\", singular: \"aldeia\") are more usual in the northern and central regions, Azores Islands and in the Alentejo. Most of them have a church and a \"Casa do Povo\" (people's house), where the village's summer \"romarias\" or religious festivities are usually held. Summer is also when many villages are host to a range of folk festivals and fairs, taking advantage of the fact that many of the locals who reside abroad tend to come back to their native village for the holidays.\nNetherlands.\nIn the flood-prone districts of the Netherlands, particularly in the northern provinces of Friesland and Groningen, villages were traditionally built on low man-made hills called terpen before the introduction of regional dyke-systems. In modern days, the term \"dorp\" (lit. \"village\") is usually applied to settlements no larger than 20,000, though there's no official law regarding status of settlements in the Netherlands.\nUnited Kingdom.\nA village in the UK is a compact settlement of houses, smaller in size than a town, and generally based on agriculture or, in some areas, mining (such as Ouston, County Durham), quarrying or sea fishing. They are very similar to those in Ireland.\nThe major factors in the type of settlement are: location of water sources, organization of agriculture and landholding, and likelihood of flooding. For example, in areas such as the Lincolnshire Wolds, the villages are often found along the spring line halfway down the hillsides, and originate as spring line settlements, with the original open field systems around the village. In northern Scotland, most villages are planned to a grid pattern located on or close to major roads, whereas in areas such as the Forest of Arden, woodland clearances produced small hamlets around village greens. Because of the topography of the Clent Hills the north Worcestershire village of Clent is an example of a village with no centre but instead consists of series of hamlets scattered on and around the Hills.\nSome villages have disappeared (for example, deserted medieval villages), sometimes leaving behind a church or manor house and sometimes nothing but bumps in the fields. Some show archaeological evidence of settlement at three or four different layers, each distinct from the previous one. Clearances may have been to accommodate sheep or game estates, or enclosure, or may have resulted from depopulation, such as after the Black Death or following a move of the inhabitants to more prosperous districts. Other villages have grown and merged and often form hubs within the general mass of suburbia\u2014such as Hampstead, London and Didsbury in Manchester. Many villages are now predominantly dormitory locations and have suffered the loss of shops, churches and other facilities.\nFor many British people, the village represents an ideal of Great Britain. Seen as being far from the bustle of modern life, it is represented as quiet and harmonious, if a little inward-looking. This concept of an unspoilt Arcadia is present in many popular representations of the village such as the radio serial \"The Archers\" or the best kept village competitions.\nMany villages in South Yorkshire, north Nottinghamshire, north east Derbyshire, County Durham, South Wales and Northumberland are known as pit villages. These (such as Murton, County Durham) grew from hamlets when the sinking of a colliery in the early 20th century resulted in a rapid growth in their population and the colliery owners built new housing, shops, pubs and churches. Some pit villages outgrew nearby towns by area and population; for example, Rossington in South Yorkshire came to have over four times more people than the nearby town of Bawtry. Some pit villages grew to become towns; for example, Maltby in South Yorkshire grew from 600 people in the 19th century to over 17,000 in 2007. Maltby was constructed under the auspices of the Sheepbridge Coal and Iron Company and included ample open spaces and provision for gardens.\nIn the UK, the main historical distinction between a hamlet and a village was that the latter had a church, and so usually was the centre of worship for an ecclesiastical parish. However, some civil parishes may contain more than one village. The typical village had a pub or inn, shops, and a blacksmith. But many of these facilities are now gone, and many villages are dormitories for commuters. The population of such settlements ranges from a few hundred people to around five thousand. A village is distinguished from a town in that:\nMiddle East.\nLebanon.\nLike France, villages in Lebanon are usually located in remote mountainous areas. The majority of villages in Lebanon retain their Aramaic names or are derivative of the Aramaic names, and this is because Aramaic was still in use in Mount Lebanon up to the 18th century.\nMany of the Lebanese villages are a part of districts, these districts are known as \"kadaa\" which includes the districts of Baabda (Baabda), Aley (Aley), Matn (Jdeideh), Keserwan (Jounieh), Chouf (Beiteddine), Jbeil (Byblos), Tripoli (Tripoli), Zgharta (Zgharta / Ehden), Bsharri (Bsharri), Batroun (Batroun), Koura (Amioun), Miniyeh-Danniyeh (Minyeh / Sir Ed-Danniyeh), Zahle (Zahle), Rashaya (Rashaya), Western Beqaa (Jebjennine / Saghbine), Sidon (Sidon), Jezzine (Jezzine), Tyre (Tyre), Nabatiyeh (Nabatiyeh), Marjeyoun (Marjeyoun), Hasbaya (Hasbaya), Bint Jbeil (Bint Jbeil), Baalbek (Baalbek), and Hermel (Hermel).\nThe district of Danniyeh consists of thirty-six small villages, which includes Almrah, Kfirchlan, Kfirhbab, Hakel al Azimah, Siir, Bakhoun, Miryata, Assoun, Sfiiri, Kharnoub, Katteen, Kfirhabou, Zghartegrein, Ein Qibil.\nDanniyeh (known also as Addinniyeh, Al Dinniyeh, Al Danniyeh, Arabic: \u0633\u064a\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0636\u0646\u064a\u0629) is a region located in Miniyeh-Danniyeh District in the North Governorate of Lebanon. The region lies east of Tripoli, extends north as far as Akkar District, south to Bsharri District and Zgharta District and as far east as Baalbek and Hermel. Dinniyeh has an excellent ecological environment filled with woodlands, orchards and groves. Several villages are located in this mountainous area, the largest town being Sir Al Dinniyeh.\nAn example of a typical mountainous Lebanese village in Dannieh would be Hakel al Azimah which is a small village that belongs to the district of Danniyeh, situated between Bakhoun and Assoun's boundaries. It is in the centre of the valleys that lie between the Arbeen Mountains and the Khanzouh.\nSyria.\nSyria contains a large number of villages that vary in size and importance, including the ancient, historical and religious villages, such as Ma'loula, Sednaya, and Brad (Mar Maroun's time). The diversity of the Syrian environments creates significant differences between the Syrian villages in terms of the economic activity and the method of adoption. Villages in the south of Syria (Hauran, Jabal al-Druze), the north-east (the Syrian island) and the Orontes River basin depend mostly on agriculture, mainly grain, vegetables, and fruits. Villages in the region of Damascus and Aleppo depend on trading. Some other villages, such as Marmarita depend heavily on tourist activity.\nMediterranean cities in Syria, such as Tartus and Latakia have similar types of villages. Mainly, villages were built in very good sites which had the fundamentals of the rural life, like water. An example of a Mediterranean Syrian village in Tartus would be al-Annazah, which is a small village that belongs to the area of al-Sauda. The area of al-Sauda is called a \"nahiya\".\nOceania.\nPacific Islands\nCommunities on Pacific islands were historically called villages by English speakers who traveled and settled in the area. Some communities such as several Villages of Guam continue to be called villages despite having large populations that can exceed 40,000 residents.\nNew Zealand\nThe traditional M\u0101ori village was the p\u0101, a fortified hill-top settlement. Tree-fern logs and flax were the main building materials. As in Australia (see below) the term is now used mainly in respect of shopping or other planned areas.\nAustralia\nThe term village often is used in reference to small planned communities such as retirement communities or shopping districts, and tourist areas such as ski resorts. Small rural communities are usually known as townships. Larger settlements are known as towns.\nSouth America.\nArgentina\nUsually set in remote mountainous areas, some also cater to winter sports or tourism. See Uspallata, La Cumbrecita, Villa Traful and La Cumbre.\nGuyana\nIn various areas villages can still be found in Guyana. While many are now towns, there are several areas on river banks, and communities off central roads that are still locally considered villages.\nUruguay\nVillage or \"villa\" is one of the three levels at which the government classifies urbanizations or \"localidades\", a \"villa\" is highest rank than a \"pueblo\" which is the lowest unit and lower than a city or \"ciudad\", which is the highest rank. This organization is more related with notability than size, since there is no official criteria to determine the level of urbanization. Every urbanization is a \"pueblo\" unless is elevated by decree to the next category. Historically this was a faculty of the executive power but more recently this faculty was transferred to the legislative. However colloquial speech still refers as \"pueblo\" to most \"villas\" and even cities and many names preceded by the word \"villa\" could represent other standard, such as \"Villa del Cerro\" or \"Villa Serrana\".\nNorth America.\nIn contrast to the Old World, the concept of village in Canada and the United States today is largely disconnected from its rural and communal origins. The situation is different in Mexico because of its large bulk of indigenous population living in traditional villages.\nCanada.\nIt is believed that the name Canada may be a transliteration of the Iroquoisan word for \"village\". Jacques Cartier was given directions to the Kanata of Kebec and it became the name of the French Colonial district before it was the nation's name.\nUnited States.\nIncorporated villages.\nIn twenty U.S. states, the term \"village\" refers to a specific form of incorporated municipal government, similar to a city but with less authority and geographic scope. However, this is a generality; in many states, there are villages that are an order of magnitude larger than the smallest cities in the state. The distinction is not necessarily based on population, but on the relative powers granted to the different types of municipalities and correspondingly, different obligations to provide specific services to residents.\nIn some states such as New York and Michigan, a village is an incorporated municipality, within a single town or civil township. In some cases, the village may be coterminous with the town or township, in which case the two may have a consolidated government. There are also villages that span the boundaries of more than one town or township; some villages may straddle county borders.\nThere is no population limit to villages in New York. Hempstead, the largest village, has 55,000 residents, making it more populous than some of the state's cities. However, villages in the state may not exceed in area. Michigan and Illinois also have no set population limit for villages and there are many villages that are larger than cities in those states. The village of Schaumburg, Illinois had 78,723 residents as of the 2020 census. A village also has no written figure against how small a population can be, with the United States' smallest incorporated village being Dering Harbor, NY, with a population of just over 10.\nIn Michigan, a village is always legally part of a township. Villages can incorporate land in multiple townships and even multiple counties. The largest village in the state is Beverly Hills in Southfield Township which had a population of 10,267 people as of the 2010 census.\nIn the state of Wisconsin, a village is always legally separate from the towns that it has been incorporated from. The largest village is Menomonee Falls, which has over 32,000 residents. In Pennsylvania law, the term borough is used to refer to the same type of entity. 80% of Pennsylvania's 956 boroughs have populations of less than 5,000 but about thirty have populations of over 10,000 with State College having more than 40,000 residents.\nIn Ohio villages are usually legally part of the township from which they were incorporated, although exceptions such as Hiram exist, in which the village is separate from the township. Villages become cities if they grow to a population of at least 5,000.\nIn Maryland, a locality designated \"Village of ...\" may be either an incorporated town or a special tax district. An example of the latter is the Village of Friendship Heights.\nIn North Carolina, the only difference between cities, towns, and villages is the term itself.\nUnincorporated villages.\nIn many states, the term \"village\" is used to refer to a relatively small unincorporated community, similar to a hamlet in New York state. This informal usage may be found even in states that have villages as an incorporated municipality, although such usage might be considered incorrect and confusing.\nIn most New England states, a \"village\" is a center of population or trade, including the town center, in an otherwise sparsely developed town or city\u00a0\u2014 for instance, the village of Hyannis in the town of Barnstable, Massachusetts. However, in Vermont and Connecticut, both incorporated and unincorporated villages exist.\nAfrica.\nNigeria.\nVillages in Nigeria vary significantly because of cultural and geographical differences.\nNorthern Nigeria\nIn the North, villages were under traditional rulers long before the Jihad of Shaikh Uthman Bin Fodio and after the Holy War. At that time Traditional rulers used to have absolute power in their administrative regions.\nAfter Dan Fodio's Jihad in 1804, political structure of the North became Islamic where emirs were the political, administrative and spiritual leaders of their people. These emirs appointed a number of people to assist them in running the administration and that included villages.\nEvery Hausa village was reigned by Magaji (Village head) who was answerable to his Hakimi (mayor) at the town level. The Magaji also had his cabinet who assisted him in ruling his village efficiently, among whom was Mai-Unguwa (Ward Head).\nWith the creation of Native Authority in Nigerian provinces, the autocratic power of village heads along with all other traditional rulers was subdued hence they ruled 'under the guidance of colonial officials'.\nEven though the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has not recognised the functions of traditional rulers, they still command respect in their villages and political office holders liaise with them almost every time to reach people.\nIn Hausa language, village is called \"\u0199auye\" and every local government area is made up of several small and large \"\u0199auyuka\" (villages). For instance, Girka is a village in Kaita town in Katsina state in Nigeria. They have mud houses with thatched roofing though, like in most of the villages in the North, zinc roofing has become a common sight.\nStill in many villages in the North, people do not have access to potable water. So they fetch water from ponds and streams. Others are lucky to have wells within a walking distance. Women rush in the morning to fetch water in their clay pots from wells, boreholes and streams. However, the government is now providing them with water bore holes.\nElectricity and GSM network are reaching more and more villages in the North almost every day. So bad feeder roads may lead to remote villages with electricity and unstable GSM network.\nSouthern Nigeria\nVillage dwellers in the Southeastern region lived separately in \"clusters of huts belonging to the patrilinage\". As the rainforest region is dominated by Igbo speaking people, the villages are called \"ime obodo\" (inside town) in Igbo language. A typical large village might have a few thousand persons who shared the same market, meeting place and beliefs.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa the majority of people in rural areas reside in villages. They vary in size from having a population of less than 500 to around 1000.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53510", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53510", "title": "Catatonia (band)", "text": "Welsh rock band\nCatatonia were an alternative rock band from Wales who gained popularity in the mid-to-late 1990s. The band formed in 1992 after Mark Roberts met Cerys Matthews. The first major lineup featured Dafydd Ieuan of Super Furry Animals on drums, Paul Jones on bass, and Clancy Pegg on keyboards. With this line-up the band recorded two EPs, \"For Tinkerbell\" and \"Hooked\".\nPegg was fired prior to work on their first studio album, \"Way Beyond Blue\", and during the recording of the album the band was joined by drummer Aled Richards, replacing Ieuan, who left to focus full-time on Super Furry Animals. During the live promotional appearances for the album the band was joined by guitarist Owen Powell. This latest incarnation of the band lasted until its dissolution in 2001. The single \"You've Got a Lot to Answer For\" received radio airplay and became the band's first top 40 single in the UK Singles Chart in September 1996. Their breakout success came at the start of 1998 with the \"International Velvet\" album and the release of the single \"Mulder and Scully\" some two weeks apart. The album went to number one in the UK Albums Chart, and sold more than 900,000 copies being certified triple platinum by British Phonographic Industry, while the single reached number 3 in the UK Singles Chart, the highest any Catatonia single would chart.\nThe follow-up release, \"Road Rage\", reached number 5 in May, and was nominated for best song at the Brit Awards and the Ivor Novello Awards, winning at the Q Awards. The title track of the album \"International Velvet\" received additional attention, and the band performed it at the opening of the opening ceremony of the 1999 Rugby World Cup on 1 October in the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff. While in Catatonia, Matthews collaborated with Space on \"The Ballad of Tom Jones\" in March 1998 and with Tom Jones on a cover of \"Baby, It's Cold Outside\" in December 1999. Their final top ten single came in April 1999 with \"Dead from the Waist Down\" off the following album, \"Equally Cursed and Blessed\". Rumours began to circulate about a breakup, but a further album, \"Paper Scissors Stone\" was released in 2001 following a two-year break from live performances.\nMatthews' drinking had long been reported in the tabloids and gossip columns, and she entered rehab in mid-2001 for drinking and smoking. The tour to support \"Paper Scissors Stone\" was cancelled, and a month later, the band announced that they were breaking up. Matthews has subsequently released solo albums, while Powell has become a radio presenter and joined the supergroup The Stand to release a charity single. Critics have highlighted the use of metaphors in Catatonia's work, as well as comparing songs to poetry. Writing duties had been shared across the band, although had been led by Matthews and Roberts. They disagreed with being labelled an indie band, with Powell saying they had only ever sought to write pop music. The band were considered a key band of 1990s Cool Cymru.\nHistory.\nFormation (1992).\nThe story that Catatonia were formed after Mark Roberts spotted Cerys Matthews busking in Cardiff in 1992 was an invention for the media in order to give the band a newsworthy biography. While the duo did go busking, they did not meet this way. Matthews had been a fan of Roberts' previous band Y Cyrff. They began dating as well as writing songs together at the end of 1991. For five years after this they remained in the relationship, many aspects of this being played out publicly in their lyrics. They took the name of the band from Matthews' experience working in a mental health facility as well as the novel \"The Doors of Perception\" by Aldous Huxley. They believed it to mean a sense of extreme pleasure and sleep, and wrote the song \"Sweet Catatonia\", subsequently naming the band after the song. As Sweet Catatonia, Matthews and Roberts recorded a series of demos at the city centre youth project in Cardiff, nicknamed \"Grassroots\".\nRoberts and Matthews routinely encountered Owen Powell during this time, who played guitar in the band Colour 45 and was working as a Welsh teacher at Brynteg Comprehensive School. Both bands entered a band competition to play at the Cardiff Bay Music Fiesta, and while Colour 45 came tenth and was given a place on the bill, Sweet Catatonia placed 45th. Roberts and Matthews hired a drummer, Stephen \"Frog\" Jenkins from the band U Thant, and continued to record bilingual Welsh/English tracks. The band began to play live, with Matthews and Roberts busking to support their income. They were spotted by the girlfriend of the lead singer of the band The Pooh Sticks, who thought that Matthews would make a good female voice for the group. But after seeing Sweet Catatonia perform, the band members did not agree and so Matthews remained with Catatonia. Further recordings were made, with Guto Pryce joining the trio. This session included the track \"Gyda Gwen\" which attracted the attention of Rhys Mwyn at Crai Records.\nThe Crai EPs, \"Whale\", and \"Bleed\" (1993\u201395).\nThe band line up changed as they signed to Crai, with Jenkins and Pryce departing for other projects. Mwyn arranged for Matthews and Roberts to be joined by Dafydd Ieuan of Ffa Coffi Pawb on drums, former Y Cyrff member Paul Jones on bass, and Londoner Clancy Pegg (who had befriended Roberts and Matthews after moving to Cardiff) on keyboards. It was at this point that the band shortened its name to \"Catatonia\". Mwyn used his contacts to get Catatonia onto Welsh language television, and strove to move their live performances away from Cardiff so that they were not simply playing in front of their regulars the entire time. They had their first overseas gigs in Germany, support Mwyn in his punk band Anrhefn. Catatonia were hired by political party Plaid Cymru to headline a Welsh language concert at Builth Wells in August 1993, but they performed in both Welsh and English.\nDespite being signed to Crai, this was more as promoter than as a record label itself. It was only when Roberts suggested that Catatonia record some extended plays (EPs) after two months with the label that Mwyn made the arrangements. The first, entitled \"For Tinkerbell\", had a cover photo taken by Roberts and Matthews' housemate Roland Dafis. Mwyn successfully got the record on BBC Radio 1 after sending a copy to radio presenter Mark Radcliffe. After Iestyn George heard the release, the journalist named it as the record of the week for the magazine \"NME\". \"For Tinkerbell\" contained some early tracks, including a version of \"Sweet Catatonia\". Matthews later explained that while she had liked the songs on the EP, she felt that she was not good at performing live at the time. They signed to Nursery Records to release the single \"Bleed\". Catatonia's first national interview was published following the release of \"For Tinkerbell\", a 300-word piece appearing in \"Melody Maker\".\nThey held their first London gigs in support of the EP, under the advice of George and The Pooh Sticks lead singer Hue Williams. After warm-up gigs in Cardiff and Birmingham, the London performance took place at the Samuel Beckett pub in Stoke Newington on 13 November 1993 alongside Anrehfn and Margi Clarke. Further Welsh radio and television appearances followed, as did an interview for \"NME\". When George arrived for the interview, Matthews asked if he'd be interested in becoming the band's manager. He politely declined, saying that he did not have the experience. On 19 and 20 February 1994, the band's follow-up EP, \"Hooked\" was recorded in Llandwrog, Gwynedd, and produced by Ken Nelson who they had met on Radio Wales. A performance was set up at The Falcon, Camden the Splash Club in London where several music executives were to be present. The band drove down from Cardiff in a Ford Transit with their equipment and then spent the afternoon drinking. Just prior to going out on stage, they began taking cocaine, the result of which was a terrible performance later lamented by Roberts. The trip became a sobering experience, as they made no money from it and were only paid \u00a350 for a gig at Kingston University a day later. Matthews later recalled that they'd needed to borrow money from a fan to pay the toll on the Severn Bridge on the way back to Cardiff.\nThe band returned to the Falcon, where they played a still shambolic, but better gig in front of record executives. Meanwhile, George had put the band in touch with their first manager, Richard Lowe from MRM management. They made further appearances on Welsh television to support the release of \"Hooked\" in May, but another drunken performance followed, this time in Newport. MRM sent them on a short tour in France during the second week of May, and then started their first UK wide support tour to the band Salad. When due to perform at the Cnapan Music Festival in Wales on 2 July, the band ran into some difficulties. The security team refused to let Matthews in as they did not recognise her. It was only after the intervention of one of the fans of the band, actor Rhys Ifans, that she was allowed in.\nMwyn departed the band when the band's time with Crai came to an end, and a few weeks later MRM sought to remove Pegg, leaving it to Matthews to tell her. Pegg was upset, and refused to discuss it with journalists. After her departure, the single \"Whale\" was published on the Rough Trade Records label. The band had rushed to record it, having only been given a month's notice by the label that one of their songs would be released as a single in September 1994. \"Whale\" was named the \"NME\" single of the week, as \"For Tinkerbell\" had been the previous year. The band appeared in the mainstream press for two incidents, the first was when they were thrown off a train at Swindon as they were travelling to London after arguing with a train guard about punk rock, and the other when they swore at the bouncers in Welsh at the Underworld club in Camden and were banned. A further single, \"Bleed\" was recorded the following November, and was released in February 1995 on Nursery Records. Geoff Travis, who had released \"Whale\" for his Rough Trade Records, offered the band \u00a3350,000 to sign for Blanco y Negro Records, a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Records. They duly signed.\n\"Way Beyond Blue\" (1996).\nThe band began work on a debut album, alongside producer Paul Sampson. Ieuan introduced Sampson to Aled Richards, who later replaced him as Catatonia's drummer when Ieuan left to join the Super Furry Animals. The label wanted to market the band, and so at some expense, had photographer Gered Mankowitz conduct a photoshoot with Matthews. She, the band and their management all hated the photos, but the label wanted to use them in order not to write the cost off as a loss. In order to have some photos, a series of black and white photos of Matthews drinking a bottle of wine while wearing a Pepsi T-shirt were taken by one of the press agency staff. Warner Bros liked the images and authorised their use. The band had a recording session at Sawmills Studios, Cornwall, which saw some disagreements during recording between Matthews and Roberts. Afterwards, Sampson was removed as producer following a row over the arrangement for \"Sweet Catatonia\".\nMusic reviewers responded with surprise when the band began to perform live while sober. Meanwhile, the release of \"Sweet Catatonia\" as a single was pushed back to January 1996 due to the issues with finding a new producer. The first time subsequent producer Stephen Street met the band was when they arrived to record at the Maison Rouge Studios in London. They found working with him far easier than Sampson, as Matthews later explained that he took their ideas into account. Ieuan left during the recording of the album to join Super Furry Animals, and was subsequently replaced by Aled Richards. They returned to live performances after completing the recording of the album, and decided to actively look for a second guitarist. They ultimately hired Colour 45's Owen Powell, who by this time was working as a music technician for the Super Furry Animals, to this role.\nAs they prepared for the album, they released a special release for the Catatonia fanclub which had formed after \"Bleed\". Containing \"Blow the Millenium, Blow\" and \"Beautiful Sailor\", the vinyl record was sent to all members. The following month, on 18 January 1996, \"Sweet Catatonia\" was released. It became the first Catatonia single to reach the UK singles chart, peaking at 61st position. MRM sought to expand the profile of the band in Europe, publishing the compilation \"The Sublime Magic of Catatonia\". The band toured the UK, supported by Liverpool-based band Space, and while touring \"Lost Cat\" was released on 22 April. It just missed out on the top 40, reaching 41st position. As part of the tour, they appeared at several music festivals that year including Reading, Phoenix and at Madstock! 3 in London.\nCatatonia began to get radio exposure with the single \"You've Got a Lot to Answer For\" which entered the top 40 in September 1996. After several delays, the album \"Way Beyond Blue\" was released on 30 September. There were 12 tracks, several of which had appeared on previous EPs and as b-sides to singles. On the background of the successful album, there were problems behind the scenes. Matthew's and Robert's relationship broke down, with Roberts ending it and seeing someone else within days. The duo sought to keep the band together despite the problems, and they found a way to continue working together. Warner Bros. Records had intended to release \"Lost Cat\" from \"Way Beyond Blue\" in the United States, but due to problems at the record label this did not occur.\n\"International Velvet\" (1997\u201398).\nWhile Roberts sought to begin work on a second album, they began to tour with fellow Welsh band The Manic Street Preachers as a support act, and the label released the compilation \"Tourist EP\" in Japan. They began recording demos for a new album in Cardiff at the start of January 1997. The subject matter was mostly based on the stories coming out of Roberts and Matthews' breakup. They booked in a recording session for the second album in June, at the Monnow Valley Studio in Rockfield, Monmouthshire. In the run up to the recording, they performed for the first time in the United States, supporting The Boo Radleys in New York. They went on to perform in Austin, Texas and in Los Angeles during March. The following month, they conducted a ten-night tour of the UK, in which songs such as \"Mulder and Scully\" made their first public appearances.\nAs they worked on the album, Catatonia feared that they were about to be dropped by their record label, which they summed up in the song \"That's All Folks\". Further references to difficulties with Warner Bros were included in \"I Am the Mob\", but they preferred working with producer TommyD on the production than they had with those on \"Way Beyond Blue\". The first single off the album had intended to be \"Mulder and Scully\", but the label insisted that \"I Am the Mob\" was released instead. As with previous works, this was delayed, and Catatonia performed at festivals during the summer of 1997 while they waited for the release. They were booked for the Glastonbury Festival, but upon arriving they were told their spot had been cancelled. Matthews continued to get the band mentioned in the gossip columns of newspapers due to her drunken behaviour. One example followed an incident at a party celebrating the victory of the yes vote in the 1997 Welsh devolution referendum, as when asked how she felt about the result, she responded \"What we want to know is who is going to shag Si\u00e2n Lloyd?\" Lloyd subsequently launched legal action, but accepted an apology from Matthews.\nThe new album was further delayed as Warner Bros ordered the removal of the six-minute-long anti-Warner track \"That's All Folks\". Meanwhile, work continued on \"I Am The Mob\" with a video shoot directed by Kevin Allen. The single was released on 6 October and entered the top 40 for a single week in the 40th position. Catatonia found their roles reversed shortly afterwards, performing as the support act to Space after the Liverpudlians had a series of top 20 singles. They finished off the year with a tour of their own, originally aimed to support the new album, but this was still being held back by the label. Warners replaced \"That's All Folks\" with \"My Selfish Gene\", and agreed to release \"Mulder and Scully\" in January 1998 and \"International Velvet\" some two weeks later.\n\"Mulder and Scully\" launched them into the mainstream public consciousness when it was released on 19 January 1998. It entered the charts at number 3; the highest position a single by Catatonia would ever achieve. \"International Velvet\" became the breakout album for the band, charting at number one in the UK Album Charts. The album sold more than 900,000 copies in 22 months, being certified triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry. \"International Velvet\" was nominated for the Mercury Music Prize 1998, which was awarded to Gomez for \"Bring It On\".\nOf the five singles released from the album, \"Road Rage\" became the most critically acclaimed, being nominated for best single at both the Ivor Novello Awards and the Brit Awards, while winning in that category at the Q Awards. Despite this, it did not chart as high as \"Mulder and Scully\", reaching number 5 on the UK Singles Charts. The subsequent releases \"Strange Glue\" and \"Game On\" did not get into the top ten, reaching number 11 and number 33 respectively.\nThe title track of the album, \"International Velvet\", featuring the line \"Every day when I wake up I thank the Lord I'm Welsh\" and Welsh language verses, received additional attention from the media. Matthews explained in an interview that she wanted to turn to invert the idea of being Welsh from an apparent negative into a positive, \"We're not seen to be very good at anything. Our football team is shit. The song is saying, despite all these things, I still wake up in the morning and thank the Lord that I'm Welsh. Hopefully, by now people realise that Wales is brimmed full of talent and we're great people with massive brains.\" In front of 70,000 spectators, Catatonia performed \"International Velvet\" at the opening ceremony of the 1999 Rugby World Cup in the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff. The album became the first to be released for Catatonia in the United States, but failed to chart. \"The Washington Post\" called it \"overlooked\".\n\"Equally Cursed and Blessed\" (1999\u20132000).\nFollowing the success of \"International Velvet\", and the heavy touring that followed, the band were pleased to return to the Monnow Valley Studio to record a third studio album. On the recommendation of TommyD, the band had been recording sample tracks onto a DPS12 hard disk recorder in their tour bus while on an American tour and they returned to Monnow Valley to record them properly. The band felt less pressure on them for the new album, due to the success of \"International Velvet\" and because they no longer feared being dropped by the label.\nIn January 1999, the band announced their new album, \"Equally Cursed and Blessed\". The title was taken from a line from \"She's A Millionaire\", a song on the album. Preceded by the first single, \"Dead from the Waist Down\" on 22 March, \"Equally Cursed and Blessed\" was released on 12 April. The album, like \"International Velvet\", reached the top spot in the UK charts. Catatonia were so popular at the time that in April 1999, \"Way Beyond Blue\", \"International Velvet\" and \"Equally Cursed and Blessed\" were all in the top 40 of the UK Albums Chart. But, the singles from \"Equally Cursed and Blessed\" did not repeat the success seen in the previous album. \"Dead From The Waist Down\" ended up becoming the final single by Catatonia to reach the top ten in the singles charts, getting to number seven in the UK singles charts. \"Londinium\" reached number 20, while \"Karaoke Queen\" barely entered the top 40 at number 36.\nIn May, they played two outdoor concerts at the Llangollen International Pavilion in front of 6,000 people on successive days. This was a warm up to their largest concert so far, held at Margam Country Park near Port Talbot. Guitarist Powell stated the importance of the Llangollen performances, as North Wales was the first place where the crowd had sung along to their songs. Matthews added that Margam Park was chosen as no-one had ever held a concert there before.\nCatatonia supported R.E.M. on two European dates in June; there was an incident at Kindl-B\u00fchne Wuhlheide, Berlin, when Matthews ran on the stage during the R.E.M. performance to kiss bassist Mike Mills. It was later attributed to her having drunk a bottle of wine. The band had wanted to release \"Karaoke Queen\" as the second single off the album, but the record label forced them to release \"Londinium\" instead. Matthews was also equally angry that the cost for the video for the single was higher than the cost to produce the entire album. A month later, Barry Cawley, who had been a roadie for the band since it originally formed, was killed in a road accident in North Wales. Cawley had been cycling when he was killed by a driver in a Fiat Punto. Roberts explained prior to the funeral that the roadie had helped keep Matthews' \"feet on the ground\".\nThe band attempted to break into the United States once more with \"Equally Cursed and Blessed\". The album release included two tracks from \"International Velvet\", including \"Road Rage\". They had been scheduled to make appearances on American television shows such as \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\" and conduct interviews with the media. But after drummer Richards was taken to hospital in the UK with appendicitis, it was abandoned and the rest of the band returned to the UK. Richards had remained in the UK and was due to join them a day and a half later. Rumours began to appear in the press that the band was about to break up, but a band spokesman stated that the intention was to return to the States later in the year. Performances did take place in Japan, Australia and New Zealand.\n\"Paper Scissors Stone\" and dissolution (2001).\nThe band took a break from performing live between the NetAid charity concert in October 1999 and 2001. They returned to the stage for a further charity gig on 28 April, in support of Unison's campaign for a living wage at the Manchester Evening News Arena. Matthews said prior to the performance that \"It's a cause I think's really important and it just seemed to be the right time for us to come back \u2013 it's a long, long time since we played live. It should be really great. We're really looking forward to what they (the new songs) are going to sound like live. It'll be good to get back on the old live circuit again.\" They played several tracks from their upcoming album, at that point entitled \"It's What's Not There That Makes What's There What It Is\". By May, it had been renamed to \"Paper Scissors Stone\". Matthews was looking forward to the new releasing, explaining to \"NME\" that \"I think it's stronger than the last album, a bit more avant garde!...It's a bit less stupid. [\"Equally Cursed and Blessed\"] was all over the shop stylistically, I think it's a bit more focused. And I think it's a bit more impassioned\".\nCatatonia went on to headline the \"NME\" stage at the T in the Park festival on 7 July, having conducted a warm up concert at The Lighthouse, Glasgow. The lead single from the new album, \"Stone by Stone\", was poorly received by the media with \"NME\" giving it a score of one out of ten, calling it \"lumpen, the voice grating\" and that Catatonia are \"fading from the public consciousness quicker than Shane Ritchie\" and \"awkwardly out of date\". On the other hand, Andy Gill of \"The Independent\" felt the song is the \"closest they come\" to a hook \"as memorable as\" their erstwhile hits.\nThe media reported that Matthews entered drug rehabilitation for drinking and smoking in mid-2001, with the singer stating that she was also suffering from depression. As a result, the tour to support \"Paper Scissors Stone\" was cancelled at the start of August. At the time this was because Matthews had not yet finished her \"ongoing treatment for anxiety and exhaustion\". It was suggested that the band might split up in August, which was dismissed as \"rubbish\" by Catatonia. However, on 21 September it was announced that they were breaking up with the record label releasing a statement which said \"Their decision has been made entirely amicably, and there are no details at present as to their future plan\".\nTributes came in for the band from a variety of sources, with BBC Radio 1 presenter Huw Stephens describing them as \"international superstars\", and adding \"I always thought they were one of the best Welsh bands. They were not just a throwaway pop band \u2013 they had real, meaningful songs.\" Iestyn George, editor of the magazine \"Maxim\" at the time, praised the influence that Matthews had through Catatonia in the later 1990s, saying that \"Around 1998 and 1999, Cerys was in the papers every other day\". He also referenced that she had never intended this role as Catatonia had thought that they had already peaked prior to \"International Velvet\".\nPost-dissolution (2002\u2013present).\nMatthews went on to release her first solo album, \"Cockahoop\", in May 2003. Her second album \"Never Said Goodbye\" was released in August 2006. In November 2007 she released a mini-album of Welsh language songs \"Awyren=Aeroplane\" on the My Kung Fu label. Matthews returned in late 2009 by releasing albums simultaneously in both Welsh and English (\"Paid Edrych I Lawr\" and \"Don't Look Down\", respectively).\nHer next album Explorer released in 2011 inbetween the release of two Welsh cover albums TIR in 2010 &amp; Hullabaloo in 2013. Since 2008 she has thrived as a music radio host: an award winning BBC Radio programmer and broadcaster including radio academy awards , the Prix Italia and Prix Europa . Cerys currently has 2 weekly radio shows on BBC, which she programmes and hosts: BBC Radio 2 's Blues show and a multi-genre BBC Radio 6 music Sunday show , 10-1pm .\nPowell has gone on to write songs, including for Duffy, and from 2007 onwards has presented a Welsh language show on Radio Cymru. He also replaced drummer Stuart Cable from the Stereophonics, following his death, in the supergroup The Stand. They released a charity single in 2010 to fund construction of a statue of Welsh footballer Fred Keenor in Cardiff city centre.\nOn 17 April 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Matthews confirmed that Catatonia were aiming to take part in a #timslisteningparty for \"International Velvet\". A date was announced, but postponed due to an unspecified problem with either Matthews' or Roberts's internet connection. The party remained on timstwitterlisteningparty.com as an upcoming event until the autumn of 2020, when all reference to it was removed. Matthews did appear as a guest on \"Tim Burgess' Listening Party\" radio show on Absolute Radio in 2023, where the album was played in its entirety, marking its 25th anniversary.\nOn 3 June 2023, Matthews announced on Twitter that a new retrospective collection of music titled \"Make Hay Not War: The Blanco Y Negro Years\" would be released by Cherry Red Records.\nSide projects and collaborations.\nWhile working on \"International Velvet\", Matthews was approached by Tommy Scott of the Liverpool-based band Space to perform on the single duet \"The Ballad of Tom Jones\". They had met while on tour two years prior and had kept in touch. She joined them on tour for several dates to sing the duet live. Matthews said of the song, \"It's great. I feel like Nancy Sinatra because it's a superb ballad.\" She went on to duet with Tom Jones on a single for his album \"Reload\". It was a cover of the song \"Baby, It's Cold Outside\", which was released as a Christmas single in 1999. She was credited as \"Cerys from Catatonia\".\nMusical style and influences.\nMatthews said that they did not have any particular influences in their music. However, she said that her family had always been singing along to BBC Radio 2. She held the ambition to have the band appear on Radio 2, as due to poor levels of radio reception in Wales they had been unable to listen to other stations. She attributed the style of Welsh music as never attempting to be cool as they would not have been aware of what was in fashion at the time. Catatonia frequently used metaphors in their songwriting, such as \"Road Rage\" which references emotional anger. The line \"If it turns to blue, what are we going to do?\" in the single \"You've Got A Lot To Answer For\" from \"Way Beyond Blue\" references a pregnancy test. Other works from \"International Velvet\" were compared to poetry by Katharine Viner in \"The Guardian\".\nAll members of the band were involved in the writing of songs, and there may have been more than one person's set of lyrics appearing in a single release. Powell said that \"It's quite interesting to have two people's viewpoints within the same song. I'm not sure how many bands actually do that. In most bands, the guitarist writes the music and the singer writes the lyrics. We tend to share things out more evenly.\" He also criticised the attachment of an indie pop label to the band, saying \"We're seen as one of the indie bands. But we've always just tried to make pop music. Even if it is pop music with a hard edge and quite a twisted little view of life. We've always seen ourselves as a little bigger than an indie band.\"\nThe style of music played by Catatonia changed slightly over time. An article in \"The People\" newspaper described \"International Velvet\" as the \"purest pop\". By the time that \"Paper Scissors Stone\" was released, the band were using country music influences in some of their songs according to Fiona Shepherd at \"The Scotsman\". She compared the music to that of the Scottish band Mogwai, while elements of \"Nightfall\" were compared to Arab Strap.\nPersonnel.\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53511", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53511", "title": "Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan", "text": ""}
{"id": "53512", "revid": "49813923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53512", "title": "Splice", "text": "A splice or splicing may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53513", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53513", "title": "Paper Scissors Stone (album)", "text": "Paper Scissors Stone was the fourth and final album by Welsh band Catatonia. It was released on 6 August 2001 in the UK, and reached #6 on the UK album chart.\nBackground.\nThe album only had one single taken from it, \"Stone by Stone\" \u2013 the group's final single release. Fittingly, the ending of the video for the song features the band members all abandoning their instruments and walking away. The band had announced on their website that the next single was to be the rocky \"Is Everybody Here on Drugs\", although the announcement was quickly removed once it was clear that Catatonia were about to put an end to the band.\nThe band were unable to promote the album, albeit with the exception of an appearance on \"Later...with Jools Holland\" and a few performances of \"Stone by Stone\", as Cerys Matthews was being treated for alcohol addiction and nervous exhaustion. The band had to cancel their upcoming eight venue UK tour which was due to take place during September due to ongoing concerns with Matthews' recovery. A statement by the record label Warners said that Matthews would not have \"recovered sufficiently\" from her treatment for \"anxiety and exhaustion.\"\nThe album's cover and in-sleeve photos were taken from the film, \"Tiger Bay\", which starred Hayley Mills. Hayley was given a thank-you in the album. The album was dedicated to close friend and roadie Barry Cawley, who was killed in a road accident on his bicycle in Betws-y-Coed, North Wales in July 2000. The track, \"Imaginary Friend\", was written about him. The album title refers to the game rock paper scissors.\nReception.\nAndy Gill of \"The Independent\" noted a feeling within some of the album's lyrics and song titles such as \"Is Everybody Here on Drugs?\", which felt like they mirrored her actual life. Gill commented: \"Cerys's boozing is, on this showing, the least of the band's problems. More pressing, surely, is the glaring absence of a hook as memorable as 'Road Rage' or 'Mulder &amp; Scully'; the closest they come here is the single 'Stone by Stone'.\" Caroline Sullivan in \"The Guardian\" said that \"[Matthews] will always be an acquired taste, one that depends wholly on the strength of the songs. Ideally suited to pub singalongs, her warble is done justice by festival anthems such as Road Rage, but when pitted against anything heavy or balladish it tends to grate relentlessly.\" She also praised the single \"Stone by Stone\", saying it \"gets it right.\" She concluded: \"on balance it comes down to loving or hating that voice.\"\nIn 2006, Iain Forrester of \"Stylus Magazine\" said the album \"certainly doesn\u2019t deserve any of the hatred it received in the press at the time. It has a fire to match their debut and a much wider musical scope, taking in the string-laden melodrama of 'Godspeed' (which certainly suits Cerys Matthews' bellowing vocals) and flirtations with dance on 'What It Is,' as well as rock blasts like 'Immediate Circle'.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53514", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53514", "title": "Edith Cavell", "text": "British nurse (1865\u20131915)\nEdith Louisa Cavell ( ; 4 December 1865 \u2013 12 October 1915) was a British nurse. She is celebrated for treating wounded soldiers from both sides without discrimination during the First World War and for helping some 200 Allied soldiers escape from German-occupied Belgium. Cavell was arrested, court-martialled under German military law and sentenced to death by firing squad. Despite international pressure for mercy, the German government refused to commute her sentence, and she was shot. The execution received worldwide condemnation and extensive press coverage.\nThe night before her execution, she said, \"Patriotism is not enough. I must have no hatred or bitterness towards anyone\". These words were inscribed on the Edith Cavell Memorial opposite the entrance to the National Portrait Gallery near Trafalgar Square. Her strong Anglican beliefs propelled her to help all those who needed it, including both German and Allied soldiers. She was quoted as saying, \"I can't stop while there are lives to be saved.\" The Church of England commemorates her in its Calendar of Saints on 12 October.\nCavell, who was 49 at the time of her execution, was already notable as a pioneer of modern nursing in Belgium.\nEarly life and career.\nCavell was born on 4 December 1865 in Swardeston, a village near Norwich, where her father Frederick Cavell was vicar for 45 years. She was the eldest of the four children of the Reverend Frederick Cavell (1824\u20131910) and his wife Louisa Sophia Warming (1835\u20131918). Edith's siblings were Florence Mary (1867-1950), Mary Lilian (1870-1967) and John Frederick Scott (1872\u20131923).\nCavell was educated at Norwich High School for Girls, then at boarding schools in Clevedon, Somerset, and Peterborough (Laurel Court).\nAfter a period as a governess, including for a family in Brussels from 1890 to 1895, Cavell returned home to care for her father during a serious illness. The experience led her to become a nurse after her father's recovery. Cavell worked as a nurse at the Fountain Fever Hospital in Tooting from December 1895. At the age of 30, Cavell applied to become a nurse probationer at the London Hospital and commenced as a regular probationer at the London Hospital in September 1896 under Matron Eva Luckes. Cavell was seconded to work with other London Hospital nurses in the Maidstone typhoid epidemic, from 15 October 1897 until early January 1898, while still a probationer. Along with other staff, she was awarded the Maidstone Typhoid Medal. After her training, Cavell worked from October 1898 to December 1899 as a private nurse employed by the Private Nursing Institution of the London Hospital, treating patients in their homes. Cavell travelled to tend patients with cancer, gout, pneumonia, pleurisy, eye issues and appendicitis. In 1901, Luckes recommended Cavell for the position of night superintendent of St Pancras Infirmary. In November 1903, she became assistant matron of St Leonard's Infirmary in Shoreditch.\nIn 1906, Cavell took a temporary post as matron of the Manchester and Salford Sick and Poor and Private Nursing Institution, working there for about nine months.\nWork in Belgium.\nIn 1907, Cavell was recruited by Dr. Antoine Depage, the Belgian royal surgeon, and the founder and president of the Belgian Red Cross, to be matron of a newly established nursing school, L'\u00c9cole Belge d'Infirmi\u00e8res Dipl\u00f4m\u00e9es (or the Berkendael Medical Institute) on the Rue de la Culture (now Rue Franz Merjay), in Ixelles, Brussels. By 1910, \"Miss Cavell 'felt that the profession of nursing had gained sufficient foothold in Belgium to warrant the publishing of a professional journal' and launched the nursing journal, \"L'infirmi\u00e8re\"\". Within a year, she was training nurses for three hospitals, twenty-four schools, and thirteen kindergartens in Belgium.\nCavell was offered a position as matron in a Brussels clinic. She worked closely with Depage, who was part of a \"growing body of people\" in the medical profession in Belgium. He realised that the care that was being provided by the religious institutions had not been keeping up with medical advances. In 1910, Cavell was asked if she would be the matron for the new secular hospital at Saint-Gilles.\nWhen the First World War broke out, Cavell was visiting her widowed mother in Norfolk. She returned to Brussels, where her clinic and nursing school were taken over by the Red Cross.\nAssistance to Allied soldiers.\nIn November 1914, after the German occupation of Brussels, Cavell began sheltering British soldiers and funnelling them out of occupied Belgium to the neutral Netherlands. Wounded British and French soldiers as well as Belgian and French civilians of military age were hidden from the Germans and provided with false papers by Prince R\u00e9ginald de Cro\u00ff at his ch\u00e2teau of Bellignies near Mons. From there, they were conducted by various guides to the houses of Cavell, Louis S\u00e9verin, and others in Brussels, where their hosts would furnish them with money to reach the Dutch frontier, and provide them with guides obtained through Philippe Baucq. This placed Cavell in violation of German military law. German authorities became increasingly suspicious of the nurse's actions, which were further fuelled by her outspokenness.\nArrest and trial.\nCavell was arrested on 6 August 1915 and charged with harbouring Allied soldiers. She had been betrayed by Georges Gaston Quien, who was later convicted by a French court as a collaborator. Cavell was held in Saint-Gilles prison for ten weeks, the last two of which were spent in solitary confinement. She made three depositions to the German police (on 8, 18 and 22 August), admitting that she had been instrumental in conveying about 60 British and 15 French soldiers, as well as about 100 French and Belgian civilians of military age, to the frontier and had sheltered most of them in her house.\nAt her court-martial, Cavell was prosecuted for aiding British and French soldiers, and young Belgian men, to cross the Dutch border and eventually enter Britain. She admitted her guilt when she signed a statement the day before the trial. Cavell declared that the soldiers she had helped escape thanked her in writing when they arrived safely in Britain. This admission confirmed that Cavell had not only helped the soldiers navigate the Dutch frontier, but it also established that she helped them escape to a country at war with Germany. Her fellow defendants included Prince Reginald's sister, Princess Marie of Cro\u00ff.\nThe penalty, according to German military law, was death. Paragraph 58 of the German Military Code determined that \"In time of war, anyone who, with the intention of aiding a hostile power, or of causing harm to German or allied troops\", commits any of the crimes defined in paragraph 90 of the German Penal Code \"shall be punished with death for war treason\". Specifically, Cavell was charged under paragraph 90 (1) no. 3 \"Reichsstrafgesetzbuch\", for \"conveying troops to the enemy\", a crime normally punishable by life imprisonment in peacetime. It was possible to charge Cavell with perfidy, or war treason (), as paragraph 160 of the German Military Code extended application of paragraph 58 to foreigners \"present in the zone of war\".\nWhile the First Geneva Convention ordinarily guaranteed protection of medical personnel, such protection was forfeit if medical practices were seen to be used as cover for belligerent action. This forfeiture is expressed in article 7 of the 1906 version of the convention, which was the version in force at the time, and justified prosecution under German military law.\nThe British government could therefore do nothing to help her. Sir Horace Rowland of the Foreign Office said, \"I am afraid that it is likely to go hard with Miss Cavell; I am afraid we are powerless.\" Lord Robert Cecil, Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, advised that, \"Any representation by us will do her more harm than good.\" The United States, however, had not yet joined the war and was in a position to apply diplomatic pressure. Hugh S. Gibson, Secretary to the U.S. Legation at Brussels, made clear to the German government that executing Cavell would further harm Germany's already damaged reputation. Later, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We reminded [German civil governor Baron von der Lancken] of the burning of Louvain and the sinking of the \"Lusitania\", and told him that this murder would rank with those two affairs and would stir all civilized countries with horror and disgust. Count Harrach broke in at this with the rather irrelevant remark that he would rather see Miss Cavell shot than have harm come to the humblest German soldier, and his only regret was that they had not \"three or four old English women to shoot.\"\nBaron von der Lancken is known to have stated that Cavell should be pardoned because of her complete honesty and because she had helped save so many lives, German as well as Allied. However, General von Sauberzweig, the military governor of Brussels, ordered that \"in the interests of the State\" the implementation of the death penalty against Baucq and Cavell should be immediate, denying higher authorities an opportunity to consider clemency. Cavell was represented by defence lawyer Sadi Kirschen from Brussels. Of the twenty-seven defendants, five were condemned to death: Cavell, Baucq (an architect in his thirties), Louise Thuliez, S\u00e9verin and Countess Jeanne de Belleville. Of the five sentenced to death, only Cavell and Baucq were executed; the other three were granted reprieves.\nCavell was arrested not for espionage, as many were led to believe, but for \"war treason\", despite not being a German national. She may have been recruited by the British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), and turned away from her espionage duties in order to help Allied soldiers escape, although this is not widely accepted. Rankin cites the published statement of M. R. D. Foot, historian and Second World War British intelligence officer, as to Cavell having been part of SIS or MI6. The former director-general of MI5, Stella Rimington, announced in 2015 that she had unearthed documents in Belgian military archives that confirmed an intelligence-gathering aspect to Cavell's network. The BBC Radio 4 programme that presented Rimington's quote, noted Cavell's use of secret codes and, though amateurish, other network members' successful transmission of intelligence.\nWhen in custody, Cavell was questioned in French, but her trial was minuted in German; which some assert gave the prosecutor the opportunity to misinterpret her answers. Although she may have been misrepresented, she made no attempt to defend herself, but responded to have channelled \"environ deux cents\" (\"about two hundred\") soldiers to the Dutch border. Cavell was provided with a defender approved by the German military governor; a previous defender, who was chosen for Cavell by her assistant, Elizabeth Wilkins, was ultimately rejected by the governor.\nExecution.\nThe night before her execution, Cavell told the Reverend H. Stirling Gahan, the Anglican chaplain of Christ Church Brussels, who had been allowed to see her and to give her Holy Communion, \"I am thankful to have had these ten weeks of quiet to get ready. Now I have had them and have been kindly treated here. I expected my sentence and I believe it was just. Standing as I do in view of God and Eternity, I realise that patriotism is not enough, I must have no hatred or bitterness towards anyone.\" These words are inscribed on her statues in London and in Melbourne, Australia. Cavell's final words to the German Lutheran prison chaplain, Paul Le Seur, were recorded as, \"Ask Father Gahan to tell my loved ones later on that my soul, as I believe, is safe, and that I am glad to die for my country.\"\nFrom his sick bed, Brand Whitlock, the U.S. ambassador to Belgium, wrote a personal note on Cavell's behalf to Moritz von Bissing, the Governor-General of Belgium. Hugh Gibson; Maitre G. de Leval, the legal adviser to the United States legation; and Rodrigo de Saavedra y Vinent, 2nd Marques de Villalobar, the Spanish minister, formed a midnight deputation of appeal for mercy or at least postponement of execution. Despite these efforts, on 11 October, Baron von der Lancken allowed the execution to proceed. Sixteen men, forming two firing squads, carried out the sentence pronounced on her and on four Belgian men at the Tir national shooting range in Schaerbeek, at 7:00am on 12 October 1915. There are conflicting reports of the details of Cavell's execution. However, according to the eyewitness account of the Reverend Le Seur, who attended Cavell in her final hours, eight soldiers fired at Cavell while the other eight executed Baucq. Her execution, certification of death, and burial were witnessed by the German war poet Gottfried Benn in his capacity as a 'Senior Doctor in the Brussels Government since the first days of the (German) occupation'. Benn wrote a detailed account titled \"Wie Miss Cavell erschossen wurde\" (\"How Miss Cavell was shot\", 1928).\nThere is also a dispute over the sentencing imposed under the German Military Code. Supposedly, the death penalty relevant to the offence committed by Cavell was not officially declared until a few hours after her death. The British post-war Committee of Enquiry into Breaches of the Laws of War however regarded the verdict as legally correct.\nOn instructions from the Spanish minister, Belgian women immediately buried Cavell's body next to Saint-Gilles Prison. After the war, her body was taken back to Britain for a memorial service at Westminster Abbey and then transferred to Norwich, to be laid to rest at Life's Green on the east side of the cathedral. The King had to grant an exception to an Order in Council of 1854, which prevented any burials in the grounds of the cathedral, to allow the reburial.\nInternational reaction.\nFollowing Cavell's death, countless newspaper articles, pamphlets, images, and books publicised her story. She became an iconic propaganda figure for military recruitment in Britain, and to help increase favourable sentiment towards the Allies in the United States. Along with the invasion of Belgium, and the sinking of the \"Lusitania\", Cavell's execution was widely publicised in both Britain and North America by Wellington House, the British War Propaganda Bureau. She was a popular icon because of her sex, her nursing profession, and her apparently heroic approach to death. Her execution was represented as an act of German barbarism and moral depravity - very much at variance with Cavell's own clearly stated wish to have \"no hatred or bitterness towards anyone.\"\nNews reports shortly after Cavell's execution were inaccurate. The \"American Journal of Nursing\" repeated the fictional account of Cavell's execution in which she fainted and fell because of her refusal to wear a blindfold in front of the firing squad. Allegedly, while she lay unconscious, the German commanding officer shot her dead with a revolver.\nBecause of the British government's decision to publicise Cavell's story as part of its propaganda effort, she became the most prominent British female casualty of the First World War. The combination of heroic appeal and a resonant atrocity-story narrative made Cavell's case one of the most effective in British propaganda of the war.\nBefore the First World War, Cavell was not well known outside nursing circles. This allowed two different depictions of the truth about her in British propaganda, which were a reply to enemy attempts to justify her shooting, including the suggestion that Cavell, during her interrogation, had given information that incriminated others. In November 1915, the British Foreign Office issued a denial that Cavell had implicated anyone else in her testimony.\nOne image commonly represented was of Cavell as an innocent victim of a ruthless and dishonourable enemy. This view depicted her as having helped Allied soldiers to escape, but innocent of 'espionage', and was most commonly used in various forms of British propaganda, such as postcards and newspaper illustrations during the war. Her story was presented in the British press as a means of fuelling a desire for revenge on the battlefield. These images implied that men must enlist in the armed forces immediately in order to stop forces that could arrange the judicial murder of an innocent British woman.\nAnother representation of a side of Cavell during the First World War saw her described as a serious, reserved, brave, and patriotic woman who devoted her life to nursing and died to save others. This portrayal has been illustrated in numerous biographical sources, from personal first-hand experiences of the Red Cross nurse. Pastor Le Seur, the German army chaplain, recalled at the time of her execution, \"I do not believe that Miss Cavell wanted to be a martyr... but she was ready to die for her country...a very brave woman and a faithful Christian\". Another account from Anglican chaplain, the Reverend Gahan, remembers Cavell's words, \"I have no fear or shrinking; I have seen death so often it is not strange, or fearful to me!\" In this interpretation, her stoicism was seen as remarkable for a non-combatant woman, and brought her even greater renown than a man in similar circumstances would have received.\nGerman justification.\nThe Imperial German government thought that it had acted fairly towards Cavell. In a letter, German Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs, Alfred Zimmermann (not to be confused with Arthur Zimmermann, German Secretary for Foreign Affairs) made a statement to the press on behalf of the German government:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a pity that Miss Cavell had to be executed, but it was necessary. She was judged justly ... It is undoubtedly a terrible thing that the woman has been executed; but consider what would happen to a State, particularly in war, if it left crimes aimed at the safety of its armies to go unpunished because they were committed by women.\nFrom the perspective of the German government, had it released Cavell there might have been a surge in the number of women participating in acts against Germany because they knew they would not be severely punished. It took the view that it was up to the responsible men to follow their legal duty to Germany and ignore the world's condemnation. Its laws did not make distinctions between sexes; the only exception to this being that, according to legal customs, women in a \"delicate\" (probably this means \"pregnant\") condition should not be executed. However, in January 1916, the Kaiser decreed that, from then on, capital punishment should not be carried out on women without his explicit prior endorsement.\nThe German government also believed that all of the convicted people were thoroughly aware of the nature of their acts. The court paid particular attention to this point, releasing several people because there was doubt as to whether the accused knew that their actions were punishable. The condemned, in contrast, knew full well what they were doing and the punishment for committing their crimes because \"numerous public proclamations had pointed out the fact that aiding enemies\u2019 armies was punishable with death.\"\nRepatriation and burial.\nCavell's remains were returned to Britain after the war, sailing from Ostend aboard the destroyer HMS \"Rowena\" and landing at Admiralty Pier in Dover on 14 May 1919. Cavell's was one of only three sets of British remains repatriated following the end of the war, the others being Charles Fryatt and The Unknown Warrior. As the ship arrived, a full peal of Grandsire Triples (5040 Changes, Parker's Twelve-Part) was rung on the bells of St Mary's Church in the town. A plaque commemorating the peal in the church's bell-ringing chamber states it was \"Rung with the bells deeply muffled with the exception of the Tenor which was open at back stroke, in token of respect to Nurse Cavell.\u201d Deep (or full) muffling is normally reserved for the deaths of sovereigns. All the ringers were former soldiers, including Frederick W Elliot, formerly King's Royal Rifle Corps, who had been a prisoner of war in Germany for eight months.\nHer body was transferred to a railway van and lay in state on the pier overnight before departing from Dover Harbour station for London Victoria station. Becoming known as the Cavell Van, that van is kept as a memorial on the Kent &amp; East Sussex Railway and is usually open to view at Bodiam railway station, though during October 2015 it was placed on display outside the Forum, Norwich. From Victoria the body was processed to Westminster Abbey for a state funeral on 15 May, before finally being reburied at the east side of Norwich Cathedral on 19 May, where a graveside service is still held each October.\nMemorials.\nFollowing Cavell's death, many memorials were created around the world to remember her.\nCentenary.\nAlthough the centenary of her death was in 2015, she was also remembered by three new musical pieces in 2014 during commemorations of the outbreak of World War One:\nTo commemorate the centenary of her death in 2015, work went ahead to restore Cavell's grave in the grounds of Norwich Cathedral after being awarded a \u00a350,000 grant and was completed in 2016. and fourteen paintings by Brian Whelan were commissioned by Norwich Cathedral to commemorate Cavell's life and death. Norwich Cathedral held a memorial service, performed live on BBC Radio 4 on 11 October 2015. In addition to cathedral clergy, guests such as General Richard Dannatt, and actress Matilda Ziegler performed various spoken vignettes organised by Canon Peter Doll. Anto Morra sang unaccompanied his \"Edith Louisa Cavell\" lyrics to a tune written by Percy Paradise.\nThe centenary was also marked by two new musical compositions. The 40-minute oratorio \"Eventide: In Memoriam Edith Cavell\" by Patrick Hawes premiered in Norwich Cathedral in July 2014 and had its London premiere in St Clement Danes, The Strand, London on 12 October 2015, the exact centenary of her death. The Belgian Edith Cavell Commemoration Group also commissioned a 20-minute-long setting of the Latin Mass by David Mitchell for the centenary - it premiered in Holy Trinity Pro-Cathedral, Brussels on 10 October 2015, in the same choir stalls where Cavell sang in 1915, with Haydn's \"Missa in Angustiis\" also performed at the same concert.\nCavell was featured on a UK commemorative \u00a35 coin, part of a set issued in 2015 by the Royal Mint to mark the centenary of the war. On 12 October that year a bust in the Montjoiepark in Uccle, Belgium, was inaugurated by Princess Anne, Princess Royal of Great Britain and Princess Astrid of Belgium. 2015 also saw a tombstone-shaped monument erected in the memorial garden dedicated to her in Inverness.\nOn the centenary of her execution, an event funded by the University of Salford took place at Sacred Trinity where historian Sir Ian Kershaw and Christine Hallett of the UK Centre for the History of Nursing and Midwifery, spoke.\nThe memorial on her grave was renewed in 2016. On 4 December 2018 a Google Doodle was created to celebrate her 153rd birthday. The centenary of her repatriation in May 2019 was marked by another half-muffled peal of bells at St Martin's Church in Dover.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53515", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53515", "title": "The Patchwork Girl of Oz", "text": "1913 novel by L. Frank Baum\nThe Patchwork Girl of Oz is the seventh book in L. Frank Baum's Oz series. Characters include the Woozy, Ojo \"the Unlucky\", Unc Nunkie, Dr. Pipt, Scraps (the patchwork girl), and others. The novel was first published on July 1, 1913, with illustrations by John R. Neill. In 1914, Baum adapted the book to film through his Oz Film Manufacturing Company. The book was followed by \"Tik-Tok of Oz\" (1914).\nIn the previous Oz book, \"The Emerald City of Oz\", magic was used to isolate Oz from all contact with the outside world. Baum did this to end the Oz series, but was forced to restart the series with this book due to financial hardship. In the prologue, he reconciles Oz's isolation with the appearance of a new Oz book by explaining that he contacted Dorothy in Oz via a wireless telegraph, and she obtained Ozma's permission to tell Baum this story.\nPlot.\nOjo, known as Ojo the Unlucky, lives in poverty with his laconic uncle Unc Nunkie in the woods of the Munchkin Country in Oz. They visit their neighbor, the magician Dr. Pipt who is about to complete the six-year process of preparing the magical Powder of Life, which can bring inanimate objects to life. Pipt's wife has constructed a life-sized stuffed girl out of patchwork, and she wishes her husband to animate her to serve as an obedient household servant. They also meet another of Pipt's creations, Bungle, an extremely vain talking cat made of glass. The Powder of Life successfully animates the patchwork girl, but an accident causes both Pipt's wife and Unc Nunkie to be turned to stone. Dr. Pipt tells Ojo that he must obtain five ingredients to make a compound to counteract the petrifaction spell.\nOjo and the patchwork girl (who names herself Scraps), along with Bungle, embark on a journey to obtain the magic ingredients: a six-leaved clover, the wing of a yellow butterfly, water from a dark well, a drop of oil from a live man's body, and three hairs from a Woozy's tail. Scraps exhibits a wild, carefree personality, and she is prone to spontaneous recitation of nonsense poetry. After several adventures, they meet a Woozy, a blocky quadruped who agrees to let them have three hairs from its tail\u2014but they are unable to remove the hairs, so they take the Woozy along with them.\nThe party is captured by large animate plants, but they are rescued by the fortuitous arrival of the Shaggy Man. He leads them to the Emerald City to meet Princess Ozma, but warns Ojo that picking a six-leaved clover is forbidden by law in Oz. Along the way they meet the Scarecrow, who is quite smitten with Scraps, as she is with him. Just outside the Emerald City, Ojo sees a six-leaved clover by the road and, believing himself to be unobserved, picks it. When they arrive at the city gates, the Soldier with the Green Whiskers approaches them and announces that Ojo is under arrest.\nBrought to trial before Ozma, Ojo confesses and Ozma pardons him and allows him to keep the clover. Dorothy and the Scarecrow join Ojo and Scraps as they continue their search for the remaining ingredients. Along the way they meet Jack Pumpkinhead, the playful but annoying Tottenhots, and the man-eating 21-foot-tall giant Mr. Yoop, before reaching the subterranean dwellings of the Hoppers, who each have just one leg, and the neighboring Horners, who each have one horn on their head. The two groups are on the verge of war due to a misunderstanding, but Scraps reconciles them. A grateful Horner leads the group to a well in a dark radium mine, and Ojo collects a flask of water from it.\nThe group continues to the castle of the Tin Woodsman who rules the Winkie Country, since yellow butterflies can be found only in that yellow-dominated quadrant of Oz. While talking to the Tin Woodsman, Ojo notices a drop of oil about to drip from his body, and he catches it in a vial. He explains that he now has all the ingredients except one; however, when he describes the last one, the Tin Woodsman is horrified at the idea of killing an innocent butterfly, and forbids them from doing so in his realm. Ojo is devastated, but the Tin Woodsman proposes that they all travel back to the Emerald City to ask Ozma's advice.\nOzma tells them that Dr. Pipt has been practicing magic illegally and has therefore been deprived of his powers. But the petrified Unc Nunkie and Pipt's wife have been brought to the Emerald City and, as they all watch, the Wizard of Oz restores them to life. Ojo and Unc Nunkie are given a new house to live in near the Emerald City and the Tin Woodsman renames Ojo \"Ojo the Lucky\".\nPrincipal character.\nScraps is a living rag doll made of patchwork, button eyes, brown yarn hair, a felt tongue, and pearl teeth. She was originally brought to life by a Munchkin magician named Dr. Pipt by means of his Powder of Life formula to be a servant for his wife Margolotte. Ojo overloaded her with magic brains in the process of bringing her to life, and as she happily jumped around she accidentally spilled the Liquid of Petrifaction on Mrs. Pipt and Ojo's uncle, consequently turning them to stone. Much of their first adventure is gathering the ingredients to find a counterspell. She later became the companion of the Scarecrow who found her quite beautiful.\nThe character had significant roles in such Oz books as \"The Gnome King of Oz\" and \"The Wonder City of Oz\", and was the title character in \"A Runaway in Oz\". In \"Return to Oz\", she is seen in the background at Princess Ozma's coronation.\nThe character's popularity led to her being featured in at least two print advertisements for school desks issued by American Seating Company.\nBackground.\nIn reference to \"The Patchwork Girl of Oz,\" one of Baum's letters to his publisher, Sumner Britton of Reilly &amp; Britton, offers unusual insight on Baum's manner of creating his Oz fantasies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A lot of thought is required on one of these fairy tales. The odd characters are a sort of inspiration, liable to strike me at any time, but the plot and plan of adventures takes me considerable time\u00a0... I live with it day by day, jotting down on odd slips of paper the various ideas that occur and in this way getting my materials together. The new Oz book is at this stage.\u00a0... But\u00a0... it's a long way from being ready for the printer yet. I must rewrite it, stringing the incidents into consecutive order, elaborating the characters, etc. Then it's typewritten. Then it's revised, retypewritten and sent on to Reilly and Britton.\nThe same correspondence (November 23\u201327, 1912) discusses the deleted Chapter 21 of the book, \"The Garden of Meats\". The text of the chapter has not survived, but Neill's illustrations and their captions still exist. The deleted chapter dealt with a race of vegetable people comparable to the Mangaboos in Chapters 4\u20136 of \"Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz.\" The vegetable people grow what Baum elsewhere calls \"meat people\", apparently for food; Neill's pictures show plants with the heads of human children being watered by their growers. (This is thematically connected with the anthropophagous plants in Chapter 10 of \"Patchwork Girl.\") Frank Reilly tactfully wrote to Baum that the material was not \"in harmony with your other fairy stories\", and would generate \"considerable adverse criticism\". Baum saw his point; the chapter was dropped.198\u2013199\nThe depiction of Patchwork Girl may have been influenced by the character of Topsy in \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\", and in turn may have influenced the character of Raggedy Ann.\nAt least at one point in his life, Baum stated that he considered \"The Patchwork Girl of Oz\" \"one of the two best books of my career\", the other being \"The Sea Fairies.\"184 The book was a popular success, selling just over 17,000 copies\u2014though this was somewhat lower than the total for the previous book, \"The Emerald City of Oz,\" and marked the start of a trend in declining sales for the Oz books that did not reverse until \"The Tin Woodman of Oz\" in 1918.\nReception.\nWhile Baum's work as a whole is occasionally criticized for using what may be seen as racial and ethnic stereotypes, the Patchwork Girl has come under particular scrutiny. Robin Bernstein suggests that the character of Scraps was inspired by Topsy in \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" and points out she was created by Dr. Pipt's wife to be a slave. Moreover, the original text included a song (by the similarly animated Phonograph) about \"mah coal black Lulu\"; the lyric, evocative of minstrelsy, was changed in later editions to \"my cross-eyed Lulu\". Similarly problematic is the inclusion in the book of a set of creatures called the Tottenhots, likely meant to be a play on the ethnic term Hottentots.\nAdaptations.\nBaum wrote and produced a film based on the book, titled \"The Patchwork Girl of Oz\". It was made by Baum's studio The Oz Film Manufacturing Company and was released in 1914. Baum was not able to find a woman of athleticism suitable to play the role, and therefore cast the male French acrobat Pierre Couderc.\nBaum also wrote a musical stage adaptation of the book, circa 1913, with composer Louis F. Gottschalk; however, this musical was never staged. Excerpts have occasionally been performed at annual conventions of The International Wizard of Oz Club.\nA 2005 film adaptation of the novel, produced by Thundertoad Animation, featured Cyndi Hotopp in the title role.\nThe character of Scraps has also been featured in a variety of television productions. The character was portrayed by Doreen Tracy on the 4th Anniversary episode of \"Disneyland\", which aired in 1957. In the 1996 animated series \"The Oz Kids\", she was voiced by Lori Alan and was depicted as the parent of numerous infant patchwork kids. The character was featured in the unaired television pilot \"Lost in Oz\", under the name of Serena. In this version, the character is depicted as extremely athletic and looks like a pale human with dark hair, but is revealed to be made of fabric underneath. She is a supporting character in the 2017 animated series, \"Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz,\" voiced by Jessica DiCicco.\nIn the 2009 computer game, \"Emerald City Confidential\", Scraps is presented as the owner of a general store. She is also part of Frogman's smuggling ring.\nIn the 1982 stage play, \"Talking With...\", the second monologue is about a housewife who dresses up as Scraps to escape her mundane life.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53516", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53516", "title": "Gladys Aylward", "text": "Missionary in China (1902\u20131970)\nGladys May Aylward (24 February 1902 \u2013 3 January 1970) was a British evangelical Christian missionary to China, whose story was told in the book \"The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward\", by Alan Burgess, published in 1957. The book served as the basis for the film \"The Inn of the Sixth Happiness\", starring Ingrid Bergman, in 1958. The film was produced by Twentieth Century Fox, and filmed entirely in North Wales and England.\nEarly life.\nAylward was born in 1902, one of three children of Thomas John Aylward (a postman) and Rosina Florence, a working-class family from Edmonton, North London. From her early teens, Gladys worked as a housemaid. Following a calling to go overseas as a Christian missionary, she was accepted by the China Inland Mission to study in a preparatory three-month course for aspiring missionaries. Because of her lack of progress in learning the Chinese language, she was not offered further training.\nOn 15 October 1930, having worked for Sir Francis Younghusband, Aylward spent her life savings on a train passage to Yangcheng, Shanxi Province, China. The dangerous trip took her across Siberia on the Trans-Siberian Railway at a time when the Soviet Union and China were in an undeclared war. She was detained by the Russians, but managed to evade them with local help and a lift from a Japanese ship. She then traveled across Japan with the help of the British Consul, and took another ship to China.\nWork in China.\nUpon arriving in Yangcheng County, Aylward worked with an older missionary, Jeannie Lawson, to help manage The Inn of the Eight Happinesses (), a name based on the eight virtues of Love, Virtue, Gentleness, Tolerance, Loyalty, Truth, Beauty and Devotion. There, she and Mrs. Lawson not only provided hospitality for travelers but would also share stories about Jesus, in hopes of spreading nascent Christianity. For a time she served as an assistant to the Government of the Republic of China as a \"foot inspector\" by touring the countryside to enforce the new law against footbinding of young Chinese girls. She met with much success in a field that had produced much resistance and even violence at times against the inspectors.\nAylward became a national of the Republic of China in 1936 and was a revered figure among the people, taking in orphans and adopting several herself, intervening in a volatile prison riot and advocating prison reform, risking her life many times to help those in need. In 1938, the region was invaded by Japanese forces, and Aylward led more than 100 orphans to safety over the mountains, despite being wounded and sick, personally caring for them (and converting many to Christianity).\nShe did not return to Britain until 1949, when her life in China was thought to be in great danger from the Communists \u2013 the army was actively seeking out missionaries. Settling in Basingstoke, she gave many lectures on her work. After her mother died, Aylward sought a return to China. After rejection by the Communist government and a stay in British-administered Hong Kong, she finally settled in Taiwan in 1958. There, she founded the Gladys Aylward Orphanage, where she worked until her death in 1970.\n\" The Inn of the Sixth Happiness\".\nA film based on her life, \"The Inn of the Sixth Happiness\", was released in 1958. It drew from the biography \"The Small Woman\", by Alan Burgess. Although she found herself a figure of international interest because of the film's popularity and television and media interviews, Aylward was mortified by her depiction in the film and the liberties it took. The tall (1.75m/5' 9\"), blonde Swedish actress Ingrid Bergman was inconsistent with Aylward's small stature, dark hair, and North London accent. The struggles of Aylward and her family to effect her initial trip to China were disregarded in favor of a movie plot device of an employer 'condescending to write to \"his old friend\" Jeannie Lawson'. Also, Aylward's dangerous, complicated travels across Russia, China, and Japan were reduced to 'a few rude soldiers', after which 'Hollywood's train delivered her neatly to Tientsin'. Many characters and names were changed, even when these names had significant meaning, such as those of her adopted children and that of the inn, which was named in fact for the Chinese belief in the number 8 as being auspicious. Her own name was changed; in real life, she was given the Chinese name Aiweide ( \u2013 a phonetic approximation to Aylward), but in the film, she was given the name Jen-Ai (). Colonel Lin Nan was portrayed as half-European, a change which she found insulting to his real Chinese lineage, and she felt that the Hollywood-embellished love scenes in the film damaged her reputation. Not only had she never kissed a man, but the film's ending portrayed her character leaving the orphans to rejoin the colonel elsewhere, even though in reality she did not retire from working with orphans until she was 60 years old. She dedicated the rest of her life to the orphans in Taiwan and was buried in Taipei.\nDeath and legacy.\nAylward died on 3 January 1970, about a month and a half short of her 68th birthday, and was buried in a small cemetery on the campus of Christ's College in Guandu (\u95dc\u6e21\u57fa\u7763\u66f8\u9662), New Taipei, Taiwan. She was known to the Chinese as (). Her ministry in Taipei continues to develop and is now called Bethany Children's Home. The new director, Sharon Chiang (), was called from Seattle to develop Bethany Children's Home further for its new vision and new building.\nA London secondary school, formerly known as 'Weir Hall and Huxley', was renamed the Gladys Aylward School (now the Aylward Academy) shortly after her death. There is a blue commemorative plaque on the house where Gladys lived near the school at 67 Cheddington Road, London N18.\nA \"house\" was named after Gladys Aylward at Fernwood Comprehensive (formerly Secondary Modern) School, in Wollaton, Nottingham, and likewise at St Nicholas\u2019 primary school in Crosby, Liverpool, which she visited while touring the UK in 1963.\nNumerous books, short stories, and films have been developed about the life and work of Gladys Aylward.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther sources.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53517", "revid": "23257138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53517", "title": "Proportional font", "text": ""}
{"id": "53518", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53518", "title": "Oxfordshire", "text": "County of England\nOxfordshire ( ; abbreviated \"Oxon\") is a ceremonial county in South East England. The county is bordered by Northamptonshire and Warwickshire to the north, Buckinghamshire to the east, Berkshire to the south, and Wiltshire and Gloucestershire to the west. The city of Oxford is the largest settlement and county town.\nThe county is largely rural, with an area of and a population of 691,667. After Oxford (162,100), the largest settlements are Banbury (54,355) and Abingdon-on-Thames (37,931). For local government purposes Oxfordshire is a non-metropolitan county with five districts. The part of the county south of the River Thames, largely corresponding to the Vale of White Horse district, was historically part of Berkshire.\nThe lowlands in the centre of the county are crossed by the River Thames and its tributaries, the valleys of which are separated by low hills. The south contains parts of the Berkshire Downs and Chiltern Hills, and the north-west includes part of the Cotswolds; all three regions are Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. The county's highest point is White Horse Hill (), part of the Berkshire Downs.\nHistory.\nOxfordshire was recorded as a county in the early years of the 10th century and lies between the River Thames to the south, the Cotswolds to the west, the Chilterns to the east and the Midlands to the north, with spurs running south to Henley-on-Thames and north to Banbury.\nAlthough it had some significance as an area of valuable agricultural land in the centre of the country, it was largely ignored by the Romans and did not grow in importance until the formation of a settlement at Oxford in the 8th century. Alfred the Great was born across the Thames in Wantage, in the Vale of White Horse. The University of Oxford was founded in 1096, although its collegiate structure did not develop until later on. The university in the county town of Oxford (whose name came from Anglo-Saxon \"Oxenaford\" = \"ford for oxen\") grew in importance during the Middle Ages and early modern period. The area was part of the Cotswolds wool trade from the 13th century, generating much wealth, particularly in the western portions of the county in the Oxfordshire Cotswolds. Morris Motors was founded in Oxford in 1912, bringing heavy industry to an otherwise agricultural county. The role of agriculture as an employer declined rapidly in the 20th century; as of 2023, 1.2 per cent of the county's population are involved in agriculture, forestry, or fishing due to high mechanisation. Nevertheless, Oxfordshire remains a very agricultural county by land use, with a lower population than neighbouring Berkshire and Buckinghamshire, which are both smaller.\nDuring most of its history, the county was partitioned as fourteen divisions called hundreds, namely Bampton, Banbury, Binfield, Bloxham, Bullingdon, Chadlington, Dorchester, Ewelme, Langtree, Lewknor, Pyrton, Ploughley, Thame and Wootton.\nThe Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry, the main army unit in the area, was based at Cowley Barracks on Bullingdon Green, Cowley.\nThe Vale of White Horse district and parts of the South Oxfordshire administrative district south of the River Thames were historically part of Berkshire, but, in 1974, Abingdon, Didcot, Faringdon, Wallingford and Wantage were added to the administrative county of Oxfordshire under the Local Government Act 1972. Conversely, the Caversham area of Reading, now administratively in Berkshire, was historically part of Oxfordshire, as was the parish of Stokenchurch, now administratively in Buckinghamshire. The areas of Oxford city south of the Thames, such as Grandpont, were transferred much earlier in 1889.\nIn October 2024, the French theme-park operator Puy du Fou has received support from the United Kingdom government for its proposal to develop a \u00a3600 million site in Oxfordshire. Correspondence released to the public indicated that a UK trade minister expressed a willingness to assist with the project.\nGeography.\nOxfordshire is a county in south-central England. Its landscape is characterised by two bands of hill ranges in the north and south of the county separated by a low-lying clay vale around the River Thames.\nThe northernmost point of the county is near Claydon Hay Farm, Claydon at . This is where the Cherwell District of Oxfordshire meets the counties of Warwickshire and Northamptonshire. This northernmost area of Cherwell is within the Northamptonshire Uplands (National Character Area 80), a range of ironstone-capped limestone hills and valleys. The area within the Northamptonshire Uplands includes the market town of Banbury.\nSouth of the Uplands are the eastern extent of the Cotswolds (NCA 107), a hill range forming part of a wider oolitic limestone range across England known for its local stone. A large part of the wider Cotswolds within the county are in the protected Costwolds National Landscape. Oxfordshire's westernmost point is in the Cotswolds NCA at , near Downs Farm, Westwell.\nSouth of the Costwolds, Oxfordshire opens up into the undulating farmland of the upper Thames clay vales (NCA 108). The clay vales encircle the Midvale Ridge (NCA 109), a band of low-lying limestone hills running through the centre of the county. These two landscapes are the population centres of the county, containing Oxford itself as well as other key towns such as Witney, Bicester and Abingdon.\nTo the south west of the county, the clay vales give way to the chalk hills of the Berkshire and Marlborough Downs (NCA 116) south of Wantage, known particularly for the Uffington White Horse. The Downs form part of the North Wessex Downs National Landscape.\nThe Berkshire Downs extend to the Thames at Goring, east of which are further chalk hills in the Chilterns (NCA 110), much of which is in the Chilterns National Landscape. South of the boundaries of the National Landscape are Oxfordshire's southermost and easternmost points near the near Thames and Kennet Marina at Playhatch () and Shiplake () respectively.\nLong-distance walks within the county include the Ridgeway National Trail, Macmillan Way, Oxfordshire Way and the D\u2019Arcy Dalton Way.\nRivers and canals.\nFrom the mid-point western edge to the southeast corner of Oxfordshire, via the city in the middle, runs the Thames with its flat floodplains. This river forms the historic limit with Berkshire, remaining so on some lowest reaches. The Thames Path National Trail follows the river from upper estuary to a source.\nMany smaller rivers in the county feed into the Thames, such as the Thame, Windrush, Evenlode and Cherwell. Some of these have trails running along their valleys. The Oxford Canal links to the Midlands and follows the Cherwell from Banbury via Kidlington into the city of Oxford, where these join the navigable Thames. About 15% of the historically named Wilts &amp; Berks Canal, in sporadic sections, has been restored to navigability.\nGreen belt.\nOxfordshire contains a green belt area that fully envelops the city of Oxford and extends for some miles to protect surrounding towns and villages from inappropriate development and urban growth. Its border in the east extends to the Buckinghamshire county boundary, while part of its southern border is shared with the North Wessex Downs AONB. It was first drawn up in the 1950s, and all of the county's districts contain some portion of the belt.\nPolitics.\nThe Oxfordshire County Council, since 2013 under no overall control, is responsible for the most strategic local government functions, including schools, county roads and social services. The county is divided into five local government districts: Oxford, Cherwell, Vale of White Horse (after the Uffington White Horse), West Oxfordshire and South Oxfordshire, which deal with such matters as town and country planning, waste collection and housing.\nIn the 2016 European Union referendum, Oxfordshire was the only English county as a whole to vote to remain in the European Union by a significant margin, at 57.06% (70.27% in the City of Oxford), despite Cherwell (barely) voting to leave at 50.31%.\nEducation.\nOxfordshire has a comprehensive education system with 23 independent schools and 35 state secondary schools. Only eight schools do not have a sixth form; these are mostly in South Oxfordshire and Cherwell districts. Oxfordshire has a large number of leading independent schools, including public schools such as Radley College.\nThe county has two universities: the ancient University of Oxford and the modern Oxford Brookes University, which are both located in Oxford. In addition, Wroxton College, located in Banbury, is affiliated with Fairleigh Dickinson University of New Jersey.\nPublic libraries.\nThere are currently 44 public libraries in Oxfordshire, all operated under Oxfordshire County Council. For members of the library service, the libraries offer a borrowing service for members to borrow books, audiobooks, e-books, and more. In addition to lending library materials, the libraries also offer many different programmes for children and adults.\nBuildings.\nThe \"dreaming spires\" of the University of Oxford are among the reasons for which Oxford is the sixth most visited city in the United Kingdom by international visitors. Among many notable University buildings are the Sheldonian Theatre, built 1664\u20131668 to the design of Sir Christopher Wren, and the Radcliffe Camera, built 1737\u20131749 to the design of James Gibbs.\nBlenheim Palace, close to Woodstock, was designed and partly built by the architect John Vanbrugh for John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, after he had won the battle of Blenheim. The gardens, which can be visited, were designed by the landscape gardener \"Capability\" Brown, who planted the trees in the battle formation of the victorious army. Sir Winston Churchill was born in the palace in 1874. It is open to the public.\nChastleton House, on the Gloucestershire and Warwickshire borders, is a great country mansion built on property bought from Robert Catesby, who was one of the men involved in the Gunpowder Plot with Guy Fawkes. Stonor Park, another country mansion, has belonged to the recusant Stonor family for centuries.\nMapledurham House is an Elizabethan stately home in the south-east of the county, close to Reading.\nThe Abbey in Sutton Courtenay is a medieval courtyard house. It has been recognised by the Historic Building Council for England (now Historic England) as a building of outstanding historic and architectural interest. It is considered to be a 'textbook' example of the English medieval manor house and is a Grade I-listed building.\nSettlements.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53519", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53519", "title": "Theatre of Poland", "text": "In common with other European countries, the most frequent and most popular form of theatre in Poland is dramatic theatre, based on the existence of stable artistic companies. It is above all a theatre of directors, who decide on the form of its productions and the appearance of individual scenes. There is no strict division in Poland between theatre and film directors and actors, therefore many stage artists are known to theatre goers from films of Andrzej Wajda, for example: Wojciech Pszoniak, Daniel Olbrychski, Krystyna Janda, Jerzy Radziwi\u0142owicz, and from films of Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski, actors such as Jerzy Stuhr, Janusz Gajos and others.\nAlongside the many types of dramatic theatre whose basis is literature, there are in Poland historic forms of theatre in which spoken word is not the most important means of expression, e.g., visual theatre popular against state censorship, musical theatre, theatre of movement, etc. An equal popularity is being gained by theatres employing puppets, figures, or shadows; there is even a theatre of drawing as well as a theatre of fire.\nTradition.\nThe strength of Polish dramatic theatre lies in the professionalism of its actors. The tradition of the great 19th century players, with Helena Modrzejewska \u2013 the \"star of two continents\" \u2013 at its forefront, has been continued by successive generations of university trained artists. This variety and authentic commitment by so many people provides the best evidence that theatre was and still is an inspirational experience in Poland. Further proof may be seen in the degree of audience interest toward the new, experimental theatre, creating a unique ambiance around them. It may also be seen in the expansion of festival life and respected theatre magazines, e.g., \"Dialog\", which has, for decades, presented the latest achievements in world dramaturgy. Alongside the established institutions with seasoned professionals and centuries-old traditions, there are amateur theatres and travelling groups as well.\nAmong the professional companies, the most representative is the National Theatre in Warsaw. The core of its repertoire consists of the most cherished Polish and foreign dramas, with which directors conduct their individual dialogues, asking these classic pieces questions tormenting modern-day Poles. Within this exploration, the National Theatre frequently attempts very courageous experiments, which means that its stage, although a showcase, is not at all academic. Most characteristic are the productions of Jerzy Grzegorzewski (Theatre director between 1997 and 2002), who, employing complicated stage equipment (metaphoric scenographic elements such as pantographs, huge musical instruments, or symbolic props) and creating his own montage of classic texts, testing their value, searching for their relevance to the here and now.\nSomewhat more conservative is the second Polish theatre with national status - the National Old Theatre in Krak\u00f3w, the only one in Poland belonging to the Union of European Theatres. This theatre, which shone in the seventies thanks to the well-regarded and world-famous productions of Konrad Swinarski, Jerzy Jarocki, and Andrzej Wajda, is attempting to continue these traditions, seeking worthy successors to these masters. The Old Theatre's most important current collaborator is Krystian Lupa. For years, he has been consistently producing the dramas and prose of German language writers (T. Bernhardt, R.M. Rilke, R. Musil), not even hesitating before transferring Broch's novel \"The Sleepwalkers\" to the stage. Russian literature also lies within his sphere of interest (productions of Dostoyevsky's \"The Brothers Karamazov\" and, recently, M. Bulgakov's \"The Master and Margarita\"). Lupa shatters the traditional action of the performances, stretching their tempos and concentrating on the poetic values of particular situations rather than the plot or conflict. This is a theatre of philosophical and existential reflection in whose centre is situated the modern human being, attempting to find a place in an ever more dehumanised world. For several seasons now, Lupa's productions have been regularly shown in Paris, where they have been received with great admiration by critics and audiences. Lupa is also one of the most important teachers of directing at the Ludwik Solski Academy for the Dramatic Arts in Krak\u00f3w, where his students have included the newest generation of Polish directors: Krzysztof Warlikowski, Grzegorz Jarzyna, Maja Kleczewska, Anna Augustynowicz, Michal Zadara and Jan Klata.\nActors and directors.\nAt present, the Polish theatre actor possibly best known outside the country is Andrzej Seweryn, who in the years 1984\u20131988 was a member of the international group formed by Peter Brook to work on the staging of the Mahabharata, and since 1993 has been linked with the Com\u00e9die Fran\u00e7aise. The most revered actor of the second half of the twentieth century in Poland is generally considered to be Tadeusz \u0141omnicki, who died in 1992 of a heart attack while rehearsing \"King Lear\".\nDuring the second half of the nineties, there appeared in Polish dramatic theatre a new generation of young directors, who have attempted to create productions relevant to the experience and problems of a thirty-something generation brought up surrounded by mass culture, habituated to a fast-moving lifestyle, but at the same time ever more lost in the world of consumer capitalism. The leading theatre in this movement is Warsaw's TR, known as \"the fastest theatre in town\". Among its collaborating directors, Krzysztof Warlikowski and Grzegorz Jarzyna stand out. Warlikowski has gained international recognition with a series of innovative productions of Shakespeare, performed both at Polish theatres (\"The Taming of the Shrew\", \"Hamlet\") and abroad (\"Pericles\" at the Piccolo Teatro in Milan, \"Twelfth Night\" and \"The Tempest\" at the Stadt-Theater in Stuttgart). Looking for a way to present the complex existential situation of contemporary humanity, Jarzyna reaches both for contemporary drama (Witkiewicz's \"Tropical Madness\", Gombrowicz's \"Princess Ivona\", or Frazer's \"Unidentified Human Remains...\") and classic European novels (Dostoyevsky's \"The Idiot\", Mann's \"Doktor Faustus\", directed at the Hebbel Theater in Berlin). Recently, both directors have taken an interest in the work of Sarah Kane, mounting startling productions: \"Cleansed\" (Warlikowski) and \"4.48 Psychosis\" (Jarzyna).\nThe true rebirth, following the collapse of the Soviet empire, was experienced by the Ludowy Theatre in Nowa Huta district of Krak\u00f3w taken over by an actor, director, and politician Jerzy Fedorowicz (1989\u20132005). Under his management, the theatre won considerable recognition, and numerous awards. It was twice invited to the Edinburgh International Festival: in 1996 with \"Macbeth\" directed by Jerzy Stuhr, and in 1997 with \"Antigone\" directed by W\u0142odzimierz Nurkowski. Current director is Jacek Strama, an award-winning theatre and film producer.\nVenues.\nThe theatrical map of Poland, on which for many years the most important points were Warsaw and Krak\u00f3w, has undergone numerous changes over the last decade. The most recognized directors in Poland, such as Krzysztof Warlikowski, Grzegorz Jarzyna, Jan Klata, Michal Zadara or Maja Kleczewska work in Warsaw, but also travel to other cities. While it is true to say that the capital's position is safe, there is strong competition for second place between Krak\u00f3w and Wroc\u0142aw. Recognised masters (Jerzy Jarocki, Krystian Lupa) and a group of younger directors, with Piotr Cieplak and Pawe\u0142 Mi\u015bkiewicz at the head, collaborate with Wroc\u0142aw's theatres. Pozna\u0144, Gda\u0144sk, and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a have similar ambitions. One of the more unanticipated surprises of recent seasons has been the blossoming of theatre in Legnica, a town which, until recent times, was the main Soviet military base in Poland, where the artistic director, Jacek G\u0142omb, has been actively searching for new ways to reach the town's inhabitants. So he began putting on shows relating events in the lives of the local citizens, as well as siting classical dramas in surprising arenas (e.g., Shakespeare's \"Coriolanus\" in an old Prussian barracks). Since Pawel Lysak became the artistic director of the theatre in Bydgoszcz, this city in central Poland has been able to enjoy top-level theatre as well.\nThere is no doubt that the greatest achievements of the 20th-century Polish theatre are thanks to those artists seeking new forms and functions for the theatrical arts. From the very beginning of the great European reform movement, Polish theatre people have undertaken courageous experiments in this area. The Polish stream of reform was characterised by the linking of theatre with metaphysics. The source of this type of search was the work and thinking of the Polish Romantics, with Adam Mickiewicz at the forefront. In his \"Forefathers' Eve\", the most important work in Polish literature, there is a vision of theatre as phenomenon on the border between a show and a ceremony led by an actor. In succeeding years, the most important artists of the Polish stage referred to, and sometimes polemicized with, this vision, developing or modifying it.\nIt was from this root that Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski's art arose. Poet, painter, visionary, working at the beginning of the twentieth century he influenced the development of theatre over the course of the following century. His works, born of Romantic and symbolic inspiration, conjoining Catholic, pagan, and classic traditions with the existential and political problems of the new century, has not been completely discovered and understood to this day, forming a vivid and fascinating heritage. It was to this tradition that the originators of Polish monumental theatre, Leon Schiller (Edward Gordon Craig's collaborator), Juliusz Osterwa, and Wilam Horzyca, harked back. Tadeusz Kantor, the avant-garde visual artist who became interested in theatre while trying to find new forms of expression, also alluded to it in his theatrical searches. After years of investigation (attempts to adapt the rules of Tachism and performance art to the needs of the theatre), Kantor created his own model, called the Theatre of Death. In his most famous productions - \"The Dead Class\", \"Wielopole, Wielopole\" or \"I Shall Never Return\" - the artist presented a kind of spiritualist s\u00e9ance, calling pictures, words and sounds deformed by the passing of time. Referring to his memories and experiences, he portrayed a collective memory of the end of the tragic twentieth century - the century of the Holocaust.\nJerzy Grotowski.\nThough arising from the same roots, a totally different attempt to renew theatre was undertaken by Jerzy Grotowski. Aiming for the creation of a performance as a selfless act of sacrifice, he carried out the second great reform, after Konstantin Stanis\u0142avski's, of the actor's art, and his book \"Towards a Poor Theatre\" is still one of the most important textbooks in drama schools the world over. The productions put on by Grotowski's Theatre Laboratory, such as \"Acropolis\" (Wyspia\u0144ski's drama, re-set in a concentration camp), \"The Constant Prince\" (after Calderon-S\u0142owacki) or \"Apocalypsis cum figuris\", are among twentieth-century world theatre's most important achievements, still points of reference for many artists. Among others, Peter Brook, Eugenio Barba, Marketa Kimbrell, Richard Schechner and Andre Gregory have derived inspiration from Grotowski's work. Over the last decade of his life, Grotowski had been investigating the possibility of creating a dramatic structure whose effect would be similar to that of a religious ceremony. After his death (1999), the work was continued by his students, Thomas Richards and Mario Biagini, leading the Workcenter, founded by Grotowski in Pontedera in Italy.\nGrotowski's work has also influenced many Polish theatre artistes. W\u0142odzimierz Staniewski, who, after some years of close collaboration with Grotowski, finally rebelled, founded the \"Gardzienice\" Centre for Theatrical Practice in 1977 in a small village near Lublin. Today, 25 years later, this centre is world-famous and Staniewski's method of acting, known as \"theatre ecology,\" has been numbered among the most important of the twentieth century. The most characteristic aspect of \"Gardzienice\" is its treatment of theatre as one of many various cultural activities, including expeditions to areas inhabited by people holding onto folk traditions (e.g., the Eastern parts of Poland, Lemko villages or the Ukrainian Hucul region), and a strong link between art and the environment from which it arises. The productions themselves, unusually intense and filled with music, movement and dramatic singing - recall the fundamental myths of East and West.\nFor several years, Staniewski has been particularly interested in Ancient Greece as a source of European culture and spirituality. After Apuleius' \"Metamorphoses\" (performed in Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom and Spain, among other countries) he brought into being, with \"Gardzienice\", a production of Eurypides' \"Elektra\", blazing new trails in his theatrical search. From the ranks of W\u0142odzimierz Staniewski's group have come the founders of many active and uncommonly interesting centres, and not just connected with theatre.\nIn Sejny, there is the Borderland Foundation, created by Krzysztof Czy\u017cewski, a one-time Gardzienice collaborator. One of \"Borderland's\" forms of work is theatre (e.g., a production of S. An-sky's \"Dybbuk\"), and its aim is to raise the consciousness of the inhabitants of the borderlands regarding the unique richness of their cultural tradition, which has for centuries linked Polish, Jewish, Belarusian, Lithuanian, Ukrainian, and even Tatar influences. In common with Czy\u017cewski, the founder of the \"Music of the Eastern Lands\" Foundation, Jan Bernad, also came from Gardzienice, and has devoted himself to gathering and reconstructing the rich multiethnic traditions of the ancient music from the Eastern Borders for years.\nDuring the Sixties and Seventies, at the same time as Grotowski's work, the movement of social and politically engaged theatre was also developing in Poland. At first, it was, above all, a rebellious student theatre, later, during the period of martial law, the movement also accepted professionals, who organised productions for the underground Home Theatre. One specific form of political rebellion through theatre was promoted by Wroc\u0142aw's Orange Alternative, an informal group which organised mass events poking fun at the symbols and ceremonies of officialdom. After the regaining of sovereignty in 1989, this movement weakened, but recently it has been reborn as an anticapitalist and antiwar movement. The most important centre for this kind of activity is Pozna\u0144, where, alongside the once famous and still active Theatre of the Eighth Day (the antiglobalist production \"Summit\"), the Travel Agency Theatre operates. One of its most important achievements is the open-air production \"Carmen Funebre\", created under the influence of events in the former Yugoslavia and shown all over the world.\nAnother developing stream of theatre in Poland is so-called visual theatre, using pictures above all, and almost completely avoiding the spoken word. Its originator is considered to be J\u00f3zef Szajna (1922), an artist whose collaboration with theatre began with stage design, went on to direction, and, since the seventies, the creation of theatrical productions employing striking pictures referring to expressionist and surrealist aesthetics. The unique form of Szajna's theatre arose both from his artistic and personal experiences (during WWII he was a concentration camp prisoner). They were based on a vision of a deformed world in which battles are fought over the basic human values, which are constantly under threat. Szajna's most famous productions, also performed abroad, are \"Dante\", \"Cervantes\", and \"Replica\", which directly relate to his traumatic wartime experiences.\nCurrently, the leading representative of visual theatre is Leszek M\u0105dzik, the founder of the Visual Stage at the Catholic University of Lublin. He has, for many years, put on productions that are a kind of theatrical meditation, touching on existential and religious topics.\nClose to this stream are the strongly theatrical happenings of Jerzy Kalina as well as the theatrical activities of Warsaw's Academy of Movement. Speaking of the borderline between art and theatre, it is also worth recalling that there are still active performance artists in Poland. Polish experimental theatre has been counted among the most interesting in Europe, evidence of which are regular prestigious Fringe First awards from the Edinburgh Festival. In recent years, for example, the Travel Agency, Wierszalin, Kana, Song of the Goat, and Provisorium theatres have been recognised in this way.\nDuring recent years in Poland, there has been a boom in musical theatre. Alongside the world-famous composers and singers, Polish directors of opera are rated ever more highly. The most important among this group has, for years, been Ryszard Peryt, collaborating with the Warsaw Chamber Opera (organising the annual Mozart Festival, among others) and the National Opera. His speciality is the production of oratorios, among which the theatrical version of Verdi's \"Requiem\", which has been performed in Moscow's Red Square, stands out. Recent seasons have been a period of great operatic success for the film director Mariusz Treli\u0144ski, who has aroused the interest of New York's Metropolitan Opera. Critical acclaim has also been enjoyed by the opera stage designs of Andrzej Majewski.\nGrowing popularity is also enjoyed by dance theatre. In addition to classical ballet, whose best groups have for years been linked with opera halls, contemporary dance groups have been appearing since the Sixties and Seventies. Among the most important are Pozna\u0144's Polish Theatre of Dance, founded by Conrad Drzewiecki and currently led by Ewa Wycichowska, and Wroc\u0142aw's \"Pantomima\", founded by Henryk Tomaszewski (1919\u20132001). Since the nineties, both Bytom (Silesian Dance Theatre) and Krak\u00f3w have become important centres, hosting festivals which attract dancers from all over the world.\nFestivals.\nInternational festivals are a particular element of Polish theatre life, occasions to allow the artistic achievements of East and West to confront each other. To this end, there are such festivals as \"Contact,\" taking place annually in Toru\u0144, and \"Dialogue,\" organised biannually in autumn in Wroc\u0142aw, in turn with Krak\u00f3w's \"Dedications\" (October) and Warsaw's \"Meetings\" (November). Aside from these, the most interesting events are \"Theatrical Confrontations\" in Lublin (October), the open-air \"Malta\" festival in Pozna\u0144 (June), Krak\u00f3w's \"Ballet in Spring\" and the Puppet Theatre Biennial in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a.\nOne world-famous person who had links with 20th-century Polish theatre and was Pope John Paul II. His interest in theatre dated back to his secondary school years in Wadowice, where the teenage Karol Wojty\u0142a worked in the school theatre. During the Second World War, he co-founded, with his old teacher Mieczys\u0142aw Kotlarczyk, the underground Rhapsodic Theatre, a group cultivating the Romantic tradition of live poetry. After the war, as a priest, he supported the group and was also its critic, publishing reviews of its performances. Within his literary work, John Paul II also has written a number of dramas, the best-known of which are \"Our God's Brother\" and \"The Jeweller's Shop\".\nWitkacy Prize.\nThe Stanis\u0142aw Ignacy Witkiewicz (Witkacy) Prize ( \"\") is an annual award of the Polish Centre of the International Theatre Institute for the foreign (awarded by the Board of Polish Centre of the ITI) and Polish (awarded by the Critics' Circle) artists, scholars or critics for outstanding achievements in the promotion of Polish theatre throughout the world. The Prize has been given since 1983 on the occasion of the World Theatre Day.\nThe candidates are put up every year by the prominent people of Polish culture and the Laureates are chosen by a jury consisted of the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage representative, Zbigniew Raszewski Theatre Institute representative, Board of Polish Centre representatives and by Critics' Circle. Foreign recipient receives the original piece of art of a Polish artist and the invitation to Poland, where the stay is funded by the Ministry. During the visit, the Laureate takes part in series of meetings with Polish theatre community, organized by the Polish Centre of ITI. Usually the visit is combined with the international theatre festival in Poland.\nSome of foreign recipients: Daniel C. Gerould (1983), Roberto Bacci (1989), Bonnie Marranca (1990), Michelle Kokosowski (1991), Richard Demarco (1992), Hendrik Lindepuu (1997), Jacques Rosner (2002), Nina Kiraly (2005), Allen Kuharski (2006), Ellen Stewart (2008), Monique Stalens (2010), Manfred Beilharz (2013), Philip Arnoult (2014), Darja Dominku\u0161 (2015), Richard Gough (2016).\nSome of Polish recipients: Jerzy Jarocki (1984), Kazimierz Dejmek (1984), Jerzy Stuhr (1988), Tadeusz Kantor (1989), J\u00f3zef Szajna (1992), Erwin Axer (1993), Andrzej Wajda (1995), Andrzej Seweryn (1996), Krystyna Meissner (1997), Krystian Lupa (2000), Jerzy Radziwi\u0142owicz (2000), Tadeusz Bradecki (2001), Janusz Opry\u0144ski (2002), Krzysztof Warlikowski (2003), Travel Agency Theatre (2004), Grzegorz Jarzyna (2005), Mariusz Treli\u0144ski (2006), Ewa Wycichowska (2008), Song of the Goat Theatre (2010), Stefan Sutkowski (2013), Andrzej Wirth (2014), Janina Szarek (2015), Andrzej Szczytko (2016).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53520", "revid": "3022076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53520", "title": "Jerzy Grotowski", "text": "Polish theatre director (1933\u20131999)\nJerzy Marian Grotowski (; 11 August 1933 \u2013 14 January 1999) was a Polish theatre director and dramatic theorist whose innovative approaches to acting, training and theatrical production have significantly influenced theatre today. He is considered one of the most influential theatre practitioners of the 20th century as well as one of the founders of experimental theatre.\nHe was born in Rzesz\u00f3w, in southeastern Poland, in 1933 and studied acting and directing at the Ludwik Solski Academy of Dramatic Arts in Krak\u00f3w and Russian Academy of Theatre Arts in Moscow. He debuted as a director in 1957 in Krak\u00f3w with Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco's play \"Chairs\" (co-directed with Aleksandra Mianowska) and shortly afterward founded a small laboratory theatre in 1959 in the town of Opole in Poland. During the 1960s, the company began to tour internationally and his work attracted increasing interest. As his work gained wider acclaim and recognition, Grotowski was invited to work in the United States and left Poland in 1982. Although the company he founded in Poland closed a few years later in 1984, he continued to teach and direct productions in Europe and America. However, Grotowski became increasingly uncomfortable with the adoption and adaptation of his ideas and practices, particularly in the US. So, at what seemed to be the height of his public profile, he left America and moved to Italy where he established the Grotowski Workcenter in 1985 in Pontedera, near Pisa. At this centre, he continued his theatre experimentation and practice, and it was here that he continued to direct training and private theatrical events almost in secret for the last twenty years of his life. Suffering from leukemia and a heart condition, he died in 1999 at his home in Pontedera.\nBiography.\nJerzy Grotowski was 6 when World War II broke out in 1939. During the war, Grotowski, with his mother and brother, moved from Rzesz\u00f3w to the village of Nienad\u00f3wka.\nCareer.\nTheatre of Productions.\nGrotowski made his individual directorial debut in 1958 with the production \"Gods of Rain\", which introduced his bold approach to text, which he continued to develop throughout his career, influencing many subsequent theatre artists. Later in 1958, Grotowski moved to Opole, where he was invited by the theatre critic and dramaturg Ludwik Flaszen to serve as director of the Theatre of 13 Rows. There he began to assemble a company of actors and artistic collaborators which would help him realize his unique vision. It was also there that he began to experiment with approaches to performance training, which enabled him to shape young actors. Although his methods were often contrasted to those of Konstantin Stanislavski, he admired the Russian as \"the first great creator of a method of acting in the theatre\" and praised him for asking \"all the relevant questions that could be asked about theatrical technique.\"\nAmong the many productions for which his theatre company became famous were \"Orpheus\" by Jean Cocteau, \"Shakuntala\" based on text by Kalidasa, \"Dziady (Forefathers' Eve)\" by Adam Mickiewicz, and \"Akropolis\" by Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski. This last production was the first complete realization of Grotowski's notion of \"poor theatre.\" In it the company of actors (representing concentration camp prisoners) build the structure of a crematorium around the audience while acting out stories from the Bible and Greek mythology. This conceptualization had particular resonance for the audiences in Opole, as the Auschwitz concentration camp was only sixty miles away. \"Akropolis\" received much attention and could be said to have launched Grotowski's career internationally due to inventive and aggressive promotion by visiting foreign scholars and theatre professionals. A film of the production was made with an introduction by Peter Brook, which constitutes one of the most accessible and concrete records of Grotowski's work.\nIn 1964, Grotowski followed success with success when his theatre premiered \"The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus\" based on the Elizabethan drama by Christopher Marlowe, featuring Zbigniew Cynkutis in the title role. Foregoing the use of props altogether, Grotowski let the actors' bodies represent objects. He seated audience members as the guests at Faust's last supper, with the action unfolding on and around their table.\nIn 1965, Grotowski moved his company to Wroc\u0142aw, relabeling them a \"Teatr Laboratorium\", in part to avoid the heavy censorship to which professional \"theatres\" were subject in Poland at that time. Work had already begun on one of their most famous productions, \"The Constant Prince\" (based on Juliusz S\u0142owacki's translation of Calder\u00f3n's play). Debuting in 1967, this production was soon considered to be a major success. In one of his final essays, Grotowski detailed how he worked individually with actor Ryszard Cieslak for more than a year to develop the scenes of torture and martyrdom intrinsic to the play.\nGrotowski's last professional production as a director was in 1969. Entitled \"Apocalypsis Cum Figuris,\" it uses texts from the Bible, this time combined with contemporary writings from authors such as T. S. Eliot and Simone Weil, this production was cited by members of the company as an example of a group 'total act'. The development of \"Apocalypsis\" took more than three years, beginning as a staging of S\u0142owacki's \"Samuel Zborowski\" and passing through a separate stage of development as a staging of the Gospels, \"Ewangelie\" (elaborated as a completed performance though never presented to audiences) before arriving to its final form.\nGrotowski revolutionized theatre and along with his first apprentice, Eugenio Barba, leader and founder of Odin Teatret, is considered a father of contemporary experimental theatre. Barba was instrumental in revealing Grotowski to the world outside the iron curtain. He was the editor of the seminal book \"Towards a Poor Theatre\" (1968), which Grotowski wrote together with Ludwik Flaszen, in which it is declared that theatre should not, because it could not, compete against the overwhelming spectacle of film and should instead focus on the very root of the act of theatre: actors cocreating the event of theatre with its spectators.\nTheatre - through the actor's technique, his art in which the living organism strives for higher motives - provides an opportunity for what could be called integration, the discarding of masks, the revealing of the real substance: a totality of physical and mental reactions. This opportunity must be treated in a disciplined manner, with a full awareness of the responsibilities it involves. Here we can see the theatre's therapeutic function for people in our present[-]day civilization. It is true that the actor accomplishes this act, but he can only do so through an encounter with the spectator - intimately, visibly, not hiding behind a cameraman, wardrobe mistress, stage designer or make-up girl - in direct confrontation with him, and somehow \" instead of\" him. The actor's act - discarding half measures, revealing, opening up, emerging from himself as opposed to closing up - is an invitation to the spectator. This act could be compared to an act of the most deeply rooted, genuine love between two human beings - this is just a comparison since we can only refer to this \"emergence from oneself\" through analogy. This act, paradoxical and borderline, we call a total act. In our opinion it epitomizes the actor's deepest calling.\nDebut in the west.\nThe year 1968 marked Grotowski's debut in the West. His company performed the Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski play \"Akropolis/Acropolis\" (1964) at the Edinburgh Festival. This was a fitting vehicle for Grotowski and his poor theatre because his treatment of the play in Poland had already achieved wider recognition and was published in \"Pami\u0119tnik Teatralny\" (Warsaw, 1964), \"Alla Ricerca del Teatro Perduto\" (Padova, 1965), and \"Tulane Drama Review\" (New Orleans, 1965). It marked the first time many in Britain had been exposed to \"poor theatre\". The same year, his book titled \"Towards a Poor Theatre\" appeared in Danish, published by Odin Teatrets Forlag. It appeared in English the following year, published by Methuen and Co. Ltd., with an Introduction by Peter Brook, then an associate director at the Royal Shakespeare Company. In it he writes feelingly about Grotowski's private consulting for the company; he/they felt Grotowski's work was unique but equally understood that its value was diminished if talked about too much, if faith were broken with the consultant.\nGrotowski's company made its debut in the United States under the auspices of the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the fall of 1969. BAM built a theatre for Grotowski's company in the Washington Square Methodist Church in Greenwich Village. Three productions were presented: Akropolis, \"The Constant Prince\" and \"Apocalypsis Cum Figuris\" during a three-week run.\nParatheatrical phase.\nIn 1973 Grotowski published \"Holiday\", which outlined a new course of investigation. He would pursue this 'Paratheatrical' phase until 1978. This phase is known as the 'Paratheatrical' phase of his career because it was an attempt to transcend the separation between performer and spectator. Grotowski attempted this through the organization of communal rites and simple interactive exchanges that went on sometimes for extended periods, attempting to provoke in poor participants a deconditioning of impulse. The most widely circulated description of one of these post-theatrical events (a \"beehive\") is given by Andre Gregory, Grotowski's longtime friend and the American director whose work he most strongly endorsed, in \"My Dinner With Andre\". Various collaborators who had been important to Grotowski's work in what he termed his \"Theatre of Productions\" phase had difficulty following him in these explorations beyond the boundary of conventional theatre. Other, younger members of the group came to the foreground, notably Jacek Zmys\u0142owski, whom many would consider Grotowski's closest collaborator in this period. Theatre critics have often exoticized and mystified Grotowski's work on the basis of these paratheatrical experiments, suggesting that his work should be seen in the lineage of Antonin Artaud, a suggestion Grotowski strongly resisted. Later in life, he clarified that he quickly found this direction of research limiting, having realized that unstructured work frequently elicits banalities and cultural clich\u00e9 from participants.\nTheatre of Sources.\nIn this period of his work, Grotowski traveled intensively through India, Mexico, Haiti and elsewhere, seeking to identify elements of technique in the traditional practices of various cultures that could have a precise and discernible effect on participants. Key collaborators in this phase of work include W\u0142odzimierz Staniewski, subsequently founder of Gardzienice Theatre, Jairo Cuesta and Magda Z\u0142otowska, who traveled with Grotowski on his international expeditions. His interest in ritual techniques linked to Haitian practice led Grotowski to a long-standing collaboration with Maud Robart and Jean-Claude Tiga of Saint Soleil. Always a master strategist, Grotowski made use of his international ties and the relative freedom of travel allowed him to pursue this program of cultural research in order to flee Poland following the imposition of martial law. He spent time in Haiti and in Rome, where he delivered a series of important lectures on the topic of theatre anthropology at the Sapienza University of Rome in 1982 before seeking political asylum in the United States. His dear friends Andre and Mercedes Gregory helped Grotowski to settle in the US, where he taught at Columbia University for one year while attempting to find support for a new program of research.\nObjective Drama.\nUnable (despite the best efforts of Richard Schechner) to secure resources for his projected research in Manhattan, in 1983 Grotowski received an invitation from Robert Cohen to come to the University of California, Irvine, where he began a course of work known as \"Objective Drama.\" This phase of his research focused on participants' psychophysiological responses to selected songs and other performative tools derived from traditional cultures, focusing specifically on relatively simple techniques that could elicit discernible and predictable effects on the 'doers', regardless of their belief structures or culture of origin. Ritual songs and related performative elements linked to Haitian and other African diaspora traditions became a favoured tool of research. During this time Grotowski continued several collaborative relationships begun in earlier phases, and Maud Robart, Jairo Cuesta and Pablo Jimenez took on significant roles as performers and research leaders in the project. He also initiated a creative relationship with the American Keith Fowler and his student, James Slowiak. Another trusted collaborator was Thomas Richards, son of Canadian-American director Lloyd Richards, to whom Grotowski would ultimately pass on responsibility for his lifelong research.\nArt as Vehicle.\nIn 1986, Grotowski was invited by Roberto Bacci to his theater center in Pontedera, Italy. There, he was offered an opportunity to conduct long-term research on performance without the pressure of having to show results until he was ready. Grotowski gladly accepted, taking with him three assistants from Objective Drama research (Richards, Jimenez and Slowiak) to help in founding his Italian Workcenter. Robart also led a work-team in Pontedera for several years, after which time funding cuts necessitated downscaling to a single research group, led by Richards. Grotowski characterized the focus of his attention in his final phase of research as \"art as a vehicle,\" a term coined by Peter Brook. \"It seems to me,\" Brook said, \"that Grotowski is showing us something which existed in the past but has been forgotten over the centuries; that is that one of the vehicles which allows man to have access to another level of perception is to be found in the art of performance.\" Moreover, it was in 1986 that Grotowski changed the name of the Italian centre to the Workcenter of Jerzy Grotowski and Thomas Richards, to signal the unique and central place Richards held in his work. Grotowski drove Richards to take on increasingly greater responsibility and leadership in the work, until he was not only the primary doer in the practice of Art as Vehicle, but also its primal leader and \"director\" (if such a term can be accurately used) of the performance structures created around these Afro-Caribbean vibratory songs, most significantly 'Downstairs Action' (filmed by Mercedes Gregory in 1989) and 'Action', on which work began in 1994 and continues to the present. Italian actor Mario Biagini, who joined the Workcenter shortly after its founding, also became a central contributor to this research. Although Grotowski died in 1999 at the end of a prolonged illness, the research of Art as Vehicle continues at the Pontedera Workcenter, with Richards as artistic director and Biagini as associate director. Grotowski's Will declared the two his \"universal heirs,\" holders of copyright on the entirety of his textual output and intellectual property.\nVoice Work.\nJerzy Grotowski was among a small group of actors and directors, including Peter Brook and Roy Hart, who sought to explore new forms of theatrical expression without employing the spoken word. In the programme notes to the production of one of Grotowski's performances called \"Akropolis\", of which the premiere was in October 1962, one of the performers stated:\nThe means of verbal expression have been considerably enlarged because all means of vocal expression are used, starting from the confused babbling of the very small child and including the most sophisticated oratorical recitation. Inarticulate groans, animal roars, tender folksongs, liturgical chants, dialects, declamation of poetry: everything is there. The sounds are interwoven in a complex score which brings back fleetingly the memory of all forms of language.\nGrotowski and his group of actors became known in particular for their experimental work on the human voice, partially inspired by the work of Roy Hart, who in turn furthered the extended vocal technique initially established by Alfred Wolfsohn. Alan Seymour, speaking of Grotowski's 1963 production of \"Faustus\" noted that the performers' voices 'reached from the smallest whisper to an astonishing, almost cavernous tone, an intoned declaiming, of a resonance and power I have not heard from actors before'.\nThe use of non-verbal voice in these productions was part of Grotowski's investigation into the use of the actor's own self as the substance of performance, and his work was founded upon his belief in the ability of a human being to express physically and vocally aspects of the psyche, including those parts allegedly buried in what Carl Jung called the collective unconscious, without recourse to words.\nAnalytical Psychology.\nBoth Grotowski and Hart compared the desired effect of the rehearsal process upon their actors, and the impact of their performances upon the audience to psychotherapy, drawing upon the principles of Carl Jung and analytical psychology to explain the principles behind their creativity. Grotowski said that theatre 'is a question of a gathering which is subordinated to ritual: nothing is represented or shown, but we participate in a ceremonial which releases the collective unconscious'.\nGrotowski repeatedly described his rehearsal process and performances as 'sacred', seeking to revive what he understood to be the routes of drama in religious ritual and spiritual practice.\nTo achieve his aims, Grotowski demanded that his actors draw from their psyches images of a collective significance and give them form through the motion of the body and the sound of the voice. Grotowski's ultimate aim was to effect in the actor change and growth, transformation and rebirth in order that the actor, in turn, could precipitate a similar development in the audience. It was for this reason that Grotowski often chose to base productions on works based on ancient narratives. For he believed that they 'embodied myths and images powerful and universal enough to function as archetypes, which could penetrate beneath the apparently divisive and individual structure of the Western psyche, and evoke a spontaneous, collective, internal response'.\nJames Roose-Evans states that Grotowski's theatre 'speaks directly to the fundamental experience of each person present, to what Jung described as the collective unconscious ... what Grotowski asks of the actor is not that he play the Lady from the Sea or Hamlet, but that he confront these characters within himself and offer the result of that encounter to an audience.\nGrotowski, like Hart, did not consider the dramatic text or script to be primary in this process, but believed that the text 'becomes theatre only through the actors' use of it, that is to say, thanks to intonations, to the association of sounds, to the musicality of language'. Grotowski thus pursued the possibility of creating 'ideograms' made up of 'sounds and gestures' which 'evoke associations in the psyche of the audience'. But, for Grotowski, as for Hart, there was, between the psyche's reservoir of images and the bodily and vocal expression of that imagery, a series of inhibitions, resistances and blocks, which his acting exercises set out to remove. Many of the acting exercises and rehearsal techniques developed by Grotowski were designed to removing these personal obstacles, which prevented the physical and vocal expression of this imagery, and Grotowski proposed that such a training process 'leads to a liberation from complexes in much the same way as psychoanalytic therapy'."}
{"id": "53521", "revid": "5067238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53521", "title": "Morris worm", "text": "1988 Internet worm\nThe Morris worm or Internet worm of November 2, 1988, is one of the oldest computer worms distributed via the Internet, and the first to gain significant mainstream media attention. It resulted in the first felony conviction in the US under the 1986 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. It was written by Robert Tappan Morris, a graduate student at Cornell University, and launched on 8:30 p.m. November 2, 1988, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology network.\nArchitecture.\nThe worm's creator, Robert Tappan Morris, is the son of cryptographer Robert Morris, who worked at the NSA. A friend of Morris said that he created the worm simply to see if it could be done, and released it from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to avoid the worm being traced directly back to Cornell, where he was a Ph.D. student at the time. \nClifford Stoll, author of \"The Cuckoo's Egg\", wrote that \"Rumors have it that [Morris] worked with a friend or two at Harvard's computing department (Harvard student Paul Graham sent him mail asking for 'Any news on the brilliant project')\".\nThe worm exploited several vulnerabilities of targeted systems, including:\nThe worm exploited weak passwords, such as words used by the spelling checker and passwords using simple patterns like username, emanresu, or usernameusername. Morris's exploits became generally obsolete due to decommissioning rsh (normally disabled on untrusted networks), fixes to sendmail and finger, widespread network filtering, and improved awareness of weak passwords.\nThough Morris said that he did not intend for the worm to be actively destructive, instead seeking to merely highlight the weaknesses present in many networks of the time, a consequence of Morris's coding resulted in the worm being more damaging and spreadable than originally planned. It was initially programmed to check each computer to determine if the infection was already present, but Morris believed that some system administrators might counter this by instructing the computer to report a false positive. Instead, he programmed the worm to copy itself 14% of the time, regardless of the status of infection on the computer. This resulted in a computer potentially being infected multiple times, with each additional infection slowing the machine down to unusability. This had the same effect as a fork bomb, and crashed the computer several times. \nThe main body of the worm can infect only DEC VAX machines running 4BSD, alongside Sun-3 systems. A portable C \"grappling hook\" component of the worm was used to download the main body parts, and the grappling hook runs on other systems, loading them down and making them peripheral victims.\nReplication rate.\nBy instructing the worm to replicate itself regardless of a computer's reported infection status, Morris transformed the worm from a potentially harmless intellectual and computing exercise into a viral denial-of-service attack. Morris's inclusion of the rate of copy within the worm was inspired by Michael Rabin's mantra of \"randomization\". \nThe resulting level of replication proved excessive, with the worm spreading rapidly, infecting some computers several times. Rabin would eventually comment that Morris \"should have tried it on a simulator first\".\nEffects.\nDuring the Morris appeal process, the US court of appeals estimated the cost of removing the virus from each installation was in the range of $200\u2013$53,000. Possibly based on these numbers, Stoll, a systems administrator known for discovering and subsequently tracking the hacker Markus Hess three years earlier, estimated for the US Government Accountability Office that the total economic impact was between $100,000 and $10,000,000. Stoll helped fight the worm, writing in 1989 that \"I surveyed the network, and found that two thousand computers were infected within fifteen hours. These machines were dead in the water\u2014useless until disinfected. And removing the virus often took two days.\" Stoll commented that the worm showed the danger of monoculture, because \"If all the systems on the ARPANET ran Berkeley Unix, the virus would have disabled all fifty thousand of them.\"\nIt is usually reported that around 6,000 major UNIX machines were infected by the Morris worm. Graham claimed, \"I was there when this statistic was cooked up, and this was the recipe: someone guessed that there were about 60,000 computers attached to the Internet, and that the worm might have infected ten percent of them\". Stoll estimated that \"only a couple thousand\" computers were affected.\nThe Internet was partitioned for several days, as regional networks disconnected from the NSFNet backbone and from each other to prevent recontamination while cleaning their own networks.\nThe Morris worm prompted DARPA to fund the establishment of the CERT/CC at Carnegie Mellon University, giving experts a central point for coordinating responses to network emergencies. Gene Spafford also created the Phage mailing list to coordinate a response to the emergency.\nMorris was tried and convicted of violating United States Code Title18 (\u00a0https://), the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, in \"United States v. Morris\". After appeals, he was sentenced to three years' probation, 400 hours of community service, and a fine of US$ plus the costs of his supervision. The total fine ran to $13,326, which included a $10,000 fine, $50 special assessment, and $3,276 cost of probation oversight.\nThe Morris worm has sometimes been referred to as the \"Great Worm\", named after the devastating \"Great Worms\" of Tolkien. The Morris worm had a devastating effect on the Internet at that time, both in overall system downtime and in psychological impact on the perception of security and reliability of the Internet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53523", "revid": "48546149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53523", "title": "Subject", "text": "Subject ( \"lying beneath\") may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53525", "revid": "14264656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53525", "title": "GameCube", "text": "Video game console by Nintendo\nThe is a home video game console developed and marketed by Nintendo. It was released in Japan on September 14, 2001, in North America on November 18, 2001, in Europe on May 3, 2002, in Australia on May 17, 2002, and in South Korea on December 14, 2002. It is the successor to the Nintendo 64. As a sixth-generation console, the GameCube primarily competed with Sony's PlayStation 2, Sega's Dreamcast, and Microsoft's Xbox.\nNintendo began developing the GameCube in 1998 after entering a partnership with ArtX to design a graphics processing unit. The console was formally announced under the codename \"Dolphin\" the following year and was released in 2001 as the GameCube. It is based on PowerPC. It is Nintendo's first console to use its own optical discs instead of ROM cartridges, supplemented by writable memory cards for saved games. Unlike its competitors, it is solely focused on gaming and does not play mass media like DVD or CD. The console supports limited online gaming for a few games via a GameCube broadband or modem adapter and can connect to a Game Boy Advance with a link cable for exclusive in-game features using the handheld as a second screen and controller. The GameCube supports e-Reader cards to unlock special features in a few games. The Game Boy Player add-on runs Game Boy, Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance cartridge games.\nReception of the GameCube was generally positive. It was praised for its controller and high quality games library, but was criticized for its lack of multimedia features and lack of third party support compared to its competitors. Its top-selling games include \"Super Mario Sunshine\", \"Super Smash Bros. Melee\", \"Star Fox Adventures\", \"Metroid Prime\", ', \"Pikmin\", ', \"Animal Crossing\", and \"Luigi's Mansion\". Nintendo sold 21.74 million GameCube units worldwide, much fewer than anticipated, and discontinued the GameCube worldwide in February 2007. It was succeeded by the Wii in late 2006.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nIn 1997, graphics hardware design company ArtX was launched with twenty engineers who had previously worked at SGI. ArtX was led by Wei Yen, who had been SGI's head of Nintendo Operations and of Project Reality, which from 1993 to 1996 had scaled down SGI's supercomputer design to become the Nintendo 64.\nDevelopment.\nIn May 1998, ArtX entered into a partnership with Nintendo to undertake the complete design of the system logic and graphics processor, codenamed \"Flipper,\" for Nintendo's sixth-generation video game console. The console went through a series of codenames, including N2000, Star Cube, and Nintendo Advance. On May 12, 1999, Nintendo publicly announced the console during a press conference, giving it the codename \"Dolphin\" and positioning it as the successor to the Nintendo 64. This announcement also revealed strategic partnerships with IBM for the creation of Dolphin's PowerPC-based CPU, codenamed \"Gekko,\" and with Panasonic (Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.) for the development of its DVD drive and other Dolphin-based devices. Following this announcement, Nintendo began providing development kits to game developers, including Rare and Retro Studios.\nIn April 2000, ArtX was acquired by ATI, whereupon the Flipper graphics processor design had already been mostly completed by ArtX and was not overtly influenced by ATI. In total, ArtX cofounder Greg Buchner recalled that their portion of the console's hardware design timeline had arced from inception in 1998 to completion in 2000. Of the ArtX acquisition, an ATI spokesperson said, \"ATI now becomes a major supplier to the game console market via Nintendo. The Dolphin platform is reputed to be king of the hill in terms of graphics and video performance with 128-bit architecture.\"\nThe console was announced as the GameCube at a press conference in Japan on August 25, 2000, abbreviated as both \"NGC\" and \"GC\" in Japan and \"GCN\" in Europe and North America. Nintendo unveiled its software lineup for the console at E3 2001, focusing on fifteen launch games, including \"Luigi's Mansion\" and \"\". Several games originally scheduled to launch with the console were delayed. It is also the first Nintendo home console since the Famicom not to have a \"Mario\" launch game.\nLong before the console's launch, Nintendo had developed and patented an early prototype of motion controls for the GameCube, with which developer Factor 5 had experimented for its launch games. Greg Thomas, Sega of America's VP of Development said, \"What does worry me is Dolphin's sensory controllers [which are rumored to include microphones and headphone jacks] because there's an example of someone thinking about something different.\" These motion control concepts would not be deployed to consumers for several years, until the Wii Remote.\nPrior to the GameCube's release, Nintendo focused resources on the launch of the Game Boy Advance, a handheld game console and successor to the original Game Boy and Game Boy Color. As a result, several games originally destined for the Nintendo 64 console were postponed to become early releases on the GameCube. Concurrently, Nintendo was developing GameCube software provisioning future connectivity with the Game Boy Advance. Certain games, such as \"\" and \"Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles\", can use the handheld as a secondary screen and controller when connected to the console via a link cable.\nNintendo began its marketing campaign with the catchphrase \"The Nintendo Difference\" at its E3 2001 reveal. The goal was to distinguish itself from the competition as an entertainment company. Later advertisements have the slogan, \"Born to Play\", and game ads feature a rotating cube animation that morphs into a GameCube logo and end with a voice whispering, \"GameCube\". On May 21, 2001, the console's launch price of US$ was announced, $ lower than that of the PlayStation 2 and Xbox. Nintendo spent $76 million marketing the GameCube.\nIn September 2020, leaked documents included Nintendo's plans for a GameCube model that would be both portable with a built-in display and dockable to a TV, similar to its later console the Nintendo Switch. Other leaks suggest plans for a GameCube successor, codenamed Tako, with HD graphics and slots for SD and memory cards, apparently resulting from a partnership with ATI and scheduled for release in 2005. Ultimately, Tako was abandoned for Revolution (later revealed and released as the Wii in 2006) which was a non-HD console with motion controls, although Nintendo would later work on Project Cafe which was an HD console that would become the Wii U, released later in 2012.\nRelease.\nThe GameCube was launched in Japan on September 14, 2001. Approximately 500,000 units were shipped in time to retailers. The console was scheduled to launch two months later in North America on November 5, 2001, but the date was pushed back in an effort to increase the number of available units. The console eventually launched in North America on November 18, 2001, with over 700,000 units shipped to the region. Other regions followed suit the following year beginning with Europe in the second quarter of 2002.\nOn April 22, 2002, veteran third-party Nintendo console developer Factor 5 announced its 3D audio software development kit titled MusyX. In collaboration with Dolby Laboratories, MusyX provides motion-based surround sound encoded as Dolby Pro Logic II.\nMarket share.\nThroughout the mid-2000s, GameCube hardware sales remained far behind its direct competitor, the PlayStation 2, and slightly behind the Xbox, though there were brief periods when the console would outsell both. The console's family-friendly appeal and lack of support from certain third-party developers skewed the GameCube toward a younger market, which was a minority of the gaming population during the sixth-generation. Many third-party games popular with teenagers or adults, such as the blockbuster \"Grand Theft Auto\" series and several key first-person shooters, skipped the GameCube entirely in favor of the PlayStation 2 and Xbox. However, many gaming journalists and analysts noted that Nintendo's primary focus on younger audiences, and its family-friendly image, was the biggest advantage and disadvantage at a time when video games were aimed at more mature audiences. Nintendo was successful with games aimed at a more mature audience.\nAs of \u00a02003[ [update]], the GameCube had a 13% market share, tying with the Xbox in sales but far below the 60% of the PlayStation 2. However, despite slow sales and tough competition, Nintendo's position improved by 2003 and 2004. The American market share for the GameCube had gone up from 19% to 37% in one year alone due to price cuts and high-quality games. One article stated that by early 2004, the GameCube had 39% market share in America. By Christmas of 2003, Nintendo of America's president, George Harrison, reported that the company's price cuts down to just under $100 quadrupled sales in the American market. GameCube's profitability never reached that of the PlayStation 2 or Game Boy Advance. However, it was more profitable than the Xbox.\nGameCube's first two years had slow sales and struggles, and by 2004 and 2005 vastly improved to a 32% share of the hardware market in Europe. Due to price drops, which saved it in the American markets, and high-quality games from various developers, such as \"Pok\u00e9mon Colosseum\" and \"Resident Evil 4\", the GameCube improved to put Xbox down to third place. The top three European countries for GameCube success included the United Kingdom, France, and Germany, and modestly in Spain and Italy. Though falling behind the PlayStation 2 in Europe, the GameCube was successful and profitable there.\nDiscontinuation.\nNintendo launched the Wii, the home console successor to the GameCube, on November 19, 2006, in North America and in December 2006 in other regions. In February 2007, Nintendo announced that it had ceased first-party support for the GameCube and that the console had been discontinued, as it was shifting its manufacturing and development efforts towards the Wii and Nintendo DS. GameCube controllers, game discs, and certain accessories continued to be supported via the Wii's backward compatibility, although these features were removed in later iterations of the Wii console. The final game officially released on the GameCube was \"Madden NFL 08\", on August 14, 2007. Several games originally developed for the GameCube were either reworked for a Wii release, such as \"Super Paper Mario\", or released on both consoles, such as the Wii launch game \"\".\nSupport for GameCube controllers continued via backward compatibility on Nintendo's next consoles, the Wii U and Nintendo Switch, with the GameCube controller adapter in 2014's \"Super Smash Bros. for Wii U\" and 2018's \"Super Smash Bros. Ultimate\". While on the Wii U, the controller was only allowed to be used in \"Super Smash Bros.\", the Nintendo Switch recognizes it as a Pro Controller. Thus, the GameCube Controller can be used in any game where the Pro Controller is recognized. However, due to the GameCube controller lacking motion controls and some buttons, it may not be fully playable in some Switch games.\nHardware.\nHoward Cheng, technical director of Nintendo technology development, said the company's goal was to select a \"simple RISC architecture\" to help speed the development of games by making it easier on software developers. IGN reported that the system was \"designed from the get-go to attract third-party developers by offering more power at a cheaper price. Nintendo's design document for the console specifies that cost is of utmost importance, followed by space.\" Hardware partner ArtX's Vice President Greg Buchner stated that their guiding thought on the console's hardware design was to target the developers rather than the players, and to \"look into a crystal ball\" and discern \"what's going to allow the Miyamoto-sans of the world to develop the best games\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe thought about the developers as our main customers. In particular, for GameCube, we spent three years working with Nintendo of America and with all sorts of developers, trying to understand the challenges, needs, and problems they face. First among these is the rising cost of development. The GameCube can see high performance without too much trouble; it isn't a quirky design, but a very clean one. It was important we didn't require jumping through hoops for high performance to be achieved. On top of that, it is rich in features, and we worked to include a dream group of technical features that developers requested.\nGreg Buchner, ArtX's Vice President\nInitiating the GameCube's design in 1998, Nintendo partnered with ArtX (then acquired by ATI Technologies during development) for the system logic and the GPU, and with IBM for the CPU. IBM designed a 32-bit PowerPC-based processor with custom architectural extensions for the next-generation console, known as Gekko, which runs at 486\u00a0MHz and features a floating point unit (FPU) capable of a total throughput of 1.9\u00a0GFLOPS and a peak of 10.5\u00a0GFLOPS. Described as \"an extension of the IBM PowerPC architecture\", the Gekko CPU is based on the PowerPC 750CXe with IBM's 0.18\u03bcm CMOS technology, which features copper interconnects. Codenamed Flipper, the GPU runs at 162\u00a0MHz, and in addition to graphics manages other tasks through its audio and input/output (I/O) processors.\nThe GameCube is Nintendo's first console to not use primarily cartridge media, following the Famicom Data Recorder, Famicom Disk System, SNES-CD, and 64DD which represent past explorations of complementary storage technologies. The GameCube introduced a proprietary miniDVD optical disc format for up to 1.5\u00a0GB of data. It was designed by Matsushita Electric Industrial (now Panasonic Corporation) with a proprietary copy-protection scheme unlike the Content Scramble System (CSS) in standard DVDs. The size is sufficient for most games, although a few multi-platform games require an extra disc, higher video compression, or removal of content. By comparison, the PlayStation 2 and Xbox use CDs and DVDs up to 8.5\u00a0GB.\nLike its predecessor, the Nintendo 64, GameCube models were produced in several different color motifs. The system launched in \"Indigo\", the primary color shown in advertising and on the logo, and in \"Jet Black\". One year later, Nintendo released a \"Platinum\" GameCube, which uses a silver color scheme for both the console and controller. A \"Spice\" orange-colored console was eventually released only in Japan, though that scheme is only on controllers released in other countries. A Platinum \"\" console was released in 2005 only in North America with a custom faceplate and a standard Platinum controller.\nNintendo developed stereoscopic 3D technology for the GameCube, supported by one launch game, \"Luigi's Mansion\". However, the feature never reached production. 3D televisions were not widespread, and it was deemed that compatible displays and crystals for the add-on accessories would be too cost-prohibitive for the consumer. Two audio Easter eggs can be invoked when the power is activated with the \"Z\" button on the Player 1 controller held down, or with four controllers connected and holding down the \"Z\" buttons.\nThe GameCube features two memory card ports for saving game data. Nintendo released three memory card options: Memory Card 59 in gray (512\u00a0KB), Memory Card 251 in black (2\u00a0MB), and Memory Card 1019 in white (8\u00a0MB). These are often advertised in megabits instead: 4\u00a0Mb, 16\u00a0Mb, and 64\u00a0Mb, respectively. Memory cards with larger capacities were released by third-party manufacturers.\nController.\nNintendo learned from its experiences\u2014both positive and negative\u2014with the Nintendo 64's three-handled controller design and chose a two-handled, \"handlebar\" design for the GameCube. The shape was popularized by Sony's PlayStation controller released in 1994 and its follow-up DualShock series in 1997 with vibration feedback and two analog sticks to improve the 3D experience. Nintendo and Microsoft designed similar features in the controllers for their sixth-generation consoles, but instead of having the analog sticks in parallel, they are staggered by swapping the positions of the directional pad (d-pad) and left analog stick. The GameCube controller features a total of eight buttons, two analog sticks, a d-pad, and a rumble motor. The primary analog stick is on the left with the d-pad located below and closer to the center. On the right are four buttons: a large, green \"A\" button in the center, a smaller red \"B\" button to the left, an \"X\" button to the right, and a \"Y\" button at the top. Below and to the inside is a yellow \"C\" analog stick, which often serves a variety of in-game functions, such as controlling the camera angle. The Start/Pause button is located in the middle, and the rumble motor is encased within the center of the controller.\nOn the top are two \"pressure-sensitive\" trigger buttons marked \"L\" and \"R\". Each essentially provides two functions: one analog and one digital. As the trigger is depressed, it emits an increasing analog signal. Once fully depressed, the trigger \"clicks\" with a digital signal that a game can use for a separate function. There is also a purple, digital button on the right side marked \"Z\".\nThe A button has a uniquely prominent size and placement, having been the primary action button in past Nintendo controller designs. The rubberized analog stick, within the overall button orientation, addresses \"Nintendo thumb\" pain.\nIn 2002, Nintendo introduced the WaveBird Wireless Controller, the first wireless gamepad developed by a first-party console manufacturer. The RF-based wireless controller is similar in design to the standard controller. It communicates with the GameCube with a wireless receiver dongle. Powered by two AA batteries, it lacks vibration.\nCompatibility.\nThe GameCube uses GameCube Game Discs, and the Game Boy Player accessory runs Game Pak cartridges for the Game Boy, Game Boy Color, and Game Boy Advance. The original version of the GameCube's successor, the Wii, supports backward compatibility with GameCube controllers, memory cards, and games but not the Game Boy Player or other hardware attachments. However, later revisions of the Wii\u2014including the \"Family Edition\" released in 2011 and the Wii Mini released in 2012\u2014do not support any GameCube hardware or software.\nPanasonic Q.\nThe is a hybrid version of the GameCube with a standard DVD player, developed by Panasonic in a strategic alliance with Nintendo to develop the optical drive for the original GameCube hardware. Its stainless steel case is completely revised with a DVD-sized front-loading tray, a backlit LCD screen with playback controls, and a carrying handle like the GameCube. Announced by Panasonic on October 19, 2001, it was released exclusively in Japan on December 14 at a suggested retail price of \u00a539,800; however, low sales resulted in Panasonic announcing the discontinuation of the Q on December 18, 2003. The Q supports CDs, DVDs, and GameCube discs but there is virtually no integration between the GameCube and DVD player modes.\nGames.\nIn its lifespan from 2001 to 2007, Nintendo licensed over 600 GameCube games. Nintendo bolstered the console's popularity by creating new franchises, such as \"Pikmin\" and \"Animal Crossing,\" which actually began as a Japanese exclusive on N64, and renewing some that had skipped the Nintendo 64, such as with \"Metroid Prime\". Longer standing franchises include the critically acclaimed ' and \"Super Mario Sunshine\", as well as '. Other Nintendo games are successors to Nintendo 64 games, such as the GameCube's best-selling game, \"Super Smash Bros. Melee\", at more than 7 million copies worldwide, \"F-Zero GX\"; '; \"Mario Party 4\", \"5\", \"6\", and \"7\"; \"Mario Power Tennis\"; and '. Though committed to its software library, Nintendo was still criticized for not releasing enough launch window games and by the release of \"Luigi's Mansion\" instead of a 3D \"Mario\" game.\nNintendo had struggled with its family-friendly image during the late 1990s and most of the 2000s. However, during this period, it released more video games for a mature audience with mostly successful results. While the video game industry was focusing on more mature audiences and online connections, Nintendo regained older players who had gravitated to the PlayStation 2 and Xbox during the early 2000s. Some games aimed at older audiences were critically and financially successful\u2014more than on Dreamcast, and less than on PlayStation 2 and Xbox. Such examples include ', \"Super Smash Bros. Melee\", \"Resident Evil 4\", ', \"Killer7\", \"Star Wars Rogue Squadron II: Rogue Leader\", \"Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles\", \"Resident Evil\" (2002), \"Metroid Prime\", ', \"Soul Calibur II\", \"Resident Evil Zero\", \"F-Zero GX\", \"Star Fox Adventures\", and '. One of the most well-known GameCube games for mature audiences is \"\", which underperformed financially, but garnered critical acclaim and is now regarded as a cult classic.\nThe GameCube is Nintendo's first home console with a system menu, activated by powering on without a valid game disc or by holding down the A button while one is loaded.\nThird-party support.\nEarly in Nintendo's history, the company had achieved considerable success with third-party developer support on the Nintendo Entertainment System and Super NES. Competition from the Sega Genesis and Sony PlayStation in the 1990s changed the market's landscape and reduced Nintendo's ability to obtain exclusive, third-party support on the Nintendo 64. The Nintendo 64 Game Pak cartridge format increased the cost to manufacture software, as opposed to the cheaper, higher-capacity optical discs on PlayStation.\nWith the GameCube, Nintendo intended to reverse the trend as evidenced by the number of third-party games available at launch. The new optical disc format increased game storage capacity significantly and reduced production costs. Successful exclusives include ' from Factor 5, \"Resident Evil 4\" from Capcom, and ' from Konami. Sega discontinued its Dreamcast console to become a third-party developer, porting Dreamcast games such as \"Crazy Taxi\" and \"Sonic Adventure 2\", and developing new franchises, such as \"Super Monkey Ball\". Longtime Nintendo partner Rare, which had developed \"GoldenEye 007\", \"Perfect Dark\", \"Banjo-Kazooie\", \"Conker's Bad Fur Day\", and the \"Donkey Kong Country\" series, released \"Star Fox Adventures\" for GameCube, its final Nintendo game before acquisition by Microsoft in 2002. Several third-party developers were contracted to work on new games for Nintendo franchises, including \"\" (which became a Player's Choice re-release), \"Donkey Konga\" by Namco, and \"Wario World\" from Treasure. Capcom had announced 5 games for the system dubbed the Capcom Five in November 2002, \"Viewtiful Joe\" and \"Resident Evil 4\" were later ported to other systems.\nThird-party GameCube support was some of the most extensive of any Nintendo console predating the Wii. Some third-party developers, such as Midway, Namco, Activision, Konami, Ubisoft, THQ, Disney Interactive Studios, Humongous Entertainment, Electronic Arts, and EA Sports, continued to release GameCube games into 2007. One of the biggest third-party GameCube developers was Sega, which had quit the console hardware market to become a third-party game developer after the failure of the Dreamcast. It partnered with long-time rival Nintendo, and with Microsoft and Sony, to recuperate profits lost from the Dreamcast. Sega was a successful third-party developer since the early 2000s, mostly those for the family market, such as \"Super Monkey Ball\", \"Phantasy Star Online\", \"Sonic Adventure\", \"Sonic Adventure 2: Battle\", and \"Sonic Heroes\".\nOnline gaming.\nNintendo's GameCube did not put heavy focus on online games earlier in the console's life. Only eight GameCube games support network connectivity, five with Internet support and three with local area network (LAN) support. The only Internet capable games released in western territories are three role-playing games (RPGs) in Sega's \"Phantasy Star\" series: \"Phantasy Star Online Episode I &amp; II\", \"Phantasy Star Online Episode I &amp; II Plus\", and '. The official servers were decommissioned in 2007, but players can still connect to fan maintained private servers. Japan received two additional games with Internet capabilities, a cooperative RPG, \"Homeland\" and a baseball game with downloadable content, \"Jikky\u014d Powerful Pro Yaky\u016b 10\". Lastly, three racing games have LAN multiplayer modes: \"1080\u00b0 Avalanche\", \"Kirby Air Ride\", and '. Those can be forced over the Internet with third-party PC software capable of tunneling the GameCube's network traffic.\nOnline play requires an official broadband or modem adapter because the GameCube lacks out of the box network capabilities. Nintendo never commissioned any Internet services for GameCube but allowed other publishers to manage custom online experiences.\nEmulation.\nOn June 5, 2025, select Nintendo GameCube titles were re-released on the Nintendo Classics service as part of the \"Expansion Pack\" tier of Nintendo Switch Online exclusively for the Nintendo Switch 2.\nReception.\nThe GameCube received generally positive reviews following its launch. \"PC Magazine\" praised the overall hardware design and quality of games available at launch. CNET gave an average review rating, noting that though the console lacks a few features offered by its competition, it is relatively inexpensive, has a great controller design, and launched a decent lineup of games. In later reviews, criticism mounted against the console often centering on its overall look and feel, describing it as \"toy-ish\". With poor sales figures and the associated financial harm to Nintendo, a \"Time International\" article called the GameCube an \"unmitigated disaster\".\nRetrospectively, Joystiq compared the GameCube's launch window to its successor, the Wii, noting that the GameCube's \"lack of games\" resulted in a subpar launch, and the console's limited selection of online games damaged its market share in the long run. \"Time International\" concluded that the system had low sales figures, because it lacked \"technical innovations\".\nSales.\nIn Japan, between 280,000 and 300,000 GameCube consoles were sold during the first three days of its sale, out of an initial shipment of 450,000 units. During its launch weekend, $100 million worth of GameCube products were sold in North America. The console was sold out in several stores, faster than initial sales of both of its competitors, the Xbox and the PlayStation 2. Nintendo reported that the most popular launch game is \"Luigi's Mansion\", with more sales at its launch than \"Super Mario 64\" had. Other popular games include ' and '. By early December 2001, 600,000 units had been sold in the US.\nNintendo predicted 50 million GameCube units by 2005, but only sold 22 million GameCube units worldwide during its lifespan, placing it slightly behind the Xbox's 24 million (though it did manage to outsell the Xbox in Japan), and well behind the PlayStation 2's 155 million. \"Ars Technica\" articles from 2006 showed and a 2020 book state that Nintendo officially sold 24 million GameCube consoles worldwide, and one article from \"Seeking Alpha\" states that the GameCube sold 26 million consoles worldwide. Its sales exceeded that of the Xbox 360 in Japan. The GameCube's predecessor, the Nintendo 64, also outperformed it at nearly 33 million units. It also exceeded the Dreamcast, which yielded 9.13 million units. In September 2009, IGN ranked the GameCube 16th in its list of best gaming consoles of all time, placing it behind all three of its sixth-generation competitors: the PlayStation 2 (3rd), the Dreamcast (8th), and the Xbox (11th). As of March 31, 2003, 9.55 million GameCube units had been sold worldwide, behind Nintendo's initial goal of 10 million consoles. Many of Nintendo's own first-party games, such as \"Super Smash Bros. Melee\", \"Pok\u00e9mon Colosseum\", and \"\", had strong sales, though this did not typically benefit third-party developers or directly drive sales of their games. However, at the same time, these first-party games, and second-party and third-party games, elevated the GameCube.\nSales of many cross-platform games\u2014such as sports franchises released by Electronic Arts\u2014were far below their PlayStation 2 and Xbox counterparts, eventually prompting some developers to scale back or completely cease support for the GameCube. Exceptions include Sega's family friendly \"Sonic Adventure 2\" and \"Super Monkey Ball\", which reportedly yielded more sales on GameCube than most of the company's games on the PlayStation 2 and Xbox. In June 2003, Acclaim Entertainment CEO Rod Cousens said that the company would no longer support the GameCube, and criticized it as a system \"that don't deliver profits\". Acclaim would later rescind his claims, by saying the company would elevate support for the system. This decision was made unclear after the company filed for bankruptcy in August 2004. In September 2003, Eidos Interactive announced to end support for the GameCube, as the publisher was losing money from developing for Nintendo's console. This led to several games in development being canceled for the system. Eidos's CEO Mike McGravey would say that the GameCube was a \"declining business\". However, after the company's purchase by the SCi Entertainment Group in 2005, Eidos resumed development for the system and released ' and '.\nIn March 2003, British retailer Dixons removed all GameCube consoles, accessories and games from its stores. That same month, another British retailer Argos, cut the price of the GameCube in their stores to \u00a378.99, which was more than \u00a350 cheaper than Nintendo's SRP for the console at the time. However, in October of that year, they did eventually restock their supply of consoles after a price drop was ordered which caused the console sales to outpace the PlayStation 2 for a week.\nWith sales sagging and millions of unsold consoles in stock, Nintendo halted GameCube production for the first nine months of 2003 to reduce surplus units. Sales rebounded slightly after a price drop to US$99.99 on September 24, 2003 and the release of \"\" bundle. A demo disc, the \"GameCube Preview Disc\", was also released in a bundle in 2003. Beginning with this period, GameCube sales continued to be steady, particularly in Japan, but the GameCube remained in third place in worldwide sales during the sixth-generation era because of weaker sales performance elsewhere, though its fortunes would change for the better in America and Europe.\nIwata forecasted to investors that the company would sell 50 million GameCube units worldwide by March 2005, but by the end of 2006, it had only sold 21.74 million\u2014fewer than half. However, it had the highest attach rate of any Nintendo console at 9.59 and was profitable, even more than Xbox with higher sales rates.\nLegacy.\nMany games that debuted on the GameCube, including the \"Pikmin\" series, \"Chibi-Robo!\", \"Metroid Prime\", and \"Luigi's Mansion\" became popular and profitable Nintendo franchises or subseries.\nGameCube controllers have limited support on Wii U and Switch, to play \"Super Smash Bros. for Wii U\", and \"Super Smash Bros. Ultimate\" respectively, via a USB adapter. While on the Wii U the controller was only allowed to be used in \"Super Smash Bros.\", the Nintendo Switch recognizes it as a Pro Controller. Thus, the GameCube Controller can be used in any game where the Pro Controller is recognized. However, due to the GameCube controller lacking motion controls and some buttons, it may not be fully playable in some Switch games.\nRegarding concerns about the correlation between violence and video games, a 2009 study by Iowa State University found that certain games like \"Super Mario Sunshine\" and \"Chibi-Robo!\", which were GameCube exclusives, would help players learn positive skills about helping others, empathy, and cooperation. The game \"Super Monkey Ball\", which was a GameCube exclusive, could help surgeons perform laparoscopic surgery better than surgeons who do not play video games.\n\"GamesRadar+\" ranked it 11th on their list of The 20 best video game consoles and hardware of all time in 2021. \"Den of Geek\" placed it at number 12 on their list of The 25 Best Video Game Consoles Ever, Ranked, in 2023.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53528", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53528", "title": "David Livingstone", "text": "British colonialist and missionary to Africa (1813\u20131873)\n David Livingstone (; 19 March 1813\u00a0\u2013 1 May 1873) was a Scottish doctor, Congregationalist, pioneer Christian missionary with the London Missionary Society, and an explorer in Africa. Livingstone was married to Mary Moffat Livingstone, from the prominent 18th-century Moffat missionary family. Livingstone came to have a mythic status as a Protestant missionary martyr, working-class \"rags-to-riches\" inspirational story, scientific investigator and explorer, imperial reformer, anti-slavery crusader, and advocate of British commercial and colonial expansion. As a result, he became one of the most popular British heroes of the late 19th-century Victorian era.\nLivingstone's fame as an explorer and his obsession with learning the sources of the Nile was founded on the belief that if he could solve that age-old mystery, his fame would give him the influence to end the East African Arab\u2013Swahili slave trade. \"The Nile sources\", he told a friend, \"are valuable only as a means of opening my mouth with power among men. It is this power [with] which I hope to remedy an immense evil.\" His subsequent exploration of the central African watershed was the culmination of the classic period of European geographical discovery and colonial penetration of Africa. At the same time, his missionary travels, \"disappearance\" and eventual death in Africa\u200d\u2014\u200cand subsequent glorification as a posthumous national hero in 1874\u200d\u2014\u200cled to the founding of several major central African Christian missionary initiatives carried forward in the era of the European \"Scramble for Africa\", during which almost all of Africa fell under European rule for decades.\nEarly life.\nLivingstone was born on 19 March 1813 in the mill town of Blantyre, Scotland, in a tenement building for the workers of a cotton factory on the banks of the River Clyde under the bridge crossing into Bothwell. He was the second of seven children born to Neil Livingstone and his wife Agnes (n\u00e9e Hunter).\nDavid was employed at the age of ten in the cotton mill of Henry Monteith &amp; Co. in Blantyre Works. He and his brother John worked 14-hour days as piecers, tying broken cotton threads on the spinning machines.\nNeil Livingstone was a Sunday school teacher and teetotaller who handed out Christian tracts on his travels as a door-to-door tea salesman. He read books on theology, travel, and missionary enterprises extensively. This rubbed off on the young David, who became an avid reader, but he also loved scouring the countryside for animal, plant, and geological specimens in local limestone quarries. Neil feared that science books were undermining Christianity and attempted to force his son to read nothing but theology, but David's deep interest in nature and science led him to investigate the relationship between religion and science. In 1832, he read \"Philosophy of a Future State\", written by Thomas Dick, and he found the rationale that he needed to reconcile faith and science and, apart from the Bible, this book was perhaps his greatest philosophical influence.\nOther significant influences in his early life were Thomas Burke, a Blantyre evangelist, and David Hogg, his Sunday school teacher. At age fifteen, David left the Church of Scotland for a local Congregational church, influenced by preachers like Ralph Wardlaw, who denied predestinarian limitations on salvation. Influenced by revivalistic teachings in the United States, Livingstone entirely accepted the proposition put by Charles Finney, Professor of Theology at Oberlin College, Ohio, that \"the Holy Spirit is open to all who ask it\". For Livingstone, this meant a release from the fear of eternal damnation. Livingstone's reading of missionary Karl G\u00fctzlaff's \"Appeal to the Churches of Britain and America on behalf of China\" enabled him to persuade his father that medical study could advance religious ends.\nLivingstone's experiences in H. Monteith's Blantyre cotton mill were also important from ages 10 to 26, first as a piecer and later as a spinner. This monotonous work was necessary to support his impoverished family, but it taught him persistence, endurance, and a natural empathy with all who labour, as expressed by lines that he used to hum from the egalitarian Robert Burns song: \"When man to man, the world o'er/Shall brothers be for a' that\".\nEducation.\nLivingstone attended Blantyre village school, along with the few other mill children with the endurance to do so despite their 14-hour workday (6 am\u20138 pm). Having a family with a strong, continuing commitment to study reinforced his education.\nAt the age of 21, he was excited by a pamphlet his father got from the church setting out G\u00fctzlaff's call for missionaries to China, with the new concept that missionaries should be trained as medical doctors. His father was persuaded and, like many other students in Scotland, Livingstone was to support himself, with the agreement of the mill management, by working at his old job from Easter to October, outwith term time. He joined Anderson's University, Glasgow, in 1836, studying medicine and chemistry, as well as attending theology lectures by the anti-slavery campaigner Richard Wardlaw at the Congregational Church College, where he may also have studied Greek.\nTo enter medical school, he needed some knowledge of Latin, and was tutored by a local Roman Catholic man, Daniel Gallagher (later a priest, founder of St Simon's, Partick). Livingstone worked hard, got a good grounding in science and medicine, and made lifelong friends including Andrew Buchanan and James Young.\nThe London Missionary Society (LMS) was at the time the major organisation in the country for missionary work, and unlike others was open to Congregationalists. He applied to the LMS in October 1837, and in January was sent questions which he answered. He got no reply until he was invited to two interviews in August 1838. He was then accepted as a probationary candidate, and given initial training at Ongar, Essex, as the introduction to studies to become a minister within the Congregational Union serving under the LMS, rather than the more basic course for an artisan missionary. At Ongar, he and six other students had tuition in Greek, Latin, Hebrew and theology from the Reverend Richard Cecil, who in January 1839 assessed that, despite \"heaviness of manner\" and \"rusticity\", Livingstone had \"sense and quiet vigour\", good temper and substantial character \"so I do not like the thought of him being rejected.\" A month later, he still thought Livingstone \"hardly ready\" to go on to theological studies at Cheshunt College, and \"worthy but remote from brilliant\". In June 1839 the LMS directors accepted Livingstone, and agreed to his request to continue studying with Cecil at Ongar until the end of the year, then have LMS support for medical studies in London.\nTo gain necessary clinical training he continued his medical studies at the Charing Cross Hospital Medical School, with his courses covering medical practice, midwifery, and botany.\nHe qualified as a licentiate of the Faculty (now Royal College) of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow on 16 November 1840 (in 1857 he was made an Honorary Fellow of the Faculty). On 20 November 1840 Livingstone was ordained a minister of the church, as was another missionary to South Africa, William Ross, in a service at the Albion Chapel, Finsbury. The ordination service was conducted by Cecil and J. J. Freeman.\nVision for Africa.\nThough Livingstone had responded to G\u00fctzlaff's call for missionaries to China, the looming First Opium War made the LMS directors cautious about sending recruits there. When he asked to extend his probationary training at Ongar, Cecil told him of their wish that he should be employed in the West Indies \"in preference to South Africa\". On 2 July 1839 he wrote to the LMS directors that the West Indies was by then well served by doctors, and he had always been attracted to other parts of the world rather than a settled pastorate. With LMS agreement, he continued to get theological tuition from Cecil until the end of the year, then resumed medical studies.\nOn beginning his clinical training in January 1840, he returned to Mrs. Sewell's missionary boarding house in Aldersgate, where he had stayed previously when in London.\nOthers staying there were visited occasionally by the missionary Robert Moffat, who was then in England with his family to publicise the work of his LMS mission at Kuruman in South Africa. Livingstone questioned him repeatedly about Africa, and as Moffat later recalled; \"By and by he asked me whether I thought he would do for Africa. I said I believed he would, if he would not go to an old station, but would advance to unoccupied ground, specifying the vast plain to the north, where I had sometimes seen, in the morning sun, the smoke of a thousand villages, where no missionary had ever been.\"\nHe was excited by Moffat's vision of expanding missionary work to the north of Bechuanaland, and by the hotly debated topic of Christianity and commerce. The LMS missionary John Philip, after discussion with the abolitionist Fowell Buxton, published \"Researches in South Africa\" in 1828, proposing that Christianity would always bring \"civilisation\" including free trade and free labour. This argument was reinforced for Livingstone when he attended the Exeter Hall meeting of 1 June 1840 where Buxton powerfully made the case that the African slave trade would be ended if chiefs, instead of having to sell slaves, could obtain desired European goods through \"legitimate trade\", its effect augmented by Christian missions preaching the gospel and introducing school education.\nMission stations.\nLivingstone left London on 17 November 1840, passenger on a sailing brig bound for the Cape of Good Hope, along with two other LMS missionaries: Ross, who had been ordained at the same service as him, and Ross's wife. During the long voyage he studied Dutch and the Tswana language, and the captain gave him extensive tuition in navigation. At Rio de Janeiro, unlike the other two, he ventured ashore and was impressed by the cathedral and scenery, but not by the drunkenness of British and American sailors, so he gave them tracts in a dockside bar.\nOn 15 March 1841 the ship arrived at Simon's Bay, and for a month while it unloaded and loaded, the three stayed at Cape Town with Mr and Mrs Philip. As resident director of the LMS, Philip had continued their policy that all people were equal before God and in law, leading to disputes with Boers, and with British settlers as Philip held that Xhosa people were not to blame for the Xhosa Wars over extending the Cape Colony. Missionary factions disagreed over this, and over his emphasis on missionary work among Griqua people of the colony, while others like Moffatt wanted more focus on new areas. There were also tensions between artisan missionaries engaged for lay expertise, and ordained missionaries.\nThe ship took Livingstone and the Rosses on to Algoa Bay, from 19 May to 31 July they were on the long trek by ox-cart to the Kuruman Mission. The Moffats had not yet returned from Britain, and he immersed himself in Tswana life. From September to late December he trekked with the artisan missionary Roger Edwards, who had been at Kuruman since 1830 and had been told by Moffat to investigate potential for a new station. They visited and discussed the area called Mabotsa, Botswana, near Zeerust, North West Province, South Africa.\nIn 1842 Livingstone went on two treks with African companions; the principals were mission members Paul and Mebalwe, a deacon. In June 1843, Edwards got LMS approval to set up a mission station with his wife at Mabotsa. Livingstone moved there by agreement, and joined them in the physical work of building facilities. He wrote to tell LMS secretary Arthur Tidman, saying he would be delighted to call Mabotsa \"the centre of the sphere of my labours\", but would try to hold himself \"in readiness to go anywhere, provided it be forward\".\nThe Moffats, accompanied by two new missionary families, reached the Vaal River in January 1844. Livingstone rode out to meet them there, and then sat in the Moffats' ox-cart talking with Robert for hours during the seventeen or eighteen days it took to get home to Kuruman. For the first time, he met their daughter Mary, who had been born and brought up in Africa.\nLions often attacked the herds of the Mabotsa villagers, and on 16 February, Mebalwe and Livingstone joined them defending sheep. Livingstone got a clear shot at a large lion, but while he was re-loading it attacked, crushing his left arm, and forced him to the ground. His life was saved by Mebalwe diverting its attention by trying to shoot the lion. He too got bitten. A man who tried spearing it was attacked just before it dropped dead.\nLivingstone's broken bone, even though inexpertly set by himself and Edwards, bonded strongly. He went for recuperation to Kuruman, where he was tended by Moffat's daughter Mary, and they became engaged. His arm healed, enabling him to shoot and lift heavy weights, though it remained a source of much suffering for the rest of his life, and he was not able to lift the arm higher than his shoulder.\nLivingstone and Mary were married on 9 January 1845.\nLivingstone was obliged to leave his first mission at Mabotsa in Botswana in 1845 after irreconcilable differences emerged between him and his fellow missionary, Rogers Edwards, and because the Bakgatla were proving indifferent to the Gospel. He abandoned Chonuane, his next mission, in 1847 because of drought and the proximity of the Boers and his desire \"to move on to the regions beyond\". At Kolobeng Mission Livingstone converted Chief Sechele in 1849 after two years of patient persuasion. Only a few months later Sechele lapsed.\nExploration of southern and central Africa.\nTo improve his Tswana language skills and find locations to set up mission stations, Livingstone made journeys far to the north of Kolobeng with William Cotton Oswell. In 1849 they crossed the Kalahari Desert and reached Lake Ngami. In 1850, he was recognised by the Royal Geographical Society which presented him a chronometer watch for 'his journey to the great lake of Ngami'. He heard of a river which could potentially become a \"Highway\" to the coast, and in August 1851 they reached the Zambezi which he hoped would be a \"key to the Interior\".\nIn 1852, after sending his family to Britain, Livingstone travelled north to the village of Linyanti on the Zambezi river, located roughly midway between the east and west coast of the continent, where Sekeletu, chief of the Kololo, granted Livingstone authority as a nduna to lead a joint investigation of trade routes to the coast, with 27 Kololo warriors acting as interpreters and guides. They reached the Portuguese city of Luanda on the Atlantic in May 1854 after profound difficulties and the near-death of Livingstone from fever. Livingstone realized the route would be too difficult for future traders, so he retraced the journey back to Linyanti. Then with 114 Kololo men, loaned by the same chief, he set off east down the Zambezi. On this leg he became the first European to see the Mosi-oa-Tunya (\"the smoke that thunders\") waterfall, which he named Victoria Falls after Queen Victoria. Eventually he successfully reached Quelimane on the Indian Ocean, having mapped most of the course of the Zambezi river.\nFor this, Livingstone became famous as the first European to cross south-central Africa at that latitude and was hailed as having \"opened up\" Africa, but there was already a long-established trans-regional network of trade routes. Portuguese traders had penetrated to the middle of the continent from both sides, in 1853\u20131854 two Arab traders crossed the continent from Zanzibar to Benguela, and around 1800 two native traders crossed from Angola to Mozambique.\nLivingstone advocated the establishment of trade and religious missions in central Africa, but abolition of the African slave trade, as carried out by the Portuguese of Tete and the Arab Swahili of Kilwa, became his primary goal. His motto\u2014now inscribed on his statue at Victoria Falls\u2014was \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Christianity, Commerce and Civilization\", a combination that he hoped would form an alternative to the slave trade, and impart dignity to the Africans in the eyes of Europeans. He believed that the key to achieving these goals was the navigation of the Zambezi as a Christian commercial highway into the interior.\nAuthor and campaigner.\nHe returned to Britain in December 1856. The Royal Geographical Society awarded him their Patron's Medal in 1855 for his explorations in Africa. Encouraged by the London Missionary Society, he wrote up his journal, but unconventionally had his \"Missionary Travels\" published in 1857 by John Murray, making it a bestselling travelogue. The book included his field science and sympathetic descriptions of African people. He proposed that missions and \"legitimate commerce\" by river into central Africa would end slave trading.\nLivingstone was encouraged by the response in Britain to his discoveries and support for future expeditions. He proposed to do more exploration, primarily to find routes for commercial trade which he believed would displace slave trade routes, more so than for solely missionary work. The London Missionary Society (LMS) on learning of his plans sent a letter which Livingstone received at Quelimane, congratulating him on his journey but said that the directors were \"restricted in their power of aiding plans connected only remotely with the spread of the Gospel\". This brusque rejection for new mission stations north of the Zambezi and his wider object of opening the interior for trade via the Zambezi, was not enough to make him resign from the LMS at once. When Roderick Murchison, president of the Royal Geographical Society, put him in touch with the foreign secretary, Livingstone said nothing to the LMS directors, even when his leadership of a government expedition to the Zambezi seemed increasingly likely to be funded by the exchequer. \"I am not yet fairly on with the Government,\" he told a friend, \"but am nearly quite off with the Society (LMS).\" Livingstone resigned from the London Missionary Society in 1857, and in May of that year he was appointed as her majesty's consul with a roving commission, extending through Mozambique to the areas west of it. In February 1858 his area of jurisdiction was stipulated to be \"the Eastern Coast of Africa and the independent districts in the interior\".\nWhile he negotiated with the government for his new position as consul, the LMS thought that he would return to Africa with their mission to the Kololo in Barotseland, which Livingstone had promoted. That mission eventually suffered deaths from malaria of a missionary, his wife, a second missionary's wife, and three children. Livingstone had suffered over thirty attacks during his previous journey but had understated his suffering and overstated the quality of the land they would find, and the missionaries set out for the marshy region with wholly inadequate supplies of quinine. Biographer Tim Jeal considered this episode a major failing for Livingstone, and indicative of a pattern of putting his goals and career above the lives of those around him.\nLivingstone was now a celebrity, in great demand as a public speaker, and was elected to the Royal Society. He gained public backing for his plans, and raised finances for his next expedition by public subscription, as well as \u00a35,000 from the government to investigate the potential for British trade via the Zambezi.\nZambezi expedition.\nIn December 1857 the Foreign Office proposed a huge expedition. Livingstone had envisaged another solo journey with African helpers, and in January 1858 he agreed to lead a second Zambezi expedition with six specialist officers, hurriedly recruited in the UK.\nThe prefabricated iron river steamer \"Ma Robert\" was quickly built in portable sections, and loaded onto the Colonial Office steamer \"Pearl\", which took them out on its way to Ceylon. They left on 10 March, at Freetown collected twelve Kru seafarers to man the river steamer, and reached the Zambezi on 14 May. The plan was for both ships to take them up the river to establish bases, but it turned out to be completely impassable to boats past the Cahora Bassa rapids, a series of cataracts and rapids that Livingstone had failed to explore on his earlier travels. \"Pearl\" offloaded their supplies on an island about upstream. From there, \"Ma Robert\" had to make repeated slow journeys, getting hauled across shoals. The riverbanks were a war zone, with Portuguese soldiers and their slaves fighting the Chikunda slave-hunters of Matakenya (Mariano), but both sides accepted the expedition as friends.\nThe experts, stuck at Shupanga, could not make the intended progress, and there were disagreements. Artist Thomas Baines was dismissed from the expedition. Others on the expedition became the first to reach Lake Nyasa and they explored it in a four-oared gig. In 1861 the Colonial Office provided a new wooden paddle survey vessel, \"Pioneer\", which took the Universities' Mission to Central Africa (UMCA) led by Bishop Charles MacKenzie up the Shire river to found a new mission.\nLivingstone raised funds for a replacement river steamer, \"Lady Nyasa\", specially designed to sail on Lake Nyasa. It was shipped out in sections, contrary to his request, with a mission party including Mary Livingstone, and arrived in 1862. The \"Pioneer\" was delayed getting down to the coast to meet them, and there were further delays after it was found that the bishop had died. Mary Livingstone died on 27 April 1862 from malaria.\nLivingstone took \"Pioneer\" up the coast and investigated the Ruvuma River, and the physician John Kirk wrote \"I can come to no other conclusion than that Dr Livingstone is out of his mind and a most unsafe leader\".\nWhen \"Pioneer\" returned to Shupanga in December 1862, they paid (in cloth) their \"Mazaro men\" who left and engaged replacements. On 10 January 1863 they set off, towing \"Lady Nyasa\", and went up the Shire river past scenes of devastation as Mariano's Chikunda slave-hunts caused famine, and they frequently had to clear the paddle wheels of corpses left floating downstream. They reached Chibisa's and the Murchison Cataracts in April, then began dismantling \"Lady Nyasa\" and building a road to take its sections past the cataracts, while explorations continued.\nHe brought the ships downriver in 1864 after the government ordered the recall of the expedition. The Zambezi Expedition was castigated as a failure in many newspapers of the time, and Livingstone experienced great difficulty in raising funds to further explore Africa. John Kirk, Charles Meller, and Richard Thornton, scientists appointed to work under Livingstone, contributed large collections of botanical, ecological, geological, and ethnographic material to scientific Institutions in the United Kingdom.\nThe Nile.\nIn January 1866, Livingstone returned to Africa, this time to Zanzibar, and from there he set out to seek the source of the Nile. Richard Francis Burton, John Hanning Speke, and Samuel Baker had identified either Lake Albert or Lake Victoria as the source (which was partially correct, as the Nile \"bubbles from the ground high in the mountains of Burundi halfway between Lake Tanganyika and Lake Victoria\"), but there was still serious debate on the matter. Livingstone believed that the source was farther south and assembled a team to find it consisting of freed slaves, Comoros Islanders, twelve Sepoys, and two servants from his previous expedition, Chuma and Susi. \nLivingstone set out from the mouth of the Ruvuma river, but his assistants gradually began deserting him. The Comoros Islanders had returned to Zanzibar and (falsely) informed authorities that Livingstone had died. He reached Lake Malawi on 6 August, by which time most of his supplies had been stolen, including all his medicines. Livingstone then travelled through swamps in the direction of Lake Tanganyika, with his health declining. He sent a message to Zanzibar requesting that supplies be sent to Ujiji and he then headed west, forced by ill health to travel with slave traders. He arrived at Lake Mweru on 8 November 1867 and continued on, travelling south to become the first European to see Lake Bangweulu. Upon finding the Lualaba River, Livingstone theorised that it could have been the high part of the Nile; but realised that it in fact flowed into the River Congo at Upper Congo Lake.\nThe year 1869 began with Livingstone finding himself extremely ill while in the jungle. He was saved by Arab traders who gave him medicines and carried him to an Arab outpost.\nOn 15 July 1871, Livingstone recorded in his field diary his immediate impressions as he witnessed around 400 Africans being massacred by Arab slavers at the Nyangwe market on the banks of the Lualaba River, while he was watching next to the leading Arab trader Dugumbe who had given him assistance.\nThe cause behind this attack is stated to be retaliation for actions of Manilla, the head slave who had sacked villages of Mohombo people at the instigation of the Wagenya chieftain Kimburu. The Arabs attacked the shoppers and Kimburu's people.\nResearchers from the Indiana University of Pennsylvania who scanned Livingstone's diary suggest that in putting his fragmentary notes about the massacre into the narrative of his journal, he left out his concerns about some of his followers, slaves owned by Banyan merchants who had been hired by John Kirk, acting consul at Zanzibar, and sent to get Livingstone to safety. These slaves had been liberated and added to his party, but had shown violent conduct against local people contrary to his instructions, and he feared they might have been involved in starting the massacre. His diary noted \"Dugumbe's men murdering Kimburu and another for slaves\" and implied that the slave Manilla played a leading part, but looking back at the events, he says Dugumb\u00e9's people bore responsibility, and started it to make an example of Manilla. In the diary he described his sending his men with protection of a flag to assist Manilla's brother. In his journal version it was to assist villagers. The version edited by Waller in the \"Last Journals\", published in 1874, left out the context of Livingstone's earlier comments about Kirk and bad behaviour of the hired Banyan men, and omitted the villagers' earlier violent resistance to Arab slavers, so it portrayed the villagers as passive victims. The section on the massacre itself had only minor grammatical corrections. Further research into diary notes continues.\nThe massacre horrified Livingstone, leaving him too shattered to continue his mission to find the source of the Nile. Following the end of the wet season, he travelled from Nyangwe back to Ujiji, an Arab settlement on the eastern shore of Lake Tanganyika\u2014violently ill most of the way\u2014arriving on 23 October 1871.\nGeographical discoveries.\nLivingstone was wrong about the Nile, but he identified numerous geographical features for Western science, such as Lake Ngami, Lake Malawi, and Lake Bangweulu, in addition to Victoria Falls mentioned above. He filled in details of Lake Tanganyika, Lake Mweru, and the course of many rivers, especially the upper Zambezi, and his observations enabled large regions to be mapped which previously had been blank. Even so, the farthest north he reached was the north end of Lake Tanganyika\u2014still south of the Equator\u2014and he did not penetrate the rainforest of the River Congo any farther downstream than Ntangwe near Misisi.\nLivingstone was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society of London and was made a Fellow of the society, with which he had a strong association for the rest of his life.\nStanley meeting.\nLivingstone completely lost contact with the outside world for six years and was ill for most of the last four years of his life. Only one of his 44 letter dispatches made it to Zanzibar. One surviving letter to Horace Waller was made available to the public in 2010 by its owner Peter Beard. It reads: \"I am terribly knocked up but this is for your own eye only... Doubtful if I live to see you again...\"\nHenry Morton Stanley had been sent to find him by the \"New York Herald\" newspaper in 1869. He found Livingstone in the town of Ujiji on the shores of Lake Tanganyika on 10 November 1871, apparently greeting him with the now famous words \"Dr. Livingstone, I presume?\" Livingstone responded, \"Yes\", and then, \"I feel thankful that I am here to welcome you.\" These famous words may have been a fabrication, as Stanley later tore out the pages of this encounter in his diary. Even Livingstone's account of this encounter does not mention these words. However, the phrase appears in a \"New York Herald\" editorial dated 10 August 1872, and the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" and the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" both quote it without questioning its veracity. The words are famous because of their perceived humour, Livingstone being the only other white person for hundreds of miles, along with Stanley's clumsy attempt at appearing dignified in the bush of Africa by making a formal greeting one might expect to hear in the confines of an upper-class London club. However, readers of the \"Herald\" immediately saw through Stanley's pretensions. As noted by his biographer Tim Jeal, Stanley struggled his whole life with a self-perceived weakness of being from a humble background, and manufactured events to make up for this supposed deficiency. Stanley's book suggests that this greeting was truly motivated by embarrassment, because he did not dare to embrace Livingstone.\nDespite Stanley's urgings, Livingstone was determined not to leave Africa until his mission was complete. His illness made him confused and he had judgment difficulties at the end of his life. He explored the Lualaba and, failing to find connections to the Nile, returned to Lake Bangweulu and its swamps to explore possible rivers flowing out northwards.\nChristianity and Sechele.\nLivingstone is known as \"Africa's greatest missionary\", yet he is recorded as having converted only one African: Sechele, who was the chief of the Kwena people of Botswana (Kwena are one of the main Sotho-Tswana clans, found in South Africa, Lesotho, and Botswana in all three Sotho-Tswana language groupings). Sechele was born in 1812. His father died when Sechele was 10, and two of his uncles divided the tribe, which forced Sechele to leave his home for nine years. When Sechele returned, he took over one of his uncle's tribes; at that point, he met Livingstone. Livingstone immediately became interested in Sechele, and especially his ability to read. Being a quick learner, Sechele learned the alphabet in two days and soon called English a second language. After teaching his wives the skill, he wrote the Bible in his native tongue.\nLivingstone was known through a large part of Africa for treating the natives with respect, and the tribes that he visited returned his respect with faith and loyalty. He could never permanently convert the tribesmen to Christianity, however. Among other reasons, Sechele, by then the leader of the African tribe, did not like the way that Livingstone could not demand rain of his God like his rainmakers, who said that they could. After long hesitation from Livingstone, he baptised Sechele and had the church completely embrace him. Sechele was now a part of the church, but he continued to act according to his African culture, which went against Livingstone's teachings.\nSechele was no different from any other man of his tribe in believing in polygamy. He had five wives, including MmaKgari (SeTswana for \"mother of Kgari\"), Mokgokong and Masebele. When Livingstone told him to get rid of four of them, it shook the foundations of the Kwena tribe. After he finally divorced the women, Livingstone baptised them all and everything went well. However, one year later one of his ex-wives became pregnant and Sechele was the father. Sechele begged Livingstone not to give up on him because his faith was still strong, but Livingstone left the country and went north to continue his Christianizing attempts.\nAfter Livingstone left the Kwena tribe, Sechele remained faithful to Christianity and led missionaries to surrounding tribes as well as converting nearly his entire Kwena people. In the estimation of Neil Parsons of the University of Botswana, Sechele \"did more to propagate Christianity in 19th-century southern Africa than virtually any single European missionary\". Although Sechele was a self-proclaimed Christian, many European missionaries disagreed. The Kwena tribe leader kept rainmaking a part of his life as well as polygamy.\nDeath.\nLivingstone died on 1 May 1873 at the age of 60 in Chief Chitambo's village at Chipundu, southeast of Lake Bangweulu, in present-day Zambia, from malaria and internal bleeding due to dysentery. Led by his loyal attendants Chuma and Susi, his expedition arranged funeral ceremonies. They removed his heart and buried it under a tree near the spot where he died, which has been identified variously as a mvula tree or a baobab tree but is more likely to be a mpundu tree, as baobabs are found at lower altitudes and in more arid regions. That site, now known as the Livingstone Memorial, lists his date of death as 4 May, the date reported (and carved into the tree's trunk) by Chuma and Susi; but most sources consider 1 May\u2014the date of Livingstone's final journal entry\u2014as the correct one.\nThe expedition led by Chuma and Susi then carried the rest of his remains, together with his last journal and belongings, on a journey that took 63 days to the coastal town of Bagamoyo, a distance exceeding . The caravan encountered the expedition of English explorer Verney Lovett Cameron, who continued his march and reached Ujiji in February 1874, where he found and sent to England Livingstone's papers. Seventy-nine followers completed the journey, the men were paid their due wages, and Livingstone's remains were returned by ship to Britain for burial. In London, his body lay in repose at No.1 Savile Row, then the headquarters of the Royal Geographical Society, prior to interment at Westminster Abbey.\nLivingstone and slavery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And if my disclosures regarding the terrible Ujijian slavery should lead to the suppression of the East Coast slave trade, I shall regard that as a greater matter by far than the discovery of all the Nile sources together.\u2014\u200a\nWhile talking about the slave trade in East Africa in his journals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To overdraw its evil is a simple impossibility.\nLivingstone wrote about a group of slaves forced to march by Arab slave traders in the African Great Lakes region when he was travelling there in 1866:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We passed a slave woman shot or stabbed through the body and lying on the path: a group of men stood about a hundred yards off on one side, and another of the women on the other side, looking on; they said an Arab who passed early that morning had done it in anger at losing the price he had given for her, because she was unable to walk any longer.\n27th June 1866 \u2013 To-day we came upon a man dead from starvation, as he was very thin. One of our men wandered and found many slaves with slave-sticks on, abandoned by their masters from want of food; they were too weak to be able to speak or say where they had come from; some were quite young.\nHe also described: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The strangest disease I have seen in this country seems really to be broken-heartedness, and it attacks free men who have been captured and made slaves... Twenty one were unchained, as now safe; however all ran away at once; but eight with many others still in chains, died in three days after the crossing. They described their only pain in the heart, and placed the hand correctly on the spot, though many think the organ stands high up in the breast-bone.\nOften cited is Livingstone's estimate of the number of slaves that made it to market versus those who died because of the slave trade:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Flight, starvation, and death ensue; and we must again record our conviction that the mortality after these slave wars, in addition to the losses on the journey to the Coast and during the middle passage, makes it certain that not more than one in five ever reach the \"kind masters\" in Cuba and elsewhere, whom, according to slave-owners' interpretation of Scripture, Providence intended for them.\u2014\u200a\nLivingstone's letters, books, and journals did stir up public support for the abolition of slavery; however, he became dependent for assistance on the very slave-traders whom he wished to put out of business. He was a poor leader of his peers, and he ended up on his last expedition as an individualist explorer with servants and porters but no expert support around him. At the same time, he did not use the brutal methods of maverick explorers such as Stanley to keep his retinue of porters in line and his supplies secure. For these reasons, he accepted help and hospitality from 1867 onwards from Mohamad Bogharib and Mohamad bin Saleh (also known as \"Mpamari\"), traders who kept and traded in slaves, as he recounts in his journals. They, in turn, benefited from Livingstone's influence with local people, which facilitated Mpamari's release from bondage to Mwata Kazembe. Livingstone was furious to discover that some of the replacement porters sent at his request from Ujiji were slaves.\nLivingstone's figures on slaves have however been criticised as highly exaggerated.\nLegacy.\nBy the late 1860s Livingstone's reputation in Europe had suffered owing to the failure of the missions he set up, and of the Zambezi Expedition; and his ideas about the source of the Nile were not supported. His expeditions were hardly models of order and organisation. His reputation was rehabilitated by Stanley and his newspaper, and by the loyalty of Livingstone's servants whose long journey with his body inspired wonder. The publication of his last journal revealed stubborn determination in the face of suffering.\nIn 1860, the Universities' Mission to Central Africa was founded at his request. Many important missionaries, such as Leader Stirling and Miss Annie Allen, would later work for this group. This group and the medical missionaries it sponsored came to have major, positive impact on the people of Africa.\nLivingstone made geographical discoveries for European knowledge. He inspired abolitionists of the slave trade, explorers, and missionaries. He opened up Central Africa to missionaries who initiated the education and healthcare for Africans, and trade by the African Lakes Company. He was held in some esteem by many African chiefs and local people and his name facilitated relations between them and the British.\nPartly as a result, within 50 years of his death, colonial rule was established in Africa, and white settlement was encouraged to extend further into the interior. However, what Livingstone envisaged for \"colonies\" was not what we now know as colonial rule, but rather settlements of dedicated Christian Europeans who would live among the people to help them work out ways of living that did not involve slavery. Livingstone was part of an evangelical and nonconformist movement in Britain which during the 19th century helped change the national mindset from the notion of a divine right to rule 'lesser races', to more modernly ethical ideas in foreign policy.\nThe David Livingstone Centre in Blantyre celebrates his life and is based in the house in which he was born, on the site of the mill in which he started his working life. His Christian faith is evident in his journal, in which one entry reads: \"I place no value on anything I have or may possess, except in relation to the kingdom of Christ. If anything will advance the interests of the kingdom, it shall be given away or kept, only as by giving or keeping it I shall promote the glory of Him to whom I owe all my hopes in time and eternity.\"\nAccording to Alvyn Austin in 1997:\nDuring the anti-colonial 1960s, Livingstone was debunked: he made only one certified convert, who later backslid; he explored few areas not already traveled by others; he freed few slaves; he treated his colleagues horribly; he traveled with Arab slave traders; his family life was in shambles\u2014in short, to many he embodied the \"White Man's Burden\" mentality. Nonetheless, at a time when countries are being renamed and statues are being toppled, Livingstone has not fallen. Despite modern Africans' animosity toward other Europeans, such as Cecil Rhodes, Livingstone endures as a heroic legend. Rhodesia has long since purged its name, but the cities of Livingstone (Zambia) and Livingstonia (Malawi) keep the explorer's appellation with pride.\nIn 2002, David Livingstone was ranked 98th among the 100 Greatest Britons following a UK-wide vote.\nFamily life.\nWhile Livingstone had a great impact on the expansion of the British Empire, he did so at a tremendous cost to his family. In his absences, his children grew up missing their father, and his wife Mary (daughter of Mary and Robert Moffat), whom he married in 1845, endured very poor health, and died of malaria on 27 April 1862.\nHe had six children:\nOnly Agnes, William Oswell and Anna Mary married and had children. His one regret in later life was that he did not spend enough time with his children.\nExhibition of Livingstone curios.\nIn 1932, several items related to Livingstone were put on display at a Missionary Exhibition in Bromley: a piece of wood from the tree under which his heart had been buried plus slave chains and irons brought to England by Livingstone himself According to the extensive article about the exhibition published in the \"\"Bromley\" \"Mercury\"\", they were especially lent for the occasion by one of Livingstone's daughters.\nLivingstone Centenary.\nMany events were held on 1913 to celebrate the centenary of Livingstone's birth, the principal of which took place in the Royal Albert Hall. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Randall Davidson, presided and stated that Livingstone \"carved his name on the history of mankind\" and \"literally left his footprints on the sands of time\". Another speaker was Harry Johnston, who expressed his feelings about what he termed the \"inadequate consideration\" shown to Livingstone during his lifetime, and the \"stupidity\" preventing the publication of Livingstone's journals.\nAs well as speeches, there was a performance by a choir of 300 of the cantata, \"Livingstone the pilgrim\", composed by the Reverend Silvester Horne and Hamish McCunn.\nDavid Livingstone Centenary Medal.\nThe Hispanic Society of America was responsible for instituting this medal. The award was set up to coincide with Livingstone's Centenary, and is awarded by the American Geographical Society. Theodore Roosevelt was awarded this medal in 1917. The medal was designed by Gutzon Borglum, most famous for the sculptures on Mount Rushmore.\nLivingstone Archives.\nSource:\nOn 11 November 2011, Livingstone's 1871 Field Diary, as well as other original works, was published online for the first time by the David Livingstone Spectral Imaging Project.\nPapers relating to Livingstone's time as a London Missionary Society missionary (including hand-annotated maps of South East Africa) are held by the Archives of the School of Oriental and African Studies.\nDigital archives unifying these and other sources are made publicly available by the Livingstone Online project at the University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln.\nPlace names and other memorials.\nAfrica.\nBotswana\nBurundi\nThe Livingstone\u2013Stanley Monument in Mugere (present-day Burundi) marks a spot that Livingstone and Stanley visited on their exploration of Lake Tanganyika, mistaken by some as the first meeting place of the two explorers.\nCongo\nGhana\nKenya\nMalawi\nNamibia\nSouth Africa\nTanzania\nUganda\nZambia\nZimbabwe\nOceania.\nNew Zealand\nEurope.\nScotland\nEngland\nNorth America.\nCanada\nUnited States\nBanknotes.\nIn 1971\u20131998 Livingstone's image was portrayed on \u00a310 notes issued by the Clydesdale Bank. He was originally shown surrounded by palm tree leaves with an illustration of African tribesmen on the back. A later issue showed Livingstone against a background graphic of a map of Livingstone's Zambezi expedition, showing the River Zambezi, Victoria Falls, Lake Nyasa and Blantyre, Malawi; on the reverse, the African figures were replaced with an image of Livingstone's birthplace in Blantyre, Scotland.\nScience.\nThe following species have been named in honour of David Livingstone:\nThe mineral livingstonite is named in his honor. It was described in 1874 from Mexico.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1940 Warner Bros. Looney Tunes cartoon \"Africa Squeaks\", a caricature of Spencer Tracy as Henry Morton Stanley erroneously presumes Porky Pig to be Livingstone in the heart of \"Darkest Africa\".\nThe Moody Blues 1968 single \"Dr. Livingstone, I Presume\" paints the adventures of Livingstone, Captain Scott, and Columbus with the refrain \"What did you find there? Did you stand awhile and stare? Did you meet anyone?\", followed by a repeated chorus of \"We're all looking for someone\".\nThe ABBA song \"What About Livingstone\" mentions Livingstone \"traveling up the Nile\". Livingstone made 4 great journeys into Africa, three of them starting in Cape Town, South Africa and the last at Zanzibar. None of the routes traveled on the Nile which lay far to the north. He may have crossed sections of the headwaters of Nile on his final expedition but he would not have known so as these areas were not considered in the Nile watershed until much later.\nA song from American heavy metal band Alcatrazz called Jet to Jet from 1983's No Parole from Rock 'n' Roll contains the lyrics \"Dr. Livingstone where are you, when We need you the most\" which is in reference to the famed doctor and his expedition to Africa.\nStanley's search for and discovery of Livingstone is the subject of the Hugh Masekela song \"Witch Doctor\" that appears on his 1976 album, \"Colonial Man\".\n\"\" includes an achievement called \"Dr. Livingstone, I presume?\" The achievement requires playing as Belgium, moving H. M. Stanley within a space of Dr. Livingstone.\nRay Stevens' 1990 song This Ain't Exactly What I Had in Mind includes a humorous reference to Dr. David Livingstone. The lyrics play on the famed explorer's unexpected discoveries, using his name as a metaphor for unforeseen circumstances in life.\nThe song, known for its comedic storytelling, follows a character who finds himself in an unexpected situation, much like Livingstone's legendary expeditions into the heart of Africa. The use of Livingstone in the song continues the tradition of referencing the explorer in popular music and entertainment.\nAn animated music video for the song was later released, further cementing its place in Stevens' extensive catalog of humorous country and pop songs.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53529", "revid": "1289154602", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53529", "title": "Raclette cheese", "text": ""}
{"id": "53530", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53530", "title": "Gruy\u00e8re cheese", "text": "Swiss medium-hard Alpine cheese\nGruy\u00e8re (, , ; , , ) is a hard Swiss cheese that originated in the cantons of Fribourg, Vaud, Neuch\u00e2tel, Jura, and Berne in Switzerland. It is named after the town of Gruy\u00e8res in Fribourg. In 2001, Gruy\u00e8re gained the (AOC), which became the (AOP) as of 2013.\nGruy\u00e8re is classified as a Swiss-type or Alpine cheese and is sweet but slightly salty, with a flavour that varies widely with age. It is often described as creamy and nutty when young, becoming more assertive, earthy, and complex as it matures. When fully aged (five months to a year), it tends to have small cracks that impart a slightly grainy texture. Unlike Emmental, with which it is often confused, modern Gruy\u00e8re has few if any eyes, the small holes that can develop in Swiss-type cheese during aging; although in the 19th century, this was not always the case. It is the most popular Swiss cheese in Switzerland and in most of Europe.\nUses.\nGruy\u00e8re is used in many ways in countless dishes. It is considered a good cheese for baking, because of its distinctive but not overpowering taste. For example, in quiche, Gruy\u00e8re adds savoriness without overshadowing the other ingredients. It is a good melting cheese, particularly suited for fondues, along with Vacherin Fribourgeois and Emmental. It is also traditionally used in French onion soup, as well as in the croque-monsieur, a classic French toasted ham and cheese sandwich. Gruy\u00e8re is also used in chicken and veal cordon bleu. It is a fine table cheese, and when grated, it is often used with salads and pastas. It is used, grated, atop le tourin, a garlic soup from France served on dried bread. White wines, such as Riesling, pair well with Gruy\u00e8re. Sparkling cider and Bock beer are also beverage affinities.\nProduction.\nTo make Gruy\u00e8re, raw cow's milk is heated to in a copper vat, and then curdled by the addition of liquid rennet. The curd is cut up into pea-sized pieces and stirred, releasing whey. The curd is cooked at , and raised quickly to .\nThe whey is strained, and the curds placed into moulds to be pressed. After salting in brine and smearing with bacteria, the cheese is ripened for two months at room temperature, generally on wooden boards, turning every couple of days to ensure even moisture distribution. Gruy\u00e8re can be cured for 3 to 10 months, with long curing producing a cheese of intense flavour.\nS\u00e9rac, a whey cheese, is a historical by-product of the manufacture of Gruy\u00e8re.\nNatural holes in cheese.\nThe presence of holes in cheeses such as Gruy\u00e8re and Emmental was long thought to be due to bacterial activity in the mass of the cheese. In the 21st century it was discovered that it was due to microscopic hay dust that got into the milk during milking. Bacteria formed around the dust particles and produced gases which caused the characteristic holes. In addition to their traditionally favoured appearance, the holes, if not too small, have the beneficial effect of preventing gaps and cracks in the block of cheese from forming. There was some suggestion in the past of a variable effect; Emmental cheese made from summer milk had smaller holes than winter cheese\u2014the cows ate hay in winter, but grass with less dust in summer. Modern production techniques and milking machines are less susceptible to hay dust, and indeed 21st-century Swiss cheeses have fewer and smaller holes.\nHoles can be restored to their former size and prevalence by adding hay flower powder to the milk; this is done in Germany and France, but such additives are forbidden in Swiss cheeses.\nAffinage.\nAn important and the longest part of the production of Gruy\u00e8re in Switzerland is the (French for 'maturation').\nAccording to the AOC, the cellars to mature a Swiss Gruy\u00e8re must have a climate close to a natural cave. This means that the humidity should be between 94% and 98%. If the humidity is lower, the cheese dries out. If the humidity is too high, the cheese does not mature and becomes smeary and gluey. The temperature of the caves should be between . This relatively high temperature is required for excellent-quality cheese. Lower-quality cheeses result from temperatures between . The lower the temperature, the less the cheese matures, resulting in a harder and more crumbly texture.\nLegal protection.\nSwitzerland.\nIn 2001, Gruy\u00e8re gained the Appellation d'origine contr\u00f4l\u00e9e (now designated Appellation d'origine prot\u00e9g\u00e9e) status. Since then, the production and the maturation have been strictly defined, and all Swiss Gruy\u00e8re producers must follow these rules.\nFrance.\nAlthough Gruy\u00e8re is recognised as a Swiss Geographical Indication in the EU, Gruy\u00e8re of French origin is also protected as a Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) in the EU. To avoid confusion, the EU PGI Gruy\u00e8re must indicate that it comes from France and must make sure it cannot be confused with Gruy\u00e8re from Switzerland. It, therefore, is generally sold as \"French Gruy\u00e8re\".\nFrench Gruy\u00e8re may be produced in an area much larger than the Swiss AOP area. The PGI documentation also requires that French Gruy\u00e8re has holes \"ranging in size from that of a pea to a cherry\", a significant departure from the Swiss original. Peter Ungphakorn, a Swiss local and an international trade expert, comments that the French Comt\u00e9 cheese could be a closer match to the Swiss version.\nUnited States.\nIn 2021, a U.S. District Court ruled that the term \"gruyere\" had become a generic term for a certain type of cheese, and Swiss and French Gruy\u00e8re producers' associations could not register it as a trademark in the United States. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed that decision in March 2023.\nSwiss Gruy\u00e8re still has a protected certification mark in the US as \"Le Gruy\u00e8re Switzerland AOC\", secured in 2013.\nThe FDA standards of identity for a \"\u00a7 133.149 Gruyere cheese\" requires \"small holes or eyes\".\nVarieties.\nGruyere (as a Swiss AOC) has many varieties with different age profiles, and an organic version of the cheese is also sold. A special variety is produced only in summer in the Swiss Alps and is branded as Le Gruy\u00e8re Switzerland AOC Alpage.\nGenerally, one can distinguish the age profiles of mild/\"doux\" (minimum five months old) and \"r\u00e9serve\", also known as \"surchoix\" (minimum ten months old). In Switzerland, other age profiles can be found, including \"mi-sal\u00e9\" (7\u20138 months), \"sal\u00e9\" (9\u201310 months), \"vieux\" (14 months), and (cave aged), but these age profiles are not part of the AOC.\nLe Gruy\u00e8re AOP Premier Cru.\nLe Gruy\u00e8re Premier Cru is a special variety, produced and matured exclusively in the canton of Fribourg and matured for 14 months in cellars with a humidity of 95% and a temperature of .\nIt is the only cheese that has won the title of the best cheese in the world at the World Cheese Awards five times: in 1992, 2002, 2005, 2015, and 2022.\nSimilar cheeses.\nL'Etivaz is a very similar Swiss hard cheese from the canton of Vaud. It is made from raw cow's milk and is very similar to aged Gruy\u00e8re in taste. In the 1930s, a group of 76 Gruy\u00e8re producing families felt that government regulations were allowing cheesemakers to compromise the qualities that made good Gruy\u00e8re so special. They withdrew from the government's Gruy\u00e8re program, and \"created\" their own cheese - L'Etivaz - named for the village around which they all lived. They founded a cooperative in 1932, and the first cheese cellars were built in 1934.\nThe French Le Brou\u00e8re cheese, made in nearby Vosges, is considered a variant of Gruy\u00e8re.\n (\"graviera\") is a popular Greek cheese which resembles Gruy\u00e8re and is an EU Protected Designation of Origin. There are Naxian varieties (produced from cow's milk) that tend to be milder and sweeter, and various \"gravieras\" from Crete, which are produced from sheep's milk.\nKars gravyer cheese is a Turkish cheese made of cow's milk or a mixture of cow's and goat's milk. Gruy\u00e8re-style cheeses are also produced in the United States, with Wisconsin having the largest output, and in Bosnia under the name \"Livanjski sir\" (Livno cheese).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53533", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53533", "title": "Dorset Blue Vinney", "text": "British blue cow's milk cheese\nDorset Blue Vinney (frequently spelled \"vinny\") is a traditional blue cheese made near Sturminster Newton in Dorset, England, from cows' milk. It is a hard, crumbly cheese. It was formerly made of skimmed milk.\n\"Vinney\" may be the Dorset form of the archaic word \"vinny\" (\"moldy\") or perhaps a corruption of \"veiny\", referring to its blue veins.\nBlue Vinney is often made from unpasteurised milk. This is considered healthy by some and risky by others due to the potential for tuberculosis from infected cows passing into the milk. It has a strong taste and smell. The cheese is said to go well with Dorset knobs, another traditional product from Dorset.\nDorset Blue Cheese has been awarded Protected Geographical Status, ensuring only cheese originating from Dorset may use the name.\nHistory.\nHistorically cheese in Dorset was merely a by-product of the much more lucrative butter market. Milk was of little value before the railways as it could not be brought to market before it went off, thus cheese and butter production was the main focus of dairy farms. Dorset butter was highly regarded in London where it fetched a premium price but making butter left the farmers with large quantities of skimmed milk which they turned into a hard, crumbly cheese.\nLocal myth describes how in years gone by, due to its supposed illegal nature, Blue Vinny would be left on the doorstep of those who ordered it on the black market.\nWhile the cheese was a common farmhouse cheese in Dorset for hundreds of years, production nearly dried up after the Second World War, and was made in very small quantities on just a few farms. However, in the 1980s Woodbridge Farm in Dorset revived the old recipe, and it is now producing the cheese again, but with whole milk.\nIn popular culture.\nIn his poem \"Praise O' Do'set\", the Dorset poet William Barnes asks,\nWoont ye have brown bread a-put ye,\nAn' some vinny cheese a-cut ye?\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53536", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53536", "title": "John Coltrane", "text": "American jazz saxophonist (1926\u20131967)\nJohn William Coltrane (September 23, 1926\u00a0\u2013 July 17, 1967) was an American jazz saxophonist, bandleader and composer. He is among the most influential and acclaimed figures in the history of jazz and 20th-century music.\nBorn and raised in North Carolina, after graduating from high school Coltrane moved to Philadelphia, where he studied music. Working in the bebop and hard bop idioms early in his career, Coltrane helped pioneer the use of modes and was one of the players at the forefront of free jazz. He led at least fifty recording sessions and appeared on many albums by other musicians, including trumpeter Miles Davis and pianist Thelonious Monk. Over the course of his career, Coltrane's music took on an increasingly spiritual dimension, as exemplified on his most acclaimed album \"A Love Supreme\" (1965) and others. Decades after his death, Coltrane remains influential, and he has received numerous posthumous awards, including a special Pulitzer Prize, and was even canonized by the African Orthodox Church.\nHis second wife was pianist and harpist Alice Coltrane. The couple had three children: John Jr. (1964\u20131982), a bassist; Ravi (born 1965), a saxophonist; and Oran (born 1967), a saxophonist, guitarist, drummer and singer.\nBiography.\n1926\u20131945: Early life.\nColtrane was born in his parents' apartment at 200 Hamlet Avenue in Hamlet, North Carolina, on September 23, 1926. His father was John R. Coltrane and his mother was Alice Blair. He grew up in High Point, North Carolina, and attended William Penn High School. While in high school, Coltrane played clarinet and alto horn in a community band before switching to the saxophone, after being influenced by the likes of Lester Young and Johnny Hodges. Beginning in December 1938, his father, aunt, and grandparents died within a few months of one another, leaving him to be raised by his mother and a close cousin. In June 1943, shortly after graduating from high school, Coltrane and his family moved to Philadelphia, where he got a job at a sugar refinery. In September that year, for his 17th birthday, his mother bought him his first saxophone, an alto. From 1944 to 1945, Coltrane took saxophone lessons at the Ornstein School of Music with Mike Guerra. Between early to mid-1945, he had his first professional work as a musician: a \"cocktail lounge trio\" with piano and guitar.\nAn important moment in the progression of Coltrane's musical development occurred on June 5, 1945, when he saw Charlie Parker perform for the first time. In a \"DownBeat\" magazine article in 1960 he recalled: \"the first time I heard Bird play, it hit me right between the eyes.\"\n1945\u20131946: Military service.\nTo avoid being drafted by the Army, Coltrane enlisted in the Navy on August 6, 1945, the day the first U.S. atomic bomb was dropped on Japan. He was trained as an apprentice seaman at Sampson Naval Training Station in upstate New York before he was shipped to Pearl Harbor, where he was stationed at Manana Barracks, the largest posting of African American servicemen in the world. By the time he got to Hawaii in late 1945, the Navy was downsizing. Coltrane's musical talent was recognized and, when he joined the Melody Masters, the base swing band, he became one of the few Navy men to serve as a musician without having been granted musician's rating. Because the Melody Masters was an all-white band, Coltrane was treated as a guest performer to avoid alerting superior officers of his participation in the band. He continued to perform other duties when not playing with the band, including kitchen and security details. By the end of his service, he had assumed a leadership role in the band. His first recordings, an informal session in Hawaii with Navy musicians, occurred on July 13, 1946. He played alto saxophone on a selection of jazz standards and bebop tunes. He was officially discharged from the Navy on August 8, 1946. He was awarded the American Campaign Medal, Asiatic\u2013Pacific Campaign Medal and the World War II Victory Medal.\n1946\u20131954: Immediate post-war career.\nAfter being discharged from the Navy as a seaman first class in August 1946, Coltrane returned to Philadelphia, where the city's bustling jazz scene offered him many opportunities for both learning and playing. Coltrane used the G.I. Bill to enroll at the Granoff School of Music, where he studied music theory with jazz guitarist and composer Dennis Sandole. He would continue to work under Sandole's tutelage from 1946 into the early 1950s. Coltrane also took saxophone lessons with Matthew Rastelli, a saxophone teacher at Granoff, once a week for about two or three years. However, the lessons stopped when Coltrane's G.I. Bill funds ran out. After touring with King Kolax, he joined a band led by Jimmy Heath, who was introduced to Coltrane's playing by his former Navy buddy, trumpeter William Massey, who had played with Coltrane in the Melody Masters. Although he started on alto saxophone, he switched to playing tenor saxophone in 1947 with Eddie Vinson.\nColtrane called this a time when \"a wider area of listening opened up for me. There were many things that people like Hawk [Coleman Hawkins] and Ben [Webster] and Tab Smith were doing in the '40s that I didn't understand, but that I felt emotionally.\" A significant influence, according to tenor saxophonist Odean Pope, was the Philadelphia pianist, composer, and theorist Hasaan Ibn Ali. \"Hasaan was the clue to ... the system that Trane uses. Hasaan was the great influence on Trane's melodic concept.\" Coltrane became fanatical about practicing and developing his craft, practicing \"25 hours a day\" according to Jimmy Heath. Heath recalls an incident in a hotel in San Francisco when after a complaint was issued, Coltrane took the horn out of his mouth and practiced fingering for a full hour. Such was his dedication; it was common for him to fall asleep with the horn still in his mouth or practice a single note for hours on end.\nCharlie Parker, whom Coltrane had first heard perform before his time in the Navy, became an idol, and the two would occasionally play together in the late 1940s. He was a member of groups led by Dizzy Gillespie, Earl Bostic, and Johnny Hodges in the early to mid-1950s.\n1955\u20131957: Miles and Monk period.\nIn 1955, Coltrane was freelancing in Philadelphia while studying with Sandole when he received a call from trumpeter Miles Davis. Davis had been successful in the 1940s, but his reputation and work had been damaged in part by heroin addiction; he was again active and about to form a quintet. Coltrane was with this edition of the Davis band (known as the \"First Great Quintet\"\u2014along with Red Garland on piano, Paul Chambers on bass, and Philly Joe Jones on drums) from October 1955 to April 1957 (with a few absences). During this period Davis released several influential recordings that revealed the first signs of Coltrane's growing ability. This quintet, represented by two marathon recording sessions for Prestige in 1956, resulted in the albums \"Cookin'\", \"Relaxin'\", \"Workin, and \"Steamin. The \"First Great Quintet\" disbanded due in part to Coltrane's heroin addiction.\nDuring the later part of 1957, Coltrane worked with Thelonious Monk at New York's Five Spot Caf\u00e9, and played in Monk's quartet (July\u2013December 1957), but, owing to contractual conflicts, took part in only one official studio recording session with this group. Coltrane recorded many sessions for Prestige under his own name at this time, but Monk refused to record for his old label. A private recording made by Juanita Naima Coltrane of a 1958 reunion of the group was issued by Blue Note Records as \"Live at the Five Spot\u2014Discovery!\" in 1993. A high quality tape of a concert given by this quartet in November 1957 was found later, and was released by Blue Note in 2005. Recorded by Voice of America, the performances confirm the group's reputation, and the resulting album, \"Thelonious Monk Quartet with John Coltrane at Carnegie Hall\", is very highly rated.\n\"Blue Train\", Coltrane's sole date as leader for Blue Note, featuring trumpeter Lee Morgan, bassist Paul Chambers, and trombonist Curtis Fuller, is often considered his best album from this period. Four of its five tracks are original Coltrane compositions, and the title track, \"Moment's Notice\", and \"Lazy Bird\", have become standards.\n1958: Davis and Coltrane.\nColtrane rejoined Davis in December 1957 after he recovered from his addiction. In October of that year, jazz critic Ira Gitler coined the term \"sheets of sound\" to describe the style Coltrane developed with Monk and was perfecting in Davis's group, now a sextet. His playing was compressed, with rapid runs cascading in very many notes per minute. Coltrane recalled: \"I found that there were a certain number of chord progressions to play in a given time, and sometimes what I played didn't work out in eighth notes, sixteenth notes, or triplets. I had to put the notes in uneven groups like fives and sevens in order to get them all in.\"\nColtrane stayed with Davis until April 1960, working with alto saxophonist Cannonball Adderley; pianists Red Garland, Bill Evans, and Wynton Kelly; bassist Paul Chambers; and drummers Philly Joe Jones and Jimmy Cobb. During this time he participated in the Davis sessions \"Milestones\" and \"Kind of Blue\", and the concert recordings \"Miles &amp; Monk at Newport\" (1963) and \"Jazz at the Plaza (1958)\".\n1959\u20131961: Period with Atlantic Records.\nAt the end of this period, Coltrane recorded \"Giant Steps\" (1960), his first released album as leader for Atlantic that contained only his compositions. The album's title track is generally considered to have one of the most difficult chord progressions of any widely played jazz composition, eventually referred to as Coltrane changes. His development of these cycles led to further experimentation with improvised melody and harmony that he continued throughout his career.\nColtrane formed his first quartet for live performances in 1960 for an appearance at the Jazz Gallery in New York City. After moving through different personnel, including Steve Kuhn, Pete La Roca, and Billy Higgins, he kept pianist McCoy Tyner, bassist Steve Davis, and drummer Elvin Jones. Tyner, a native of Philadelphia, had been a friend of Coltrane for some years, and the two men had an understanding that Tyner would join the band when he felt ready. \"My Favorite Things\" (1961) was the first album recorded by this band. It was Coltrane's first album on soprano saxophone, which he began practicing while with Miles Davis. It was considered an unconventional move because the instrument was more associated with earlier jazz.\n1961\u20131962: First years with Impulse! Records.\nIn May 1961, Coltrane's contract with Atlantic was bought by Impulse!. The move to Impulse! meant that Coltrane resumed his recording relationship with engineer Rudy Van Gelder, who had recorded his and Davis's sessions for Prestige. He recorded most of his albums for Impulse! at Van Gelder's studio in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.\nBy early 1961, bassist Davis had been replaced by Reggie Workman, while Eric Dolphy joined the group as a second horn. The quintet had a celebrated and extensively recorded residency at the Village Vanguard, which demonstrated Coltrane's new direction. It included the most experimental music he had played, influenced by Indian ragas, modal jazz, and free jazz. John Gilmore, a longtime saxophonist with musician Sun Ra, was particularly influential; after hearing a Gilmore performance, Coltrane is reported to have said, \"He's got it! Gilmore's got the concept!\" The most celebrated of the Vanguard tunes, the 15-minute blues \"Chasin' the 'Trane\", was strongly inspired by Gilmore's music.\nIn 1961, Coltrane began pairing Workman with a second bassist, usually Art Davis or Donald Garrett. Garrett recalled playing a tape for Coltrane where \"I was playing with another bass player. We were doing some things rhythmically, and Coltrane became excited about the sound. We got the same kind of sound you get from the East Indian water drum. One bass remains in the lower register and is the stabilizing, pulsating thing, while the other bass is free to improvise, like the right hand would be on the drum. So Coltrane liked the idea.\" Coltrane also recalled: \"I thought another bass would add that certain rhythmic sound. We were playing a lot of stuff with a sort of suspended rhythm, with one bass playing a series of notes around one point, and it seemed that another bass could fill in the spaces.\" According to Eric Dolphy, one night: \"Wilbur Ware came in and up on the stand so they had three basses going. John and I got off the stand and listened.\" Coltrane employed two basses on the 1961 albums \"Ol\u00e9 Coltrane\" and \"Africa/Brass\", and later on \"The John Coltrane Quartet Plays\" and \"Ascension\". Both Reggie Workman and Jimmy Garrison play bass on the 1961 Village Vanguard recordings of \"India\" and \"Miles' Mode\".\nDuring this period, critics were divided in their estimation of Coltrane, who had radically altered his style. Audiences, too, were perplexed; in France he was booed during his final tour with Davis. In 1961, \"DownBeat\" magazine called Coltrane and Dolphy players of \"anti-jazz\" in an article that bewildered and upset the musicians. Coltrane admitted some of his early solos were based mostly on technical ideas. Furthermore, Dolphy's angular, voice-like playing earned him a reputation as a figurehead of the New Thing, also known as free jazz, a movement led by Ornette Coleman that was denigrated by some jazz musicians (including Davis) and critics. But as Coltrane's style developed, he was determined to make every performance \"a whole expression of one's being\".\n1962\u20131965: Classic Quartet period.\nIn 1962, Dolphy departed and Jimmy Garrison replaced Workman as bassist. From then on, the \"Classic Quartet\", as it came to be known, with Tyner, Garrison, and Jones, produced searching, spiritually driven work. Coltrane was moving toward a more harmonically static style that allowed him to expand his improvisations rhythmically, melodically, and motivically. Harmonically complex music was still present, but on stage Coltrane heavily favored continually reworking his \"standards\": \"Impressions\", \"My Favorite Things\", and \"I Want to Talk About You\".\nThe criticism of the quintet with Dolphy may have affected Coltrane. In contrast to the radicalism of his 1961 recordings at the Village Vanguard, his studio albums in the following two years (with the exception of \"Coltrane\", 1962, which featured a blistering version of Harold Arlen's \"Out of This World\") were much more conservative. He recorded an album of ballads and participated in album collaborations with Duke Ellington and singer Johnny Hartman, a baritone who specialized in ballads. The album \"Ballads\" (recorded 1961\u201362) is emblematic of Coltrane's versatility, as the quartet shed new light on standards such as \"It's Easy to Remember\". Despite a more polished approach in the studio, in concert the quartet continued to balance \"standards\" and its own more exploratory and challenging music, as can be heard on the albums \"Impressions\" (recorded 1961\u201363), \"Live at Birdland\" and \"Newport '63\" (both recorded 1963). \"Impressions\" consists of two extended jams including the title track along with \"Dear Old Stockholm\", \"After the Rain\" and a blues. Coltrane later said he enjoyed having a \"balanced catalogue\".\nOn March 6, 1963, the group entered Van Gelder Studio in New Jersey and recorded a session that was lost for decades after its master tape was destroyed by Impulse! Records to cut down on storage space. On June 29, 2018, Impulse! released \"\", made up of seven tracks made from a spare copy Coltrane had given to his wife. On March 7, 1963, they were joined in the studio by Hartman for the recording of six tracks for the \"John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman\" album, released that July.\nImpulse! followed the successful \"lost album\" release with 2019's \"Blue World\", made up of a 1964 soundtrack to the film \"The Cat in the Bag\", recorded in June 1964.\nThe Classic Quartet produced its best-selling album, \"A Love Supreme\", in December 1964. A culmination of much of Coltrane's work up to this point, this four-part suite is an ode to his faith in and love for God. These spiritual concerns characterized much of Coltrane's composing and playing from this point onward\u2014as can be seen from album titles such as \"Ascension\", \"Om\" and \"Meditations\". The fourth movement of \"A Love Supreme\", \"Psalm\", is, in fact, a musical setting for an original poem to God written by Coltrane, and printed in the album's liner notes. Coltrane plays almost exactly one note for each syllable of the poem, and bases his phrasing on the words. The album was composed at Coltrane's home in Dix Hills on Long Island.\nThe quartet played \"A Love Supreme\" live only three times, recorded twice \u2013 in July 1965 at a concert in Antibes, France, and in October 1965 in Seattle, Washington. A recording of the Antibes concert was released by Impulse! in 2002 on the remastered Deluxe Edition of \"A Love Supreme\", and again in 2015 on the \"Super Deluxe Edition\" of The Complete Masters. A recently discovered second amateur recording titled \"A Love Supreme: Live in Seattle\" was released in 2021.\n1965: Adding to the quartet and avant-garde jazz.\nIn his late period, Coltrane showed an interest in the avant-garde jazz of Ornette Coleman, Albert Ayler, and Sun Ra. He was especially influenced by the dissonance of Ayler's trio with bassist Gary Peacock, who had worked with Paul Bley, and drummer Sunny Murray, whose playing was honed with Cecil Taylor as leader. Coltrane championed many young free jazz musicians such as Archie Shepp, and, under his influence, Impulse! became a leading free jazz label.\nAfter \"A Love Supreme\" was recorded, Ayler's style became more prominent in Coltrane's music. A series of recordings with the Classic Quartet in the first half of 1965 show Coltrane's playing becoming abstract, with greater incorporation of devices like multiphonics, use of overtones, and playing in the altissimo register, as well as a mutated return of Coltrane's sheets of sound. In the studio, he all but abandoned soprano saxophone to concentrate on tenor. The quartet responded by playing with increasing freedom. The group's evolution can be traced through the albums \"The John Coltrane Quartet Plays\", \"Living Space\", \"Transition\", \"New Thing at Newport\", \"Sun Ship\", and \"First Meditations\".\nIn June 1965, he went into Van Gelder's studio with ten other musicians (including Shepp, Pharoah Sanders, Freddie Hubbard, Marion Brown, and John Tchicai) to record \"Ascension\", a 38-minute piece that included solos by young avant-garde musicians. The album was controversial primarily for the collective improvisation sections that separated the solos. After recording with the quartet over the next few months, Coltrane invited Sanders to join the band in September 1965. While Coltrane frequently used overblowing as an emotional exclamation-point, Sanders \"was involved in the search for 'human' sounds on his instrument,\" and drastically expanding the vocabulary of his horn by employing multiphonics, growling, and \"high register squeals [that] could imitate not only the human song but the human cry and shriek as well.\" Regarding Coltrane's decision to add Sanders to the band, Gary Giddins wrote \"Those who had followed Coltrane to the edge of the galaxy now had the added challenge of a player who appeared to have little contact with earth.\"\n1965\u20131967: The second quartet.\nBy late 1965, Coltrane was regularly augmenting his group with Sanders and other free jazz musicians. Rashied Ali joined the group as a second drummer. This was the end of the quartet. Claiming he was unable to hear himself over the two drummers, Tyner left the band shortly after the recording of \"Meditations\". Jones left in early 1966, dissatisfied by sharing drumming duties with Ali and stating that, concerning Coltrane's latest music, \"only poets can understand it\". In interviews, Tyner and Jones both voiced their displeasure with the music's direction; however, they would incorporate some of the intensity of free jazz in their solo work. Later, both musicians expressed tremendous respect for Coltrane: regarding his late music, Jones stated: \"Well, of course it's far out, because this is a tremendous mind that's involved, you know. You wouldn't expect Einstein to be playing jacks, would you?\" Tyner recalled: \"He was constantly pushing forward. He never rested on his laurels, he was always looking for what's next... he was always searching, like a scientist in a lab, looking for something new, a different direction... He kept hearing these sounds in his head...\" Jones and Tyner both recorded tributes to Coltrane, Tyner with \"Echoes of a Friend\" (1972) and ' (1987), and Jones with ' (1978) and \"Tribute to John Coltrane \"A Love Supreme\"\" (1994).\nThere is speculation that in 1965 Coltrane began using LSD, informing the \"cosmic\" transcendence of his late period. Nat Hentoff wrote: \"it is as if he and Sanders were speaking with 'the gift of tongues' \u2013 as if their insights were of such compelling force that they have to transcend ordinary ways of musical speech and ordinary textures to be able to convey that part of the essence of being they have touched.\" After the departure of Tyner and Jones, Coltrane led a quintet with Sanders on tenor saxophone, his second wife Alice Coltrane on piano, Garrison on bass, and Ali on drums. When touring, the group was known for playing long versions of their repertoire, many stretching beyond 30 minutes to an hour. In concert, solos by band members often extended beyond fifteen minutes.\nThe group can be heard on several concert recordings from 1966, including \"Live at the Village Vanguard Again!\" and \"Live in Japan\". In 1967, Coltrane entered the studio several times. Although pieces with Sanders have surfaced (the unusual \"To Be\" has both men on flute), most of the recordings were either with the quartet minus Sanders (\"Expression\" and \"Stellar Regions\") or as a duo with Ali. The latter duo produced six performances that appear on the album \"Interstellar Space\". Coltrane also continued to tour with the second quartet up until two months before his death; his penultimate live performance and final recorded one, a radio broadcast for the Olatunji Center of African Culture in New York City, was eventually released as in 2001.\n1967: Illness and death.\nColtrane died of liver cancer at the age of 40 on July 17, 1967, at Huntington Hospital on Long Island. His funeral was held four days later at St. Peter's Lutheran Church in New York City. The service was started by the Albert Ayler Quartet and finished by the Ornette Coleman Quartet. Coltrane is buried at Pinelawn Memorial Park in Farmingdale, New York.\nBiographer Lewis Porter speculated that the cause of Coltrane's illness was hepatitis, although he also attributed the disease to Coltrane's heroin use at a previous period in his life. Frederick J. Spencer wrote that Coltrane's death could be attributed to his needle use \"or the bottle, or both.\" He stated that \"[t]he needles he used to inject the drugs may have had everything to do with\" Coltrane's liver disease: \"If any needle was contaminated with the appropriate hepatitis virus, it may have caused a chronic infection leading to cirrhosis or cancer.\" He noted that despite Coltrane's \"spiritual awakening\" in 1957, \"[b]y then, he may have had chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis... Unless he developed a primary focus elsewhere in later life and that spread to his liver, the seeds of John Coltrane's cancer were sown in his days of addiction.\"\nColtrane's death surprised many in the music community who were unaware of his condition. Miles Davis said, \"Coltrane's death shocked everyone, took everyone by surprise. I knew he hadn't looked too good... But I didn't know he was that sick\u2014 or even sick at all.\"\nArtistry.\nColtrane started out on alto saxophone, but in 1947, when he joined King Kolax's band, he switched to tenor saxophone, the instrument he became known for playing. In the early 1960s, during his contract with Atlantic, he also played soprano saxophone.\nAssistant music editor at \"Time Out\" John Lewis assessed, \"By 1962, Coltrane had developed a brand of modal jazz that invoked Indian and Arabic scales while maintaining an impassioned spiritual focus. As he spoke in tongues on tenor and soprano saxophone, his now legendary Fab Four rumbled beneath him, playing hard bop that pushed towards India and Africa, toward soul, [and] even toward psychedelia.\"\nHis preference for playing melody higher on the range of the tenor saxophone is attributed to his training on alto horn and clarinet. His \"sound concept\", manipulated in one's vocal tract, of the tenor was set higher than the normal range of the instrument. Coltrane observed how his experience playing the soprano saxophone gradually affected his style on the tenor, stating \"the soprano, by being this small instrument, I found that playing the lowest note on it was like playing ... one of the middle notes in the tenor ... I found that I would play \"all over\" this instrument ... And on tenor, I hadn't always played all over it, because I was playing certain ideas which would just run in certain ranges ... By playing on the soprano and becoming accustomed to playing from that low B-flat on up, it soon got so when I went to tenor, I found myself doing the same thing ... And this caused ... the willingness to change and just try to play... as much of the instrument as possible.\"\nToward the end of his career, he experimented with flute in his live performances and studio recordings (\"Live at the Village Vanguard Again!\", \"Expression\"). After Eric Dolphy died in June 1964, his mother gave Coltrane his flute and bass clarinet.\nAccording to drummer Rashied Ali, Coltrane had an interest in the drums. He would often have a spare drum set on concert stages that he would play. His interest in the drums and his penchant for having solos with the drums resonated on tracks such as \"Pursuance\" and \"The Drum Thing\" from \"A Love Supreme\" and \"Crescent\", respectively. It resulted in the album \"Interstellar Space\" with Ali. In an interview with Nat Hentoff in late 1965 or early 1966, Coltrane stated: \"I feel the need for more time, more rhythm all around me. And with more than one drummer, the rhythm can be more multi-directional.\" In an August 1966 interview with Frank Kofsky, Coltrane repeatedly emphasized his affinity for drums, saying \"I feel so strongly about drums, I really do.\" Later that year, Coltrane would record the music released posthumously on \"\", which features Ali on drums supplemented by three percussionists.\nColtrane's tenor (Selmer Mark VI, serial number 125571, dated 1965) and soprano (Selmer Mark VI, serial number 99626, dated 1962) saxophones were auctioned on February 20, 2005, to raise money for the John Coltrane Foundation.\nAlthough he rarely played alto, he owned a prototype Yamaha alto saxophone given to him by the company as an endorsement in 1966. He can be heard playing it on live albums recorded in Japan, such as \"Second Night in Tokyo\", and is pictured using it on the cover of the compilation \"Live in Japan\". He can also be heard playing the Yamaha alto on the album \"Stellar Regions\".\nPersonal life and religious beliefs.\nUpbringing and early influences.\nColtrane was born and raised in a Christian home. He was influenced by religion and spirituality beginning in childhood. His maternal grandfather, the Reverend William Blair, was a minister at an African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in High Point, North Carolina, and his paternal grandfather, the Reverend William H. Coltrane, was an A.M.E. Zion minister in Hamlet, North Carolina. Critic Norman Weinstein observed the parallel between Coltrane's music and his experience in the southern church, which included practicing music there as a youth.\nFirst marriage.\nIn 1955, Coltrane married Naima (n\u00e9e Juanita Grubbs). Naima Coltrane, a Muslim convert, heavily influenced his spirituality. When the couple married, she had a five-year-old daughter named Antonia, later named Syeeda. Coltrane adopted Syeeda. He met Naima at the home of bassist Steve Davis in Philadelphia. The love ballad he wrote to honor his wife, \"Naima\", was Coltrane's favorite composition. In 1956, the couple left Philadelphia with their six-year-old daughter and moved to New York City. In August 1957, Coltrane, Naima and Syeeda moved into an apartment on 103rd Street and Amsterdam Avenue in New York. A few years later, John and Naima Coltrane purchased a home at 116\u201360 Mexico Street in St. Albans, Queens. This is the house where they would break up in 1963.\nAbout the breakup, Naima said in J. C. Thomas's \"Chasin' the Trane\": \"I could feel it was going to happen sooner or later, so I wasn't really surprised when John moved out of the house in the summer of 1963. He didn't offer any explanation. He just told me there were things he had to do, and he left only with his clothes and his horns. He stayed in a hotel sometimes, other times with his mother in Philadelphia. All he said was, 'Naima, I'm going to make a change.' Even though I could feel it coming, it hurt, and I didn't get over it for at least another year.\" But Coltrane kept a close relationship with Naima, even calling her in 1964 to tell her that 90 percent of his playing would be prayer. They remained in touch until his death in 1967. Naima Coltrane died of a heart attack in October 1996.\n1957 \"spiritual awakening\".\nIn 1957, Coltrane had a religious experience that may have helped him overcome the heroin addiction and alcoholism he had struggled with since 1948. In the liner notes of \"A Love Supreme\", Coltrane states that in 1957 he experienced \"by the grace of God, a spiritual awakening which was to lead me to a richer, fuller, more productive life. At that time, in gratitude, I humbly asked to be given the means and privilege to make others happy through music.\" Further evidence of this universal view can be found in the liner notes of \"Meditations\" (1965) in which Coltrane declares, \"I believe in all religions.\"\nSecond marriage.\nIn 1963, he met pianist Alice McLeod. He and Alice moved in together and had two sons before he became \"officially divorced from Naima in 1966, at which time [he] and Alice were immediately married.\" John Jr. was born in 1964, Ravi in 1965, and Oranyan (\"Oran\") in 1967. According to the musician Peter Lavezzoli, \"Alice brought happiness and stability to John's life, not only because they had children, but also because they shared many of the same spiritual beliefs, particularly a mutual interest in Indian philosophy. Alice also understood what it was like to be a professional musician.\"\nSpiritual influence in music, religious exploration.\nAfter \"A Love Supreme\", many of the titles of his songs and albums had spiritual connotations: \"Ascension\", \"Meditations\", \"Om\", \"Selflessness\", \"Amen\", \"Ascent\", \"Attaining\", \"Dear Lord\", \"Prayer and Meditation Suite\", and \"The Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost\". His library of books included \"The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna\", the Bhagavad Gita, and Paramahansa Yogananda's \"Autobiography of a Yogi\". The last of these describes, in Lavezzoli's words, a \"search for universal truth, a journey that Coltrane had also undertaken. Yogananda believed that both Eastern and Western spiritual paths were efficacious, and wrote of the similarities between Krishna and Christ. This openness to different traditions resonated with Coltrane, who studied the Qur'an, the Bible, Kabbalah, and astrology with equal sincerity.\" He also explored Hinduism, Jiddu Krishnamurti, African history, the philosophical teachings of Plato and Aristotle, and Zen Buddhism.\nIn October 1965, Coltrane recorded \"Om\", referring to the sacred syllable in Hinduism, which symbolizes the infinite or the entire universe. Coltrane described \"Om\" as the \"first syllable, the primal word, the word of power\". The 29-minute recording contains chants from the Hindu \"Bhagavad Gita\" and the Buddhist \"Tibetan Book of the Dead\", and a recitation of a passage describing the primal verbalization \"om\" as a cosmic/spiritual common denominator in all things.\nStudy of world music.\nColtrane's spiritual journey was interwoven with his investigation of world music. He believed in not only a universal musical structure that transcended ethnic distinctions, but also being able to harness the mystical language of music itself. His study of Indian music led him to believe that certain sounds and scales could \"produce specific emotional meanings.\" According to Coltrane, the goal of a musician was to understand these forces, control them, and elicit a response from the audience. He said, \"I would like to bring to people something like happiness. I would like to discover a method so that if I want it to rain, it will start right away to rain. If one of my friends is ill, I'd like to play a certain song and he will be cured; when he'd be broke, I'd bring out a different song and immediately he'd receive all the money he needed.\"\nVeneration.\nAfter Coltrane's death, a congregation called the Yardbird Temple in San Francisco began worshipping him as God incarnate. The group was named after Charlie \"Yardbird\" Parker, whom they equated to John the Baptist. The congregation became affiliated with the African Orthodox Church; this involved changing Coltrane's status from a god to a saint. The resultant St. John Coltrane African Orthodox Church, San Francisco, is the only African Orthodox church that incorporates Coltrane's music and his lyrics as prayers in its liturgy.\nRev. F. W. King, describing the African Orthodox Church of Saint John Coltrane, said \"We are Coltrane-conscious...God dwells in the musical majesty of his sounds.\"\nSamuel G. Freedman wrote in \"The New York Times\" that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0the Coltrane church is not a gimmick or a forced alloy of nightclub music and ethereal faith. Its message of deliverance through divine sound is actually quite consistent with Coltrane's own experience and message. ... In both implicit and explicit ways, Coltrane also functioned as a religious figure. Addicted to heroin in the 1950s, he quit cold turkey, and later explained that he had heard the voice of God during his anguishing withdrawal. ... In 1966, an interviewer in Japan asked Coltrane what he hoped to be in five years, and Coltrane replied, \"a saint\".\nColtrane is depicted as one of the 90 saints in the Dancing Saints icon of St.\u00a0Gregory of Nyssa Episcopal Church in San Francisco. The icon is a painting in the Byzantine iconographic style that wraps around the entire church rotunda. It was executed by Mark Dukes, an ordained deacon at the Saint John Coltrane African Orthodox Church who painted other icons of Coltrane for the Coltrane Church. Saint Barnabas Episcopal Church in Newark, New Jersey, included Coltrane on its list of historical black saints and made a \"case for sainthood\" for him in an article on its website.\nDocumentaries about Coltrane and the church include Alan Klingenstein's \"The Church of Saint Coltrane\" (1996), and a 2004 program presented by Alan Yentob for the BBC.\nSelected discography.\nThe discography below lists albums conceived and approved by Coltrane as a leader during his lifetime. It does not include his many releases as a sideman, sessions assembled into albums by various record labels after Coltrane's contract expired, sessions with Coltrane as a sideman later reissued with his name featured more prominently, or posthumous compilations, except for the one he approved before his death. See main discography link above for full list.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1965, Coltrane was inducted into the \"Down Beat\" Jazz Hall of Fame. In 1972, \"A Love Supreme\" was certified gold by JASRAC for selling over half a million copies in Japan. This album was certified gold in the United States in 2001. In 1982 he was awarded a posthumous Grammy for Best Jazz Solo Performance on the album \"Bye Bye Blackbird\", and in 1997 he was awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante named him one of his 100 Greatest African Americans. He was awarded a special Pulitzer Prize in 2007 citing his \"masterful improvisation, supreme musicianship and iconic centrality to the history of jazz.\" He was inducted into the North Carolina Music Hall of Fame in 2009.\nA former home, the John Coltrane House in Philadelphia, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1999. His last home, the John Coltrane Home in the Dix Hills district of Huntington, New York, where he resided from 1964 until his death, was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 29, 2007.\nFrench drummer, composer and singer Christian Vander, founder of the band Magma, regards Coltrane as his greatest musical inspiration, and dedicated his 2011 album \"John Coltrane L'Homme Supr\u00eame\" to him as a tribute.\nIn media.\nA documentary on Jazz was made in 1990 by fellow musician Robert Palmer, called \"The World According to John Coltrane\".\n\"\", is a 2016 American film directed by John Scheinfeld.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53537", "revid": "8491779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53537", "title": "Mary River National Park", "text": "National park in the Northern Territory, Australia\nMary River National Park is an Australian national park located about east and stretching to the southeast of Darwin in the Northern Territory.\nWildlife.\nThe national park is inhabited by several bird species and saltwater crocodiles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53539", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53539", "title": "Soyuz programme", "text": "Human spaceflight programme of the Soviet Union\nThe Soyuz programme ( , ; , meaning \"Union\") is a human spaceflight programme initiated by the Soviet Union in the early 1960s. The Soyuz spacecraft was originally part of a Moon landing project intended to put a Soviet cosmonaut on the Moon. It was the third Soviet human spaceflight programme after the Vostok (1961\u20131963) and Voskhod (1964\u20131965) programmes.\nThe programme consists of the Soyuz capsule and the Soyuz rocket and is now the responsibility of Roscosmos. After the retirement of the Space Shuttle in 2011, the Soyuz was the only way for humans to get to the International Space Station (ISS) until 30 May 2020 when Crew Dragon flew to the ISS for the first time with astronauts.\nSoyuz rocket.\nThe launch vehicles used in the Soyuz expendable launch system are manufactured at the Progress State Research and Production Rocket Space Center (TsSKB-Progress) in Samara, Russia. As well as being used in the Soyuz programme as the launcher for the crewed Soyuz spacecraft, Soyuz launch vehicles are now also used to launch robotic Progress supply spacecraft to the International Space Station and commercial launches marketed and operated by TsSKB-Progress and the Starsem company. Currently Soyuz vehicles are launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan and the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northwest Russia and, since 2011, Soyuz launch vehicles are also being launched from the Guiana Space Centre in French Guiana. The Spaceport's new Soyuz launch site has been handling Soyuz launches since 21 October 2011, the date of the first launch. As of December 2019, 19 Guiana Soyuz launches had been made from French Guiana Space Centre, all successful. \nThe Soyuz rocket family is one of the most dependable and widely utilized launch vehicles in the history of space travel. It has been in operation for nearly six decades, having been developed by the Soviet Union and presently run by Russia. The Soyuz rockets have played an important role in both crewed and uncrewed space missions, launching people to the International Space Station (ISS) and delivering satellites and scientific payloads.\nSoyuz spacecraft.\nThe basic Soyuz spacecraft design was the basis for many projects, many of which were never developed. Its earliest form was intended to travel to the Moon without employing a huge booster like the Saturn V or the Soviet N-1 by repeatedly docking with upper stages that had been put in orbit using the same rocket as the Soyuz. This and the initial civilian designs were done under the Soviet Chief Designer Sergei Pavlovich Korolev, who did not live to see the craft take flight. Several military derivatives took precedence in the Soviet design process, though they never came to pass.\nA Soyuz spacecraft consists of three parts (from front to back):\nThere have been many variants of the Soyuz spacecraft, including:\nDerivatives.\nThe Zond spacecraft was designed to take a crew around the Moon, but never achieved the required degree of safety or political need. Zond 5 did circle the Moon in September 1968, with two tortoises and other life forms, and returned safely to Earth although in an atmospheric entry which probably would have killed human travelers. \nThe Progress series of robotic cargo ships for the Salyut, Mir, and ISS use the engine section, orbital module, automatic navigation, docking mechanism, and overall layout of the Soyuz spacecraft, but are incapable of reentry.\nWhile not a direct derivative, the Chinese Shenzhou spacecraft follows the basic template originally pioneered by Soyuz.\nSoyuz uncrewed flights.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53540", "revid": "1942604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53540", "title": "Terminal emulator", "text": "Program that emulates a video terminal\nA terminal emulator, or terminal application, is a computer program that emulates a video terminal within another display architecture. Though typically synonymous with a shell or text terminal, the term \"terminal\" covers all remote terminals, including graphical interfaces. A terminal emulator inside a graphical user interface is often called a terminal window.\nA terminal window allows the user access to a text terminal and all its applications such as command-line interfaces (CLI) and text user interface (TUI) applications. These may be running either on the same machine or on a different one via telnet, ssh, dial-up, or over a direct serial connection. On Unix-like operating systems, it is common to have one or more terminal windows connected to the local machine.\nTerminals usually support a set of escape sequences for controlling color, cursor position, etc. Examples include the family of terminal control sequence standards that includes ECMA-48, ANSI X3.64, and ISO/IEC 6429.\nBackground.\nIn the early days of computing, with the advent of interactive computing, the prevailing model involved a central computer connected to multiple terminals. This configuration, known as the centralized or mainframe model, featured a powerful central computer that performed all the processing tasks, while terminals served as input/output devices for users to interact with the system. These systems were initially character based.\nEmulators.\nWhen personal computers became ubiquitous in the 1980s, they offered the option of running software on the user's personal computer, providing an opportunity to replace the expensive and space consuming hardware terminals with something that had additional functions. Immediately software became available, that could emulate the functions of the hardware terminals on a PC. Examples of such software for DOS were Telix or Telemate, which was published in 1988 and could emulate a DEC VT102 terminal.\nWorkstations, usually running versions of Unix, also became common in the 1980s. Unix systems usually provided access to the command line with locally-attached or dial-up terminals. Unix workstations were designed to be used primarily through a graphical user interface (GUI); to provide access to the command line, the GUI included terminal emulator applications that behaved like locally-attached terminals.\nDuring the 1990s, new operating systems like Windows and OS/2 arrived, providing the technical background for more terminal emulators such as ZOC for OS/2, or PuTTY, which was initially released for Windows in 1998 and which (together with its derivates) remains a very popular choice to this day.\nThrough the success of Linux, especially running on data centers and cloud servers, the necessity of accessing remote computers through character based terminals remains. This is evident in the fact, that today lists of terminal emulators that could serve as alternative to the aforementioned PuTTY offers over 100 alternatives.\nExamples of terminals emulated.\nMany terminal emulators have been developed for physical hardware terminals such as VT52, VT100, VT220, VT320, IBM 3270/8/9/E, IBM 5250, IBM 3179G, Data General D211, Hewlett-Packard HP700/92, Sperry/Unisys 2000-series UTS60, Burroughs/Unisys A-series T27/TD830/ET1100, ADDS ViewPoint, AT386, Siemens Nixdorf (SNI) 97801, Televideo 925, and Wyse 50/60.\nSome terminal emulators, such as xterm, implement additional features not present in the emulated terminal.\nAdditionally, programs have been developed to emulate assorted system console \"terminals\" such as the Sun workstation console and the Linux console.\nFinally, some emulators simply refer to a set of standards, such as the standards for ANSI escape codes.\nSuch programs are available on many platforms, including DOS, Unix-like systems including Linux and macOS, Windows, and embedded operating systems found in cellphones and industrial hardware.\nImplementation details.\nUnix-like systems.\nIn the past, Unix and Unix-like systems used serial port devices such as RS-232 ports, and provided device files for them.\nWith terminal emulators these device files are themselves emulated by a pair of pseudoterminal devices. These in turn emulate a physical port/connection to the host computing endpoint \u2013 hardware provided by operating system APIs, or software such as rlogin, telnet or SSH, among others. In Linux systems, for example, these would be (for the master side) and (for the slave side) pseudoterminal devices respectively.\nThere are also special virtual console files like codice_1. In text mode, writing to the file displays text on the virtual console and reading from the file returns text the user writes to the virtual console. As with other text terminals, there are also special escape sequences, control characters and functions that a program can use, most easily via a library such as \"ncurses\". For more complex operations, the programs can use console and terminal special \"ioctl\" system calls. One can compare devices using the patterns vcs (\"virtual console screen\") and vcsa (\"virtual console screen with attributes\") such as codice_2 and codice_3.\nSome terminal emulators also include escape sequences for configuring the behavior of the terminal to facilitate good interoperation between the terminal and programs running inside of it, for example to configure paste bracketing.\nThe virtual consoles can be configured in the file codice_4 read by \"init\"\u2014typically it starts the text mode login process \"getty\" for several virtual consoles. X Window System can be configured in codice_4 or by an X display manager. A number of Linux distributions use systemd instead of init, which also allows virtual console configuration.\nCLI tools.\nTypical Linux system programs used to access the virtual consoles include:\nLocal echo.\nTerminal emulators may implement a local echo function, which may be named \"half-duplex\", or still slightly incorrectly \"echoplex\" (which is formally an error detection mechanism rather than an input display option).\nLine-at-a-time mode/Local editing.\nTerminal emulators may implement local editing, also known as \"line-at-a-time mode\". This is also mistakenly referred to as \"half-duplex\". In this mode, the terminal emulator only sends complete lines of input to the host system. The user enters and edits a line, but it is held locally within the terminal emulator as it is being edited. It is not transmitted until the user signals its completion, usually with the key on the keyboard or a \"send\" button of some sort in the user interface. At that point, the entire line is transmitted. Line-at-a-time mode implies local echo, since otherwise the user will not be able to see the line as it is being edited and constructed. However, line-at-a-time mode is independent of echo mode and does not \"require\" local echo. When entering a password, for example, line-at-a-time entry with local editing is possible, but local echo is turned off (otherwise the password would be displayed).\nThe complexities of line-at-a-time mode are exemplified by the line-at-a-time mode option in the telnet protocol. To implement it correctly, the \"Network Virtual Terminal\" implementation provided by the terminal emulator program must be capable of recognizing and properly dealing with \"interrupt\" and \"abort\" events that arrive in the middle of locally editing a line.\nSynchronous terminals.\nIn asynchronous terminals data can flow in any direction at any time. In synchronous terminals a protocol controls who may send data when. IBM 3270-based terminals used with IBM mainframe computers are an example of synchronous terminals. They operate in an essentially \"screen-at-a-time\" mode (also known as block mode). Users can make numerous changes to a page, before submitting the updated screen to the remote machine as a single action.\nTerminal emulators that simulate the 3270 protocol are available for most operating systems, for use both by those administering systems such as the z9, as well as those using the corresponding applications such as CICS.\nOther examples of synchronous terminals include the IBM 5250, ICL 7561, Honeywell Bull VIP7800 and Hewlett-Packard 700/92.\nVirtual consoles.\nVirtual consoles, also called virtual terminals, are emulated text terminals, using the keyboard and monitor of a personal computer or workstation. The word \"text\" is key since virtual consoles are not GUI terminals and they do not run inside a graphical interface. Virtual consoles are found on most Unix-like systems. They are primarily used to access and interact with servers, without using a graphical desktop environment.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53541", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53541", "title": "Command line", "text": ""}
{"id": "53542", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53542", "title": "Moscow, Idaho", "text": "City in northern Idaho, United States\nMoscow ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Latah County, Idaho. Located in the North Central region of the state along the border with Washington, it had a population of 25,435 at the 2020 United States census. Moscow is the home of the University of Idaho, the state's land-grant institution and primary research university.\nIt is the principal city in the Moscow, Idaho Micropolitan Statistical Area, which includes all of Latah County. The city contains over 60% of the county's population, and whilst the university is Moscow's dominant employer, the city also serves as an agricultural and commercial hub for the Palouse region.\nAlong with the rest of the Idaho Panhandle, Moscow is in the Pacific Time Zone. The elevation of its city center is above sea level. Two major highways serve the city, passing through the city center: US-95 (north-south) and ID-8 (east-west). The Pullman\u2013Moscow Regional Airport, west, provides limited commercial air service. The local newspaper is the \"Moscow-Pullman Daily News\".\nHistory.\nIndigenous people who inhabited what is now Moscow, Idaho include the Nez Perce, Palouse, and the Coeur d'Alene people (Schitsu\u2019umsh).\nCommunity.\nMiners and farmers began arriving in the northern Idaho area after the Civil War. The first permanent settlers came to the Moscow area in 1871. The abundance of camas bulbs, a favorite fodder of pigs brought by the farmers, led to naming the vicinity \"Hog Heaven.\" When the first US post office opened in 1872, the town was called \"Paradise Valley,\" but the name changed to \"Moscow\" in 1875. The name Paradise persists in the main waterway through town, Paradise Creek, which originates at the west end of the Palouse Range, flows south to the Troy Highway, and west to Pullman where it enters the South Fork of the Palouse River.\nHistorians have disputed the precise origin of the name \"Moscow\". There is no conclusive proof that it is connected to the Russian capital, though various accounts suggest it purposely evoked the Russian city or was named by Russian immigrants. Another account claims that the name derives from a Native American tribe named \"Masco\". Early settlers reported that five local men met to choose a proper name for the town, but could not agree. The postmaster, Samuel Neff, then completed the official papers for the town and chose \"Moscow\" for the name. Neff was born in Moscow, Pennsylvania.\nBy 1875, the town had a business district that was a center of commerce for the region. By 1890, the Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company's rail line (later the Union Pacific) and the Northern Pacific railroad line helped boost the town's population to 2,000.\nThe capital of the Idaho Territory was relocated from Lewiston to Boise in December 1864. In the late 1880s, statehood for the Washington Territory was nearing. Because its commercial and transportation interests looked west, rather than south, the citizens of the Idaho Panhandle passionately lobbied for their region to join Washington, or to form an entirely separate state, rather than remain connected with the less accessible southern Idaho. To appease the residents of the north, the territorial legislature of Idaho in Boise placed the new land grant university in Moscow, which at the time was the largest city other than Boise in the state. The University of Idaho was chartered in January 1889, and first opened its doors to students in October 1892.\nIn March 1890, Moscow's neighboring city, Pullman, became the home of Washington's land grant institution. The college that became Washington State University opened its doors in January 1892. Washington entered the union as the 42nd state in November 1889 and Idaho entered next, eight months later, in July 1890.\nMoscow Public Library.\nMembers of the Pleiades Club and Ladies' Historical Club formed a cooperative named the Women's Reading Room Society and established a small library in the Browne building at the corner of Main and Second Streets in 1902.\nIn 1904, the committee planned to raise funds for a new library building. Andrew Carnegie promised funding of $10,000 if the community agreed to maintain a free public library at the rate of at least $1000 annually. Moscow voters approved a permanent tax in 1905 and with successful fundraising by subscription of local residents and businesses, coupled with the Carnegie library money, the library construction was begun in 1905. In March 1906, the Mission Style building was ready for occupancy. Later that month, a fire at the university's Administration Building totally destroyed that structure, so the new library was used for university classes during the day and residents used the library in the evening. Beginning in 1907 the building was returned to full use as a library. The original library building (which is on the National Register of Historic Places) was expanded in 1931 and 1983. It houses a children's room named for Moscow native Carol Ryrie Brink, the author of 1936 Newbery Medal winner \"Caddie Woodlawn\".\nIn 2006, the Friends of the Library celebrated a Century of Service for the organization. The current organizational structure of library service encompasses all public libraries in Latah County as the Latah County Library District. The library enjoys broad support from the citizens of Moscow and the county and is also supported by the Idaho Commission for Libraries (formerly the Idaho State Library.)\nThe Moscow Public Library currently houses about 60% of Latah County Library District's 100,000 volume collection. Administrative, technical, youth services, and branch services offices for the Library District are all housed at this location as well. The library offers year-round programming for all ages, including storytimes and a summer reading program for children, book clubs for teenagers and adults, and presentations by outside experts and organizations. The library also offers public Internet access computers as well as free wifi.\nThe library serves as resource for all the residents of Moscow, or as one essayist (Ellis Clark) in the 2006 contest states, \"When time, money, or circumstances bind you to one locale, the Library is your passport for travel.\"\n1970 to 2009.\nThe opening of Moscow Mall (now Eastside Marketplace) and Palouse Empire Mall (now Palouse Mall) in the late 1970s shifted many retail businesses away from the aging city center, with buildings dating to the 1890s. The\u00a0city developed a revitalization project for downtown in the early 1970s that included a major traffic revision, which was enacted in\u00a01981. Traffic from US 95 on Main Street was diverted a block away to one-way corridors on Washington (northbound) and Jackson (southbound) streets, to alleviate congestion and improve pedestrian safety and the overall city center experience. Main Street was converted from four busy lanes with metered parallel parking to two lanes of local retail traffic with free diagonal parking; its sidewalks were modified and trees were added. At the north end of Moscow, southbound highway traffic divided west at 'D' Street to Jackson and returned to Main at 8th; the northbound route divided east at 8th, but returned to Main four blocks earlier in the north end, \nThe original 90-degree couplets of 1981 used existing streets of the grid. Planners intended these as temporary, but they remained for years. The primary safety hazard was inexperienced truck drivers\u2014excessive speed through the tight corners led to toppled loads and subsequent traffic snarls, with occasional damage to adjacent structures. The new, straighter couplets at the north end are both over a block in length and eliminated existing structures. The return couplet from Washington Street runs from 1st Street to beyond 'A' Street; it eliminated the original front portion (white stucco chapel) of the Corner Club tavern at the northeast corner of 'A' and Main, which was demolished in early 1991 after staving off its elimination for over a decade. The building on the southeast corner, was razed for the traffic project in 1977 and was a vacant lot for \nThe first of the new couplets was completed during the summer of 1991. The new southbound couplet to Jackson Street was completed the following year in 1992 and begins north of 'C' Street. It eliminated a former service station at the northwest corner of 'C' and Main, which had been converted to other retail for over a decade. The critical couplet at the south end of the city was delayed several times for various reasons. Completed in 2000, it is two blocks south and one block east of the 1981 divider at 8th Street. After Sweet Avenue, northbound Main Street bends a block east to align with northbound one-way Washington Street, intersecting the two-way Troy Highway from the southeast. Southbound US 95 traffic joins the intersection from the northwest, arriving on a one-way diagonal from Jackson Street. Agricultural buildings on the block between Jackson and Main (College St. to Lewis St.) were razed in the late 1990s to complete this new corridor. The\u00a0completion of the south couplet allowed Gritman Medical Center to expand southward, over Eighth Street.\nAnother significant change to local commerce was the increase of the state's legal drinking age to 21 in April 1987, after nearly fifteen years at age\u00a019. Many establishments that relied on revenues from 19- and 20-year-olds from the two university communities had to adjust or cease operations. Prior to the lowering to 19 in July 1972, the drinking age in Idaho was 20 for beer and 21 for liquor and wine.\nA fixture of the Moscow skyline for nearly a century, the concrete grain elevators on south Main Street were demolished in March 2007. Located on the southwest corner of 8th &amp; Main, the elevators were last operated by the Latah County Grain Growers. The other major concrete elevator complex, on Jackson Street south of 6th, was also slated for the wrecking ball. Idle since 2005, a preservationist group saved it in 2007. Its newer large-diameter metal silo hosted summer theater productions in 2011.\n2010 to present.\nMoscow is known internationally as the location of Christ Church and its associated ministries: Canon Press and New Saint Andrews College, as well as Logos School. Crawford Gribben suggests that Moscow is \"America's most postmillennial town\", since the town's two explicitly postmillennial congregations (Christ Church and Trinity Reformed Church), make up about 10% of the town's permanent population.\nIn the early morning hours of November 13, 2022, four University of Idaho students were stabbed to death in an off-campus rented home in Moscow by an attacker using a Ka-Bar knife. On December 30, 28-year-old Bryan C. Kohberger, a PhD candidate at the Washington State University, was arrested and charged with four counts of murder and one count of felony burglary, after his DNA was linked to the crime scene. He initially pleaded not guilty, before changing his plea to guilty in July 2025, to avoid the death penalty. Kohberger was subsequently sentenced to four consecutive life sentences without the possibility of parole and an additional 10 years for burglary.\nGeography.\nMain Street runs north\u2013south through Moscow along the 117th meridian west.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.\nMoscow lies on the eastern edge of the Palouse region of north central Idaho in the Columbia River Plateau. East of the city is a valley within the mountains of the Palouse Range to the northeast, whose highest point is Moscow Mountain at above sea level. The less prominent Paradise Ridge at and Tomer Butte at are southeast of the city. Paradise Creek, with headwaters on Moscow Mountain to the northeast, flows through Moscow, then crosses the state border and joins the south fork of the Palouse River near Pullman, which eventually drains into the Snake River and Columbia River on its way to the Pacific Ocean.\nThe geology in and around Moscow represents varied formations: very old intrusive granite structures of the Jurassic\u2212Eocene Idaho Batholith, fertile fields atop rolling hills of deep Pleistocene loess of the Palouse Formation deposited after the last ice age by westerly winds, and flood-worn channels of the Columbia River Basalt Group.\nThere is a variety of flora and fauna within the vicinity of Moscow. An amphibian, the Rough-skinned Newt, has a disjunctive population at Moscow; this species is found typically along the Pacific coast of the US. The city sits at the boundary between the Palouse grasslands and wheat fields, and the conifer forests of the Rocky Mountains to the east.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Moscow has either a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csb\") or a dry-summer continental climate (\"Dsb\").\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe most reported ancestries in 2020 were:\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 23,800 people, 9,180 households, and 4,335 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 9,879 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 90.9% White, 1.1% African American, 0.6% Native American, 3.1% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 1.4% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.6% of the population.\nThere were 9,180 households, of which 22.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.8% were married couples living together, 6.1% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.4% had a male householder with no wife present, and 52.8% were non-families. 31.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.91.\nThe median age in the city was 24.2 years. 16.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 36.1% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 24.7% were from 25 to 44; 15.6% were from 45 to 64; and 7.4% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 51.8% male and 48.2% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 21,291 people, 7,724 households, and 3,869 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 8,029 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was:\nHispanic or Latino of any race were 2.47% of the population.\nThere were 7,724 households, out of which 24.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.0% were married couples living together, 6.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 49.9% were non-families. 29.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.87.\nIn the city, the age distribution of the population shows:\nThe median age was 24 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 110.1 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $26,884, and the median income for a family was $46,331. Males had a median income of $35,494 versus $24,560 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,930. About 9.5% of families and 22.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.2% of those under age 18 and 4.5% of those age 65 or over.\nArts and culture.\nThe city was highlighted in a comedy special at University of Idaho by actor-comedian Yakov Smirnoff, filmed in late 1990. Using Moscow as its setting pokes fun at Smirnoff emigrating from Moscow, Russia.\nParks and recreation.\nThere are seventeen neighborhood parks located throughout the town offering a wide variety of venues for outdoor activities. These parks fall under the jurisdiction of the Moscow Parks and Recreation Department. The Moscow Pathways Commission (formerly Paradise Path Task Force) is a citizen committee seeking to develop a system of linearly connected parks throughout the area. Carol Ryrie Brink Nature Park was a community collaboration between the Palouse Clearwater Environmental Institute and local volunteers to remeander Paradise Creek and add riparian plantings. The Moscow community, including schools and the city, led by local youth, raised money over several years to fund, design, and build a skate park that was completed in 2000. A\u00a0park just north of the university is named for Admiral Robert Ghormley, from 1933 to 1997, it was the site of the city's outdoor swimming pool. Its replacement, the Hamilton-Lowe Aquatics Center in northeast Moscow, opened in June 2000.\nThe Latah Trail, completed in October 2008, extends from the eastern edge of Moscow bike path system to Troy, parallel to the Troy Highway (SH-8) for most of its . On\u00a0the west side of Moscow, the Bill Chipman Palouse Trail connects the two university communities of the Palouse. Starting at the University of Idaho's Perimeter Road, it gradually descends with Paradise Creek for to Pullman through Whitman County, alongside the Moscow-Pullman Highway. Completed in April 1998, the trail honors a Pullman businessman (and UI alumnus) who died two years earlier, following a winter highway accident in Spokane County. The Paradise Path bridges the gap in Moscow between the endpoints of the Chipman and Latah trails, passing through the north and east edges of the UI campus. The trail systems together constitute a continuous paved linear park from Pullman to Troy, extending in Troy beyond the eastern boundary of the Palouse ecosystem. From Pullman to the western boundary of Moscow (the state line), it follows the right of way of a dismantled Union Pacific railroad line, and east of US-95 it follows the right of way of a dismantled BNSF railroad line that junctioned at Arrow on the Clearwater River by way of Troy, Kendrick, and Juliaetta.\nThe defunct Tamarack Ski Area was on the east-facing slope of East Moscow Mountain; a grove of ancient red cedar trees is nearby, just northeast of Moscow Mountain's summit.\nGovernment.\nMoscow has a Mayor-Council form of government consisting of six Council members (at large) and a Mayor. These positions are elected separately and serve four year terms. Council member elections are held in odd-numbered years in November, with terms staggered so that three of the six seats are open at each election. Mayoral elections are held the November after a US presidential election.\nThe Council elects a President and vice-president from among its members at its first meeting in January each year. These two officers may stand in for the mayor as necessary. Council is the legislative and judicial arm of Moscow's City government; enacting ordinances and resolutions. This body confirms the Mayor's appointments of City officials and citizen advisory commission members. Council approves the city's annual budget and serves as the convening body for public hearings and appeals of other City Boards and Commissions. Meetings are generally scheduled for the first and third Monday of each month, beginning at 7:00\u00a0p.m.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nThe University of Idaho (officially abbreviated \"U of I\") is Idaho's oldest public university, located in the city of Moscow in Latah County in the northern portion of the state. It is the state's flagship, land-grant, and primary research university. The University of Idaho was the state's sole university for 71 years, until 1963, and its College of Law, established in 1909, was first accredited by the American Bar Association in 1925.\nFormed by the territorial legislature on January 30, 1889, the university opened its doors in 1892 on October 3, with an initial class of 40 students. The first graduating class in 1896 contained two men and two women. It presently has an enrollment exceeding 12,000, with over 11,000 on the Moscow campus. The university offers 142 degree programs, including bachelor's, master's, doctoral, and specialists' degrees. Certificates of completion are offered in 30 areas of study. At 25% and 53%, its 4 and 6 year graduation rates are the highest of any public university in Idaho, and it generates 74% of all research money in the state, with research expenditures of $100 million in 2010 alone.\nAs a land-grant university and the primary research university in the state, UI has the largest campus in the state at , located in the hills of the Palouse region. The school is home to the Idaho Vandals, who competed on the Division I FBS (formerly I-A) level through the 2017 season before dropping down to the FCS level in 2018. In addition to the main campus in Moscow, the UI has branch campuses in Coeur d'Alene, Boise, Twin Falls, and Idaho Falls. It also operates a research park in Post Falls and dozens of extension offices statewide.\nNew Saint Andrews College opened in 1994 and moved to its present campus on Main Street in 2003.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe Moscow School District #281, which covers the entire city limits, operates Moscow High School (9-12), an alternative high school, a middle school (6-8), and four elementary schools (two K-5, one K-2, one 3\u20135).\nThere are two public charter schools and three private schools in the city.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nUS-95 connects Moscow to Coeur d'Alene, Lewiston, and the Treasure Valley with onward connections to Boise. ID-8 runs east\u2013west through Moscow and travels to Pullman in the west and Troy to the east.\nAirports.\nPullman\u2013Moscow Regional Airport is west, just east of the Washington State University campus. Other nearby airports are the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport, south, and Spokane International, north.\nRail and bus service.\nThe Moscow Intermodal Transit Center is the transport hub for SMART (Sustainable Moscow Area Transit Service) transit and intercity bus services. Bus service to Spokane and Boise is offered by Northwestern Trailways. Wheatland Express also provides service to Spokane.\nBicycles.\nThe Paradise Path is an east-to-west multi-use path that connects to shopping centers, the University of Idaho, and city parks. A small network of bike lanes and sharrows connects the Paradise Path to downtown and residential areas to the east. There are intercity bike trail connections with the Bill Chipman Palouse Trail to Pullman, Washington and the Latah Trail to the eastern town of Troy.\nSister city.\nMoscow has one sister city, as designated by Sister Cities International:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53543", "revid": "150564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53543", "title": "Domestication of the horse", "text": "It is not entirely clear how, when or where the domestication of the horse took place. Although horses appeared in Paleolithic cave art as early as 30,000\u00a0BCE, these were wild horses and were probably hunted for meat. The clearest evidence of early use of the horse as a means of transport is from chariot burials dated c.\u20092000\u00a0BCE. However, an increasing amount of evidence began to support the hypothesis that horses were domesticated in the Eurasian Steppes in approximately 3500 BCE.\nDiscoveries in the context of the Botai culture had suggested that Botai settlements in the Akmola Province of Kazakhstan are the location of the earliest domestication of the horse. However, Taylor and Barr\u00f3n-Ortiz (2021) argue that Botai findings only reflect intensive exploitation of wild horses\u2014possibly involving some level of management, herding, or seasonal capture\u2014but not full domestication in the way we see in later horse-using societies. Warmuth et al. (2012) pointed to horses having been domesticated around 3000\u00a0BCE in what is now Ukraine and Western Kazakhstan. The evidence is disputed by archaeozoologist Williams T. Taylor, who argues that domestication did not take place until around 2000\u00a0BCE.\nGenetic evidence indicates that domestication of the modern horse's ancestors likely occurred in an area known as the Volga\u2013Don, in the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe region of eastern Europe, around 2200\u00a0BCE. From there, use of horses spread across Eurasia for transportation, agricultural work, and warfare. Scientists have linked the successful spread of domesticated horses to observed genetic changes. They speculate that stronger backs (GSDMC gene) and increased docility (ZFPM1 gene) may have made horses more suitable for riding.\nBackground.\nThe date of the domestication of the horse depends to some degree upon the definition of \"domestication\". Some zoologists define \"domestication\" as human control over breeding, which can be detected in ancient skeletal samples by changes in the size and variability of ancient horse populations. Other researchers look at the broader evidence, including skeletal and dental evidence of working activity; weapons, art, and spiritual artifacts; and lifestyle patterns of human cultures. There is evidence that horses were kept as a source of meat and milk before they were trained as working animals.\nAttempts to date domestication by genetic study or analysis of physical remains rest on the assumption that there was a separation of the genotypes of domesticated and wild populations. Such a separation appears to have taken place, but dates based on such methods can only produce an estimate of the latest possible date for domestication without excluding the possibility of an unknown period of earlier gene flow between wild and domestic populations (which will occur naturally as long as the domesticated population is kept within the habitat of the wild population).\nWhether one adopts the narrower zoological definition of domestication or the broader cultural definition that rests on an array of zoological and archaeological evidence affects the time frame chosen for the domestication of the horse. The date of 4000\u00a0BCE is based on evidence that includes the appearance of dental pathologies associated with bitting, changes in butchering practices, changes in human economies and settlement patterns, the depiction of horses as symbols of power in artifacts, and the appearance of horse bones in human graves. On the other hand, measurable changes in size and increases in variability associated with domestication occurred later, about 2500\u20132000\u00a0BCE, as seen in horse remains found at the site of Csepel-Haros in Hungary, a settlement of the Bell Beaker culture.\nUse of horses spread across Eurasia for transportation, agricultural work and warfare. Horses and mules in agriculture used a breastplate type harness or a yoke more suitable for oxen, which was not as efficient at utilizing the full strength of the animals as the later-invented padded horse collar that arose several millennia later.\nPredecessors to the domestic horse.\nA 2005 study analyzed the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of a worldwide range of equids, from 53,000-year-old fossils to contemporary horses. Their analysis placed all equids into a single clade, or group with a single common ancestor, consisting of three genetically divergent species: the South American \"Hippidion\", the North American New World stilt-legged horse, and \"Equus\", the true horse. The true horse included prehistoric horses and the Przewalski's horse, as well as what is now the many breeds of modern domestic horses, belonged to a single Holarctic species.\nThe true horse migrated from the Americas to Eurasia via Beringia, becoming broadly distributed from North America to central Europe, north and south of Pleistocene ice sheets. It became extinct in Beringia around 14,200 years ago, and in the rest of the Americas around 10,000 years ago. This clade survived in Eurasia, however, and it is from these horses which all domestic horses appear to have descended. These horses showed little phylogeographic structure, probably reflecting their high degree of mobility and adaptability.\nTherefore, the domestic horse today is classified as \"Equus ferus caballus\". No genetic originals of native wild horses currently exist. The Przewalski diverged from the modern horse before domestication. It has 66 chromosomes, as opposed to 64 among modern domesticated horses, and their Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) forms a distinct cluster. Genetic evidence suggests that modern Przewalski's horses are descended from a distinct regional gene pool in the eastern part of the Eurasian steppes, not from the same genetic group that gave rise to modern domesticated horses. Nevertheless, evidence such as the cave paintings of Lascaux suggests that the ancient wild horses that some researchers now label the \"Tarpan subtype\" probably resembled Przewalski horses in their general appearance: big heads, dun coloration, thick necks, stiff upright manes, and relatively short, stout legs.\nThe horses of the Ice Age were hunted for meat in Europe and across the Eurasian steppes and in North America by early modern humans. Numerous kill sites exist and many cave paintings in Europe indicate what they looked like. Many of these Ice Age subspecies died out during the rapid climate changes associated with the end of the last Ice Age particularly in North America, where the horse became completely extinct.\nTwo undomesticated sub-species survived into historic times: Przewalski's horse (\"Equus ferus przewalski\") and the Tarpan (\"Equus ferus ferus\"). The Tarpan became extinct in the late 19th century and Przewalski's horse is endangered; it became extinct in the wild during the late 1960s, but was re-introduced in the early 1990s to two preserves in Mongolia. Although researchers such as Marija Gimbutas theorized that the horses of the Chalcolithic (Copper Age) were Przewalski's, more recent genetic studies indicate that Przewalski's horse is not an ancestor to modern domesticated horses.\nGenetic evidence.\nA 2014 study compared DNA from ancient horse bones that predated domestication and compared them to DNA of modern horses, discovering 125 genes that correlated to domestication. Some were physical, affecting muscle and limb development, cardiac strength and balance. Others were linked to cognitive function and most likely were critical to the taming of the horse, including social behavior, learning capabilities, fear response, and agreeableness. The DNA used in this study came from horse bones 16,000 to 43,000 years ago, and therefore the precise changes that occurred at the time of domestication have yet to be sequenced.\nThe domestication of stallions and mares can be analyzed separately by looking at those portions of the DNA that are passed on exclusively along the maternal (mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA) or paternal line (Y-chromosome or Y-DNA). DNA studies indicate that there may have been multiple domestication events for mares, as the number of female lines required to account for the genetic diversity of the modern horse suggests a minimum of 77 different ancestral mares, divided into 17 distinct lineages. Studies of modern horses showed very little Y chromosome diversity, which was originally interpreted as evidence of a single domestication event for a limited number of stallions combined with repeated restocking of wild females into the domesticated herds. However, more recent studies of ancient DNA show that Y chromosome diversity was significantly higher a thousand years ago. The low present diversity may be partially explained by the popularity of Arabian and Turkoman studs, especially the three foundation stallions of the Thoroughbred breed.\nA study published in 2012 that performed genomic sampling on 300 work horses from local areas as well as a review of previous studies of archaeology, mitochondrial DNA, and Y-DNA suggested that horses were originally domesticated in the western part of the Eurasian steppe. Both domesticated stallions and mares spread out from this area, and then additional wild mares were added from local herds; wild mares were easier to handle than wild stallions. Most other parts of the world were ruled out as sites for horse domestication, either due to climate unsuitable for an indigenous wild horse population or no evidence of domestication.\nGenes located on the Y-chromosome are inherited only from sire to its male offspring and these lines show a very reduced degree of genetic variation (aka genetic homogeneity) in modern domestic horses, far less than expected based on the overall genetic variation in the remaining genetic material. This indicates that a relatively few stallions were domesticated and that it is unlikely that many male offspring originating from unions between wild stallions and domestic mares were included in early domesticated breeding stock.\nGenes located in the mitochondrial DNA are passed on along the maternal line from the mother to her offspring. Multiple analyses of the mitochondrial DNA obtained from modern horses as well as from horse bones and teeth from archaeological and palaeological finds consistently shows an increased genetic diversity in the mitochondrial DNA compared to the remaining DNA, showing that a large number of mares has been included into the breeding stock of the originally domesticated horse.\nVariation in the mitochondrial DNA is used to determine so-called haplogroups. A haplogroup is a group of closely related haplotypes that share the same common ancestor. In horses, eighteen main haplogroups are recognized (A-R). Several haplogroups are unequally distributed around the world, indicating the addition of local wild mares to the domesticated stock.\nIn 2018, genomic comparison of 42 ancient-horse genomes, 20 of which were from Botai, with 46 published ancient and modern-horse genomes yielded surprising results. It was found that modern domestic horses are not closely related to the horses at Botai. Rather, Przewalski's horses were identified as feral descendants of horses herded at Botai. Evidence suggested that \"a massive genomic turnover\" had occurred along with the domestication of horses and large-scale human population expansion in the Early Bronze Age.\nSubsequent research showed that horse lineages from Iberia and Siberia, also associated with early domestication, had little influence on the genetics of modern domestic horses.\nMore than 150 scientists collaborated in gathering 264 ancient horse genomes from across Eurasia, dating from 50,000 to 200 B.C.E. In October 2021, results of the analysis were published in \"Nature\". They indicated that domestication of the modern horse's ancestors likely occurred in the Volga-Don region of the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe grasslands of Western Eurasia. Both Tarpan and Przewalski's horse were related to different ancestral populations than those underlying the modern domestic horses (DOM2).\nIn addition, researchers were able to map population changes over time as modern domestic horses expanded rapidly across Eurasia and displaced other local populations, from about 2000\u00a0BCE onwards. The genetic profile for DOM2 horses is associated with horses buried in Sintashta kurgans with early spoke-wheeled chariots, and with horses in Central Anatolia where two-wheeled vehicles were depicted. DOM2 horses also occur in some areas prior to the earliest evidence for chariots, suggesting that both horseback riding and chariot use were factors in expansion.\nGenetic data may also provide clues as to why this particular domestication event had far more widespread impact than other domestication events in Botai, Iberia, SIberia and Anatolia. The genetic lineage that leads to modern domestic horses shows evidence of strong selection for locomotor and behavioural adaptations. Changes relate to the GSDMC gene and the ZFPM1 gene. The GSDMC gene is linked to back problems in people, and scientists speculate that changes may have made horses' backs stronger. The ZFPM1 gene is related to mood regulation, and scientists speculate that this may have made horses more docile and easier to tame and manage. Strength and docility would have made horses more suitable for riding and other uses.\nArchaeological evidence.\nArchaeological evidence for the domestication of the horse comes from three kinds of sources: 1) changes in the skeletons and teeth of ancient horses; 2) changes in the geographic distribution of ancient horses, particularly the introduction of horses into regions where no wild horses had existed; and\n3) archaeological sites containing artifacts, images, or evidence of changes in human behavior connected with horses.\nExamples include horse remains interred in human graves; changes in the ages and sexes of the horses killed by humans; the appearance of horse corrals; equipment such as bits or other types of horse tack; horses interred with equipment intended for use by horses, such as chariots; and depictions of horses used for equestrianism, driving, draught work, or symbols of human power.\nFew of these categories, taken alone, provide irrefutable evidence of domestication, but the cumulative evidence becomes increasingly more persuasive.\nHorses interred with chariots.\nThe least ancient, but most persuasive, evidence of domestication comes from sites where horse leg bones and skulls, probably originally attached to hides, were interred with the remains of chariots in at least 16 graves of the Sintashta and Petrovka cultures. These were located in the steppes southeast of the Ural Mountains, between the upper Ural and upper Tobol Rivers, a region today divided between southern Russia and northern Kazakhstan. Petrovka was a little later than and probably grew out of Sintashta, and the two complexes together spanned about 2100\u20131700 BCE. A few of these graves contained the remains of as many as eight sacrificed horses placed in, above, and beside the grave.\nIn all of the dated chariot graves, the heads and hooves of a pair of horses were placed in a grave that once contained a chariot. Evidence of chariots in these graves was inferred from the impressions of two spoked wheels set in grave floors 1.2\u20131.6m apart; in most cases the rest of the vehicle left no trace. In addition, a pair of disk-shaped antler \"cheekpieces,\" an ancient predecessor to a modern bit shank or bit ring, were placed in pairs beside each horse head-and-hoof sacrifice. The inner faces of the disks had protruding prongs or studs that would have pressed against the horse's lips when the reins were pulled on the opposite side. Studded cheekpieces were a new and fairly severe kind of control device that appeared simultaneously with chariots.\nAll of the dated chariot graves contained wheel impressions, horse bones, weapons (arrow and javelin points, axes, daggers, or stone mace-heads), human skeletal remains, and cheekpieces. Because they were buried in teams of two with chariots and studded cheekpieces, the evidence is extremely persuasive that these steppe horses of 2100\u20131700 BCE were domesticated. Shortly after the period of these burials, the expansion of the domestic horse throughout Europe was little short of explosive. In the space of possibly 500 years, there is evidence of horse-drawn chariots in Greece, Egypt, and Mesopotamia. By another 500 years, the horse-drawn chariot had spread to China.\nSkeletal indicators of domestication.\nSome researchers do not consider an animal to be \"domesticated\" until it exhibits physical changes consistent with selective breeding, or at least having been born and raised entirely in captivity. Until that point, they classify captive animals as merely \"tamed\". Those who hold to this theory of domestication point to a change in skeletal measurements detected among horse bones recovered from middens dated about 2500 BCE in eastern Hungary in Bell-Beaker sites, and in later Bronze Age sites in the Russian steppes, Spain, and Eastern Europe. Horse bones from these contexts exhibited an increase in variability, thought to reflect the survival under human care of both larger and smaller individuals than appeared in the wild; and a decrease in average size, thought to reflect penning and restriction in diet. Horse populations that showed this combination of skeletal changes probably were domesticated. Most evidence suggests that horses were increasingly controlled by humans after about 2500 BCE. However, more recently there have been skeletal remains found at a site in Kazakhstan which display the smaller, more slender limbs characteristic of corralled animals, dated to 3500 BCE.\nBotai culture.\nSome of the most intriguing evidence of early domestication comes from the Botai culture, found in northern Kazakhstan. The Botai culture was a culture of foragers who seem to have adopted horseback riding in order to hunt the abundant wild horses of northern Kazakhstan between 3500 and 3000 BCE. Botai sites had no cattle or sheep bones; the only domesticated animals, in addition to horses, were dogs. Botai settlements in this period contained between 50 and 150 pit houses. Garbage deposits contained tens to hundreds of thousands of discarded animal bones, 65% to 99% of which had come from horses. Also, there has been evidence found of horse milking at these sites, with horse milk fats soaked into pottery shards dating to 3500 BCE. Earlier hunter-gatherers who lived in the same region had not hunted wild horses with such success, and lived for millennia in smaller, more shifting settlements, often containing less than 200 wild animal bones.\nEntire herds of horses were slaughtered by the Botai hunters, apparently in hunting drives. The adoption of horseback riding might explain the emergence of specialised horse-hunting techniques and larger, more permanent settlements. Domesticated horses could have been adopted from neighboring herding societies in the steppes west of the Ural Mountains, where the Khvalynsk culture had herds of cattle and sheep, and perhaps had domesticated horses, as early as 4800 BCE.\nOther researchers have argued that all of the Botai horses were wild, and that the horse-hunters of Botai hunted wild horses on foot. As evidence, they note that zoologists have found no skeletal changes in the Botai horses that indicate domestication. Moreover, because they were hunted for food, the majority of the horse remains found in Botai-culture settlements indeed probably were wild. On the other hand, any domesticated riding horses were probably the same size as their wild cousins and cannot now be distinguished by bone measurements. They also note that the age structure of the horses slaughtered at Botai represents a natural demographic profile for hunted animals, not the pattern expected if they were domesticated and selected for slaughter. However, these arguments were published before a Copper Age corral was discovered at Krasnyi Yar in 2006 and mats of horse-dung at two other Botai sites. Current findings continue to support the Botai as having domesticated horses.\nA study in 2018 revealed that the Botai horses did not contribute significantly to the genetics of modern domesticated horses, and that therefore a subsequent and separate domestication event must have been responsible for the modern domestic horse. Genetic evidence also connects Botai horses with Przewalski's horse in Mongolia, which has led to debates over whether Przewalski's horses should be considered a never-domesticated population or feral descendants of domesticated Botai horses.\nBit wear.\nThe presence of bit wear is an indicator that a horse was ridden or driven, and the earliest of such evidence from a site in Kazakhstan dates to 3500 BCE. The absence of bit wear on horse teeth is not conclusive evidence against domestication because horses can be ridden and controlled without bits by using a noseband or a hackamore, but such materials do not produce significant physiological changes nor are they apt to be preserved for millennia.\nThe regular use of a bit to control a horse can create wear facets or bevels on the anterior corners of the lower second premolars. The corners of the horse's mouth normally keep the bit on the \"bars\" of the mouth, an interdental space where there are no teeth, forward of the premolars. The bit must be manipulated by a human or the horse must move it with its tongue for it to touch the teeth. Wear can be caused by the bit abrading the front corners of the premolars if the horse grasps and releases the bit between its teeth; other wear can be created by the bit striking the vertical front edge of the lower premolars, due to very strong pressure from a human handler.\nModern experiments showed that even organic bits of rope or leather can create significant wear facets, and also showed that facets 3mm (.118 in) deep or more do not appear on the premolars of wild horses. However, other researchers disputed both conclusions.\nWear facets of 3\u00a0mm or more were found on seven horse premolars in two sites of the Botai culture, Botai and Kozhai 1, dated about 3500\u20133000 BCE. The Botai culture premolars are the earliest reported multiple examples of this dental pathology in any archaeological site, and preceded any skeletal change indicators by 1,000 years. While wear facets more than 3\u00a0mm deep were discovered on the lower second premolars of a single stallion from Dereivka in Ukraine, an Eneolithic settlement dated about 4000 BCE, dental material from one of the worn teeth later produced a radiocarbon date of 700\u2013200 BCE, indicating that this stallion was actually deposited in a pit dug into the older Eneolithic site during the Iron Age.\nDung and corrals.\nSoil scientists working with Sandra Olsen of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History at the Chalcolithic settlements of Botai and Krasnyi Yar in northern Kazakhstan found layers of horse dung, discarded in unused house pits in both settlements. The collection and disposal of horse dung suggests that horses were confined in corrals or stables. An actual corral, dated to 3500\u20133000 BCE was identified at Krasnyi Yar by a pattern of post holes for a circular fence, with the soils inside the fence yielding ten times more phosphorus than the soils outside. The phosphorus could represent the remains of manure.\nGeographic expansion.\nThe appearance of horse remains in human settlements in regions where they had not previously been present is another indicator of domestication. Although images of horses appear as early as the Upper Paleolithic period in places such as the caves of Lascaux, France, suggesting that wild horses lived in regions outside of the Eurasian steppes before domestication and may have even been hunted by early humans, concentration of remains suggests animals being deliberately captured and contained, an indicator of domestication, at least for food, if not necessarily use as a working animal.\nAround 3500\u20133000 BCE, horse bones began to appear more frequently in archaeological sites beyond their center of distribution in the Eurasian steppes and were seen in central Europe, the middle and lower Danube valley, and the North Caucasus and Transcaucasia. Evidence of horses in these areas had been rare before, and as numbers increased, larger animals also began to appear in horse remains. This expansion in range was contemporary with the Botai culture, where there are indications that horses were corralled and ridden. This does not necessarily mean that horses were first domesticated in the steppes, but the horse-hunters of the steppes certainly pursued wild horses more than in any other region.\nEuropean wild horses were hunted for up to 10% of the animal bones in a handful of Mesolithic and Neolithic settlements scattered across Spain, France, and the marshlands of northern Germany, but in many other parts of Europe, including Greece, the Balkans, the British Isles, and much of central Europe, horse bones do not occur or occur very rarely in Mesolithic, Neolithic or Chalcolithic sites. In contrast, wild horse bones regularly exceeded 40% of the identified animal bones in Mesolithic and Neolithic camps in the Eurasian steppes, west of the Ural Mountains.\nHorse bones were rare or absent in Neolithic and Chalcolithic kitchen garbage in western Turkey, Mesopotamia, most of Iran, South and Central Asia, and much of Europe. While horse bones have been identified in Neolithic sites in central Turkey, all equids together totaled less than 3% of the animal bones. Within this three percent, horses were less than 10%, with 90% or more of the equids represented by onagers (\"Equus hemionus\") or another ass-like equid that later became extinct, the hydruntine or European wild ass (\"Equus hydruntinus\"). Onagers were the most common native wild equids of the Near East. They were hunted in Syria, Anatolia, Mesopotamia, Iran, and Central Asia; and domesticated asses (\"Equus asinus\") were imported into Mesopotamia, probably from Egypt, but wild horses apparently did not live there.\nOther evidence of geographic expansion.\nIn Northern Caucasus, the Maikop culture settlements and burials of c. 3300 BC contain both horse bones and images of horses. A frieze of nineteen horses painted in black and red colours is found in one of the Maikop graves. The widespread appearance of horse bones and images in Maikop sites suggest to some observers that horseback riding began in the Maikop period.\nLater, images of horses, identified by their short ears, flowing manes, and tails that bushed out at the dock, began to appear in artistic media in Mesopotamia during the Akkadian period, 2300\u20132100 BCE. The word for \"horse\", literally translated as \"ass of the mountains,\" first appeared in Sumerian documents during the Third dynasty of Ur, about 2100\u20132000 BCE. The kings of the Third Dynasty of Ur apparently fed horses to lions for royal entertainment, perhaps indicating that horses were still regarded as more exotic than useful, but King Shulgi, about 2050 BCE, compared himself to \"a horse of the highway that swishes its tail\", and one image from his reign showed a man apparently riding a horse at full gallop. Horses were imported into Mesopotamia and the lowland Near East in larger numbers after 2000 BCE in connection with the beginning of chariot warfare, replacing the long-established kunga (a hybrid between the now-extinct Syrian wild ass and a domestic donkey) as the main equid for warfare.\nA further expansion, into the lowland Near East and northwestern China, also happened around 2000 BCE. Although \"Equus\" bones of uncertain species are found in some Late Neolithic sites in China dated before 2000 BCE, \"Equus caballus\" or \"Equus ferus\" bones first appeared in multiple sites and in significant numbers in sites of the Qijia and Siba cultures, 2000\u20131600 BCE, in Gansu and the northwestern provinces of China. Skeletal evidence from sites in Shirenzigou and Xigou in eastern Xinjiang indicate that by the fourth century BCE both horseback riding and mounted archery were practiced along China's northwest frontier.\nA few horse bones, and an iron horse bit, have been found at Gandhara grave culture (c. 1200 - 800 BCE) sites, of Pakistan's, Swat Valley. While the contemporary Vedas (c. 1500\u2013500 BCE) make numerous references to both the use of horses and chariots within the Indian subcontinent.\nIn 2008, archaeologists announced the discovery of rock art in Somalia's northern Dhambalin region, which the researchers suggest is one of the earliest known depictions of a hunter on horseback. The rock art is in the Ethiopian-Arabian style, dated to 1000 to 3000 BCE.\nHorse images as symbols of power.\nAbout 4200-4000 BCE, more than 500 years before the geographic expansion evidenced by the presence of horse bones, new kinds of graves, named after a grave at Suvorovo, appeared north of the Danube delta in the coastal steppes of Ukraine near Izmail. Suvorovo graves were similar to and probably derived from earlier funeral traditions in the steppes around the Dnieper River. Some Suvorovo graves contained polished stone mace-heads shaped like horse heads and horse tooth beads. Earlier steppe graves also had contained polished stone mace-heads, some of them carved in the shape of animal heads. Settlements in the steppes contemporary with Suvorovo, such as Sredni Stog II and Dereivka on the Dnieper River, contained 12\u201352% horse bones.\nWhen Suvorovo graves appeared in the Danube delta grasslands, horse-head maces also appeared in some of the indigenous farming towns of the Trypillia and Gumelnitsa cultures in present-day Romania and Moldova, near the Suvorovo graves. These agricultural cultures had not previously used polished-stone maces, and horse bones were rare or absent in their settlement sites. Probably their horse-head maces came from the Suvorovo immigrants. The Suvorovo people in turn acquired many copper ornaments from the Trypillia and Gumelnitsa towns. After this episode of contact and trade, but still during the period 4200\u20134000 BCE, about 600 agricultural towns in the Balkans and the lower Danube valley, some of which had been occupied for 2000 years, were abandoned. Copper mining ceased in the Balkan copper mines, and the cultural traditions associated with the agricultural towns were terminated in the Balkans and the lower Danube valley. This collapse of \"Old Europe\" has been attributed to the immigration of mounted Indo-European warriors. The collapse could have been caused by intensified warfare, for which there is some evidence; and warfare could have been worsened by mounted raiding; and the horse-head maces have been interpreted as indicating the introduction of domesticated horses and riding just before the collapse.\nHowever, mounted raiding is just one possible explanation for this complex event. Environmental deterioration, ecological degradation from millennia of farming, and the exhaustion of easily mined oxide copper ores also are cited as causal factors.\nArtifacts.\nPerforated antler objects discovered at Derievka (mistakenly, Dereivka) and other sites contemporary with Suvorovo have been identified as cheekpieces or \"psalia\" for horse bits. This identification is no longer widely accepted, as the objects in question have not been found associated with horse bones, and could have had a variety of other functions. However, through studies of microscopic wear, it has been established that many of the bone tools at Botai were used to smooth rawhide thongs, and rawhide thongs might have been used to manufacture of rawhide cords and ropes, useful for horse tack. Similar bone thong-smoothers are known from many other steppe settlements, but it cannot be known how the thongs were used. The oldest artifacts clearly identified as horse tack\u2014bits, bridles, cheekpieces, or any other kind of horse gear\u2014are the antler disk-shaped cheekpieces associated with the invention of the chariot, at the Sintashta-Petrovka sites.\nHorses interred in human graves.\nThe oldest possible archaeological indicator of a changed relationship between horses and humans is the appearance about 4800\u20134400 BCE of horse bones and carved images of horses in Chalcolithic graves of the early Khvalynsk culture and the Samara culture in the middle Volga region of Russia. At the Khvalynsk cemetery near the town of Khvalynsk, 158 graves of this period were excavated. Of these, 26 graves contained parts of sacrificed domestic animals, and additional sacrifices occurred in ritual deposits on the original ground surface above the graves. Ten graves contained parts of lower horse legs; two of these also contained the bones of domesticated cattle and sheep. At least 52 domesticated sheep or goats, 23 domesticated cattle, and 11 horses were sacrificed at Khvalynsk. The inclusion of horses with cattle and sheep and the exclusion of obviously wild animals together suggest that horses were categorized symbolically with domesticated animals.\nAt S'yezzhe, a contemporary cemetery of the Samara culture, parts of two horses were placed above a group of human graves. The pair of horses here was represented by the head and hooves, probably originally attached to hides. The same ritual\u2014using the hide with the head and lower leg bones as a symbol for the whole animal\u2014was used for many domesticated cattle and sheep sacrifices at Khvalynsk. Horse images carved from bone were placed in the above-ground ochre deposit at S'yezzhe and occurred at several other sites of the same period in the middle and lower Volga region. Together these archaeological clues suggest that horses had a symbolic importance in the Khvalynsk and Samara cultures that they had lacked earlier, and that they were associated with humans, domesticated cattle, and domesticated sheep. Thus, the earliest phase in the domestication of the horse might have begun during the period 4800-4400 BCE.\nMethods of domestication.\nEquidae died out in the Western Hemisphere at the end of the last glacial period. A question raised is why and how horses avoided this fate on the Eurasian continent. It has been theorized that domestication saved the species. While the environmental conditions for equine survival were somewhat more favorable in Eurasia than in the Americas, the same stressors that led to extinction for the mammoth had an effect upon horse populations. Thus, some time after 8000 BCE, the approximate date of extinction in the Americas, humans in Eurasia may have begun to keep horses as a livestock food source, and by keeping them in captivity, may have helped to preserve the species. Horses also fit the six core criteria for livestock domestication, and thus, it could be argued, \"chose\" to live in close proximity to humans.\nOne model of horse domestication starts with individual foals being kept as pets while the adult horses were slaughtered for meat. Foals are relatively small and easy to handle. Horses behave as herd animals and need companionship to thrive. Both historic and modern data shows that foals can and will bond to humans and other domestic animals to meet their social needs. Thus domestication may have started with young horses who were predisposed to docility being repeatedly bred as pets, preceding the great discovery that these pets could be ridden or otherwise put to work.\nHowever, there is disagreement over the definition of the term \"domestication\". One interpretation of \"domestication\" is that it must include physiological changes associated with being selectively bred in captivity, and not merely \"tamed.\" It has been noted that traditional peoples worldwide (both hunter-gatherers and horticulturists) routinely tame individuals from wild species, typically by hand-rearing infants whose parents have been killed, and these animals are not necessarily \"domesticated.\"\nOn the other hand, some researchers look to examples from historical times to hypothesize how domestication occurred. For example, while Native American cultures captured and rode horses from the 16th century onwards, most tribes did not exert significant control over their breeding, thus their horses developed a genotype and phenotype adapted to the uses and climatological conditions in which they were kept, making them more of a landrace than a planned breed as defined by modern standards, but nonetheless \"domesticated\".\nHorses in historic warfare.\nWhile riding may have been practiced during the 4th and 3rd millennia BCE, and the disappearance of \"Old European\" settlements may be related to attacks by horseback-mounted warriors, the clearest influence by horses on ancient warfare was by pulling chariots, introduced around 2000 BCE.\nHorses in the Bronze Age were relatively small by modern standards, which led some theorists to believe the ancient horses were too small to be ridden and so must have been used for driving. Herodotus' description of the Sigynnae, a steppe people who bred horses too small to ride but extremely efficient at drawing chariots, illustrates this stage. However, as horses remained generally smaller than modern equines well into the Middle Ages, this theory is highly questionable.\nThe Iron Age in Mesopotamia saw the rise of mounted cavalry as a tool of war, as evidenced by the notable successes of mounted archer tactics used by various invading eurasian nomads such as the Parthians. Over time, the chariot gradually became obsolete.\nThe horse of the Iron Age was still relatively small, perhaps 12.2 to 14.2\u00a0hands ( to \u00a0inches, to \u00a0cm) high (measured at the withers.) This was shorter overall than the average height of modern riding horses, which range from about 14.2 to 17.2\u00a0hands ( to \u00a0inches, to \u00a0cm). However, small horses were used successfully as light cavalry for many centuries. For example, Fell ponies, believed to be descended from Roman cavalry horses, are comfortably able to carry fully grown adults (although with rather limited ground clearance) at an average height of \u00a0hands Likewise, the Arabian horse is noted for a short back and dense bone, and the successes of the Muslims against the heavy mounted knights of Europe demonstrated that a horse standing \u00a0hands can easily carry a full-grown human adult into battle.\nMounted warriors such as the Scythians, Huns and Vandals of late Roman antiquity, the Turks and Mongols who invaded eastern Europe in the 7th century through 14th centuries CE, the Arab warriors of the 7th through 14th centuries CE, and the Native Americans in the 16th through 19th centuries each demonstrated effective forms of light cavalry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53544", "revid": "1306371710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53544", "title": "Crab canon", "text": "Arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward\nA crab canon (also known by the Latin form of the name, \"canon cancrizans\"; as well as \"retrograde canon\", \"canon per recte et retro\" or \"canon per rectus et inversus\") is an arrangement of two musical lines that are complementary and backward. If the two lines were placed next to each other (as opposed to stacked), the lines would form something conceptually similar to a palindrome. The name 'crab' refers to the fact that crabs are known to walk backward (although they can also walk forward and sideways). It originally referred to a kind of canon in which one line is played backward (e.g. FABACEAE played simultaneously with EAECABAF). An example is found in J. S. Bach's \"The Musical Offering\", which also contains a table canon (\"Quaerendo invenietis\"), which combines retrogression with inversion by having one player turn the music upside down.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53545", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53545", "title": "University of Idaho", "text": "Public university in Moscow, Idaho, US\nThe University of Idaho (U of I, or UIdaho) is a public land-grant research university in Moscow, Idaho, United States. Established in 1889 and opened three years later, it was the state's sole university for 71 years, until 1963.\nThe university comprises ten undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools. It enrolls approximately 12,000 students across its campuses, with 11,000 on the Moscow campus. The university is classified among \"Research 1: Very High Spending and Doctorate Production\".\nLocated on the rural Palouse, the university is represented in intercollegiate athletics by the Idaho Vandals, who compete in NCAA Division I, primarily in the Big Sky Conference. In addition to the main campus in Moscow, the U of I has branch campuses in Coeur d'Alene, Boise, and Idaho Falls; it also operates a research park in Post Falls, and dozens of extension offices statewide.\nHistory.\nOn January 30, 1889, Governor Edward Stevenson of the Idaho Territory signed the territorial legislature's Council Bill No. 20, which officially established the UI as the upcoming state's land-grant institution. Nearly four years later, the university opened for classes on October 3, 1892.\nThe choice of location for the University of Idaho was an \"Olive Branch of Peace\" by Gov. Stevenson for his actions in styming the nearly successful effort to detach the north Idaho Panhandle and join the state of Washington.\nFormed by the Idaho Territory legislature in 1889, the university opened its doors in 1892 with a class of 40 students. The first graduating class in 1896 consisted of two men and two women.\nIn 2023, the University of Idaho established a non-profit organization, Four Three Education, which would acquire the University of Phoenix by issuing $550 million in bonds (creating an estimated $685 million in debt). Idaho spent approximately $7 million on consultants prior to the deal. Three University of Idaho administrators sit on the Four Three board, including UI attorney Kent Nelson. The slate of directors of Four Three Education will be selected by the Regents of the University of Idaho. However, President Green and University of Phoenix President Chris Lynne will be ex-officio members with full voting rights.\nCampus.\nAccording to the U of I Facts Books, the Moscow campus, abutting the Washington state line, is , including 253 buildings with a replacement value of $812 million. It has of parking lots, of bike paths, 22 computer labs, an 18-hole golf course on , of arboreta, and of farms.\nAdministration Building.\nThe Administration Building, with its clock tower and Collegiate Gothic-style structure, was built from 1907 to 1909 and has become an icon of the university. The building holds classrooms, an auditorium, and administrative offices, including the offices of the President and Provost. Multiple expansions were made, with the north wing added in 1912, the eastern portion of the south wing in 1916 (extended west in 1936 for the library), and the functional annex in 1950, incorporated into the Albertson addition of 2002. The U of I library was housed in the Administration Building until 1957, when the Library building opened, constructed on the former site of tennis courts. The\u00a0College of Law occupied the south wing until its building (Menard) opened in\u00a01973.\nThe original Administration Building, with a single tall spire reaching to , was constructed through the decade of the 1890s and ultimately finished in 1899. It burned in 1906. In the meantime, classes were held at various sites in Moscow. The new Administration Building was designed by John E. Tourtellotte, who modeled the new structure after Hampton Court Palace in England.\nThe 1909 Administration Building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1978.\nHello Walk.\nThe \"Hello Walk\" is one of the best-known and traveled pathways on the Idaho campus. It includes monuments such as Presidential Grove, where historical figures, such as Teddy Roosevelt, planted trees; the Spanish\u2013American War memorial statue who had his hands cut off but was reconstructed by the handless sculptor Bud Washburn; and Administration Lawn that was designed by the Olmsted Brothers.\nIdaho Student Union Building.\nThe Idaho Student Union Building (ISUB), completed in 2000 as the Commons, is the heart of campus and contains a food court, copy center, bagel and coffee shop (Einstein's Bagels), credit union, and convenience store. Additionally, there is study space, wireless internet, laptop checkout, and many student services such as the offices of the Associated Students of the University of Idaho (ASUI), Academics Assistance, the University of Idaho Writing Center, and Student Support.\nWith the completion of the Teaching and Learning Center (TLC) at the beginning of the fall semester of 2005, the second phase, the Idaho Student Union Building gained classrooms and completed the vision of a common area where students could learn, study, relax, and get university services all in one place.\nBruce M. Pitman Center.\nThe Bruce M. Pitman Center is located on the east end of campus on Deakin Street. The building houses the university's financial aid, admissions, new student services, registrar and Graduate &amp; Professional Student Association (GPSA) offices. For students, the Pitman Center also features meeting rooms, a computer lab, wireless access, borrowable laptops and a movie theater. The building began as a motel, the Blue Bucket Inn, which UI purchased in 1936 and later expanded. The VandalStore, built in 1989 on a former parking lot, is located directly across the street to the east; it was previously adjacent to the south.\nUI student-run media offices are also present on the third floor of the Pitman Center: \"The Argonaut\", a newspaper; KUOI-FM, a radio station; student media advertising; and \"Blot\", a magazine.\nIn October 2014, the University of Idaho announced the renaming of the Student Union Building as Bruce M. Pitman Center in honor of the retiring dean of students and vice provost for student affairs, who had served the campus community for more than 41 years. The name change took effect on January 1, 2015.\nP1FCU Kibbie Dome.\nUI's multi-purpose \"Kibbie Dome\" is the primary home to Vandal athletics; it is the venue for football, soccer, tennis, and indoor track &amp; field. Its Trus-Dek roof system, constructed in 1975, uses natural wood arches to span at a height of over the field's hashmarks. Previously on this site was Neale Stadium, which opened in 1937 as an earthen horseshoe with wooden sideline grandstands. It was named the Kibbie ASUI Activity Center, later changed to ASUI Kibbie Dome.\nTartan Turf, similar to AstroTurf, was installed in 1972 with the roll-up mechanism; the arched roof and vertical end walls were completed in time for the 1975 home opener on September 27, enclosing the stadium to become the Kibbie Dome. The seating capacity is 16,000 for football games, 7,000 for basketball games (in a configuration known as the \"Cowan Spectrum\" since 2001), and 7,500 for concerts.\nIn 2023 it was renamed \"P1FCU Kibbie Dome\" after Potlach First Financial Credit Union bought the naming rights for $10 million. \nIdaho Central Credit Union Arena.\nIdaho Central Credit Union Arena (ICCU Arena), located immediately to the north of the Kibbie Dome, became the new home of Vandals men's and women's basketball for the 2021\u201322 season. The university had attempted to build a new arena to replace Memorial Gym for over 50 years, but nothing came of the plans until 2018, when a $10 million naming gift from Idaho Central Credit Union encouraged the administration to go forward with construction. Ground was broken the following year. The 4,200-seat facility, costing about $51 million, is primarily made from engineered wood, with the superstructure consisting mainly of over 850 Douglas fir beams prepared from trees logged at the university's experimental forest. Several major forest products companies assisted in the construction process. The arena opened for a media tour on September 29, 2021, with the basketball teams using the main arena and an included practice court during preseason practice. The first event in the new arena was a men's basketball exhibition against NAIA member Evergreen State on October 29. The first regular-season game was a men's game against Long Beach State on November 10. This game served as a homecoming for Beach head coach Dan Monson, son of former longtime Vandals head coach Don Monson and himself a former Vandals football player.\nGolf course.\nThe UI Golf Course was established in 1933 on the southwest edge of campus and opened as nine holes in 1937. It was expanded to 18 holes in 1970 and its current clubhouse was built in 1969. Due to its demanding rolling terrain and southwesterly summer winds, the par-72 course's moderate length of from the back tees yields a challenging slope of 135 with a scratch rating of 72.4.\nArboretum and botanical garden.\nReferred to as \"Tree City\" or \"The Arb\" by U of I students, the University of Idaho Arboretum and Botanical Garden is a site adjacent to the golf course which features display gardens, ponds, and a variety of trees and plants from Asia, Europe, and North America.\nThe original Shattuck Arboretum was conceived in 1910 by Charles H. Shattuck, the head of the forestry department. His efforts gradually turned a treeless slope southwest of the Administration Building into a dense forest grove. The arboretum was named for Shattuck in 1933, two years after his death. Until the late 1960s, this area provided the background for left &amp; center field of the MacLean field, whose infield was displaced by the construction of the new College of Education buildings, which were completed in 1968.\nThe newer portion of the arboretum complex is south of the Shattuck area, in the valley below the president's residence (1967), along the eastern edge of the University of Idaho Golf Course.\nLibrary.\nThe U of I Library is the state's largest library, with more than 1.4 million books, periodicals, government documents, maps, video recordings, and special collections. The Library's Special Collections and Archives houses a collection of first edition works by Sir Walter Scott, as well as more than 1200 texts by and about the author. The Library also has materials by many famous Idahoans, including Ezra Pound, Vardis Fisher, Frank Bruce Robinson, and Carol Ryrie Brink of Moscow. Digitized historic photographs from the University of Idaho campus and the state of Idaho, yearbooks, and the student newspaper the Argonaut, can be found on the Library's Digital Initiatives website.\nDirectly north of the Memorial Gymnasium and built on the former site of tennis courts, the library opened in 1957, relocating from the south wing of the Administration Building. The U of I post office station was formerly housed in its lower northwest corner; it was moved to the new U of I bookstore in 1990. The U of I Library was expanded by 50% in 1993 and rededicated in 1994. The first floor underwent major renovation during the 2016 academic year to up-date collaborative spaces and technology.\nMemorial Gymnasium.\nThe Tudor Gothic-style Memorial Gymnasium is another U of I icon, known for its whimsical athletic gargoyles perched along the brick building's ledges. The multi-purpose \"Mem Gym\" has a modest seating capacity of only 1,500. Opened in 1928 to honor the Idaho citizens who died in World War I (1917\u201318) and Spanish\u2013American War (1898), the heavily buttressed structure was designed by the chairman of the university's architecture department, David C. Lang.\nMemorial Gym was the primary venue for men's basketball until January 1976, following the enclosure of the Kibbie Dome the previous fall. The women's team hosted its home games in the gym until 2001, when the Cowan Spectrum (inside the Kibbie Dome) was completed. The gym is still in active use today as the home court for the women's volleyball team, and was also used for early-season basketball games before the opening of ICCU Arena. It is also used extensively for intramurals and open recreation, as well as for ROTC.\nThe MacLean baseball field was located directly south of the Memorial Gym, until its infield was displaced by the construction of the College of Education building in 1967. The catcher and batter faced southwest (towards the pitcher's mound); the right field line was just south of the gym, running east\u2013west. The background of left and center field was the Shattuck Arboretum. The new baseball field (Guy Wicks Field) was relocated northwest, to the vast intramural fields near the Moscow-Pullman Highway, northwest of the Wallace Complex dormitories. The batter and catcher now faced southeast, toward campus, an unorthodox configuration resulting in a difficult sun field for the left side of the defense (the recommended alignment is east-northeast). Due to budget constraints, varsity baseball was dropped following the 1980 season, but continued for a while as a club sport. MacLean was also the venue for football until the opening of Neale Stadium in\u00a01937.\nThe swim center and physical education building (formerly known as the \"Women's Gym\"), which both opened in 1970, are adjacent to the south side of the gym. Before the swim center was opened, the Mem Gym had a narrow swimming pool in its basement.\nIn 1977, the Memorial Gymnasium was added to the National Register of Historic Places after only 49 years.\nUnder the elms.\nRare Camperdown elms line the walkway between the Music building, Nichols Building (home to Family and Consumer Sciences) and Administration Building. These \"upside-down\" trees have been on campus for over 80 years and are among few of their kind in the Northwest. The weeping branches and knotty trunk are formed by being grafted upwards.\nSteam plant.\nBuilt in 1926, the steam plant provides heat to U of I buildings from a single location. Originally designed to burn coal, then oil, then natural gas, the plant was modified in 1986 to burn waste wood chips left over from local sawmills. The use of wood has significantly reduced the emissions of the plant, as well as cut costs to heat the campus. The plant is shut down twice a year for cleaning and maintenance. As a side benefit of the heat generation, the steam pipes are routed underneath campus walkways and provide clean (and ice free) walkways throughout the north Idaho winter.\nUniversity housing.\nThe University of Idaho offers various options for on-campus housing, including five residence halls (Wallace Residence Center, Theophilus Tower, McConnell Hall, Living Learning Communities, and North Campus Communities) for students and Apartments (South Hill Apartments, South Hill Vista Apartments, and Elmwood Apartments) for non-traditional students or those who need special accommodations.\nUsually apartments are only available to single parents, married couples (with or without children), law students, and students over 21 years old. Theophilus Tower, 3 of the 4 Wallace Residence wings, and one LLC building is only available for first-year students. Students can also live in a Fraternity or Sorority chapter on campus. Summer housing is available but choices are limited.\nRidenbaugh Hall.\nThe Board of Regents authorized the construction of Ridenbaugh Hall as the first women's dormitory on campus. Completed in 1901 at a cost of $17,000, it is the oldest extant building on campus. It was designed by architect Willis A. Ritchie of Spokane, who also designed the Spokane County Courthouse. The building used stone quarried in Latah County for the exterior walls. It was also used as a space for domestic science classes until 1927 when it became a men's dormitory. The building was later used for music practice rooms and currently houses the Art and Architecture gallery.\nRidenbaugh Hall was the first U of I campus structure to be named after a person. The hall was dedicated to \"the young women of Idaho\" in honor of Mary E. Ridenbaugh (1857\u20131926) of Boise, who was vice president of the U of I Board of Regents, and served as regent from 1901 to 1907. The building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1977.\nAcademics.\nFrom 1896 through May 2011, the University of Idaho granted 80,233 bachelor's degrees, 21,734 master's degrees, 2,694 doctoral degrees, 240 honorary degrees, 1,164 specialist degrees, and 3,654 law degrees.\nThe university is organized into ten colleges; two are exclusively for graduate students (Law &amp; Graduate Studies).\nIn July 2002, the College of Letters &amp; Science was split into two separate colleges: the College of Science and the College of Letters, Arts, and Social Sciences (CLASS). Concurrently, the College of Mines and Earth Resources was discontinued; its programs were split between the College of Engineering and the new College of Science.\nThe College of Law opened a second campus in Boise in 2010. Initially, the Boise campus only offered third-year classes. It expanded to offer second-year classes in 2014, and as of 2017\u201318, law students can take their entire three-year curriculum at either location.\nReputation and rankings.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranks U of I tied for 89th among the nation's best public universities and tied for 179th among the best national universities in its 2020 report. In 2024, \"Washington Monthly\" ranked U of I 83rd among 438 national universities in the U.S. based on U of I's contribution to the public good, as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service. In 2025, the Carnegie Classification listed University of Idaho among \"R1 Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research spending and doctorate production\", among with other 186 universities.\nThe University of Idaho is included in the 2021 edition of Princeton Review's \"Best 386 Colleges.\" The Princeton Review also ranks U-Idaho as one of the nation's top 286 environmentally responsible colleges. The university was named by the Corporation for National and Community Service to the 2010 President's Higher Education Community Service Honor Roll for exemplary service efforts\u2014more than 3,800 students volunteered more than 150,000 hours to community and service-learning. This was the fifth consecutive year Idaho has earned this highest federal recognition for its commitment to service-learning and civic engagement.\nStudent life.\nU of I is a rural, residential campus, with four residence hall communities to choose from on campus, as well as 27 housed fraternities and sororities. On-campus residence is currently required for freshmen, and many other upperclassmen choose to live on campus in the Greek system or the residence halls.\nApartments on campus are available for families, married couples, graduate students, law students, and non-traditional students. The \"Law Cluster\" is a group of apartments reserved for law students, allowing for a community close to campus for law students, facilitating study groups.\nStudent organizations.\nMany students participate in a wide variety of over 200 clubs and organizations. Clubs range from sports to faith based, and everything in between. Palousafest is a fair that brings clubs and students together, and is a way for students to find out more about how to get involved with extracurricular activities. The fair is usually the weekend just before the fall semester starts. The literary journal Fugue is published at the university.\nGreek life.\nThe University of Idaho is home to more than two dozen (multicultural) Greek organizations that make up more than 20% of the student population. Over 44% of the students who live on campus are involved in Greek life.\nAthletics.\nThe Idaho Vandals are the intercollegiate athletic teams representing the University of Idaho. The Vandals compete at the NCAA Division I level as a member of the Big Sky Conference.\nThe university's official colors are silver and gold, honoring the state's mining tradition. Because these metallic colors in tandem are not visually complementary for athletic uniforms, black and gold are the prevalent colors for the athletic teams, with an occasional use of silver. When Idaho moved out of the Big Sky to the Big West in 1996, the yellow \"Green Bay\" gold was changed to metallic \"Vegas\" gold. Yellow gold and black were the colors used by most of the varsity teams from 1978 to 1996, initiated by first-year head football coach Jerry Davitch's new uniforms for 1978.\nThe Kibbie Dome is the home of the Idaho Vandals for four sports (football, tennis, indoor track and field, soccer). Basketball was played in the venue until the autumn 2021 opening of the adjacent Idaho Central Credit Union Arena.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53547", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53547", "title": "Mnemonic link system", "text": "A mnemonic link system, sometimes also known as a chain method, is a method of remembering lists that is based on creating an association between the elements of that list. For example, when memorizing the list (dog, envelope, thirteen, yarn, window), one could create a story about a \"dog stuck in an envelope, mailed to an unlucky thirteen black cat playing with yarn by the window\". It is argued that the story would be easier to remember than the list itself.\nAnother method is to actually link each element of the list with a mental picture of an image that includes two elements in the list that are next to each other. This would form an open doubly linked list which could be traversed at will, backwards or forwards. For example, in the last list one could imagine their dog inside of a giant envelope, then a black cat eating an envelope. The same logic would be used with the rest of the items. The observation that absurd images are easier to remember is known as the Von Restorff effect, although the success of this effect was refuted by several studies (Hock et al. 1978; Einstein 1987), which found that the established connection between the two words is more important than the image's absurdity.\nIn order to access a certain element of the list, one needs to recite the list step by step, much in the same vein as a linked list, in order to get the element from the system.\nThere are three limitations to the link system. The first is that there is no numerical order imposed when memorizing, hence the practitioner cannot immediately determine the numerical position of an item; this can be solved by bundling numerical markers at set points in the chain or using the peg system instead. The second is that if any of the items is forgotten, the entire list may be in jeopardy. The third is the potential for confusing repeated segments of the list, a common problem when memorizing binary digits. This limitation can be resolved either through bundling or by using either the peg system or the method of loci.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53551", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53551", "title": "Charadriiformes", "text": "Order of birds\nCharadriiformes (, from \"Charadrius\", the type genus of family Charadriidae) is a diverse order of small to medium-large birds. It includes about 390 species and has members in all parts of the world. Most charadriiform birds live near water and eat invertebrates or other small animals; however, some are pelagic (seabirds), others frequent deserts, and a few are found in dense forest. Members of this group can also collectively be referred to as shorebirds.\nTaxonomy, systematics and evolution.\nThe order was formerly divided into three suborders:\nThe Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy lumps all the Charadriiformes together with other seabirds and birds of prey into a greatly enlarged order Ciconiiformes. However, the resolution of the DNA-DNA hybridization technique used by Sibley &amp; Ahlquist was not sufficient to properly resolve the relationships in this group, and indeed it appears as if the Charadriiformes constitute a single large and very distinctive lineage of modern birds of their own.\nThe auks, usually considered distinct because of their peculiar morphology, are more likely related to gulls, the \"distinctness\" being a result of adaptation for diving.\nFamilies.\nThe order Charadriiformes contains 3 suborders, 19 families and 391 species.\nEvolutionary history.\nThat the Charadriiformes are an ancient group is also borne out by the fossil record. Alongside the Anseriformes, the Charadriiformes are the only other order of modern bird to have an established fossil record within the late Cretaceous, alongside the other dinosaurs. Much of the Neornithes' fossil record around the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event is made up of bits and pieces of birds which resemble this order. In many, this is probably due to convergent evolution brought about by semiaquatic habits. Specimen VI 9901 (L\u00f3pez de Bertodano Formation, Late Cretaceous of Vega Island, Antarctica) is probably a basal charadriiform somewhat reminiscent of a thick-knee. However, more complete remains of undisputed charadriiformes are known only from the mid-Paleogene onwards. Present-day orders emerged around the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, roughly 35\u201330 mya. Basal or unresolved charadriiformes are:\nThe \"transitional shorebirds\" (\"Graculavidae\") are a generally Mesozoic form taxon formerly believed to constitute the common ancestors of charadriiforms, waterfowl and flamingos. They are now assumed to be mostly basal taxa of the charadriiforms and/or \"higher waterbirds\", which probably were two distinct lineages 65 mya already, and few if any are still believed to be related to the well-distinct waterfowl. Taxa formerly considered graculavids are:\nOther wader- or gull-like birds \"incertae sedis\", which may or may not be Charadriiformes, are:\nEvolution of parental care in Charadriiformes.\nShorebirds pursue a larger diversity of parental care strategies than do most other avian orders. They therefore present an attractive set of examples to support the understanding of the evolution of parental care in avians generally. The ancestral avian most likely had a female parental care system. The shorebird ancestor specifically evolved from a bi-parental care system, yet the species within the clade Scolopacidae evolved from a male parental care system. These transitions might have occurred for several reasons. Brooding density is correlated with male parental care. Male care systems in birds are shown to have a very low breeding density while female care systems in birds have a high breeding density. (Owens 2005). Certain rates of male and female mortality, male and female egg maturation rate, and egg death rate have been associated with particular systems as well. It has also been shown that sex role reversal is motivated by the male-biased adult sex ratio. The reason for such diversity in shorebirds, compared to other birds, has yet to be understood.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53554", "revid": "34360570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53554", "title": "Somerville College, Oxford", "text": "College of the University of Oxford\nSomerville College is a constituent college of the University of Oxford in England. It was founded in 1879 as Somerville Hall, one of its first two women's colleges. It began admitting men in 1994. The college's liberal tone derives from its founding by social liberals, as Oxford's first non-denominational college for women, unlike the Anglican Lady Margaret Hall, the other to open that year. In 1964, it was among the first to cease locking up at night to stop students staying out late. No gowns are worn at formal halls.\nIn 2021 it was recognised as a sanctuary campus by City of Sanctuary UK. It is one of three colleges to offer undergraduates on-site lodging throughout their course. It stands near the Science Area, University Parks, Oxford University Press, Jericho, and Green Templeton, St Anne's, Keble and St Benet's. Over a third of its 650 students are not from the UK. Over half the UK admissions are from state schools \u2013 close to the university average. Its total net assets in 2021 were \u00a3238\u00a0million, the seventh highest of an Oxford undergraduate college. Its sister college at Cambridge is Girton.\nAmong its alumnae have been Margaret Thatcher, Indira Gandhi, Dorothy Hodgkin, Iris Murdoch, Philippa Foot, Vera Brittain and Dorothy L. Sayers. \nHistory.\nFounding.\nIn June 1878, the \"Association for the Higher Education of Women\" was formed, aiming for the eventual creation of a college for women in Oxford. Some of the more prominent members of the association were George Granville Bradley, Master of University College, T. H. Green, a prominent liberal philosopher and Fellow of Balliol College, and Edward Stuart Talbot, Warden of Keble College. Talbot insisted on a specifically Anglican institution, which was unacceptable to most of the other members. The two parties eventually split, and Talbot's group (the \"Christ Church camp\") founded Lady Margaret Hall, which opened its doors for students in 1879, the same year as Somerville did.\nThus, in 1879, a second committee was formed to create a college \"in which no distinction will be made between students on the ground of their belonging to different religious denominations.\" This committee was called the \"Balliol camp\" and had close ties to the Liberal Party. This second committee included A. H. D. Acland, Thomas Hill Green, George William Kitchin, James Legge, Henry Nettleship, Walter Pater, Henry Francis Pelham, its chairman John Percival, Grace Prestwich, Eleanor Smith, A. G. Vernon Harcourt, and Mary Ward. Other people who assisted in the founding were Anna Swanwick, Bertha Johnson, Charlotte Byron Green, and Owen Roberts.\nThis new effort resulted in the founding of \"Somerville Hall\", named after the then recently deceased Scottish mathematician and renowned scientific writer Mary Somerville. It was felt that the name would reflect the virtues of liberalism and academic success which the college wished to embody. She was admired by the founders of the college as a scholar, as well as for her religious and political views, including her conviction that women should have equality in terms of suffrage and access to education.\nMadeleine Shaw-Lefevre was chosen as the first principal because, though not a well-known academic at the time, her background was felt to reflect the college's political stance. Because of its status as both women's college and non-denominational institution, Somerville was widely regarded within Oxford as \"an eccentric and somewhat alarming institution.\"\nWomen's college.\nWhen it opened, Somerville Hall had twelve students, ranging in age between 17 and 36. The first 21 students from Somerville and Lady Margaret Hall attended lectures in rooms above a baker's shop on Little Clarendon Street. Just two of the original 12 students admitted in 1879 remained in Oxford for three years, the period of residence required for male students to complete a bachelor's degree.\nIncreasingly, however, as the college admitted more students, it became more formalised. Somerville appointed Lilla Haigh as its first in-house tutor in 1882, and by the end of the 1890s female students were permitted to attend lectures in almost all colleges. In 1883, the college was visited by the prominent suffragette Susan B. Anthony, calling it \"a shelter for girls\". In 1891 it became the first women's hall to introduce entrance exams and in 1894 the first of the five women's halls of residence to adopt the title of college (changing its name to Somerville College), the first of them to appoint its own teaching staff, and the first to build a library. In Oxford legend it soon became known as the \"bluestocking college\", its excellent examination results refuting the widespread belief that women were incapable of high academic achievement.\nIn the 1910s, Somerville became known for its support for the women's suffrage campaign. Prior to becoming secretary of the Women's Employment Federation Irene Hilton taught natural sciences at Somerville. In 1920, Oxford University allowed women to matriculate and therefore gain degrees. From the college's inception, all female students had to be chaperoned when in the presence of male students. The practice was abolished in 1925, although male visitors to the college were still subject to a curfew. In the same year the college was granted its charter.\n\"The Mutual Admiration Society\".\n\"The Mutual Admiration Society (MAS)\" was a literary society (or literary circle) of women who became friends at Somerville College. Its members included Dorothy L. Sayers, Muriel St Clare Byrne, Charis Frankenburg, Dorothy Rowe, and Amphilis Throckmorton Middlemore, among others.\nThe society of the title was a real club. The members composed poetry and prose for each other's pleasure. Apart from Sayers, none of them was a household name, though all were notable. Mo Moulton argued in their Agatha Award-winning book, \"The Mutual Admiration Society: How Dorothy L. Sayers and Her Oxford Circle Remade the World For Women\", that each one lived a life worthy of attention.\nYears later, the writer Vera Brittain \u2014 a Somerville contemporary of the group, but not one of its members \u2014 recalled that the MAS \u201ctook themselves very seriously\u201d.\nFirst World War.\nDuring the First World War, Somerville College together with the Examination Schools and other Oxford buildings were requisitioned by the War Office to create the Third Southern General Hospital, a facility for the Royal Army Medical Corps to treat military casualties. For the duration of the war, Somerville students relocated to Oriel College. Because many male students had left Oxford to enlist in the military, Somerville was able to rent St Mary Hall Quad which they bricked off from the rest of the college to segregate it from Oriel's remaining male students. Many students and tutors were involved in work in World War I and some of them went to the Western Front in France.\nNotable patients who stayed in Somerville include the war poets Robert Graves, Siegfried Sassoon and R. E. Vern\u00e8de. Sassoon arrived on 2 August 1916. Graves and Sassoon later reminisced about their time at Somerville Hospital: \"How unlike you to crib my idea of going to the Ladies' College at Oxford\", Sassoon wrote to Graves in 1917, and called it \"very much like Paradise\". At Somerville College, Graves met his first love, a nurse and professional pianist called Marjorie. About his time at Somerville, he wrote: \"I enjoyed my stay at Somerville. The sun shone, and the discipline was easy\". Alfred Mills was received in the hospital in 1916 and officer Llewelyn Davies died at the college.\nOnce the war ended, the return to normality between Oriel and Somerville was delayed, sparking both frustration and an incident in spring 1919 known as the \"Oriel raid,\" in which male students made a hole in the wall dividing the sexes. In July 1919 the principal (Emily Penrose) and fellows returned to Somerville. Alumna Vera Brittain wrote about the impact of the war in Oxford and paid tribute to the work of the principal, Miss Penrose, in her memoir \"Testament of Youth\".\nAdmission of men.\nStarting in the 1970s, the traditionally all-male colleges in Oxford began to admit female students. Since it was assumed that recruiting from a wider demographic would guarantee better students, there was pressure on single-sex colleges to change their policy to avoid falling down the rankings. All-female colleges, like Somerville, found it increasingly difficult to attract good applicants and fell to the bottom of the intercollegiate academic rankings during the period.\nDuring the 1980s, there was much debate as to whether women's colleges should become mixed. Somerville remained a women's college until 1992, when its statutes were amended to permit male students and fellows; the first male fellows were appointed in 1993, and the first male students admitted in 1994. Somerville became the second-to-last college (after St Hilda's) to become coeducational. A 50 per cent male/female gender balance has been maintained to this day, though without formal quotas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the 1890s Somerville helped fashion the \"New Woman\"; a century later... the college has set itself the perhaps greater challenge of educating the \"New Man.\"\u2014\u200a\nBuildings and grounds.\nThe college and its main entrance, the Porters' Lodge, are located at the southern end of Woodstock Road, with Little Clarendon Street to the south, Walton Street to the west and the Radcliffe Observatory Quarter to the north. The front of the college runs between the Oxford Oratory and the Faculty of Philosophy. Somerville has buildings of various architectural styles, many of which bear the names of former principals of the college, located around one of Oxford's biggest quads. Five buildings are Grade II-listed.\nA 2017 archaeological evaluation of the site shows that in the medieval period the area now occupied by Somerville lay in fields beyond the boundary of Oxford. There is evidence of 17th-century building and earthworks beneath the site, some of which almost certainly relates to the defensive network placed around the city by Royalists during the Civil War. There are also remains of some 19th-century buildings, including a stone-lined well.\nWalton House.\nThe original building of Somerville Hall, Walton House (commonly called House) was built in 1826 and purchased from St John's College in 1880 amid fears that the men's colleges might, in the future, repossess the site for their own purposes. The house could only accommodate seven of the twelve students who came up to Oxford in the first year. In 1881, Sir Thomas Graham Jackson was commissioned to build a new south wing which could accommodate eleven more students. In 1892, Walter Cave added a north wing and an extra storey. He also installed a gatehouse at the Woodstock Road entrance. In 1897/98, the Eleanor Smith Cottages were added, adjoining Walton House.\nToday House is home to only one or two students, and, until 2014, it housed the college bar. It also contains Green Hall, where guests to college are often greeted and in which prospective students are registered and wait for interviews; some of the college's paintings by Roger Fry are located here. Most of the administration of college, and the academic pigeon-holes are in House, as is the Mary Somerville Room, a reception room featuring paintings by Mary Somerville, George Romney and George Frederic Watts.\nPark.\nOriginally known as West, from its location in the college, the idea of building a second self-contained hall was inspired by Newnham College, Cambridge. It was designed by Harry Wilkinson Moore and built in two stages. The 1885\u20131887 phase saw the construction of rooms for 18 students with their own dining-room, sitting rooms and vice-principal. This was a deliberate policy aimed at replicating the family environment that the women students had left. It had the effect of turning House and West into rivals. The second building stage (1888\u20131894) created two sets of tutors' rooms, a further 19 rooms and the West Lodge (now Park Lodge). In 2004 it was renamed Park in honour of Daphne Park, Principal from 1980 to 1989.\nToday there are over 60 student and fellows' rooms in the building along with a music room and a computer room. Park is a Grade II-listed building.\nLibrary.\nThe Grade II-listed library designed by Basil Champneys in 1903 was opened by John Morley the following year. Specially for the opening, \"Demeter\" was written by Robert Bridges and performed for the first time. Somerville Library was the first purpose-built library in the women's colleges of the university. With some foresight it was designed to contain 60,000 volumes, although the college only possessed 6,000 when it opened. It now holds around 120,000 items (95,000 on open shelves), as one of the largest college libraries in the university.\nAmelia Edwards, John Stuart Mill, John Ruskin and Vera Brittain have been notable benefactors to the library. It contains paintings by Mary Somerville, John Constable, Maud Sumner and Patrick George.\nThe John Stuart Mill room contains what was Mill's personal library in London at the time of his death, with annotations in many of the books.\nThe library dominates the north wing of the main quadrangle, having been designed to bring the college together, and is open 24 hours, with access to college-wide wifi, a group study room, and computing and printing facilities. It gives full satisfaction according to several annual student surveys.\nHall and Maitland.\nThere was no hall large enough to seat the entire college until 1911, when Maitland Hall and Maitland, designed by Edmund Fisher in Queen Anne style and Edwardian Baroque, were opened by H. A. L. Fisher, the Vice-Chancellor of the university and Gilbert Murray. Murray, whose translations of Greek drama were performed at Somerville in 1912 and 1946, supported Somerville in many ways, including endowing its first research fellowship. A fund was raised as a memorial to Miss Maitland, Principal of Somerville Hall (College from 1894) from 1889 to 1906, and the money was used to pay for oak panelling in Hall. The panelling of the south wall was designed to frame a portrait of Mary Somerville by John Jackson. The buildings were constructed on the site of an adjoining building gifted to Somerville by E. J. Forester in 1897 and bought from University and Balliol Colleges for \u00a34,000 and \u00a31,400 respectively. There was difficulty in constructing the buildings, now thought to have resulted from the outer limit of the Oxford city fortifications running under the site. In 1935, Morley Horder reconstructed the archway connecting Maitland Hall and the south wing of Walton House, creating a Reading Room off the main hall; in 1947, Andr\u00e9 Gide gave a lecture that filled both these rooms and the staircase and quadrangle outside.\nSomerville's is the one Oxford dining hall where all portraits show women. They were painted by Michael Noakes, Herbert James Gunn, George Percy Jacomb-Hood, William Coldstream, https://, Francis Helps, Claude Rogers, Humphrey Ocean, Thomas Leveritt, Richard Twose, and Tania Rivilis.\nHall and Maitland form the east face of the main quad, as Grade II-listed buildings. The Senior Common Room is situated on the ground floor. The first floor holds the pantry and the hall, in which Formal Hall (called guest night) is held weekly in term time.\nMaitland now houses few students, being mainly occupied by fellows' offices. The building, named after former Principal Agnes Maitland, stands to the south of Hall.\nPenrose.\nThe Penrose block was designed by Harold Rogers in 1925 and its first students were installed in 1927. A row of poplars had to be removed in 1926 to construct the south-western end of the main quadrangle on the site of 119 and 119A Walton Street. It was refurbished in 2014, with carpets replacing the bare wooden floorboards, and new furniture. Penrose is named after Dame Emily Penrose, third Principal of the college. It contains mainly first-year accommodation in about 30 rooms.\nDarbishire.\nDarbishire Quad was the culmination of a long-standing project to absorb Woodstock Road properties above the Oxford Oratory. In 1920, three houses (29, 31 and 33) were bought by the college from the vicar of St Giles' Church, Oxford for \u00a31,300. The three had been constructed in 1859 and rented by the college before the purchase. The adjoining \"Waggon and Horses\" pub was purchased from St John's College in 1923. These buildings were demolished in 1932\u20131933 together with the old Gate House.\nMorley Horder was commissioned to build a quadrangle that would fill the space left by the demolished structures, using a loan of \u00a312,000 from Christ Church. The porters' lodge and New Council Room were constructed at the entrance to the quad, which housed undergraduates and fellows. The coat of arms of Somerville and of co-founder John Percival, first Principal Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre and Helen Darbishire were carved by https:// inside the quadrangle. The archway leading to Hall was added in 1938.\nOriginally the East Quadrangle, it was opened in June 1934 by Lord Halifax as \"a notable addition to buildings of varying styles\" (\"varii generis aedificiia additamentum nobile\") in the Creweian Oration during the Encaenia. Darbishire was renamed in 1962 in honour of the principal of the college during its construction, Helen Darbishire.\nToday Darbishire contains some 50 student rooms, along with tutors' offices, the college archive and a medical room. The offices of the Global Ocean Commission, co-chaired by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Figueres, Trevor Manuel and David Miliband, were housed in Darbishire as part of a partnership with Somerville in 2012\u20132016, when the organisation completed its work.\nDarbishire Quad is described on the opening page of \"Gaudy Night\" by alumna Dorothy L. Sayers. The clock was donated by alumna Eleanor Rathbone.\nChapel.\nBuilt largely with funds provided by alumna Emily Georgiana Kemp in 1935, Somerville Chapel reflects the non-denominational principle on which the college was founded in 1879. No religious tests were used for admission and non-denominational Christian prayers were said in college.\nInstead of a chaplain, there is a \"Chapel Director\", in keeping with its non-denominational tradition. The chapel provides opportunities for Christian worship in addition to hosting speakers with a multiple range of religious perspectives. It holds an excellent mixed-voice Choir of Somerville College, which tours and issues occasional recordings.\nHostel and Holtby.\nHostel is a small block between House and Darbishire completed in 1950 by Geddes Hyslop. It houses 10 students on three floors. The Bursary is on the ground floor.\nHoltby, designed in 1951 and completed in 1956 by Hyslop, lies above the library extension, adjacent to Park. It has ten rooms for undergraduates and is named after the alumna Winifred Holtby.\nVaughan and Margery Fry &amp; Elizabeth Nuffield House.\nDesigned by Sir Philip Dowson between 1958 and 1966, Vaughan and Margery Fry &amp; Elizabeth Nuffield House (commonly shortened to Margery Fry) are both named for former principals of the college, while Elizabeth Nuffield was an important proponent of women's education and along with her husband Lord Nuffield, a financial benefactor of the college. Margery Fry was opened in 1964 by Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit and Vaughan in 1966. Constructed in the same architectural style, with an exterior concrete frame standing away from the walls of the interior edifice, the two buildings overlie a podium of shops and an arcaded walkway in Little Clarendon Street.\nVaughan is the larger of the two, with eleven rows to its concrete frame compared to eight. It is Grade II-listed and contains some 60 undergraduate rooms, smaller than those of Margery Fry and used exclusively for first-year students, along with the junior deans. Vaughan was refurbished in 2013, with new bathroom facilities, including, for the first time, sinks. Beneath the two buildings, a tunnel provides access to Somerville from Little Clarendon Street.\nMargery Fry serves as the centre of the postgraduate student community at Somerville, with 24 graduate rooms. Other accommodation for graduate students is provided in buildings adjacent to the college.\nWolfson.\nSir Philip Dowson was commissioned to design a building at the back of the college to house undergraduates and offices for fellows and Wolfson. Like his other work in Somerville, it is constructed largely of glass and concrete; it is also Grade II listed. A four-storey building with five bays on each floor, Wolfson has impressive views of Walton Street from the rear and Somerville's main quadrangle from the front. Wolfson is named after the building's main benefactor, Sir Isaac Wolfson, and was opened in 1967 by Principal Barbara Craig, with Harold Macmillan, Dorothy Hodgkin and Lord Wolfson giving speeches.\nThe ground floor contains the Flora Anderson Hall (FAH) and Brittain-Williams Room, named after Vera Brittain and Shirley Williams, the college's most famous mother-daughter alumnae. The room was designed in 2012 by the architect Niall McLaughlin and opened on 29 November 2013 by Williams at an event that included her unveiling a portrait of herself, which now hangs in the room. The FAH is used for lectures and events, notably college parties (or bops) and mock exams, known as Collections.\nMargaret Thatcher Centre and Dorothy Hodgkin Quadrangle.\nNamed after the alumna-Prime Minister, the MTC comprises a lecture room, ante room and lobby used for meetings, conferences and other internal college events. The lecture room has full AV facilities and for 60 seated patrons. A bust of Margaret Thatcher stands in the lobby and the meeting room has portraits of Somerville's two prime-minister alumnae: of Margaret Thatcher by Michael Noakes and Indira Gandhi by Sanjay Bhattacharyya.\nThe Dorothy Hodgkin Quad (DHQ) was conceived in 1985, completed in 1991 and named after Somerville's Nobel Prize-winner. The quadrangle is above the MTC and designed around self-contained flats of two and four bedrooms with communal kitchens, housing mainly finalists and some second-year students.\nArchitect Geoffrey Beard's scheme was submitted to Oxford City Council in 1986 and the energies of Sir Geoffrey Leigh and alumna and former principal Baroness Daphne Park brought support from around the world. The buildings were opened in 1991 by Margaret Thatcher, Dorothy Hodgkin, Principal Catherine Hughes and College Visitor Baron Roy Jenkins.\nSt Paul's Nursery.\nSomerville College was the first Oxford college to provide a nursery for children of Fellows and staff and is still one of the few colleges to do so. Alumna Dorothy Hodgkin donated much of her Nobel Prize money to the project. St Paul's Nursery is also open to families unconnected with the college and cares for 16 children between the ages of three months and five years.\nRadcliffe Observatory Quarter.\nROQ East and West flank the north side of Somerville and overlook the site of the university's new Blavatnik School of Government and Mathematical Institute. Completed in 2011, they were the first new buildings in the university's Radcliffe Observatory Quarter and have won four awards for their architect Niall McLaughlin. The project was also awarded Oxford City Council's David Steel Sustainable Building Award, being commended for balancing Somerville's collegiate heritage with the need for energy efficiency. Energy-efficiency measures include renewable technologies such as solar thermal energy and ground source heat pumps.\nThe buildings house 68 students in en-suite rooms. There are several rooms and facilities designed to help those with disabilities, including lifts and adjoining carer rooms. The buildings were funded by donations of over \u00a32.7\u00a0million from over 1,000 alumni and friends of the college and by a significant loan. There is now an unimpeded view of the Radcliffe Observatory.\nThe Terrace.\nThe bar and caf\u00e9 of the college, The Terrace, opened in 2013 (replacing the old bar in House) and is attached to the Vaughan building. It is housed in a mainly glass structure, with seating in the college colours of red and black. It has an open-air terrace looking down on Little Clarendon Street. The Terrace has the usual pool table and bar facilities and serves the college drink, \"Stone-cold Jane Austen\", consisting of blue VK, Southern Comfort, and Magners cider, as well as the \"College Triple\" and the non-alcoholic \"Somerville Sunset\".\nCatherine Hughes Building.\nNamed after Somerville's late principal in 1989\u20131996, the Catherine Hughes Building was completed in October 2019 and provides 68 additional bedrooms. Designed by Niall McLaughlin Architects, it includes en suite bathrooms, kitchens and accessible rooms on every floor and a new communal study area for graduate students.\nThe red-brick building has a frontage onto Walton Street and additional access from the college gardens, aligning with key levels on the adjacent Penrose Building. The bedrooms are arranged in clusters with kitchens and circulation spaces forming social focal points.\nThe building's construction has given Somerville sufficient accommodation to be one of three Oxford colleges which can allow all students applying from 2017 to live in college for the entirety of their three or four-year undergraduate degree courses.\nGardens.\nSomerville is one of few Oxford colleges where students may walk on the grass. An unassuming frontage opens onto a vast green space looked after by two gardeners. The original site consisted of a paddock, an orchard and a vegetable garden and was bounded by large trees. It was home to a donkey, two cows, a pony and a pig. The paddock was soon transformed into tennis courts, where huge tents were erected during World War I. During World War II, large water tanks were dug in the Main Quad and in Darbishire Quad in case of firebombing, and the lawns dug up and planted with vegetables.\nIn the Main or Library Quad has a cedar planted by Harold Macmillan in 1976, after an earlier cedar fell victim to a winter storm. Another tree, a \"Picea likiangensis\" (var. \"rubescens\"), was planted in 2007 on the chapel lawn, providing Somerville with an outdoor Christmas tree. The library border of lavender and \"Agapanthus\" references the bluestocking reputation of Somerville. The tory blue \"Ceratostigma willmottianum\" stands outside the Margaret Thatcher Centre. The garden outside the Thatcher Centre, now dedicated to Lisa Minoprio, was originally designed by the former director of the Oxford Botanic Garden and Lecturer in Plant Sciences Timothy Walker, and retains yellow and blue as its theme colours.\nThere are nods to Somerville's long-standing links with India, the most notable being a large specimen of the Indian horse chestnut, \"Aesculus indica\", planted on the Library lawn in 2019. Features of interest include a narrow bed of low-growing Mediterranean plants in front of Wolfson in a modernist style, a varied selection of mature trees in the Library Quad, and large herbaceous borders containing emblematic Somerville thistles (\"Echinops\").\nThe annual summer and winter bedding plants in Darbishire Quad, the beds outside the SCR, and those in pots around site have traditionally been in the Victorian style, to reflect the era of inception of the college. However, this is evolving due to a change in garden management in late 2019, with aims of following more environmentally friendly growing principles and developing a more contemporary style. The western wall of Penrose and the northern wall of Vaughan form a secluded area, historically known as the Fellows' Garden (currently in a transitional phase). It is distinct from the main quad and separated from it by a hedge and a wall, and which were previously kitchen gardens. This walled garden is home to a sundial, commissioned in 1926 and commemorating first principal Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre, and a garden roller gifted by the parents of tutor Rose Sidgwick.\nIn 1962, Henry Moore lent his work \"Falling Warrior\" to the college and Barbara Hepworth lent \"Core\" shortly afterwards. There are also permanent sculptures by Wendy Taylor, Friedrich Werthmann and Somervillian Polly Ionides. The most striking sculpture on site is Taylor's \"Triad\" (1971), situated on the Chapel Lawn in front of Maitland building.\nStudent life.\nIn 2011 student satisfaction was rated in some categories as the highest in the university. Central to it is its large quad, onto which most accommodation blocks back; it is often filled with students in summer. Somerville is one of the few Oxford colleges where students (as opposed to just fellows) may walk on the grass. Somerville is sometimes nicknamed \"The Ville\". Formal Halls take place on some Tuesdays and Fridays about six times a term. No gowns are worn and the grace is \"Benedictus benedicat\". The college song is \"Omnes laetae nunc sodales\".\nSports.\nSomerville has a gym beneath Vaughan with treadmills, cross-trainers and weights. It shares a sports ground with Wadham College and St Hugh's College, in Marston Ferry Road. There are clubs and teams in men's and women's football, rugby (with Corpus Christi), mixed lacrosse, cricket, swimming, hockey, netball, basketball, pool, water polo, tennis, squash, badminton, cycling, golf, rounders, and croquet.\nBoth the Somerville cricket and netball team won Cuppers for the 2014/15 season. The swimming team won Cuppers for the 2015/16 season.\nRowing.\nSomerville formed a rowing team in 1921. It competes in both of the annual university bumps races, Torpids and Summer Eights. The women are the most successful women's rowing team at the university, having won the title Head of the River eight times in Summer Eights and five times in Torpids. The club shares the award-winning University College Boathouse on The Isis with St Peter's College, University College and Wolfson College.\nChoir.\nThe Choir of Somerville College is mixed voice and led by the Director of Chapel Music, Will Dawes. In conjunction with the organ scholars, the choir is central to the musical life at the college.\nThere are regular concerts and cathedral visits, and recitals featuring soloists from the choir. In recent years it has toured Germany (2005 and 2009), Italy (2010) and the United States (2014 and 2016). It sings every term-time Sunday at the evening service. The organ of the college chapel is a traditionally voiced instrument by Harrison &amp; Harrison.\nSomerville offers up to eight Choral Exhibitions a year to applicants reading any subject.\nThe college choir has released two CDs on the Stone Records label, \"Requiem Aeternam\" (2012) and \"Advent Calendar\" (2013).\nTriennial Ball.\nOnce every three years, Somerville hosts a ball jointly with Jesus College, Oxford. The last, for over a thousand people, was held in April 2022 and the next ball will come in 2025.\nHowever, the 2013 ball, \"The Last Ball\", was mired in controversy reported in national news. The organisers had intended to display a live nurse shark as entertainment. Permission for the shark was initially granted by the principal Alice Prochaska, but was subsequently revoked following student protests. The ball was widely condemned for poor organisation, examples of which included a lack of canap\u00e9s and the presence of only one food stand, serving pork; the vegetarian options were said to run out quickly and revellers were reportedly set on fire by the pork r\u00f4tisserie. \"The Guardian\" reported \"The ball descended into farce with guests questioning what the organisers had done with the money paid by 1,000 guests.\"\nAcademic reputation.\nBefore men were admitted Somerville, under the principalship of Barbara Craig, established a position at or near the head of the Norrington Table. Currently Somerville is in the lower half of the university's colleges for academic achievement. For the academic year 2018/19, it came 21st out of 30 in the Norrington Table, which lists the university's undergraduate colleges in order of their students' examination performances. The college has been recognised as a University College of Sanctuary by the UK charity City of Sanctuary, and offers a fully-funded postgraduate Sanctuary scholarship.\n\"University Challenge\".\nSomerville has had recent success disproportionate to its size on the TV quiz show \"University Challenge\". It won the competition once, triumphing in the University Challenge 2001\u201302 series by beating Imperial College, London by 200 points to 185. Croatian quizzer Dorjana \u0160irola was one of the contestants. Recently the college team reached the final of the University Challenge 2013\u201314 series, losing in the final to Trinity College, Cambridge, with a score of 135 to 240.\nIndia.\nSomerville College plays a major role in relations between Oxford and India. Cornelia Sorabji, born in the Bombay Presidency of British India, became the first Indian woman to study at any British university, when she came to Somerville in 1889 to read law, while Indira Gandhi, India's first female prime minister, read Modern History at the college in 1937. Radhabai Subbarayan, the first woman member of the Indian Council of States (Rajya Sabha) studied at Somerville College as well, as did princess Bamba Sutherland, the last surviving member of a family that had ruled the Sikh Empire in the Punjab, and her sister Catherine Hilda Duleep Singh. Other alumni with links to India include Moon Moon Sen, Agnes de Selincourt, Smit Singh, Gurmehar Kaur, Hilda Stewart Reid and Utsa Patnaik. Former principal of Somerville College Barbara Craig from 1967 to 1980 and fellow Aditi Lahiri were born in Kolkata.\nSonia Gandhi visited Somerville in 2002 and presented a portrait of her late mother-in-law to her alma mater. Indira Gandhi received an honorary degree from the college in 1971.\nIn 2012, the college and Oxford University announced a \u00a319\u00a0million \"Indira Gandhi Centre for Sustainable Development\". India provided \u00a33\u00a0million and the university and college \u00a35.5\u00a0million. The name was later changed to the \"Oxford India Centre for Sustainable Development\" (OICSD). The OICSD carries out research on sustainable development challenges facing India and provides scholarships for outstanding Indian students. The centre now hosts 12 India scholars. A new building is planned in the Radcliffe Observatory Quarter, adjacent to the college's ROQ accommodation.\nSomerville's choir was in 2018 the first Oxford college choir to tour India.\nPeople associated with Somerville.\nAlumni.\nSomervillians include Prime Ministers Margaret Thatcher and Indira Gandhi, Nobel Prize winning scientist Dorothy Hodgkin, television personalities Esther Rantzen and Susie Dent, reformer Cornelia Sorabji, writers Marjorie Boulton, A. S. Byatt, Vera Brittain, Susan Cooper, Penelope Fitzgerald, Winifred Holtby, Nicole Krauss, Iris Murdoch and Dorothy L. Sayers, politicians Lucy Powell, Shirley Williams, Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Coffey, Margaret Jay and Sam Gyimah, Princess Bamba Sutherland and her sister, biologist Marian Dawkins, philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe, Patricia Churchland, Philippa Foot and Mary Midgley, psychologist Anne Treisman, archaeologist Kathleen Kenyon, actress Moon Moon Sen, soprano Emma Kirkby, banker Baroness Vadera and numerous (women's rights) activists.\nSomerville alumnae have achieved an impressive number of \"firsts\", both (inter)nationally and at the University of Oxford. Arguably the most prominent of these are: the first woman Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher; the first, and only, British woman to win a Nobel Prize in science Dorothy Hodgkin and the first woman to lead the world's largest democracy Indira Gandhi, who was Prime Minister of India for much of the 1970s.\nSomervillians include at least 30 Dames, 18 heads of Oxford colleges, 12 MP's, 15 life peers, four Olympic rowers, three of \"The 50 greatest British writers since 1945\", two prime ministers, two princesses, a queen consort, a first lady, and a Nobel laureate (plus three nominees).\nFormer students of Somerville belong to an alumni group, the Somerville Association, which was originally founded in 1888.\nFellows.\nNotable fellows of Somerville College (excluding alumni) include philosopher G. E. M. Anscombe, biochemist Louise Johnson, classical archaeologist Margarete Bieber, Egyptologist K\u00e4the Bosse-Griffiths, classicists Edith Hall and Lotte Labowsky, author Alan Hollinghurst, astronomer Chris Lintott, International Federation of University Women founder Rose Sidgwick, botanist Timothy Walker and philologist Anna Morpurgo Davies.\nPrincipals.\nThe first principal of Somerville Hall was Madeleine Shaw-Lef\u00e8vre (1879\u20131889). The first principal of Somerville College was Agnes Catherine Maitland (1889\u20131906), when in 1894 it became the first of the five women's halls to adopt the title of college, the first to appoint its own teaching staff, the first to set an entrance examination, and the first to build a library. She was succeeded by the classical scholar Emily Penrose (1906\u20131926), who set up in 1903 the \"Mary Somerville Research Fellowship\" offering women in Oxford opportunities for research.\nThe current principal is Catherine Royle, who took up the appointment in October 2025, succeeding Janet Royall, Baroness Royall of Blaisdon. To date, eight principals have been alumnae of Somerville, two of St Hilda's College.\nCoat of arms and motto.\nLike all Oxford colleges, Somerville has a variety of symbols and colours which are associated with it. The college's colours, which feature on the college scarf and on the blades of its boats, are red and black. The combination was originally adopted in the 1890s. Its flag has the shield from the arms on a yellow background.\nThe two colours also feature in the college's coat of arms, which depicts three mullets in chevron reversed gules, between six crosses crosslet fitched sable. The college's motto, \"Donec rursus impleat orbem\", was originally that of the family of Mary Somerville. Her family befriended the new hall, allowing it to adopt their arms and motto. The Latin motto itself is described as \"baffling\" as, although it translates as \"Until It Should Fill the World Again\", the subject of the sentence (\"it\") is left unspecified. The crest, which is often omitted, is a hand grasping a crescent and occasionally a helmet with mantling is added.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53555", "revid": "49195408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53555", "title": "Mnemonic peg system", "text": "Mnemonic technique for memorizing long numbers\nThe mnemonic peg system, invented by Henry Herdson, is a memory aid that works by creating mental associations between two concrete objects in a one-to-one fashion that will later be applied to to-be-remembered information. Typically this involves linking nouns to numbers and it is common practice to choose a noun that rhymes with the number it is associated with. These will be the pegs of the system. These associations have to be memorized one time and can be applied repeatedly to new information that needs to be memorized.\nTypes of peg-word systems.\nRhyming peg-word system.\nThe rhyming peg-word system is very simple, as stated above and could look something like this:\nFor example, to remember the first 8 digits of Pi, using the major system as well:\nThe next step is to link the items with some sort of dramatic action, in order to record the order in which they appear.\nThe less likely you are to have seen the scene in real life, the more likely it is to make a reliably retrievable impression.\nMajor system.\nWhile it is common to link rhyming nouns with numbers, that is by no means the only system. There is also the major system, which connects sounds to numbers. The major system is more complicated to learn than simple rhymes or alphabetic pegs, because it associates numbers 0-9 with a specific letter or sound, then larger numbers can combine to create words out of the sounds. It is limitless in the number of pegs it can produce. The most common association between numbers and letters is the following:\nThis would make the number 33 \"MM\" which could be made into the word \"mom\" to better aid in memorization or 92 is \"PN\" and could become \"pen.\" \"Cat\" (or \"cut\") would correspond to 71, as vowels do not have any value.\nPAO system.\nThe person-action-object (PAO) system is the most complex. It associates all numbers 00-99 with a distinctive person, action and object. Any six-digit number can be memorized by using the person assigned the first two digits, the action of the next two digits and the object of the third. For example:\nThis would make the number 341379, Frank Sinatra kicking a cape. Memory grand master, Ed Cooke, reportedly has been working on the Millennium PAO system, which would create an association for all numbers 000-999.\nApplication.\nThe peg system is commonly used by Mental Athletes for memory competitions for events like card memorization as well as digit memorization. The peg system has also been applied in a classroom with learning disabled students. The students that used the peg system performed significantly better than the control in both immediate and delayed tests.\nSeveral studies have investigated the use of this memory mnemonic as a form of an imagery-based memory system within the process of learning a second-language.\u00a0 For example, if a native English speaker is attempting to learn Spanish, he will notice that the Spanish for duck is pato, which is pronounced similarly to the English word pot.\u00a0 The individual can develop a mnemonic peg system in order to remember this association by thinking of a duck with a pot on its head.\u00a0 \nOne complaint concerning the peg system is that it seems to only be applicable in mundane situations. However, the peg system can be used to remember grocery lists, key points in speeches, and many other lists specific to one's particular area of study or interest. Many recognise that this system can be used to remember a wide variety of objects or information. The peg system works, so long as the information trying to be remembered is specific, able to be visualized, and tied to a unique retrieval cue. This tool of memory can be more efficient than rote memorization.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMaking pegs from rhymes:\nMaking pegs from shapes:\nAlphabet Pegs:\nMajor system peg list"}
{"id": "53557", "revid": "48886350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53557", "title": "Dominic system", "text": "Mnemonic system for remembering sequences of digits\nThe Dominic system is a mnemonic system used to remember sequences of digits similar to the mnemonic major system. It was invented and used in competition by eight-time World Memory Champion Dominic O'Brien.\nDifferences from the major system.\nThe main difference between the Dominic system and the major system is the assignment of sounds and letters to digits. The Dominic system is a letter-based abbreviation system where the \"letters\" comprise the initials of someone's name, while the major system is typically used as a phonetic-based \"consonant\" system for either objects, animals, persons, or even words. One letter is assigned to each digit; the other sixteen letters of the alphabet are unused.\nThe major system would assign the \"sounds\" T + L to the number 15, and then find a word that has those sounds as the first two consonants. Mnemonic images like Tolkien, tiles, or toolbox could be assigned under the major system. In the Dominic system, 15 would be the \"letters\" A and E, and they would be used as the initials of someone's name\u2014for example, Albert Einstein. Albert Einstein would then be given a characteristic action, such as \"writing on a blackboard\". Each two-digit number would have an associated person and action.\nThe Dominic system is specifically designed as a person-action system, while the major system can also be used to represent stand-alone objects. Many mnemonists use the major system as a person-action system as well, so the main difference is the way that images are assigned to the numbers.\nLike the mnemonic major system, the Dominic system can be combined with a memory palace, thereby creating the Hotel Dominic.\nEncoding pairs of digits as people.\nUsing the Dominic system every pair of digits is first associated with a person. O'Brien feels that stories and images created using people are easier to remember. This encoding is carried out ahead of time and the people are reused, since it can take quite some time.\nTo perform this encoding, each digit is associated with a letter using the table below. These letters then become the initials of the person representing this number. People will often use quite a loose definition of \"initials\", using the initial letters of a phrase describing a person, such as \"80 = HO = Santa Claus, laughing and holding his belly (HO, HO, HO!)\".\nEncoding pairs of digits as actions.\nOnce each pair of digits has been associated with a person one can then cheaply create a corresponding action for each person. For example, if one had chosen to represent AE as the physicist Albert Einstein one might use a corresponding action of writing on a blackboard.\nUsage.\nOnce the mappings of a pair of digits are in place a sequence of digits can be converted into a story by first encoding pairs of digits as people or actions and then chaining these people and actions together.\nFor example, one might remember the number 2739 as follows: First 27 would be encoded BG and then as Bill Gates, then 39 would be encoded as CN and then Chuck Norris. Using the first two digits as a person and the second two as an action, one creates the image of Bill Gates delivering a roundhouse kick. Similarly 3927 might be converted into the image of Chuck Norris writing software.\nLonger numbers become stories. The long number 27636339, for example, could be chunked into 2763 6339 and then converted into BGSC SCCN. If the memorizer has also associated Santa Claus delivering presents with SC, then the chunk 2763 would represent Bill Gates delivering presents while 6339 would represent Santa Claus performing a roundhouse kick. The remembered story, therefore, could be that Bill Gates delivered presents and then got roundhouse kicked by Santa Claus.\nThe Dominic System is typically used along with the method of loci, which allows the easy recall of the images in order by placing them in locations along a mental journey.\nPacks of cards.\nAlthough the Dominic system is a method for remembering long sequences of numbers, it can also be used to remember other sequences such as the order of a deck of playing cards. This works by establishing some method of systematically converting the objects into numbers. If the nine of clubs is associated with 39 (CN), for instance, then Chuck Norris or a roundhouse kick could be used in a story describing where the nine of clubs is in the deck.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53560", "revid": "38759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53560", "title": "Procellariiformes", "text": "Order of birds\nProcellariiformes is an order of seabirds that comprises four families; the albatrosses, the petrels and shearwaters, and two families of storm petrels. Formerly called Tubinares and still called tubenoses in English, procellariiforms are often referred to collectively as the petrels, a term that has been applied to all members of the order, or more commonly all the families except the albatrosses. They are almost exclusively pelagic (feeding in the open ocean), and have a cosmopolitan distribution across the world's oceans, with the highest diversity being around New Zealand.\nProcellariiforms are colonial, mostly nesting on remote, predator-free islands. The larger species nest on the surface, while most smaller species nest in natural cavities and burrows. They exhibit strong philopatry, returning to their natal colony to breed and returning to the same nesting site over many years. Procellariiforms are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds that are formed over several years and may last for the life of the pair. A single egg is laid per nesting attempt, and usually a single nesting attempt is made per year, although the larger albatrosses may only nest once every two years. Both parents participate in incubation and chick rearing. Incubation times are long compared to other birds, as are fledging periods. Once a chick has fledged there is no further parental care.\nProcellariiforms have had a long relationship with humans. They have been important food sources for many people, and continue to be hunted as such in some parts of the world. The albatrosses in particular have been the subject of numerous cultural depictions. Procellariiforms include some of the most endangered bird taxa, with many species threatened with extinction due to introduced predators in their breeding colonies, marine pollution and the danger of fisheries by-catch. Scientists, conservationists, fishermen, and governments around the world are working to reduce the threats posed to them, and these efforts have led to the signing of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels, a legally binding international treaty signed in 2001.\nTaxonomy.\nThe order was named Procellariiformes by German anatomist Max F\u00fcrbringer in 1888. The word comes from the Latin word \"procella\", which means \"a violent wind\" or \"a storm\", and \"-iformes\" for \"order\". \nUntil the beginning of the 20th century, the family Hydrobatidae was named Procellariidae, and the family now called Procellariidae was rendered \"Puffinidae\". The order itself was called Tubinares. A major early work on this group is Frederick DuCane Godman's \"Monograph of the Petrels\", five fascicles, 1907\u20131910, with figures by John Gerrard Keulemans.\nIn the Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy, the tubenoses were included in a greatly enlarged order \"Ciconiiformes\". This taxonomic treatment was almost certainly erroneous, but its assumption of a close evolutionary relationship with other \"higher waterbirds\" \u2013 such as loons (Gaviiformes) and penguins (Sphenisciformes) \u2013 appears to be correct. The procellariiforms are most closely related to penguins, having diverged from them about 60 million years ago.\nThe diving petrels in the genus \"Pelecanoides\" were formerly placed in their own family Pelecanoididae. When genetic studies found that they were embedded within the family Procellariidae, the two families were merged.\nAll the storm petrels were once placed in the family Hydrobatidae but genetic data indicated that Hydrobatidae consisted of two deeply divergent clades that were not sister taxa. In 2018 the austral storm petrels were moved to the new family Oceanitidae. The northern storm petrels in the family Hydrobatidae are more closely related to the family Procellariidae than they are to the austral storm petrels in the family Oceanitidae.\nEarlier molecular phylogenetic studies found the family Oceantidae containing the austral storm petrels as the most basal with differing branching topologies for other three families. More recent large-scale studies have found a consistent pattern with the albatross family Diomedeidae as the most basal and Hydrobatidae sister to Procellariidae.\nThere are 147 living species of procellariiform worldwide, and the order is divided into four extant families, with a fifth prehistorically extinct:\nFossils of a bird similar to a petrel from the Eocene have been found in the London Clay and in Louisiana. Diving petrels occurred in the Miocene, with a species from that family (\"Pelecanoides miokuaka\") being described in 2007. The most numerous fossils from the Paleogene are those from the extinct family Diomedeoididae, fossils of which have been found in Central Europe and Iran.\nBiology.\nDistribution and movements.\nThe procellariiforms have a cosmopolitan distribution across the world's oceans and seas, although at the levels of family and genus there are some clear patterns. Antarctic petrels, \"Thalassoica antarctica\", have to fly over to get to the ocean from their breeding colonies in Antarctica, and northern fulmars breed on the northeastern tip of Greenland, the northernmost piece of land. The most cosmopolitan family is the Procellariidae, which are found in tropical, temperate and polar zones of both the Northern and the Southern Hemispheres, though the majority do not breed in the tropics, and half the species are restricted to southern temperate and polar regions. The gadfly petrels, \"Pterodroma\", have a generally tropical and temperate distribution, whereas the fulmarine petrels are mostly polar with some temperate species. The majority of the fulmarine petrels, along with the prions, are confined to the Southern Hemisphere.\nThe storm petrels are almost as widespread as the procellariids, and fall into two distinct families; the Oceanitidae have a mostly Southern Hemisphere distribution and the Hydrobatidae are found mostly in the Northern Hemisphere. Amongst the albatrosses the majority of the family is restricted to the Southern Hemisphere, feeding and nesting in cool temperate areas, although one genus, \"Phoebastria\", ranges across the north Pacific. The family is absent from the north Atlantic, although fossil records indicate they bred there once. Finally the diving petrels are restricted to the Southern Hemisphere.\nMigration.\nThe various species within the order have a variety of migration strategies. Some species undertake regular trans-equatorial migrations, such as the sooty shearwater which annually migrates from its breeding grounds in New Zealand and Chile to the North Pacific off Japan, Alaska and California, an annual round trip of , the second longest measured annual migration of any bird. A number of other petrel species undertake trans-equatorial migrations, including Wilson's storm petrel, sooty and Manx shearwaters, and the Providence petrel, but no albatrosses cross the equator, as they rely on wind assisted flight. There are other long-distance migrants within the order; Swinhoe's storm petrels breed in the western Pacific and migrate to the western Indian Ocean, and Bonin petrels nesting in Hawaii migrate to the coast of Japan during the non-breeding season.\nNavigation.\nMany species in the order travel long distances over open water but return to the same nest site each year, raising the question of how they navigate so accurately. The Welsh naturalist Ronald Lockley carried out early research into animal navigation with the Manx shearwaters that nested on the island of Skokholm. In release experiments, a Manx shearwater flew from Boston to Skokholm, a distance of in 12&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 days.\nLockley showed that when released \"under a clear sky\" with sun or stars visible, the shearwaters oriented themselves and then \"flew off in a direct line for Skokholm\", making the journey so rapidly that they must have flown almost in a straight line. But if the sky was overcast at the time of release, the shearwaters flew around in circles \"as if lost\" and returned slowly or not at all, implying that they navigated using astronomical cues.\nResearchers have also begun investigating olfaction's role in procellariiform navigation. In a study where Cory's shearwaters were rendered anosmic with zinc sulphate, a compound which kills the surface layer of the olfactory epithelium, and released hundreds of kilometers away from their home colony at night, control birds found their way to their home nests before night was over, whereas anosmic birds did not home until the next day. A similar study that released Cory's shearwaters 800\u00a0km from their home nests, testing both magnetic and olfactory disturbance effects on navigation, found that anosmic birds took longer to home than magnetically disturbed or control birds.\nMorphology and flight.\nProcellariiforms range in size from the very large wandering albatross, at and a wingspan, to tiny birds like the least storm petrel, at with a wingspan, and the smallest of the prions, the fairy prion, with a wingspan of . Their nostrils are enclosed in one or two tubes on their straight deeply-grooved bills with hooked tips. The beaks are made up of several plates. Their wings are long and narrow; the feet are webbed, and the hind toe is undeveloped or non-existent; their adult plumage is predominantly black, white, and grey.\nThe order has a few unifying characteristics, starting with their tubular nasal passage which is used for olfaction. Procellariiformes that nest in burrows have a strong sense of smell, being able to detect dimethyl sulfide released from plankton in the ocean. This ability to smell helps to locate patchily distributed prey at sea and may also help locate their nests within nesting colonies. In contrast, surface nesting Procellariiformes have increased vision, having six times better spatial resolution than those that nest in burrows. The structure of the bill, which contains seven to nine distinct horny plates, is another unifying feature, although there are differences within the order. Petrels have a plate called the maxillary unguis that forms a hook on the maxilla. The smaller members of the order have a comb-like mandible, made by the tomial plate, for plankton feeding. Most members of the order are unable to walk well on land, and many species visit their remote breeding islands only at night. The exceptions are the huge albatrosses, several of the gadfly petrels and shearwaters and the fulmar-petrels. The latter can disable even large predatory birds with their obnoxious stomach oil, which they can project some distance. This stomach oil, stored in the proventriculus, is a digestive residue created in the foregut of all tubenoses except the diving petrels, and is used mainly for storage of energy-rich food during their long flights. The oil is also fed to their young, as well as being used for defense.\nProcellariiforms drink seawater, so they have to excrete excess salt. All birds have an enlarged nasal gland at the base of the bill, above the eyes, and in the Procellariiformes the gland is active. In general terms, the salt gland removes salt from the system and forms a 5 percent saline solution that drips out of the nostrils, or is forcibly ejected in some petrels. The processes behind this involve high levels of sodium ion reabsorption into the blood plasma within the kidneys, and secretion of sodium chloride via the salt glands using less water than was absorbed, which essentially generates salt-free water for other physiological uses. This high efficiency of sodium ion absorption is attributed to mammalian-type nephrons.\nMost albatrosses and procellariids use two techniques to minimise exertion while flying, namely, dynamic soaring and slope soaring. The albatrosses and giant petrels share a morphological adaptation to aid in flight, a sheet of tendon which locks the wing when fully extended, allowing the wing to be kept up and out without any muscle effort. Amongst the Oceanitidae storm petrels there are two unique flight patterns, one being surface pattering. In this they move across the water surface holding and moving their feet on the water's surface while holding steady above the water, and remaining stationary by hovering with rapid fluttering or by using the wind to anchor themselves in place. A similar flight method is thought to have been used by the extinct petrel family Diomedeoididae. The white-faced storm petrel possesses a unique variation on pattering: holding its wings motionless and at an angle into the wind, it pushes itself off the water's surface in a succession of bounding jumps.\nDiet and feeding.\nThe procellariiforms are for the most part exclusively marine foragers; the only exception to this rule are the two species of giant petrel, which regularly feed on carrion or other seabirds while on land. While some other species of fulmarine and \"Procellaria\" petrels also take carrion, the diet of most species of albatrosses and petrels is dominated by fish, squid, krill and other marine zooplankton. The importance of these food sources varies from species to species and family to family. For example, of the two albatross species found in Hawaii, the black-footed albatross takes mostly fish, while the Laysan feeds mainly on squid. The albatrosses in general feed on fish, squid and krill. Among the procellariids, the prions concentrate on small crustacea, the fulmarine petrels take fish and krill but little squid, while the \"Procellaria\" petrels consume mainly squid. The storm petrels take small droplets of oil from the surface of the water, as well as small crustaceans and fish.\nPetrels obtain food by snatching prey while swimming on the surface, snatching prey from the wing or diving down under the water to pursue prey. Dipping down from flight is most commonly used by the gadfly petrels and the storm petrels. There have been records of wedge-tailed shearwaters snatching flying fish from the air, but as a rule this technique is rare. Some diving birds may aid diving by beginning with a plunge from the air, but for the most part petrels are active divers and use their wings to move around under the water. The depths achieved by various species were determined in the 1990s and came as a surprise to scientists; short-tailed shearwaters have been recorded diving to and the Light-mantled sooty albatross to .\nBreeding behaviour.\nBreeding colonies.\nAll procellariiforms are colonial, predominantly breeding on offshore or oceanic islands. The few species that nest on continents do so in inhospitable environments such as dry deserts or on Antarctica. These colonies can vary from the widely spaced colonies of the giant petrels to the dense 3.6 million-strong colonies of Leach's storm petrels. For almost all species the need to breed is the only reason that procellariiforms return to land at all. Some of the larger petrels have to nest on windswept locations as they require wind to take off and forage for food. Within the colonies, pairs defend usually small territories (the giant petrels and some albatrosses can have very large territories) which is the small area around either the nest or a burrow. Competition between pairs can be intense, as is competition between species, particularly for burrows. Larger species of petrels will even kill the chicks and even adults of smaller species in disputes over burrows. Burrows and natural crevices are most commonly used by the smaller species; all the storm petrels and diving petrels are cavity nesters, as are many of the procellariids. The fulmarine petrels and some tropical gadfly petrels and shearwaters are surface nesters, as are all the albatrosses.\nProcellariiforms show high levels of philopatry, both site fidelity and natal philopatry. Natal philopatry is the tendency of an individual bird to return to its natal colony to breed, often many years after leaving the colony as a chick. This tendency has been shown through ringing studies and mitochondrial DNA studies. Birds ringed as chicks have been recaptured close to their original nests, sometimes extremely close; in the Laysan albatross the average distance between hatching site and the site where a bird established its own territory was , and a study of Cory's shearwaters nesting near Corsica found that nine out of 61 male chicks that returned to breed at their natal colony actually bred in the burrow they were raised in. Mitochondrial DNA provides evidence of restricted gene flow between different colonies, strongly suggesting philopatry.\nThe other type of philopatry exhibited is site fidelity, where pairs of birds return to the same nesting site for a number of years. Among the most extreme examples known of this tendency was the fidelity of a ringed northern fulmar that returned to the same nest site for 25 years. The average number of birds returning to the same nest sites is high in all species studied, with around 91 percent for Bulwer's petrels, and 85 percent of males and 76 percent of females for Cory's shearwaters (after a successful breeding attempt).\nPair bonds and life history.\nProcellariiforms are monogamous breeders and form long-term pair bonds. These pair bonds take several years to develop in some species, particularly with the albatrosses. Once formed, they last for many breeding seasons, in some cases for the life of the pair. Petrel courtship can be elaborate. It reaches its extreme with the albatrosses, where pairs spend many years perfecting and elaborating mating dances. These dances are composed of synchronised performances of various actions such as preening, pointing, calling, bill clacking, staring, and combinations of such behaviours (like the sky-call). Each particular pair will develop their own individual version of the dance. The breeding behaviour of other procellariiforms is less elaborate, although similar bonding behaviours are involved, particularly for surface-nesting species. These can involve synchronised flights, mutual preening and calling. Calls are important for helping birds locate potential mates and distinguishing between species, and may also help individuals assess the quality of potential mates. After pairs have been formed, calls serve to help them reunite; the ability of individuals to recognise their own mate has been demonstrated in several species.\nProcellariiforms are K-selected, being long-lived and caring extensively for their few offspring. Breeding is delayed for several years after fledging, sometimes for as long as ten years in the largest species. Once they begin breeding, they make only a single breeding attempt per nesting season; even if the egg is lost early in the season, they seldom re-lay. Much effort is placed into laying a single (proportionally) large egg and raising a single chick. Procellariiforms are long-lived; the longest living albatross known survived for over 70 years, but was probably older, and even the tiny storm petrels are known to have survived for over 38 years. The oldest living bird is Wisdom, a female Laysan albatross currently at least 75 years old.\nNesting and chick rearing.\nThe majority of procellariiforms nest once a year and do so seasonally. Some tropical shearwaters, like the Christmas shearwater, are able to nest on cycles slightly shorter than a year, and the large great albatrosses (genus \"Diomedea\") nest in alternate years (if successful). Most temperate and polar species nest over the spring-summer, although some albatrosses and procellariids nest over the winter. In the tropics, some species can be found breeding throughout the year, but most nest in discreet periods. Procellariiforms return to nesting colonies as much as several months before laying, and attend their nest sites regularly before copulation. Prior to laying, females embark on a lengthy pre-laying exodus to build up energy reserves in order to lay the exceptionally large egg. In the storm petrels, a very small procellariiform, the egg can be 29 percent of the body weight of the female, while in the grey-faced petrel, the female may spend as much as 80 days feeding out at sea after courtship before laying the egg.\nWhen the female returns and lays, incubation is shared between the sexes, with the male taking the first incubation stint and the female returning to sea. The duration of individual stints varies from just a few days to as much as several weeks, during which the incubating bird can lose a considerable amount of weight. The incubation period varies from species to species, around 40 days for the smallest storm petrels but longer for the largest species; for albatrosses it can span 70 to 80 days, which is the longest incubation period of any bird.\nUpon hatching, the chicks are semi-precocial, having open eyes, a dense covering of white or grey down feathers, and the ability to move around the nesting site. After hatching, the incubating adult remains with the chick for a number of days, a period known as the guard phase. In the case of most burrow-nesting species, this is only until the chick is able to thermoregulate, usually two or three days. Diving-petrel chicks take longer to thermoregulate and have a longer guard phase than other burrow nesters. However, surface-nesting species, which have to deal with a greater range of weather and to contend with predators like skuas and frigatebirds, consequently have a longer guard phase (as long as two weeks in procellariids and three weeks in albatrosses).\nThe chick is fed by both parents. Chicks are fed on fish, squid, krill, and stomach oil. Stomach oil is oil composed of neutral dietary lipids that are the residue created by digestion of the prey items. As an energy source for chicks it has several advantages over undigested prey, its calorific value is around 9.6 kcal per gram, which is only slightly lower than the value for diesel oil. This can be a real advantage for species that range over huge distances to provide food for hungry chicks. The oil is also used in defence. All procellariiforms create stomach oil except the diving-petrels.\nThe chick fledges between two and nine months after hatching, almost twice as long as a gull of the same body mass. The reasons behind the length of time are associated with the distance from the breeding site to food. First, there are few predators at the nesting colonies, therefore there is no pressure to fledge quickly. Second, the time between feedings is long due to the distance from the nest site that adults forage, thus a chick that had a higher growth rate would stand a better chance of starving to death. The duration between feedings vary among species and during the stages of development. Small feeds are frequent during the guard phase, but afterward become less frequent. However, each feed can deliver a large amount of energy; both sooty shearwater and mottled petrel chicks have been recorded to double their weight in a single night, probably when fed by both parents.\nRelationship with humans.\nRole in culture.\nThe most important family culturally is the albatrosses, which have been described by one author as \"the most legendary of birds\". Albatrosses have featured in poetry in the form of Samuel Taylor Coleridge's famous 1798 poem \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", which in turn gave rise to the usage of albatross as metaphor for a burden. More generally, albatrosses were believed to be good omens, and to kill one would bring bad luck. There are few instances of petrels in culture, although there are sailors' legends regarding the storm petrels, which are considered to warn of oncoming storms. In general, petrels were considered to be \"soul birds\", representing the souls of drowned sailors, and it was considered unlucky to touch them.\nIn the Russian language, many petrel species from the Hydrobatidae and Procellariidae families of the order Procellariiformes are known as \"burevestnik\", which literally means 'the announcer of the storm'. When in 1901, the Russian writer Maxim Gorky turned to the imagery of subantarctic avifauna to describe Russian society's attitudes to the coming revolution, he used a \"storm-announcing\" petrel as the lead character of a poem that soon became popular in the revolutionary circles as \"the battle anthem of the revolution\". Although the species called \"stormy petrel\" in English is not one of those to which the \"burevestnik\" name is applied in Russian (it, in fact, is known in Russian as an entirely un-romantic \"\"), the English translators uniformly used the \"stormy petrel\" image in their translations of the poem, usually known in English as \"The Song of the Stormy Petrel\".\nVarious tubenose birds are relevant to the mythologies and oral traditions of Polynesia. The M\u0101ori used the wing bones of the albatross to carve flutes. In Hawaiian mythology, Laysan albatrosses are considered \"aumakua\", being a sacred manifestation of the ancestors, and quite possibly also the sacred bird of K\u0101ne. The storm petrel features prominently in the \"Origin of Birds\" myth.\nExploitation.\nAlbatrosses and petrels have been important food sources for humans for as long as people have been able to reach their remote breeding colonies. Amongst the earliest-known examples of this is the remains of shearwaters and albatrosses along with those of other seabirds in 5,000-year-old middens in Chile, although it is likely that they were exploited prior to this. Since then, many other marine cultures, both subsistence and industrial, have exploited procellariiforms, in some cases almost to extinction. Some cultures continue to harvest shearwaters (a practice known as muttonbirding); for example, the M\u0101ori of New Zealand use a sustainable traditional method known as \"kaitiakitanga\". In Alaska, residents of Kodiak Island harpoon short-tailed albatrosses, \"Diomedea albatrus\", and until the late 1980s residents of Tristan Island in the Indian Ocean harvested the eggs of the Yellow-nosed Mollymawks, \"Diomedea chlororhynchos\", and sooty albatrosses, \"Phoebetria fusca\". Albatrosses and petrels are also now tourist draws in some locations, such as Taiaroa Head. While such exploitation is non-consumptive, it can have deleterious effects that need careful management to protect both the birds and the tourism.\nThe English naturalist William Yarrell wrote in 1843 that \"ten or twelve years ago, Mr. Gould exhibited twenty-four [storm petrels], in a large dish, at one of the evening meetings of the Zoological Society\".\nThe engraver Thomas Bewick wrote in 1804 that \"Pennant, speaking of those [birds] which breed on, or inhabit, the Isle of St Kilda, says\u2014'No bird is of so much use to the islanders as this: the Fulmar supplies them with oil for their lamps, down for their beds, a delicacy for their tables, a balm for their wounds, and a medicine for their distempers'\". A photograph by George Washington Wilson taken about 1886 shows a \"view of the men and women of St Kilda on the beach dividing up the catch of Fulmar\". James Fisher, author of \"The Fulmar\" (1952) calculated that every person on St Kilda consumed over 100 fulmars each year; the meat was their staple food, and they caught around 12,000 birds annually. However, when the human population left St Kilda in 1930, the population did not suddenly grow.\nThreats and conservation.\nThe albatrosses and petrels are \"amongst the most severely threatened taxa worldwide\". They face a variety of threats, the severity of which varies greatly from species to species. Several species are among the most common of seabirds, including Wilson's storm petrel (an estimated 12 to 30 million individuals) and the short-tailed shearwater (23 million individuals); while the total population of some other species is a few hundred. There are less than 200 Magenta petrels breeding on the Chatham Islands, only 130 to 160 Zino's petrels and only 170 Amsterdam albatrosses. Only one species is thought to have become extinct since 1600, the Guadalupe storm petrel of Mexico, although a number of species had died out before this. Numerous species are very poorly known; for example, the Fiji petrel has rarely been seen since its discovery. The breeding colony of the New Zealand storm petrel was not located until February 2013; it had been thought extinct for 150 years until its rediscovery in 2003, while the Bermuda petrel had been considered extinct for nearly 300 years.\nThe principal threat to the albatrosses and larger species of procellariids is long-line fishing. Bait set on hooks is attractive to foraging birds and many are hooked by the lines as they are set. As many as 100,000 albatrosses are hooked and drown each year on tuna lines set out by long-line fisheries. Before 1991 and the ban on drift-net fisheries, it was estimated that 500,000 seabirds a year died as a result. This has caused steep declines in some species, as procellariiforms are extremely slow breeders and cannot replace their numbers fast enough. Losses of albatrosses and petrels in the Southern Ocean were estimated at between 1 percent and 16 percent per year, which these species cannot sustain for long.\nExotic species introduced to the remote breeding colonies threaten all types of procellariiform. These principally take the form of predators; most albatross and petrel species are clumsy on land and unable to defend themselves from mammals such as rats, feral cats and pigs. This phenomenon, ecological naivete, has resulted in declines in many species and was implicated in the extinction of the Guadalupe storm petrel. Already in 1910 Godman wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Owing to the introduction of the mongoose and other small carnivorous mammals into their breeding haunts, some species, such as \"Oestrelata jamaicensis\" and \"newelli\", have already been completely exterminated, and others appear to be in danger of extinction.\nIntroduced herbivores may unbalance the ecology of islands; introduced rabbits destroyed the forest understory on Cabbage Tree Island off New South Wales, which increased the vulnerability of the Gould's petrels nesting on the island to natural predators, and left them vulnerable to the sticky fruits of the native birdlime tree (\"Pisonia umbellifera\"). In the natural state these fruits lodge in the understory of the forest, but with the understory removed the fruits fall to the ground where the petrels move about, sticking to their feathers and making flight impossible.\nExploitation has decreased in importance as a threat. Other threats include the ingestion of plastic flotsam. Once swallowed, plastic can cause a general decline in the fitness of the bird, or in some cases lodge in the gut and cause a blockage, leading to death by starvation. It can also be picked up by foraging adults and fed to chicks, stunting their development and reducing the chances of successfully fledging. Procellariids are also vulnerable to marine pollution, as well as oil spills. Some species, such as Barau's petrel, Newell's shearwater and Cory's shearwater, which nest high up on large developed islands, are victims of light pollution. Fledging chicks are attracted to streetlights and may then be unable to reach the sea. An estimated 20 to 40 percent of fledging Barau's petrels and 45 to 60 percent of fledging Cory's shearwater are attracted to the streetlights on R\u00e9union and Tenerife, respectively.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53569", "revid": "6200168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53569", "title": "Leonard Nimoy", "text": "American actor (1931\u20132015)\nLeonard Simon Nimoy ( ; March 26, 1931 \u2013 February 27, 2015) was an American actor and director, famous for playing Spock in the \"Star Trek\" franchise for almost 50 years. This includes originating Spock in in 1966, then ', the first six \"Star Trek\" films, ', the 2009 \"Star Trek\" film, and \"Star Trek Into Darkness\". Nimoy also directed films, including ' (1984), ' (1986), and \"Three Men and a Baby\" (1987), and his career included roles in music videos and video games. In addition to acting and filmmaking, Nimoy was a photographer, author, singer, and songwriter.\nNimoy's acting career began during his early twenties, teaching acting classes in Hollywood and making minor film and television appearances throughout the 1950s. From 1953 to 1955, he served in the United States Army as a sergeant in the Special Services, an entertainment branch of the American military. He originated and developed Spock beginning with the 1964 \"Star Trek\" television pilot \"\" and 1965\u2019s \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\", through series' end in early 1969, followed by eight feature films and guest appearances in spin-offs. From 1967 to 1970, Nimoy had a music career with Dot Records, with his first and second albums mostly as Spock. After the original \"Star Trek\" series, Nimoy starred in \"\" for two seasons, hosted the documentary series \"In Search of...\", appeared in \"Columbo\", and made several well-received stage appearances.\nNimoy's portrayal of Spock made a significant cultural impact and earned him three Emmy Award nominations. His public profile as Spock was so strong that both his autobiographies, \"I Am Not Spock\" (1975) and \"I Am Spock\" (1995), were written from the viewpoint of coexistence with the character. Leonard Nimoy played the elder Spock, with Zachary Quinto portraying a younger Spock, in the 2009 \"Star Trek\" reboot film, directed by J. J. Abrams. In 2010, Nimoy announced that he was retiring from playing Spock, citing both his advanced age and the desire to give Quinto full media attention as the character. His final role as Spock was in the 2013 sequel, \"Star Trek Into Darkness\".\nNimoy died in February 2015 after a long case of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). His death was international news and was met with expressions of shock and grief by fans, \"Star Trek\" co-stars, scientists, celebrities, and the media. An asteroid was named in his honor. \"For the Love of Spock\" (2016) was produced by his son Adam about his life and career, and \"Remembering Leonard Nimoy\" (2017) was produced by his daughter Julie about his illness.\nEarly life.\nLeonard Simon Nimoy was born on March 26, 1931, in an Irish section of the West End of Boston, Massachusetts, to Jewish immigrants from Iziaslav, Ukraine. His parents left Iziaslav separately, his father first walking over the border into Poland while his mother and grandmother were smuggled out of the Soviet Union in a horse-drawn wagon by hiding under bales of hay. They reunited after arriving in the United States. His mother, Dora (n\u00e9e Spinner; 1904\u20131987), was a homemaker, and his father, Max Nimoy (1901\u20131987), owned a barbershop in the Mattapan section of Boston. He had an elder brother, Melvin (1926\u20132022).\nAs a child, Nimoy took miscellaneous jobs to supplement his family's income, including selling newspapers and greeting cards, shining shoes, or setting up chairs in theaters, and when he got older, selling vacuum cleaners. He began acting at the age of eight in a children's and neighborhood theater. His parents wanted him to attend college and pursue a stable career, or even learn to play the accordion, so he could always make a living, but his grandfather encouraged him to do what he then wanted to do most, which was acting. Nimoy realized he had an aptitude for singing, which he developed in his synagogue's choir. His singing during his bar mitzvah at age 13 was so good he was asked to repeat his performance the following week at another synagogue. William Shatner said, \"He is still the only man I know whose voice was two bar mitzvahs good!\"\nHis first major role was at 17, as Ralphie in an amateur production of Clifford Odets's \"Awake and Sing!\", about the struggles of a matriarchal Jewish family similar to his during the Great Depression. He said, \"Playing this teenage kid in this Jewish family that was so much like mine was amazing... The same dynamics, the same tensions in the household.\" The role \"lit a passion\" that led to his acting career, with Nimoy saying \"I never wanted to do anything else.\" Shatner has said that Nimoy also worked on local radio shows for children, often voice acting Bible stories:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Obviously, there was something symbolic about that. Many years later as Captain Kirk, I would be busy rescuing civilizations in distress on distant planets while Leonard's Mr. Spock would be examining the morality of man- and alienkind.\nNimoy took drama classes at Boston College, and after moving to Los Angeles, he used $600 he saved from selling vacuum cleaners to enroll at the Pasadena Playhouse, supporting himself by working as a theatre usher and a taxicab driver, and stocking vending machines. However, he was soon disillusioned and quit after six months, feeling that the acting skills he had already acquired from earlier roles were more advanced: \"I thought, I have to study here three years in order to do this level of work, and I'm already doing better work\".\nHe became a devotee of method acting concepts derived from the teachings of Konstantin Stanislavsky, realizing the stage allowed him to explore his original inspirations for acting: the \"psychological, emotional, and physical territories of life that can't be done anywhere else\". Like his method actor role model, Marlon Brando, Nimoy wore jeans and T-shirts. Between studies, he took a job at an ice cream parlor on the Sunset Strip.\nIn 1953, Nimoy enlisted in the United States Army Reserve at Fort McPherson Georgia, serving for 18 months until 1955, leaving as a Staff Sergeant. He had been in the Army Special Services, putting on shows which he wrote, narrated, and emceed. One of his soldiers was Ken Berry, whom he encouraged to go into acting as a civilian and helped contact agents. During that period, he directed and starred in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\", with the Atlanta Theater Guild. Soon after he was discharged, his wife Sandi was pregnant with their second child, and they rented an apartment while he became a cab driver in Los Angeles. He once picked up Senator John F. Kennedy at the Bel Air Hotel in 1956, before the Democratic Convention began on August 13. As the Senator was not carrying any cash, Nimoy had to follow him into the Beverly Hilton to collect his $1.25 from someone Kennedy knew. He got a $1.75 tip.\nActing career.\nBefore and during \"Star Trek\".\nNimoy spent more than a decade playing only small parts in B movies and the lead in one, along with a minor TV role. He believed his performance as the title role in the 1952 film \"Kid Monk Baroni\" would make him a star, but the film failed after a brief cinema showing. During his military career, the film gained a larger audience on television, and after his discharge he got steadier work portraying a \"heavy\", where his character used street weapons like switchblades and guns or had to threaten or attack people. He overcame his Boston accent, but realized his lean appearance made stardom unlikely.\nHe decided to be a supporting actor rather than take lead roles, an attitude he acquired from his childhood: \"I'm a second child who was educated to the idea my older brother was to be given respect and not perturbed. I was not to upstage him[...] So my acting career was designed to be a supporting player, a character actor.\" He played more than 50 small parts in B movies, television series such as \"Perry Mason\" and \"Dragnet\", and serials such as \"Zombies of the Stratosphere\" (1952), in which he played a Martian named Narab. To support a wife and two children, he often took other work, such as delivering newspapers, working in a pet shop, and driving cabs.\nNimoy played an army sergeant in the 1954 science fiction thriller \"Them!\" and a professor in the 1958 science fiction movie \"The Brain Eaters\", and had a role in \"The Balcony\" (1963), a film adaptation of the Jean Genet play. With Vic Morrow, he co-produced \"Deathwatch\", a 1965 English-language film version of Genet's play \"Haute Surveillance\", adapted and directed by Morrow and starring Nimoy. The story deals with three prison inmates. Partly as a result of his role, he then taught drama classes to members of Synanon, a drug rehab center, explaining: \"Give a little here and it always comes back\".\nHe had guest roles in the \"Sea Hunt\" series from 1958 to 1960 and a minor role in the 1961 \"The Twilight Zone\" episode \"A Quality of Mercy\". He also appeared in the syndicated \"Highway Patrol\" starring Broderick Crawford, and as Luke Reid in the \"Night of Decision\" episode of the ABC/Warner Bros. western series \"Colt .45\".\nNimoy appeared four times in ethnic roles on NBC's \"Wagon Train\", the number one rated program of the 1961\u20131962 season. He portrayed Bernabe Zamora in \"The Estaban Zamora Story\" (1959), \"Cherokee Ned\" in \"The Maggie Hamilton Story\" (1960), Joaquin Delgado in \"The Tiburcio Mendez Story\" (1961), and Emeterio Vasquez in \"The Baylor Crowfoot Story\" (1962).\nNimoy appeared in numerous episodes of \"Gunsmoke\", as well as in \"Steve Canyon\" (1959), \"Bonanza\" (1960), \"The Rebel\" (1960), \"Two Faces West\" (1961), \"Laramie\" (1961), \"Rawhide\" (1961), \"The Untouchables\" (1962), \"The Eleventh Hour\" (1962), \"Perry Mason\" (1963), \"Combat!\" (1963, 1965), \"Daniel Boone\", \"The Outer Limits\" (1964), \"The Virginian\" (1963\u20131965; first working with \"Star Trek\" co-star DeForest Kelley in \"Man of Violence\", episode 14 of season 2, in 1963), and \"Get Smart\" (1966). He appeared in the 1995 \"Outer Limits\" series. He appeared on \"Gunsmoke\" in 1961 as Grice, in 1962 as Arnie, and in 1966 as John Walking Fox.\nNimoy and later \"Star Trek\" co-star William Shatner first worked together on an episode of the NBC spy series \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\", \"The Project Strigas Affair\" (1964). Their characters were from opposite sides of the Iron Curtain, though with his saturnine appearance, Nimoy played the villain and Shatner played a reluctant U.N.C.L.E. recruit. By then he had a good reputation in Hollywood as a character actor, and chose \"Star Trek\" over a role on \"Peyton Place\".\nOn the stage, Nimoy played the lead role in a short run of Gore Vidal's \"Visit to a Small Planet\" in 1968 (shortly before the end of the \"Star Trek\" series) at the Pheasant Run Playhouse in St. Charles, Illinois.\n\"Star Trek\".\nNimoy was best known for his portrayal of Spock, the half-human, half-Vulcan character he played on \"Star Trek\" from the first TV episode in 1966 to the film \"Star Trek Into Darkness\" in 2013. According to biographer Dennis Fischer, Spock was Nimoy's \"most important role\". Spock became an icon and one of the most popular alien characters ever featured on television. Viewers admired his composure and intellect and his ability to take on any task successfully. As a result, Nimoy's character \"took the public by storm\", nearly eclipsing the star of the series, William Shatner's Captain Kirk, adds Fischer. Nimoy was later credited for bringing \"dignity and intelligence to one of the most revered characters in science fiction\".\nNimoy and Shatner, who portrayed his commanding officer, became close friends during the series' television run, and were \"like brothers\", according to Shatner. \"Star Trek\" was broadcast from 1966 to 1969. For his role as Spock, Nimoy was nominated three times for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, and has long remained the only \"Star Trek\" actor nominated for an Emmy.\nAmong Spock's recognized and unique symbols Nimoy incorporated into the series is the Vulcan salute, which became identified with him in pop culture. Nimoy created the sign from his childhood memories of the way \"kohanim\" (Jewish priests) hold their hands when giving the Priestly Blessing. The accompanying spoken blessing is \"Live long and prosper\".\nNimoy conceived the \"Vulcan nerve pinch\", which he suggested as a replacement for the scripted knock out method of using the butt of his phaser. He wanted a more sophisticated way of rendering a person unconscious. Nimoy explained to the director that Spock had, per the story, attended the Vulcan Institute of Technology and had studied human anatomy. Spock possessed the ability to project a unique form of energy through his fingertips. Nimoy explained the idea of putting his hand on his neck and shoulder to Shatner, and they rehearsed it. Nimoy credits Shatner's acting during the \"pinch\" that sold the idea and made it work on screen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis legacy as that character is key to the enjoyment of \"Star Trek\". The way that Spock was used as a device for the writers to examine humanity and examine what it meant to be human, that's really what \"Star Trek\" was all about. And in finding Leonard Nimoy, they found the perfect person to portray that.\nMatt Atchity, editor-in-chief of Rotten Tomatoes\nNimoy reprised Spock in ' and two episodes of '. When the new series ' was planned in the late 1970s, Nimoy was to be in only two of eleven episodes, but when the series was elevated to a feature film, he agreed to reprise his role. The first six \"Star Trek\" movies feature the original cast including Nimoy, who also directed two of the films, ' and \"\". He played the elder Spock in the 2009 \"Star Trek\" reboot film and briefly in the 2013 sequel, \"Star Trek Into Darkness\", both directed by J. J. Abrams.\nAfter \"Star Trek\".\nFollowing \"Star Trek\" in 1969, Nimoy immediately joined the cast of the spy series \", which was seeking a replacement for Martin Landau. Nimoy was cast in the role of Paris, an IMF agent who was an ex-magician and make-up expert, \". He played the role during and from 1969 to 1971. Nimoy had been strongly considered as part of the initial cast for the show, but remained on \"Star Trek\".\nHe co-starred with Yul Brynner and Richard Crenna in the Western movie \"Catlow\" (1971). He also had roles in two episodes of Rod Serling's \"Night Gallery\" (1972 and 1973) and \"Columbo\" (1973). He appeared in television films such as \"Assault on the Wayne\" (1970), \"Baffled!\" (1972), \"The Alpha Caper\" (1973), \"The Missing Are Deadly\" (1974), \"Seizure: The Story Of Kathy Morris\" (1980), and \"Marco Polo\" (1982). He received an Emmy Award nomination for best supporting actor for the television film \"A Woman Called Golda\" (1982), for playing the role of Morris Meyerson, Golda Meir's husband, opposite Ingrid Bergman as Golda in her final role.\nIn 1975, Nimoy filmed an opening introduction to Ripley's World of the Unexplained museum located at Gatlinburg, Tennessee, and Fisherman's Wharf at San Francisco, California. From 1976 to 1982, he hosted and narrated the television series \"In Search of...\", which investigated paranormal or unexplained events or subjects. In 2000\u20132001 he hosted CNBC TV series \"The Next Wave With Leonard Nimoy\", which explored how e-businesses were integrating with technology and the Internet. He also had a character part as a psychiatrist in Philip Kaufman's 1978 remake of \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\".\nStage.\nNimoy won acclaim for a series of stage roles. In 1971 he played the starring role of Tevye in \"Fiddler on the Roof\", which toured for eight weeks. Having performed in the Yiddish theater as a young man, he said the part was like a \"homecoming\" for him because his parents, like Tevye, also came from a shtetl in Russia and could relate to the play when they saw him in it. Later that year he starred as Arthur Goldman in \"The Man in the Glass Booth\" at the Old Globe Theater in San Diego.\nHe starred as Randle McMurphy in \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" in 1974, one year prior to its release as a feature film, with Jack Nicholson in the same role. During the run of the play, Nimoy took over as its director and wanted his character to be \"rough and tough,\" and insisted on having tattoos. The costumer for the show, Sharon White, was amused: \"That was sort of an intimate thing... Here I am with Mr. Spock, for god's sakes, and I am painting pictures on his arms.\"\nIn 1975, Nimoy toured with and played the title role in the Royal Shakespeare Company's \"Sherlock Holmes\". A number of authors have perceived parallels between the rational Holmes and the character of Spock, and it became a running theme in \"Star Trek\" fan clubs. \"Star Trek\" writer Nicholas Meyer said that \"the link between Spock and Holmes was obvious to everyone.\" Meyer gives a few examples, including a scene in \"Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country,\" in which Spock quotes directly from a Doyle book and credits Holmes as a forefather to the logic he was espousing. In addition, the connection was implied in \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\", which paid homage to both Holmes and Spock.\nBy 1977, when Nimoy played Martin Dysart in \"Equus\" on Broadway, he had played 13 important roles in 27 cities, including Tevye, Malvolio in \"Twelfth Night\", and Randle McMurphy in \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\". In 1981, Nimoy starred in \"Vincent\", a one-man show which he wrote and published as a book in 1984. The audio recording of the play is available on DVD under the title, \"Van Gogh Revisited.\" It was based on the life of artist Vincent van Gogh, in which Nimoy played Van Gogh's brother Theo. Other plays included \"Oliver!\", at The Melody Top Theater in Milwaukee, \"6 Rms Riv Vu\" opposite Sandy Dennis, in Florida, \"Full Circle\" with Bibi Anderson on Broadway and in Washington, D.C. He was in \"Camelot\", \"The King and I\", \"Caligula\", \"The Four Poster\", and \"My Fair Lady.\"\n\"Star Trek\" films.\nAfter Paramount agreed to settle a lawsuit by Nimoy for \"Star Trek\" merchandise royalties, he agreed to join \"\", the first in the \"Star Trek\" film series. By 1986, Nimoy had earned more than half a million dollars in royalties.\nOther roles.\nVoice acting.\nIn 1975, Nimoy's renditions of Ray Bradbury's \"There Will Come Soft Rains\" and \"Usher II\", both from \"The Martian Chronicles\" (1950), were released on Caedmon Records. During 1980, Nimoy hosted the Friday \"Adventure Night\" segment of the radio drama series \"Mutual Radio Theater\", heard via the Mutual Broadcasting System. In 1986, Nimoy lent his voice to the character Galvatron in the animated film \"\".\nIn Bradbury's 1993 animated TV film \"The Halloween Tree\", Nimoy was the voice of Mr.Moundshroud, the children's guide. Nimoy lent his voice as narrator to the 1994 IMAX documentary film, \"Destiny in Space\", showcasing film-footage of space from nine Space Shuttle missions over four years time. In 1999, he voiced the narration of the English version of the Sega Dreamcast game \"Seaman\" and promoted Y2K educational films.\nTogether with John de Lancie, who portrayed Q in the \"Star Trek\" franchise, Nimoy created Alien Voices, an audio-production venture that specializes in audio dramatizations. Among the works jointly narrated by the pair are \"The Time Machine\", \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\", \"The Lost World\", \"The Invisible Man\", \"The First Men in the Moon\", and several television specials for the Sci-Fi Channel. In an interview published on the official \"Star Trek\" website, Nimoy said that Alien Voices was discontinued because the series did not sell well enough to recoup costs.\nIn 2001, Nimoy voiced the Atlantean King Kashekim Nedakh in the Disney animated feature \"\". Nimoy provided a comprehensive series of voice-overs for the 2005 computer game \"Civilization IV\". In the television series \"The Next Wave\" he interviewed people about technology. He hosts the documentary film \"The Once and Future Griffith Observatory\". Nimoy and his wife, Susan Bay-Nimoy, were major supporters of the Griffith Observatory's historic 2002\u20132004 expansion.\nIn 2009, he voiced \"The Zarn\" in the television-based movie \"Land of the Lost\". He voiced the \"Star Trek Online\" massive multiplayer online game, released in February 2010, and \"Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep\" as Xehanort, the series' leading villain. Tetsuya Nomura, the director of \"Birth by Sleep\", said Nimoy was chosen for the role specifically because of his role as Spock, to play opposite Mark Hamill, famous for his role as Luke Skywalker in \"Star Wars\", as Nomura was a fan of both series and wanted to pit them against each other. Nimoy reprised this role for ' in 2012. After his death in 2015, Nimoy was replaced in the role of Xehanort by Rutger Hauer. Hauer died in 2019 and was succeeded by Christopher Lloyd, who also appeared in '.\nNimoy voiced Sentinel Prime in the 2011 film \"\". He was a frequent and popular reader for \"Selected Shorts\", an ongoing series of programs at Symphony Space in New York City (that also tours around the country) which features actors, and sometimes authors, reading works of short fiction. The programs are broadcast on radio and available on websites through Public Radio International, National Public Radio and WNYC radio. Nimoy was honored by Symphony Space with the renaming of the Thalia Theater as the Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater.\nSpecial appearances.\nFrom 1982 to 1987, Nimoy hosted the children's educational show \"Standby...Lights! Camera! Action!\" on Nickelodeon. He was an occasional voice actor in animated feature films, including the character of Galvatron in ' in 1986. He narrated the 1991 CBS paranormal series '. In 1994, he voiced Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in \"The Pagemaster\". In 1998, he had a leading role as Mustapha Mond in \"Brave New World\", a TV-movie version of Aldous Huxley's 1932 novel.\nFrom 1994 to 1997, he narrated the \"Ancient Mysteries\" series on A&amp;E including \"The Sacred Water of Lourdes\" and \"Secrets of the Romanovs\". He appeared in advertising in the United Kingdom for the computer company Time Computers in the late 1990s. In 1997, he played the prophet Samuel, alongside Nathaniel Parker, in \"The Bible Collection\" movie \"David\". He appeared in several popular television series, including \"Futurama\" and \"The Simpsons\", both as himself and as Spock. In 2000, he provided on-camera hosting and introductions for 45 half-hour episodes of the anthology series \"Our 20th Century\" on the AEN TV Network. The series covers world news, sports, entertainment, technology, and fashion using original archive news clips from 1930 to 1975 from the National Archives in Washington, D.C. and other private archival sources.\nIn 2001, Nimoy appeared on the television show \"Becker\", where he played Dr. Emmett Fowler, a professor who cannot recall his former student.\nNimoy played the recurring enigmatic character of Dr.William Bell on the television show \"Fringe\". Nimoy opted for the role after previously working with Abrams, Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman on the 2009 \"Star Trek\" film and offered another opportunity to work with this production team again. Nimoy also was interested in the series, which he saw was an intelligent mixture of science and science fiction, and continued to guest star through the show's fourth season, even after his stated 2012 retirement from acting. Nimoy's first appearance as Bell was in the Season1 finale, \"There's More Than One of Everything\", which explored the possible existence of a parallel universe. In the May 9, 2009, episode of \"Saturday Night Live\", Nimoy appeared as a surprise guest in the \"Weekend Update\" segment with Zachary Quinto and Chris Pine, who play the young Spock and Kirk in the \"Star Trek\" which had just premiered days earlier. In the sketch, the three actors attempt to appease long-time Trekkers by assuring them the new film would be true to the original \"Star Trek\".\nProducer.\nIn 1991, Nimoy starred in \"Never Forget\", which he co-produced with Robert B. Radnitz. The movie was about a \"pro bono publico\" lawsuit by an attorney on behalf of Mel Mermelstein, played by Nimoy as an Auschwitz survivor, against a group of organizations engaged in Holocaust denial. Nimoy said he experienced a strong \"sense of fulfillment\" from doing the film. In 2007, he produced the play, \"Shakespeare's Will\" by Canadian Playwright Vern Thiessen. The one-woman show starred Jeanmarie Simpson as Shakespeare's wife, Anne Hathaway. The production was directed by Nimoy's wife, Susan Bay.\nSemi-retirement.\nIn April 2010, Nimoy announced that he was retiring from playing Spock, citing both his advanced age and the desire to give Zachary Quinto full media attention as the character. \"Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep\" was to be his final performance; however, in February 2011, he announced his intent to return to \"Fringe\" and reprise his role as William Bell. Nimoy continued voice acting during retirement; his appearance in the third season of \"Fringe\" includes his voice (his character appears only in animated scenes), and he provided the voice of Sentinel Prime in \"\". In May 2011, he made a cameo appearance in the alternate version music video of \"The Lazy Song\" by Bruno Mars. Aaron Bay-Schuck, the Atlantic Records executive who signed Mars to the label, is Nimoy's stepson.\nNimoy provided the voice of Spock as a guest star in a Season5 episode of the CBS sitcom \"The Big Bang Theory\" titled \"The Transporter Malfunction\", which aired on March 29, 2012. Also in 2012, Nimoy reprised his role of William Bell in \"Fringe\" for the fourth season episodes \"Letters of Transit\" and \"Brave New World\" parts1 and2. Nimoy reprised his role as Master Xehanort in the 2012 video game \"\". On August 30, 2012, Nimoy narrated a satirical segment about Mitt Romney's life on Comedy Central's \"The Daily Show with Jon Stewart\". In 2013, Nimoy reprised his role as Ambassador Spock in a cameo appearance in \"Star Trek Into Darkness\".\nOther career work.\nPhotography.\nNimoy's interest in photography began in childhood; for the rest of his life, he owned a camera he had rebuilt at the age of 13. During the 1970s, he studied photography at the University of California, Los Angeles. His photography studies at UCLA occurred after \"Star Trek\" and \"Mission: Impossible\" while he was seriously considering changing careers. His work has been exhibited at the R. Michelson Galleries in Northampton, Massachusetts and the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art.\nDirecting.\nNimoy's directorial debut was in 1973, with the \"Death on a Barge\" segment for an episode of \"Night Gallery\" during its final season. In the early 1980s, he resumed directing consistently, including television and film.\nNimoy began feature film directing in 1984 with ', the third in the film series. He directed the second most successful movie (critically and financially) in the franchise, ' (1986), and then \"Three Men and a Baby\", the highest-grossing film of 1987. These successes made him a star director. He directed \"The Good Mother\" (1988) and \"Funny About Love\" (1990). In 1994 he directed his last feature film, \"Holy Matrimony\". His final directorial credit was \"Killshot\", the 1995 pilot episode for \"Deadly Games\", a short-lived science-fiction television series.\nAt a press conference promoting the 2009 \"Star Trek\" movie, he said he had no further plans or ambition to direct although he enjoyed it.\nWriting.\nNimoy authored two volumes of autobiography. The first is \"I Am Not Spock\" (1975) and was controversial, as many fans incorrectly assumed Nimoy was distancing himself from the Spock character. In the book, Nimoy conducts dialogues between himself and Spock. The contents of this first autobiography also touched on a self-proclaimed \"identity crisis\" that seemed to haunt Nimoy throughout his career. It also related to an apparent love and hate relationship with the character of Spock and the \"Star Trek\" franchise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I went through a definite identity crisis. The question was whether to embrace Mr. Spock or to fight the onslaught of public interest. I realize now that I really had no choice in the matter. Spock and \"Star Trek\" were very much alive and there wasn't anything that I could do to change that.\nIn the second volume, \"I Am Spock\" (1995), Nimoy communicates that he finally realized his years of portraying the Spock character had led to a much greater identification between the fictional character and himself. Nimoy had much input into how Spock would act in certain situations, and conversely Nimoy's contemplation of how Spock acted gave him cause to think about things in a way he never would have, had he not portrayed the character. Nimoy maintained that in some meaningful sense he had merged with Spock while distancing between fact and fiction. In 2014, the audiobook version of \"I Am Spock\", read by Nimoy, was published.\nHe composed several volumes of poetry, some published along with a number of his photographs. A later poetic volume titled \"A Lifetime of Love: Poems on the Passages of Life\" was published in 2002. His poetry can be found in the Contemporary Poets index of The HyperTexts. Nimoy adapted and starred in the one-man play \"Vincent\" (1981), based on the play \"Van Gogh\" (1979) by Phillip Stephens.\nIn 1995, Nimoy was involved in the production of \"Primortals\", a comic book series published by Tekno Comix about first contact with aliens, which had arisen from a discussion he had with Isaac Asimov. There was a novelization by Steve Perry.\nMusic.\nIn December 1966, when it became apparent that the original ' was developing a strong following in spite of low Nielsen ratings, Dot Records approached the producers of the show. The result was the signing of Nimoy to that label. Dot Records was a subsidiary of Paramount Pictures, and both Paramount and Desilu\u2014the studio producing \"Star Trek\"\u2014were acquired by Gulf+Western: first Paramount in 1966, and then Desilu in 1967. So after the merger of the two companies, Nimoy wound up working for Paramount both as an actor (from 1966 to 1971) and singer (from 1967 to 1970), doing two television series (\"Star Trek\" and ') and five albums. Nimoy later recorded a few spoken word albums and contributed narration to albums such as \"Whales Alive\".\nNimoy's voice appeared in sampled form on a song by the pop band Information Society in the late Eighties. The song, \"What's on Your Mind (Pure Energy)\" (released in 1988), reached No.3 on the US Pop charts, and No.1 on the Dance charts.\nNimoy played the part of the chauffeur in the 1985 music video of The Bangles' cover version of \"Going Down to Liverpool\". He also appeared in the alternate music video for the song \"The Lazy Song\" by pop artist Bruno Mars.\nPersonal life.\nNimoy was long active in the Jewish community, and could speak and read Yiddish. In 1997, he narrated the documentary \"A Life Apart: Hasidism in America\", about the various sects of Hasidic Orthodox Jews. In October 2002, Nimoy published \"The Shekhina Project\", a photographic study exploring the feminine aspect of God's presence, inspired by Kabbalah. Reactions have varied from enthusiastic support to open condemnation. Nimoy said objections to Shekhina did not bother or surprise him, but he smarted at the stridency of the Orthodox protests, and was saddened at the attempt to control thought.\nNimoy was married twice. In 1954, he married Sandra Zober (1927\u20132011), an actress; they had two children: film producer and director Julie, and director Adam. After 32 years of marriage, he reportedly left Sandra on her 56th birthday and divorced her in 1987. On New Year's Day 1989, Nimoy married his second wife, actress Susan Bay, cousin of director Michael Bay.\nAfter two years of part-time study, in 1977 Nimoy earned an MA in education from Antioch College. In 2000, he received an honorary doctorate from Antioch University in Ohio, awarded for activism in Holocaust remembrance, the arts, and the environment. In 2012, he received an honorary doctorate of humane letters from Boston University.\nIn the 2001 documentary film \"Mind Meld\", in which Leonard Nimoy and William Shatner discuss their acting careers and personal lives, Nimoy revealed that he had become an alcoholic while working on \"Star Trek\" and ended up in drug rehabilitation. William Shatner, in his 2008 book \"Up Till Now: The Autobiography\", spoke about how later in their lives, Nimoy tried to help Shatner's alcoholic wife, Nerine Kidd.\nNimoy has said that the character of Spock, which he played twelve to fourteen hours a day, five days a week, influenced his personality in his private life. Each weekend during the original run of the series, he would be in character throughout Saturday and into Sunday, behaving more like Spock than himself\u2014more logical, more rational, more thoughtful, less emotional, and finding calm in every situation. It was only on Sunday in the early afternoon that Spock's influence on his behavior diminished enough to allow him to feel more himself again\u2014only to start the cycle over again on Monday morning. Years after the show, he observed Vulcan speech patterns, social attitudes, patterns of logic, and emotional suppression in his own behavior.\nNimoy was a private pilot and had owned an airplane. The Space Foundation bestowed to him the 2010 Douglas S. Morrow Public Outreach Award for creating a positive role model that inspired countless viewers to learn more about the universe.\nNimoy endorsed Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis in the 1988 presidential election.\nIn 2009, Nimoy was honored by his childhood hometown when the Office of Mayor Thomas Menino proclaimed the date of November 14, 2009, as \"Leonard Nimoy Day\" in the City of Boston.\nIn 2014, Walter Koenig revealed that Nimoy personally and successfully advocated to the show's producers for equal pay for Nichelle Nichols's work on \"Star Trek\". This incident was confirmed by Nimoy in a Trekmovie interview, and happened during his years at Desilu.\nNimoy has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. On June 2, 2015, the asteroid 4864 Nimoy was named after him.\nIllness and death.\nIn January 2014, Nimoy revealed publicly that he had been diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a condition he attributed to a smoking addiction he had quit about 30 years earlier. On February 19, 2015, having been in and out of hospitals for several months, Nimoy was taken to UCLA Medical Center for chest pains.\nOn February 25, 2015, Nimoy fell into a coma, and died of complications from COPD at his home in the Bel Air neighborhood of Los Angeles on the morning of February 27, 2015 at the age of 83. Adam Nimoy said that as his father came closer to death, \"he mellowed out. He made his family a priority and his career became secondary.\" A few days before his death, Nimoy shared some of his poetry on Twitter: \"A life is like a garden. Perfect moments can be had, but not preserved, except in memory. LLAP\". It was his final tweet.\nHe was buried at Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles on March 1, 2015. The service was attended by nearly 300 family members, friends, and former colleagues, including Zachary Quinto, Chris Pine, and J. J. Abrams. Though William Shatner did not attend, he was represented by his daughters.\nPersonal tributes.\nCast members of \"Star Trek\" who had worked alongside Nimoy gave personal tributes after his death. William Shatner wrote, \"I loved him like a brother... We will all miss his humor, his talent, and his capacity to love.\" George Takei called him an \"extraordinarily talented man\" and a \"very decent human being\". Walter Koenig said that after working with him, he discovered Nimoy's \"compassion, his intelligence and his humanity\". Nichelle Nichols noted that Nimoy's integrity, passion and devotion as an actor \"helped transport \"Star Trek\" into television history.\" Quinto, who portrayed Spock as a young man in \"Star Trek\" and \"Star Trek Into Darkness\", wrote, \"My heart is broken. I love you profoundly, my dear friend. And I will miss you every day.\"\nU.S. President Barack Obama, who had met Nimoy in 2007, remembered him as \"a lifelong lover of the arts and humanities, a supporter of the sciences, generous with his talent and his time\". Former NASA astronaut Buzz Aldrin called Nimoy \"a fellow space traveler because he helped make the journey into the final frontier accessible to us all\".\n\"The Big Bang Theory\", which made frequent references to Spock, and for which Nimoy voiced one episode, paid tribute to him after his death. Creator Chuck Lorre's vanity card at the end of the Season 8 episode, \"The Colonization Application\" (airing on March 5), featured a picture of Nimoy with the caption, \"The impact you had on our show and on our lives is everlasting.\"\nThe 136th episode of the web series \"Angry Video Game Nerd\" created by and starring James Rolfe, which covered \"Seaman\", was dedicated to Nimoy.\nAs part of a campaign for the 2016 feature film \"Star Trek Beyond\", aimed at benefiting several charities, Zachary Quinto and other cast members posted a video tribute to Nimoy, and the film itself paid tribute to him. Its director, Justin Lin, explained: \"It's something you'll see in the film. It obviously affected everybody, because he's been a big part of our lives. There's an attempt to acknowledge that in some way.\"\nAdam Nimoy directed a biographical documentary on his father, \"For the Love of Spock\", which Quinto narrated and with which Shatner was also involved. For charity, Shatner used selfies made by Nimoy's fans to create an online tribute mosaic of the Vulcan salute.\nIn June 2015, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory named a -wide asteroid 4864 Nimoy, originally discovered in 1988, in the Solar System's main asteroid belt.\nShatner wrote a book about his friendship with Nimoy titled \"Leonard: My Fifty Year Friendship with a Remarkable Man\", released on February 16, 2016.\nIn April 2017, a biographical documentary about his illness, \"Remembering Leonard Nimoy\" was released, produced by his daughter Julie.\nIn front of the Boston Museum of Science, a memorial to Nimoy is planned for installation, near where he grew up in the West End of Boston. The monumental sculpture will be a larger-than-life representation of a hand displaying his iconic \"live long and prosper\" gesture. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], the project is at least 75% funded.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
