{"id": "49966", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49966", "title": "Carlos Menem", "text": "President of Argentina from 1989 to 1999\nCarlos Sa\u00fal Menem (; 2 July 1930 \u2013 14 February 2021) was an Argentine politician who served as the president of Argentina for ten years, from 1989 to 1999. He identified as Peronist, serving as President of the Justicialist Party for 13 years (from 1990 to 2001 and again from 2001 to 2003), and his political approach became known as Menemism.\nBorn in Anillaco, La Rioja, to a Syrian family, Menem was raised as a Muslim, but later converted to Roman Catholicism to pursue a political career. Menem became a Peronist during a visit to Buenos Aires. He was elected governor of La Rioja in 1973, deposed and detained following the 1976 Argentine coup d'\u00e9tat, and re-elected in 1983. He defeated the Buenos Aires governor Antonio Cafiero in the primary elections for the 1989 presidential elections. Hyperinflation and riots forced outgoing president Ra\u00fal Alfons\u00edn to resign early, shortening the presidential transition.\nMenem's presidency supported the Washington Consensus and tackled inflation with the Convertibility plan in 1991. The plan was complemented by a series of privatizations and was initially a success. Argentina re-established diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom, suspended since the 1982 Falklands War, and aligned itself with the United States. Under his administration, the country participated in the 1991 Gulf War and suffered two terrorist attacks: an attack on the Israeli embassy in 1992 and the 1994 AMIA bombing. The Peronist victory in the 1993 midterm elections allowed him to persuade Alfons\u00edn, by then leader of the opposition party Radical Civic Union, to sign the Pact of Olivos for the 1994 amendment of the Argentine Constitution. This amendment allowed Menem to run for re-election in 1995, winning a second, four-year term. A new economic crisis began, and the opposing parties formed a political coalition, winning the 1997 midterm elections and the 1999 presidential election.\nMenem was investigated on various criminal and corruption charges, including illegal arms trafficking (he was sentenced to seven years in prison), embezzlement of public funds (he was sentenced to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 years to prison), extortion and bribery (he was declared innocent of both charges). His position as senator earned him immunity from incarceration.\nMenem ran for the presidency again in 2003, but faced with a likely defeat in a ballotage against N\u00e9stor Kirchner, he chose to pull out, effectively handing the presidency to Kirchner. He was elected senator for La Rioja in 2005. By the time he died in 2021 at age 90, he was the oldest living former Argentine president. He is regarded as a polarizing figure in Argentina, mostly due to corruption and economic mismanagement throughout his presidency.\nEarly life and education.\nCarlos Sa\u00fal Menem () was born on 2 July 1930 in Anillaco, a small town in the mountainous north of La Rioja Province, Argentina. His parents, Sa\u00fal Menem () and Mohibe Akil (), were Syrian nationals from Yabroud who had emigrated to Argentina. He attended elementary and high school in La Rioja, and joined a basketball team during his university studies. He visited Buenos Aires in 1951 with the team, and met the president Juan Per\u00f3n and his wife Eva Per\u00f3n. This influenced Menem to become a Peronist. He studied law at the National University of C\u00f3rdoba, graduating in 1955.\nAfter President Juan Per\u00f3n's overthrow in 1955, Menem was briefly incarcerated. He later joined the successor to the Peronist Party, the Justicialist Party \"(Partido Justicialista)\" (PJ). He was elected president of its La Rioja Province chapter in 1973. In that capacity, he was included in the flight to Spain that brought Per\u00f3n back to Argentina after his long exile. According to the Peronist politician Juan Manuel Abal Medina, Menem played no special part in the event.\nGovernor of La Rioja.\n1st term (1973\u20131976) and arrest.\nMenem was elected governor of La Rioja in 1973 when the proscription of Peronism was lifted. He was deposed during the 1976 Argentine coup d'\u00e9tat that overthrew President Isabel Per\u00f3n. He was accused of corruption and having links with the guerrillas of the Dirty War. He was detained on 25 March, kept for a week at a local barracks, and then moved to a temporary prison on the ship \"33 Orientales\" in Buenos Aires. He was detained alongside former ministers Antonio Cafiero, , Miguel Unamuno, Jos\u00e9 Deheza, and Pedro Arrighi, the unionists Jorge Triaca, Diego Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez, and Lorenzo Miguel, the diplomat Jorge V\u00e1zquez, the journalist Osvaldo Papaleo, and the former president Ra\u00fal Lastiri. He shared a cell with Pedro Eladio V\u00e1zquez, Juan Per\u00f3n's personal physician. During this time he helped the chaplain Lorenzo Lavalle, despite still being a Muslim. In July he was sent to Magdalena, to a permanent prison. His wife Zulema visited him every week, but rejected his conversion to Roman Catholicism. His mother died during the time he was a prisoner, and dictator Jorge Rafael Videla denied his request to attend her funeral. He was released on 29 July 1978, on the condition that he live in a city outside his home province without leaving it. He settled in Mar del Plata.\nMenem met Admiral Eduardo Massera, who intended to run for president, and had public meetings with personalities such as Carlos Monz\u00f3n, Susana Gim\u00e9nez, and Alberto Olmedo. As a result, he was forced to reside in another city, Tandil. He had to report daily to Chief of Police Hugo Zamora. This forced residence was lifted in February 1980. He returned to Buenos Aires, and then to La Rioja. He resumed his political activities, despite the prohibition, and was detained again. His new forced residence was in Las Lomitas in the province of Formosa. He was one of the last politicians to be released from prison by the National Reorganization Process.\n2nd and 3rd terms (1983\u20131989).\nMilitary rule ended in 1983, and the Radical Ra\u00fal Alfons\u00edn was elected president. Menem ran for governor again and was elected by a clear margin. The province benefited from tax regulations established by the military, which allowed increased industrial growth. His party gained control of the provincial legislature, and he was re-elected in 1987 with 63% of the vote. The Partido Justicialista at the time was divided into two factions, the conservatives that still supported the political doctrines of Juan and Isabel Per\u00f3n, and those who proposed a renovation of the party. The internal disputes ceased in 1987. Menem, with his prominent victory in his district, was one of the leading figures of the party and disputed its leadership.\nPresidential elections.\nAntonio Cafiero, who had been elected governor of Buenos Aires Province, led the renewal of the Partido Justicialista, and was considered their most likely candidate for the presidency. Menem, on the other hand, was seen as a populist leader. Using a big tent approach, he got support from several unrelated political figures. As a result, he defeated Cafiero in the primary elections. He sought alliances with Bunge and Born, union leaders, former members of Montoneros, and the AAA, people from the church, \"Carapintadas\", etc. He promised a \"revolution of production\" and huge wage increases, but it was not clear exactly which policies he was proposing. The rival candidate, Eduardo Angeloz, tried to point out the mistakes made by Menem and Alfons\u00edn. Jacques de Mahieu, a French ideologue of the Peronist movement (and former Vichy collaborator), was photographed campaigning for Menem. His campaign slogans were \"\u00a1Siganme!\" (Follow me!) and \"\u00a1No los voy a defraudar!\" (I won't let you down!)\nThe elections were held on 14 May 1989. Menem won by a wide margin, and became the president-elect of Argentina. He was scheduled to take office on 10 December, but inflation levels took a turn for the worse, growing into hyperinflation, causing public riots. The outgoing president Alfons\u00edn resigned and transferred power to Menem five months early, on 8 July. Menem's accession marked the first time since Hip\u00f3lito Yrigoyen took office in 1916 that an incumbent president peacefully transferred power to an elected successor from the opposition.\nPresidency.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Carlos Menem's first presidency marked the end of a period fraught with uncertainties, during which successive de facto or constitutional national administrations had failed in trying to order the economy, curb monetary emission, and dismantle the powerful armed state apparatus in the 1940s during the presidency of Juan Per\u00f3n and further enlarged by his successors. Menem drastically corrected, with accurate intuition and a firm pulse, the mistaken tendency to include among the functions of the State a number of business, industrial and commercial activities that had nothing to do with its essential mission. The results of its economic policy were reflected in an anticipated entry into the globalized world that was built after the fall of the Berlin Wall, in a rapid modernization of the country's productive infrastructure, and stability, which is the basis of long-term growth. Unfortunately, Menem's reformist drive collapsed when his second government began. His program of structural transformation of the country was interrupted and many strategic changes that were essential for the reforms of the previous period to produce the expected results were not executed.\"\nEditorial of the newspaper \"La Naci\u00f3n\".\nEconomic policy.\nHyperinflation forced Menem to abandon party orthodoxy in favour of a fiscally conservative, market-oriented economic policy.\nAt the time, most economists thought that the ideal solution was the Washington Consensus; i.e. reduce expenditures below the amount of money earned by the state, and open international commerce to free trade. Alfons\u00edn had proposed similar reforms in the past, alongside some limited privatization of state-owned enterprises; those projects were resisted by the Partido Justicialistal opposition party, whose internal factions were actually benefiting from the prevailing protectionist policies. The magnitude of the crisis, however, convinced most politicians to change their minds. Menem, fearing that the crisis might force him to resign as well, embraced the Washington Consensus and rejected the traditional policies of Peronism.\nThe president invited several conservative figures into his cabinet, such as \u00c1lvaro Alsogaray, as well as a businessman from Bunge and Born; Miguel Roig, the company's then-vice president, became Menem's first appointed minister of economy on 30 May, although he would be replaced just five days after taking office due to his sudden death by myocardial infarction; in his place was appointed N\u00e9stor Mario Rapanelli, who had succeeded Roig as vice president at Bunge and Born.\nCongress passed the economic emergency and state reform laws. The first allowed president Menem to reduce or remove subsidies at his discretion, and the latter to privatize state enterprises \u2013 the first being telephones and airlines. These privatizations were beneficial to foreign creditors, who replaced their bonds with company shares. Despite increased tax revenue and the money gained from privatizations, the economy was still unstable. The Bunge and Born businessmen left the government in late 1989, amid a second round of hyperinflation.\nThe first measure of the new minister of economy, Antonio Erman Gonz\u00e1lez, was a mandatory conversion of time deposits into government bonds: the BONEX plan. It exacerbated the recession but was successful in reducing the inflation rate, which was its intended purpose. His fourth minister of economy, Domingo Cavallo, was appointed in 1991 and deepened the liberalization of the economy. The Convertibility plan was sanctioned by Congress, setting a one-to-one fixed exchange rate between the United States dollar and the new peso, which replaced the austral. The law also limited public expenditures, but this was frequently ignored. Under Cavallo, there was increased free trade, alongside a general reduction of tariffs on imports and state regulations to tackle inflation, and high taxes on sales and earnings to reduce the deficit caused by it. Initially, the plan was a success: the capital flight ended, interest rates were lowered, inflation fell to single digits, and economic activity increased; in that year alone, the gross domestic product grew at a rate of 10.5%.\nThe money from privatizations allowed Argentina to repurchase many of the Brady Bonds issued during the crisis. The privatizations of electricity, water, and gas services were more successful than previous ones. YPF, the national oil refinery, was partially privatized as well, with the state keeping a good portion of its shares. The project to privatize the pension funds was resisted in Congress and was approved as a mixed system that allowed both public and private options for workers. The national state also signed a fiscal pact with the provinces, so that they reduced their local deficits as well; Buenos Aires Province was aided with a fund that gave the governor a million pesos daily.\nAlthough the Convertibility plan had positive consequences in the short term, it caused problems that surfaced later. Large numbers of employees of privatized state enterprises were fired, and unemployment grew to over 10%. Big compensation payments prevented an immediate public reaction. Free trade and the expensive costs in dollars forced private companies to reduce the number of workers as well, or risk bankruptcy. Unions were unable to resist the changes. People with low incomes, such as retirees and state workers, suffered under tax increases while their wages remained frozen. Some provinces, such as Santiago del Estero, Jujuy, and San Juan, endured violent riots as well. To compensate for these issues, the government started a number of social welfare programs and restored protectionist policies over some sectors of the economy. It was difficult for Argentine companies to export, and easy imports damaged most national producers. The national budget soon slid into a deficit.\nCavallo soon began the second wave of privatizations, this time targeting the national postal service, the Correo Argentino, and the country's nuclear power plants. He also limited the amount of money released to the provinces. He still had the full support of Menem, despite growing opposition within the Justicialist Party.\nThe Mexican Tequila Crisis of 1994 impacted the national economy, causing the deficit, recession, and a growth in unemployment. The government further reduced public expenditures, the wages of state workers, and raised taxes. The deficit and recession were reduced, but unemployment stayed high. External debt increased. The crisis also proved that the economic system was vulnerable to capital flight.\nThe growing discontent over unemployment and the scandals caused by the privatization of the postal service led to Cavallo's removal as a minister, and his replacement by Roque Fern\u00e1ndez. Fern\u00e1ndez maintained Cavallo's fiscal austerity; he increased the price of fuels, sold the remaining state shares of YPF to Repsol, fired state employees, and raised the value-added tax to 21%. New labor law was met with resistance, both by Peronists, opposition parties, and unions, and could not be approved by Congress.\nThe 1997 Asian financial crisis and the 1998 Russian financial crisis also affected the country with consequences that lasted longer than the Tequila Crisis and started a depression.\nDomestic policy.\nMenem began his presidency assuming a non-confrontational approach, appointing people from the conservative opposition and business people to his cabinet. To prevent successful legal cases against pro-market economic reforms, the Supreme Court's numbers were increased from five to nine judges; the new judges ruled in support of Menem and usually had the majority. Other institutions that restrained or limited executive power were controlled as well. When Congress resisted some of his proposals, he used the Necessity and Urgency Decree as an alternative to sending bills to it. He even considered it feasible to dissolve Congress and rule by decree, but this step was never implemented. In addition, he developed a \"bon vivant\" lifestyle, taking advantage of his authority. For instance, he made a journey from Buenos Aires to Pinamar driving a Ferrari 348 TB (often misreported as a Ferrari Testarossa) in less than two hours, violating speed limits. He divorced his wife Zulema Yoma and expanded the Quinta de Olivos presidential residence with a golf course, a small zoo, servants, a barber, and even a buffoon.\nThe swiftgate scandal broke out in December 1990, as American investors were damaged by a case of corruption, and asked for assistance from the United States' Ambassador Terence Todman. Most of the ministers resigned as a result of it. Cavallo was reassigned as minister of economy, and his successful economic plan turned him into a prominent figure in Menem's cabinet. Cavallo brought a number of independent economists to the cabinet, and Menem supported him by replacing Peronist politicians. Both teams complemented each other. Both Menem and Cavallo tried to be recognized as the designer of the convertibility plan.\nAntonio Cafiero, a rival of Menem in the Partido Justicialistal, was unable to amend the constitution of the province of Buenos Aires to run for re-election. Duhalde stepped down from the vice presidency and became the new governor in the 1991 elections, turning the province into a powerful bastion. Menem also selected famous people with no political background to run for office in those elections, including the singer Palito Ortega and racing driver Carlos Reutemann. The elections were a big success for the Partido Justicialistal. After these elections, all of the Partido Justicialistal, was aligned with Menem's leadership, with the exception of a small number of legislators known as the \"Group of Eight\". The opposition from the UCR was minimal, as the party was still discredited by the 1989 crisis. With such political influence, Menem began his proposal to amend the constitution to allow a re-election. The party did not have the required supermajority in the Congress to call for it. The Partido Justicialistal was divided, as other politicians intended to replace Menem in 1995 or negotiate their support. The UCR was divided as well, as Alfons\u00edn opposed the proposal, but governors Angeloz and Massaccesi were open for negotiations. The victory in the 1993 elections strengthened his proposal, which was approved by the Senate. Menem called for a non-binding referendum on the proposal, to increase pressure on the Radical deputies. He also sent a bill to Congress to modify the majority requirements. Alfons\u00edn met with Menem and agreed to support the proposal in exchange for amendments that would place limits on presidential power. This negotiation is known as the Pact of Olivos. The capital city of Buenos Aires would be allowed to elect its own chief of government. Presidential elections would use a system of ballotage, and the president could only be re-elected once. The electoral college was abolished, replaced by direct elections. The provinces would be allowed to elect a third senator; two for the majority party and one for the first minority. The Council of Magistracy of the Nation would have the power to propose new judges, and the Necessity and Urgency Decrees would have a reduced scope.\nDespite the internal opposition of Fernando de la R\u00faa, Alfons\u00edn got his party to approve the pact. He reasoned that Menem would be supported by the eventual referendum, that many legislators would turn to his side, and he would eventually be able to amend the constitution reinforcing presidential power rather than limiting it. Still, as both sides feared a betrayal, all the contents of the pact were included as a single proposal, not allowing the Constituent Assembly to discuss each one separately. The Broad Front, a new political party composed of former Peronists, led by Carlos \u00c1lvarez, grew in the elections for the Constituent Assembly. Both the Partido Justicialista and the UCR respected the pact, which was completely approved. Duhalde made a similar amendment to the constitution of Buenos Aires province, in order to be re-elected in 1995. Menem won the elections with more than 50% of the vote, followed by Jos\u00e9 Octavio Bord\u00f3n and Carlos \u00c1lvarez. The UCR finished third in the elections for the first time.\nGrowing unemployment increased popular resistance against Menem after his re-election. There were several riots and demonstrations in the provinces, unions opposed the economic policies, and the opposing parties organized the first \"cacerolazos\". Estanislao Esteban Karlic replaced Antonio Quarracino as the head of the Argentine Episcopal Conference, which led to a growing opposition to Menem from the Church. The teachers' unions established a \"white tent\" at the Congressional plaza as a form of protest. The first \"piqueteros\" operated in Cutral C\u00f3, and this protest method was soon imitated in the rest of the country. Menem's authority in the Partido Justicialista was also held in doubt, as he was unable to run for another re-election and the party sought a candidate for the 1999 elections. This led to a fierce rivalry with Duhalde, the most likely candidate. Menem attempted to undermine his chances, and proposed a new amendment to the constitution allowing him to run for an unlimited number of re-elections. He also started a judicial case, claiming that his inability to run for a third term was a proscription. Several scandals erupted, such as the scandal over Argentine arms sales to Ecuador and Croatia, the R\u00edo Tercero explosion that may have destroyed evidence, the murder of the journalist Jos\u00e9 Luis Cabezas, and the suicide of Alfredo Yabr\u00e1n, who may have ordered it. The Partido Justicialista lost the 1997 midterm elections against the UCR and the FREPASO united in a political coalition, the Alliance for Work, Justice and Education (Alianza). The Supreme Court confirmed that Menem was unable to run for a third re-election. Duhalde became the candidate for the presidential elections, and lost to the candidate for the Alianza ticket, Fernando de la R\u00faa.\nForeign policy.\nDuring Menem's presidency, Argentina aligned with the United States, and had special relations with the country. Menem had good relations with U.S. president George H. W. Bush, and his successor Bill Clinton from 1993 on.\nThe country left the Non-Aligned Movement, and the C\u00f3ndor missile program was discontinued. Argentina supported all the international positions of the U.S., and sent forces to the Gulf War, and the peace keeping efforts during the War in Bosnia and after the Kosovo War.\nThe country was accepted as a major non-NATO ally, but not as a full member.\nMenem's government re-established relations with the United Kingdom, suspended since the Falklands War, after Margaret Thatcher left office in 1990. The discussions on the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute were temporarily given a lower priority, and the focus shifted to discussions of fishing rights.\nIn 1991, Menem became the first head of state of Argentina to make a diplomatic visit to Israel. He proposed mediating between Israel and Syria in their negotiations over the Golan Heights. The diplomatic relations between Argentina and Israel were later damaged by the lack of results in the investigations over the terrorist attacks against the Israeli embassy and the AMIA center in Buenos Aires.\nIn 1998, Menem visited Russia, and met with Russian president Boris Yeltsin, where Menem expressed his anticommunist sentiments and congratulated Yeltsin for \"defeating communism\" in Russia.\nChile.\nMenem also settled all remaining border issues with Chile. The Lago del Desierto dispute had an international arbitration, favourable to Argentina. The only exception was the dispute over the Southern Patagonian Ice Field, which is still open.\nPreviously and contrary to other Peronist authorities, Menem voted for the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between Chile and Argentina. Chilean president Patricio Aylwin was at first sceptical towards his Argentine counterpart whom he according to Emol considered \"scruffy\" (). Over time however Aylwin changed his opinion, saying at one point \"this Turk wins everybody over\" (\"este turco se los conquista a todos\"). Aylwin's successor, Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, had particularly warm relations with Menem. Former Chilean foreign minister Jos\u00e9 Miguel Insulza recalls of meetings with Menem and Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle in Anillaco in the 1990s where they enjoyed talking about politics and football. All of this made the critics of Menem label him \"pro-Chilean\". President of Chile Sebasti\u00e1n Pi\u00f1era posthumously called him \"a good friend of Chile\". Similarly, Jos\u00e9 Miguel Insulza called Menem \"one of the best friends of Chile\".\nArmed forces.\nArgentina was still divided by the aftermath of the Dirty War (the dirty war ended in 1983, Menem's presidency began in 1989). Menem proposed an agenda of national reconciliation. First, he arranged the repatriation of the body of Juan Manuel de Rosas, a controversial 19th century governor, and proposed to reconcile his legacy with those of Bartolom\u00e9 Mitre and Domingo Faustino Sarmiento, who also fought in the Argentine Civil Wars. Menem intended to use the reconciliation of these historical Argentine figures as a metaphor for the reconciliation of the Dirty War. However, although the repatriation and acceptance of Rosas was a success, the acceptance of the military regime was not.\nThe military leaders of the National Reorganization Process, convicted in the 1985 Trial of the Juntas, received presidential pardons, despite popular opposition to them. This was an old request of the \"Carapintadas\" in previous years. However, Menem did not apply their proposed changes to the military. The colonel, Mohamed Al\u00ed Seineld\u00edn, who was also pardoned, started a new mutiny, killing two military men. Unlike the mutinies that took place during the presidency of Alfons\u00edn, the military fully obeyed Menem's orders for a forceful repression. Seineld\u00edn was utterly defeated, and sentenced to life imprisonment. This was the last military mutiny in Argentina.\nThe president effected drastic cuts to the military budget, and privatized military factories. Menem appointed Lt. Gen. Mart\u00edn Balza, who had performed well during the repression of Seineld\u00edn's mutiny, as the Army's General Chief of Staff (head of the military hierarchy). The death of a conscript soldier in 1994, victim of abuses by his superiors, led to the abolition of conscription in the country. The following year, Balza voiced the first institutional self-criticism of the armed forces during the Dirty War, saying that obedience did not justify the actions committed in those years.\nTerrorist attacks.\nThe Israeli embassy suffered a terrorist car bomb attack on 17 March 1992. It was perceived as a consequence of Argentina's involvement in the Gulf War. Although Hezbollah claimed responsibility for it, the Supreme Court investigated several other hypotheses. The Court wrote a report in 1996 suggesting that it could have been the explosion of an arms cache stored in the basement. Another hypothesis was that the attack could have been performed by Jewish extremists, in order to cast blame on Muslims and thwart the peace negotiations. The Court finally held Hezbollah responsible for the attack in May 1999.\nThe Argentine Israelite Mutual Association suffered a terrorist attack with another car bomb on 18 July 1994, killing eighty-five people. It was the most destructive terrorist attack in the history of Latin America. The attack was universally condemned and 155,000 people demonstrated at the Congressional plaza, but Menem did not attend. The legal case stayed unresolved during the remainder of Menem's presidency. Menem had suggested, in the first press conference, that former \"Carapintada\" leaders may be responsible for the attack, but this idea was rejected by the minister of defense several hours later. The CIA office in Buenos Aires initially considered it a joint Iranian-Syrian attack, but some days later considered it just an Iranian attack. Menem and Mossad also preferred this line of investigation. As a result of the attack, the Jewish community in Argentina had increased influence over Argentine politics. Years later, the prosecutor Alberto Nisman charged Menem with covering up a local connection to the attack, as the local terrorists may have been distant Syrian relatives of the Menem family. However, Menem was never tried for this suspected cover-up, and on 18 January 2015, Nisman was found dead of a gunshot to his head at his home in Buenos Aires.\nOn 15 March 1995, Menem's son Carlos Menem Jr. died while piloting a Bell 206B-3 helicopter, along with his friend and fellow racing driver Silvio Oltra who was riding as a passenger. The helicopter reportedly struck overhead power lines near Ramallo in the north of the province of Buenos Aires and crashed, killing both men. Later on, remains of Menem Jr. were exhumed amid murder claims by his mother Zulema Yoma. Menem had accused the Lebanese Shia Islamist group, Hezbollah, of killing his son.\nPost-presidency.\nMenem ran in 2003 and won the greatest number of votes, 24%, in the first round of the 27 April 2003 presidential election; but votes were split among numerous parties. Under the 1994 amendment, a presidential candidate can win outright by winning 45% of the vote, or 40% if the margin of victory is 10 or more percentage points. This set the stage for Argentina's first-ever ballotage between Menem and second-place finisher, and fellow Peronist, N\u00e9stor Kirchner, who had received 22%. It was scheduled for 18 May. However, by that time, Menem had become very unpopular. Polls predicted that he faced almost certain defeat by Kirchner in the runoff. Most polls showed Kirchner taking at least 60 percent of the vote, and at least one poll showed Menem losing by as many as 50 points. To avoid a humiliating defeat, Menem withdrew his candidacy on 14 May, effectively handing the presidency to Kirchner.\n\u00c1ngel Maza, the elected governor of La Rioja, was allied with Menem, and had campaigned for him. However, weak provincial finances forced Maza to switch his support to Kirchner, which weakened Menem's influence even further. In June 2004 Menem announced that he had founded a new faction within the Partido Justicialista, called \"People's Peronism\". He announced his intention to run in the 2007 election. In 2005, the press reported that he was trying to form an alliance with his former minister of economy Cavallo to fight in the parliamentary elections. Menem said that there had been only preliminary conversations and an alliance did not result. In the 23 October 2005 elections, Menem won the minority seat in the Senate representing his province of birth. The two seats allocated to the majority were won by President Kirchner's faction, locally led by \u00c1ngel Maza.\nMenem ran for Governor of La Rioja in August 2007, but was defeated. He finished in third place with about 22% of the vote. This was viewed as a catastrophic defeat, signaling the end of his political dominance in La Rioja. It was the first time in 30 years that Menem had lost an election. Following this defeat in his home province, he withdrew his candidacy for president. At the end of 2009 he announced that he intended to run for the presidency again in the 2011 elections. but ran for a new term as a senator instead. In 2019, he eventually sat in the Frente de Todos' Senate bench until his death in 2021.\nCorruption charges.\nOn 7 June 2001, Menem was arrested over a weapons export scandal. The scheme was based on exports to Ecuador and Croatia in 1991 and 1996. He was held under house arrest until November. He appeared before a judge in late August 2002 and denied all charges. Menem and his Chilean second wife Cecilia Bolocco, who had had a child since their marriage in 2001, fled to Chile. Argentine judicial authorities repeatedly requested Menem's extradition to face embezzlement charges. This request was rejected by the Chilean Supreme Court as under Chilean law, people cannot be extradited for questioning. On 22 December 2004, after the arrest warrants were cancelled, Menem returned with his family to Argentina. He still faced charges of embezzlement and failing to declare illegal funds in a Swiss bank. He was declared innocent of those charges in 2013.\nIn August 2008, the BBC reported that Menem was under investigation for his role in the 1995 R\u00edo Tercero explosion, which is alleged to have been part of the weapons scandal involving Croatia and Ecuador. Following an Appeals Court ruling that found Menem guilty of aggravated smuggling, he was sentenced to seven years in prison on 13 June 2013, for his role in illegally smuggling weapons to Ecuador and Croatia; his position as senator earned him immunity from incarceration, and his advanced age (82) afforded him the possibility of house arrest. His minister of defence during the weapons sales, Oscar Camili\u00f3n, was concurrently sentenced to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442 years. Menem was scheduled to attend a trial on the matter in which he was charged with \"indirect responsibility\", on 24 February 2021; but died ten days before that.\nIn December 2008, the German multinational Siemens agreed to pay an $800\u00a0million fine to the United States government, and approximately \u20ac700\u00a0million to the German government, to settle allegations of bribery. The settlement revealed that Menem had received about US$2\u00a0million in bribes from Siemens in exchange for awarding the national ID card and passport production contract to Siemens; Menem denied the charges but nonetheless agreed to pay a fine.\nOn 1 December 2015, Menem was also found guilty of embezzlement, and sentenced to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 years to prison. Domingo Cavallo, his economy minister, and Ra\u00fal Granillo Ocampo, Menem's former minister of justice, also received prison sentences of more than three years for participating in the scheme, and were ordered to repay hundreds of thousands of pesos' worth of illegal bonuses.\nIllness and death.\nOn 13 June 2020, Menem was hospitalized due to a severe case of pneumonia and placed in intensive care; he tested negative for COVID-19 and was discharged on 29 June 2020, three days before his 90th birthday. On 15 December 2020, he was hospitalized again at the Los Arcos Sanatorium due to a urinary infection. On 24 December 2020, Menem was induced into coma after a kidney failure.\nHe died on 14 February 2021 at the Sanatorio Los Arcos in Buenos Aires from complications of urinary tract infection. The national government issued three days of national mourning, and had a public funeral at the Palace of the Argentine National Congress. It was attended by several politicians, including the president Alberto Fern\u00e1ndez, and by hundreds of people. He was buried at the San Justo Islamic cemetery the following day, next to his son. His daughter, Zulemita, confirmed that he had died as a Catholic, but he would be buried according to Muslim rites in the Islamic Cemetery to be with his family.\nAlthough former presidents are meant to have a bust at the Hall of Busts of the Casa Rosada eight years after they leave office, by the time of his death Menem never received that honor. Casa Rosada had a bust of Menem donated by artist Fernando Pugliese, but had not yet disclosed this to the public. President Alberto Fern\u00e1ndez told Zulemita Menem that the intention was to reveal the bust in a ceremony once Menem recovered from his illness but Menem's death disrupted the plans.\nStyle and legacy.\nIn the early days, Menem sported an image similar to the old \"caudillos\", such as Facundo Quiroga and Chacho Pe\u00f1aloza. He groomed his sideburns in a similar style. His presidential inauguration was attended by several gauchos.\nContrary to Peronist tradition, Menem did not prepare huge rallies in the Plaza de Mayo to address the people from the balcony of the Casa Rosada. Instead, he took full advantage of mass media, such as television.\nMenem's administration was exalted by libertarians Javier Milei and Diego Giacomini in the late 2010s, after being strongly criticized during and by Kirchnerism. Some liberal economists such as Jos\u00e9 Luis Espert and Alberto Benegas Lynch have also taken a critical approach towards Menem's presidency.\nPresident Javier Milei inaugurated the bust of Carlos Menem at the Casa Rosada in May 2024, 35 years after his victory in the 1989 elections. The event was attended by the Menem family (except for his former wife Zulema Yoma), former officers of the Menem administration, and Milei's own cabinet. The bust is modeled after Menem's 1980s appearance, with high sideburns. Milei praised that, unlike most Argentine politicians Menem had worked in the private sector before getting started in politics, and that he pardoned the military and guerrillas alike even if facing rejection from his own family. The bust is made of carrara marble and, unlike most other busts in the hall, it shows Menem with a prominent smile. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His lasting legacy was a record so notorious as to shut off rational discussion about economic policy in Latin America for a generation. He and his Argentina were indelibly branded as \"neoliberal\" slaves to the \"Washington consensus\". By extension, liberalism and a capitalist economy were damned.\u2014\u200a\nIn July 2025, the former Argentine presient was featured in the drama miniseries Menem, premiering on July 9, 2025 and distributed internationally by Amazon Prime Video. Within hours of its premiere, Menem ranked in the Top 10 on Amazon Prime Video regionally, setting an important precedent for Latin productions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49968", "revid": "12744189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49968", "title": "Lviv", "text": "City in Lviv Oblast, Ukraine\nLviv ( or ; ; ; see below for other names) is the largest city in western Ukraine, as well as the fifth-largest city in Ukraine, officially with a population of 723,403 (2025 estimate). It serves as the administrative centre of Lviv Oblast and Lviv Raion, and is one of the main cultural centres of Ukraine. Lviv also hosts the administration of Lviv urban hromada. It was named after Leo I of Galicia, the eldest son of Daniel, King of Ruthenia.\nLviv (then Lw\u00f3w) emerged as the centre of the historical regions of Red Ruthenia and Galicia in the 14th century, superseding Halych, Che\u0142m, Belz, and Przemy\u015bl. It was the capital of the Kingdom of Galicia\u2013Volhynia from 1272 to 1340, when it went to King Casimir III the Great of Poland in a war of succession. In 1356, Casimir the Great granted it town rights. From 1434, it was the regional capital of the Ruthenian Voivodeship in the Kingdom of Poland. In 1772, after the First Partition of Poland, the city became the capital of the Habsburg semi-autonomous Polish-dominated Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria. From 1918, between the wars, the city was the centre of the Lw\u00f3w Voivodeship in the Second Polish Republic. There it flourished in culture, industry and academia such as the Lw\u00f3w School of Mathematics, the Lw\u00f3w Historical School () and the Lw\u00f3w School of Economics. After the German-Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939, the massacre of Lw\u00f3w professors took place, and Lw\u00f3w was eventually annexed by the Soviet Union.\nThe once-large Jewish community of the city was murdered in large numbers by the Nazis and Ukrainian police during the Holocaust. For decades there was no working synagogue in Lviv after the final one was closed by the Soviets. The greater part of the once-predominant Polish population was forcibly expelled during the Ukrainian massacres of Poles and later with population transfers between Communist Poland and Soviet Ukraine in 1944\u201346.\nThe historical heart of the city, with its cobblestone streets and architectural assortment of Renaissance, Baroque, Neo-classicism and Art Nouveau, survived Soviet and German occupations during World War II largely unscathed. The historic city centre is on the UNESCO World Heritage List; however, it has been listed as an endangered site due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In 1991 Lviv became part of the independent nation of Ukraine.\nThe city has a number of industries and institutions of higher education, such as Lviv University and Lviv Polytechnic. Lviv is also the home of multiple cultural institutions, including a philharmonic orchestra and the Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet.\nNames and symbols.\nThe city of Lviv has been known by multiple names: () ; ; and ; () ; () ; () ; () and () ; ; ; and .\nThe coat of arms, the banner of the Lviv City Council and the logo, are the officially approved symbols of Lviv. The names or images of architectural and historical monuments are also considered symbols of the city by the Statute of Lviv.\nLviv's modern coat of arms is based on the coat of arms from the city seal in the middle of the 14th century\u2014a stone gate with three towers, and in the opening of the gate walks a golden lion. Lviv's large coat of arms is a shield, with the coat of arms of the city, crowned with a silver crown with three edges, held by a lion and an ancient warrior.\nLviv's flag is a blue square banner with an image of the city emblem and with yellow and blue triangles at the edges.\nLviv's logo is an image of five colorful towers in Lviv and the slogan \"Lviv \u2013 open to the world\" under them. The Latin phrase \"Semper fidelis\" ('Always faithful') was used as a motto on the former coat of arms of 1936\u20131939 but was no longer used after the Second World War.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Kingdom of Galicia\u2013Volhynia c. 1250\u20131340\n Kingdom of Poland 1340\u20131569\n Poland (First Republic) 1569\u20131772\n Austria/A.H. Empire 1772\u20131918\n Poland (Second Republic) 1918\u20131939 \n Soviet Union (\u00a0Ukrainian SSR) 1939\u20131941 (\"occupation\")\n Nazi Germany (General Government) 1941\u20131944 (\"occupation\")\n Soviet Union (\u00a0Ukrainian SSR) 1944\u20131991 \n Ukraine 1991\u2013present\nArchaeologists have demonstrated that the Lviv area was settled by the fifth century, with the gord at -Voznesensk Street in Lychakivskyi District attributed to White Croats. The city of Lviv was founded in 1250 by King Daniel of Galicia (1201\u20131264) in the Principality of Halych of Kingdom of Ruthenia. It was named in honor of his son Lev as Lvihorod which is consistent with names of other Ukrainian cities, such as Myrhorod, Sharhorod, Novhorod, Bilhorod, Horodyshche, and Horodok.\nEarlier there was a settlement in the form of a borough with a characteristic layout element\u2014an elongated market square. Daniel's foundation of the stronghold was its next reconstruction after the Batu Khan invasion of 1240.\nLviv was invaded by the Mongols in 1261. Various sources relate the events, which range from the destruction of the castle to a complete razing of the town. All sources agree that it was on the orders of the Mongol general Burundai. The Shevchenko Scientific Society says that Burundai issued the order to raze the city. The Galician-Volhynian chronicle states that in 1261 \"Said Buronda to Vasylko: 'Since you are at peace with me then raze all your castles'\". Basil Dmytryshyn states that the order was implied to be the fortifications as a whole: \"If you wish to have peace with me, then destroy [all fortifications of] your towns\".\nAfter Daniel's death, King Lev rebuilt the town around 1270, choosing Lviv as his residence, and made it the capital of Galicia-Volhynia. Around 1280 Armenians lived in Galicia and were mainly based in Lviv where they had their own archbishop.\nIn the 13th and early 14th centuries, Lviv was largely a wooden city, except for its several Galician-style stone churches. Some of them, like the Church of Saint Nicholas, have survived, although in a thoroughly rebuilt form. The town was inherited by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1340 and ruled by voivode Dmytro Dedko, the favourite of the Lithuanian prince Liubartas, until 1349.\nIn the 13th and 14th centuries the city and region was a destination of 50,000 Armenians fleeing from the Saljuq and Mongol invasions of Armenia.\nGalicia\u2013Volhynia Wars.\nDuring the wars over the succession of Galicia-Volhynia Principality in 1339 King Casimir III of Poland undertook an expedition and captured the city in 1340, burning down the old princely castle. Poland ultimately gained control over Lviv and the adjacent region in 1349. From then on the population was subjected to attempts to both Polonize and Catholicize the population. The Lithuanians ravaged Lviv land in 1351 during the Halych-Volhyn Wars with Lviv being plundered and destroyed by duke Liubartas in 1353.\nCasimir built a new city center (or founded a new town) in a basin, surrounded it by walls, and replaced the wooden palace by masonry castle \u2013 one of the two built by him. The old (Ruthenian) settlement, after it had been rebuilt, became known as the Krakovian Suburb in reference to the city of Krak\u00f3w.\nKingdom of Poland.\nIn 1349, the Kingdom of Ruthenia with its capital Lviv was annexed by the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. The kingdom was transformed into the Ruthenian domain of the Crown with Lw\u00f3w as the capital. On 17 June 1356 King Casimir III the Great moved the city to a new location and granted it Magdeburg rights, which implied that all city matters were to be resolved by a council elected by the wealthy citizens. In 1362, the High Castle was completely rebuilt with stone replacing the previous wood. In 1358, the city became a seat of Roman Catholic Archdiocese, which initiated the spread of Latin Church onto the Ruthenian lands.\nAfter Casimir had died in 1370, he was succeeded as king of Poland by his nephew, King Louis I of Hungary, who in 1372 put Lw\u00f3w together with the region of Kingdom of Galicia\u2013Volhynia under the administration of his relative Vladislaus II of Opole, Duke of Opole. When in 1387 W\u0142adys\u0142aw retreated from the post of its governor, Galicia-Volhynia became occupied by Hungary, but soon Jadwiga, the youngest daughter of Louis, and also the ruler of Poland and wife of King of Poland W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o, unified it directly with the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland.\nThe city's prosperity during the following centuries is owed to the trade privileges granted to it by Casimir, Queen Jadwiga, and the subsequent Polish monarchs. Germans, Poles and Czechs formed the largest groups of newcomers. Most of the settlers were polonised by the end of the 15th century, and the city became a Polish island surrounded by the Ruthenian Orthodox population. In 1356, the Armenian diocese was founded centered at the Armenian Cathedral. Lw\u00f3w was one of two main cultural and religious centers of Armenians in Poland alongside Kamieniec Podolski. In the early modern period, it also became one of the largest concentrations of Scots and Italians in Poland.\nIn 1412, the local archdiocese has developed into the Roman Catholic Metropolis, which since 1375 as diocese had been in Halych. The new metropolis included regional diocese in Lw\u00f3w, Przemy\u015bl, Che\u0142m, W\u0142odzimierz, \u0141uck, Kamieniec, as well as Siret and Kij\u00f3w (see Old Cathedral of St. Sophia, Kyiv). The first Catholic Archbishop who resided in Lw\u00f3w was Jan Rzeszowski.\nIn 1434, the Ruthenian domain of the Crown was transformed into the Ruthenian Voivodeship. In 1444, the city was granted the staple right, which resulted in its growing prosperity and wealth, as it became one of the major trading centres on the merchant routes between Central Europe and Black Sea region. It was also transformed into one of the main fortresses of the kingdom. As one of the largest and most influential royal cities of Poland, it enjoyed voting rights in the Royal elections in Poland, alongside other major cities such as Krak\u00f3w, Pozna\u0144, Warsaw or Gda\u0144sk. During the 17th century, it was the second largest city of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, with a population of about 30,000.\nIn 1572, one of the first publishers of books in what is now Ukraine, Ivan Fedorov, a graduate of the University of Krak\u00f3w, settled here for a brief period. The city became a significant centre for Eastern Orthodoxy with the establishment of an Orthodox brotherhood, a Greek-Slavonic school, and a printer which published the first full versions of the Bible in Church Slavonic in 1580. A Jesuit Collegium was founded in 1608, and on 20 January 1661 King John II Casimir of Poland issued a decree granting it \"the honour of the academy and the title of the university\".\nThe 17th century brought invading armies of Swedes, Hungarians, Turks, Russians and Cossacks to its gates. In 1648 an army of Cossacks and Crimean Tatars besieged the town. They captured the High Castle, murdering its defenders. The city itself was not sacked due to the fact that the leader of the revolution Bohdan Khmelnytsky accepted a ransom of 250,000 ducats, and the Cossacks marched north-west towards Zamo\u015b\u0107. It was one of two major cities in Poland which was not captured during the so-called \"Deluge\": the other one was Gda\u0144sk.\nAt that time, Lw\u00f3w witnessed a historic scene, as here King John II Casimir made his famous Lw\u00f3w Oath. On 1 April 1656, during a holy mass in Lw\u00f3w's Cathedral conducted by the papal legate Pietro Vidoni, John Casimir in a grandiose and elaborate ceremony entrusted the Commonwealth under the Blessed Virgin Mary's protection, whom he announced as \"The Queen of the Polish Crown and other of his countries\".\nIn 1672, it was surrounded by the Ottomans who also failed to conquer it. Three years later, the Battle of Lw\u00f3w (1675) took place near the city. Lw\u00f3w was captured for the first time since the Middle Ages by a foreign army in 1704, when Swedish troops under King Charles XII entered the city after a short siege. The plague of the early 18th century caused the death of about 10,000 inhabitants (40% of the city's population).\nHabsburg Empire.\nIn 1772, following the First Partition of Poland, the region was annexed by the Habsburg monarchy to the Austrian Partition. Known in German as \"Lemberg\", the city became the capital of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria. Lemberg grew dramatically during the 19th century, increasing in population from approximately 30,000 at the time of the Austrian annexation in 1772, to 196,000 by 1910 and to 212,000 three years later; rapid population growth brought about an increase in urban squalor and poverty in Austrian Galicia. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries a large influx of Austrians and German-speaking Czech bureaucrats gave the city a character that by the 1840s was quite Austrian, in its orderliness and in the appearance and popularity of Austrian coffeehouses.\nDuring Habsburg rule, Lviv became one of the most important Polish, Ukrainian and Jewish cultural centres. In Lviv, according to the Austrian census of 1910, which listed religion and language, 51% of the city's population was Roman Catholics, 28% Jews, and 19% belonged to the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. Linguistically, 86% of the city's population used the Polish language and 11% preferred Ruthenian.\nIn 1773, the first newspaper in Lemberg, \"Gazette de Leopoli\", began to be published. In 1784, a Latin language university was opened with lectures in German, Polish and even Ruthenian; after closing in 1805, it was reopened in 1817. By 1825, German became the sole language of instruction. Lemberg University was opened by Maria Theresa in 1784. By 1787, her successor Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor opened \"Studium Ruthenum\" for students who did not know enough Latin to take regular courses.\nDuring the 19th century, the Austrian administration attempted to Germanise the city's educational and governmental institutions. A number of cultural organisations which did not have a pro-German orientation were closed. After the revolutions of 1848, the language of instruction at the university shifted from German to include Ukrainian and Polish. Around that time, a certain sociolect developed in the city known as the Lw\u00f3w dialect. Considered to be a type of Polish dialect, it draws its roots from a number of other languages besides Polish. In 1853, kerosene lamps as street lighting were introduced by Ignacy \u0141ukasiewicz and Jan Zeh. Then in 1858, these were updated to gas lamps, and in 1900 to electric ones.\nAfter the so-called \"Ausgleich\" of February 1867, the Austrian Empire was reformed into a dualist Austria-Hungary and a slow yet steady process of liberalisation of Austrian rule in Galicia started. From 1873, Galicia was \"de facto\" an autonomous province of Austria-Hungary, with Polish and Ruthenian as official languages. Germanisation was halted and censorship lifted as well. Galicia was subject to the Austrian part of the Dual Monarchy, but the Galician Sejm and provincial administration, both established in Lviv, had extensive privileges and prerogatives, especially in education, culture, and local affairs. In 1894, the General National Exhibition was held in Lviv. The city started to grow rapidly, becoming the fourth largest in Austria-Hungary, according to the census of 1910. Multiple Belle \u00c9poque public edifices and tenement houses were erected, with a number of the buildings from the Austrian period, such as the Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet, built in the Viennese neo-Renaissance style.\nAt that time, Lviv was home to a number of renowned Polish-language institutions, such as the Ossolineum, with the second-largest collection of Polish books in the world, the Polish Academy of Arts, the National Museum (since 1908), the Historical Museum of the City of Lw\u00f3w (since 1891), the Polish Copernicus Society of Naturalists, the Polish Historical Society, Lw\u00f3w University, with Polish as the official language since 1882, the Lw\u00f3w Scientific Society, the Lw\u00f3w Art Gallery, the Polish Theatre, and the Polish Archdiocese.\nFurthermore, Lviv was the centre of a number of Polish independence organisations. In June 1908, J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski and Kazimierz Sosnkowski founded the Union of Active Struggle in the city. Two years later, the paramilitary organisation, called the Riflemen's Association, was also founded in the city by Polish activists.\nAt the same time, Lviv became the city where famous Ukrainian writers (such as Ivan Franko, Panteleimon Kulish and Ivan Nechuy-Levytsky) published their work. It was a centre of Ukrainian cultural revival. The city also housed the largest and most influential Ukrainian institutions in the world, including the Prosvita society dedicated to spreading literacy in the Ukrainian language, the Shevchenko Scientific Society, the Dniester Insurance Company and base of the Ukrainian cooperative movement, and it served as the seat of the Ukrainian Catholic Church. However, the Polish-dominated city council blocked Ukrainian attempts to create visible monuments for their own. The most important streets had names referring to Polish history and literature, and only minor roads referred to Ukrainians.\nLviv was also a major centre of Jewish culture, in particular as a centre of the Yiddish language, and was the home of the world's first Yiddish-language daily newspaper, the \"Lemberger Togblat\", established in 1904.\nWorld War I.\nIn the Battle of Galicia at the early stages of the First World War, Lviv was captured by the Russian army in September 1914 following the Battle of Gnila Lipa. The Lemberg Fortress fell on 3 September. The historian P\u00e1l Kelemen provided a first-hand account of the chaotic evacuation of the city by the Austro-Hungarian Army and civilians alike.\nThe town was retaken by Austria-Hungary in June of the following year during the Gorlice\u2013Tarn\u00f3w offensive. Lviv and its population, therefore, suffered greatly during the First World War as many of the offensives were fought across its local geography causing significant collateral damage and disruption.\nPolish\u2013Ukrainian War.\nAfter the collapse of the Habsburg Monarchy at the end of the First World War, Lviv became an arena of battle between the local Polish population and the Ukrainian Sich Riflemen. Both nations perceived the city as an integral part of their new statehoods which at that time were forming in the former Austrian territories. On the night of 31 October \u2013 1 November 1918 the Western Ukrainian People's Republic was proclaimed with Lviv as its capital. 2,300 Ukrainian soldiers from the Ukrainian Sich Riflemen (Sichovi Striltsi), which had previously been a corps in the Austrian Army, made an attempt to take over Lviv. The city's Polish majority opposed the Ukrainian declaration and began to fight against the Ukrainian troops. During this combat an important role was taken by young Polish city defenders called Lw\u00f3w Eaglets.\nThe Ukrainian forces withdrew outside Lw\u00f3w's confines by 21 November 1918, after which elements of Polish soldiers began to loot and burn much of the Jewish and Ukrainian quarters of the city, killing approximately 340 civilians (see: Lw\u00f3w pogrom). The pogromists were tried by Polish authorities and three were executed. The retreating Ukrainian forces besieged the city. The Sich riflemen reformed into the Ukrainian Galician Army (UHA). The Polish forces aided from central Poland, including General Haller's Blue Army, equipped by the French, relieved the besieged city in May 1919 forcing the UHA to the east.\nDespite Entente mediation attempts to cease hostilities and reach a compromise between belligerents the Polish\u2013Ukrainian War continued until July 1919 when the last UHA forces withdrew east of the River Zbruch. The border on the River Zbruch was confirmed at the Treaty of Warsaw, when in April 1920 Field Marshal Pi\u0142sudski signed an agreement with Symon Petlura where it was agreed that in exchange for military support against the Bolsheviks the Ukrainian People's Republic renounced its claims to the territories of Eastern Galicia.\nIn August 1920, Lviv was attacked by the Red Army under the command of Aleksandr Yegorov and Stalin during the Polish\u2013Soviet War but the city repelled the attack. For the courage of its inhabitants Lviv was awarded the Virtuti Militari cross by J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski on 22 November 1920.\nOn 23 February 1921, the council of the League of Nations declared that Galicia (including the city) lay outside the territory of Poland and that Poland did not have the mandate to establish administrative control in that country, and that Poland was merely the occupying military power of Galicia (as a whole), whose sovereign remained the Allied Powers and fate would be determined by the Council of Ambassadors at the League of Nations. On 14 March 1923, the Council of Ambassadors decided that Galicia would be incorporated into Poland \"whereas it is recognised by Poland that ethnographical conditions necessitate an autonomous regime in the Eastern part of Galicia.\" This provision was never honoured by the interwar Polish government. After 1923, the region was internationally recognized as part of the Polish state.\nInterwar period.\nDuring the interwar period Lw\u00f3w was the Second Polish Republic's third-most populous city (following Warsaw and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a), and it became the seat of the Lw\u00f3w Voivodeship. Following Warsaw, Lw\u00f3w was the second most important cultural and academic centre of interwar Poland. For example, in 1920 Professor Rudolf Weigl of Lw\u00f3w University developed a vaccine against typhus fever. Furthermore, the geographic location of Lw\u00f3w gave it an important role in stimulating international trade and fostering the city's and Poland's economic development. A major trade fair named Targi Wschodnie was established in 1921. In the academic year 1937\u20131938, there were 9,100 students attending five institutions of higher education, including Lw\u00f3w University as well as the Polytechnic.\nWhile about two-thirds of the city's inhabitants were Poles, some of whom spoke the characteristic Lw\u00f3w dialect, the eastern part of the Lw\u00f3w Voivodeship had a relative Ukrainian majority in most of its rural areas. Polish authorities were obliged through international agreements to provide Eastern Galicia with autonomy (including the creation of a separate Ukrainian university in Lw\u00f3w), and even though a bill was enacted the Polish Sejm in September 1922, this was not fulfilled.\nThe Polish government discontinued multiple Ukrainian schools which functioned during the Austrian rule, and closed down Ukrainian departments at the University of Lw\u00f3w with the exception of one. Prewar Lw\u00f3w also had a large and thriving Jewish community, which constituted about a quarter of the population, but were accused of having collaborated with the Ukrainians.\nUnlike in Austrian times, when the size and number of public parades or other cultural expressions corresponded to each cultural group's relative population, the Polish government emphasised the Polish nature of the city and limited public displays of Jewish and Ukrainian culture. Military parades and commemorations of battles at particular streets within the city, all celebrating the Polish forces who fought against the Ukrainians in 1918, became frequent, and in the 1930s a vast memorial monument and burial ground of Polish soldiers from that conflict was built in the city's Lychakiv Cemetery. On the other hand, Ukrainians strove to create their own memorial culture in the town. An underground military organization attacked Polish institutions, as well as Polish politicians.\nWorld War II.\nSoviet occupation and incorporation.\nGermany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939 and by 14 September Lw\u00f3w was completely encircled by German Army units. Subsequently, the Soviets invaded Poland on 17 September. On 22 September 1939 Lw\u00f3w capitulated to the Red Army. The USSR annexed the eastern half of the Second Polish Republic with Ukrainian and Belarusian populations. The city became the capital of the newly formed Lviv Oblast. The Soviets reopened uni-lingual Ukrainian schools, which had been discontinued by the Polish government.\nThe only change over imposed by the Soviets was the language of instruction, with the actual net loss of about 1,000 schools in short order. Ukrainian was made compulsory in the University of Lviv with almost all its books in Polish. It became thoroughly Ukrainized and was renamed after Ukrainian writer Ivan Franko. Polish academics were laid off. Soviet rule turned out to be much more oppressive than Polish rule; the rich world of Ukrainian publications in Polish Lw\u00f3w, for instance, was gone in Soviet Lviv, and multiple journalism jobs were lost with it.\nGerman occupation.\nOn 22 June 1941, Nazi Germany and several of its allies invaded the USSR. In the initial stage of Operation Barbarossa (30 June 1941) Lviv was taken by the Germans. The evacuating Soviets killed most of the prison population, with arriving Wehrmacht forces easily discovering evidence of the Soviet mass murders in the city committed by the NKVD and NKGB. On 30 June 1941 Yaroslav Stetsko proclaimed in Lviv the Government of an independent Ukrainian state allied with Nazi Germany. This was done without preapproval from the Germans and after 15 September 1941, the organisers were arrested.\nThe Sikorski\u2013Mayski Agreement signed in London on 30 July 1941 between the Polish government-in-exile and the Soviet government invalidated the September 1939 Soviet-German partition of Poland, as the Soviets declared it null and void. Meanwhile, German-occupied Eastern Galicia at the beginning of August 1941 was incorporated into the General Government as \"Distrikt Galizien\" with Lviv as the district's capital. German policy towards the Polish population in this area was as harsh as in the rest of the General Government.\nDuring the occupation of the city, the Germans committed multiple atrocities, including the killing of Polish university professors in 1941. German Nazis viewed the Ukrainian Galicians, former inhabitants of Austrian Crown Land, as more aryanised and civilised than the Ukrainian population living in the territories belonging to the USSR before 1939. As a result, they escaped the full extent of German acts in comparison to Ukrainians who lived to the east, in the German-occupied Soviet Ukraine turned into the \"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\".\nAccording to the Third Reich's racial policies, local Jews then became the main target of German repressions in the region. Following the German occupation, the Jewish population was concentrated in the Lw\u00f3w Ghetto established in the city's Zamarstyn\u00f3w (today \"Zamarstyniv\") district and the Janowska concentration camp was also set up. In the Janowska concentration camp, the Nazis conducted torture and executions to music. The Lviv National Opera members, who were prisoners, played one and the same tune, Tango of Death.\nOn the eve of Lviv's liberation, German Nazis ordered 40 orchestra musicians to form a circle. The security ringed the musicians tightly and ordered them to play. First, the orchestra conductor, Mund, was executed. Then the commandant ordered the musicians to come to the center of the circle one by one, put their instruments onto the ground and strip naked, after which they were killed by a headshot. A photo of the orchestra players was one of the incriminating documents at the Nuremberg trials.\nIn 1931 there were 75,316 Yiddish-speaking inhabitants, but by 1941 approximately 100,000 Jews were present in Lviv. The majority of these Jews were either killed within the city or deported to Belzec extermination camp. In the summer of 1943, on the orders of Heinrich Himmler, SS-Standartenf\u00fchrer Paul Blobel was tasked with the destruction of any evidence of Nazi mass murders in the Lviv area. On 15 June Blobel, using forced labourers from Janowska, dug up a number of mass graves and incinerated the remains.\nLater, on 19 November 1943, inmates at Janowska staged an uprising and attempted a mass escape. A few succeeded, but most were recaptured and killed. The SS staff and their local auxiliaries then, at the time of the Janowska camp's liquidation, murdered at least 6,000 more inmates, as well as the Jews in other forced labour camps in Galicia. By the end of the war, the Jewish population of the city was virtually eliminated, with only around 200 to 800 survivors remaining.\nSoviet re-occupation.\nAfter the successful Lvov\u2013Sandomierz Offensive of July 1944, the Soviet 3rd Guards Tank Army captured Lw\u00f3w on 27 July 1944, with significant cooperation from the local Polish resistance. Soon thereafter, the local commanders of Polish \"Armia Krajowa\" were invited to a meeting with the commanders of the Red Army. During the meeting, they were arrested, as it turned out to be a trap set by the Soviet NKVD. Later, in the winter and spring of 1945, the local NKVD continued to arrest and harass Poles in Lw\u00f3w (which according to Soviet sources on 1 October 1944 still had a clear Polish majority of 66.7%) in an attempt to encourage their emigration from the city.\nThose arrested were released only after they had signed papers in which they agreed to emigrate to Poland, which postwar borders were to be shifted westwards in accordance with the Yalta Conference settlements. In Yalta, despite Polish objections, the Allied leaders, Joseph Stalin, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill decided that Lw\u00f3w should remain within the borders of the Soviet Union. Roosevelt wanted Poland to have Lw\u00f3w and the surrounding oilfields, but Stalin refused to allow it.\nOn 16 August 1945, a border agreement was signed in Moscow between the government of the Soviet Union and the Provisional Government of National Unity installed by the Soviets in Poland. In the treaty, Polish authorities formally ceded the prewar eastern part of the country to the Soviet Union, agreeing to the Polish-Soviet border to be drawn according to the Curzon Line. Consequently, the agreement was ratified on 5 February 1946.\nSoviet era.\nIn February 1946, Lviv became a part of the Soviet Union. It is estimated that from 100,000 to 140,000 Poles were resettled from the city into the so-called Recovered Territories as a part of postwar population transfers, many of them to the area of newly acquired Wroc\u0142aw, formerly the German city of Breslau. Many buildings in the old part of the city are examples of Polish architecture, which flourished in Lviv after the opening of the Technical School (later Polytechnic), the first higher-education technical academy in Polish lands. Polytechnic educated generations of architects who were influential in the entire country. Examples include the main buildings of Lviv Polytechnic, the University of Lviv, the Lviv Opera, the Lviv railway station, the former building of Galicyjska Kasa Oszcz\u0119dno\u015bci, and Potocki Palace.\nMany Polish pieces of art and sculpture can be found in Lviv galleries, among them works by Jan Piotr Norblin, Marcello Bacciarelli, Kazimierz Wojniakowski, Antoni Brodowski, Henryk Rodakowski, Artur Grottger, Jan Matejko, Aleksander Gierymski, Jan Stanis\u0142awski, Leon Wycz\u00f3\u0142kowski, J\u00f3zef Che\u0142mo\u0144ski, J\u00f3zef Mehoffer, Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski, Olga Bozna\u0144ska, W\u0142adys\u0142aw S\u0142owi\u0144ski, Jacek Malczewski. Poles who stayed in Lviv formed the organisation the Association of Polish Culture of the Lviv Land.\nAccording to various estimates, Lviv lost between 80% and 90% of its prewar population. Expulsion of the Polish population and the Holocaust together with migration from Ukrainian-speaking surrounding areas (including forcibly resettled from the territories which, after the war, became part of the Polish People's Republic), from other parts of the Soviet Union, altered the ethnic composition of the city. Immigration from Russia and Russian-speaking regions of eastern Ukraine was encouraged. The prevalence of the Ukrainian-speaking population led to the fact that under the conditions of Soviet Russification, Lviv became a major centre of the dissident movement in Ukraine and played a key role in Ukraine's independence in 1991.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, the city expanded both in population and size mostly due to the city's rapidly growing industrial base. Due to the fight of SMERSH with the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, Lviv obtained a nickname with a negative connotation: \"Banderstadt\", meaning the city of Stepan Bandera. The German suffix for the city \"stadt\" was added instead of the Russian \"grad\" to imply alienation. Over the years the residents of the city found this so ridiculous that even people not familiar with Bandera accepted it as sarcasm in reference to the Soviet perception of western Ukraine. In the period of liberalisation from the Soviet system in the 1980s, the city became the centre of political movements advocating Ukrainian independence from the USSR. By the time of the fall of the Soviet Union the name became a proud mark for the Lviv natives culminating in the creation of a local rock band under the name \"Khloptsi z Bandershtadtu\" (Boys from Banderstadt).\nOn 17 September 1989 Lviv saw the largest rally in support of Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union, gathering some 100,000 participants.\nIndependent Ukraine.\nThe citizens of Lviv strongly supported Viktor Yushchenko during the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election and played a key role in the Orange Revolution. Hundreds of thousands of people would gather in freezing temperatures to demonstrate for the Orange camp. Acts of civil disobedience forced the head of the local police to resign and the local assembly issued a resolution refusing to accept the fraudulent first official results. Lviv remains today one of the main centres of Ukrainian culture and the origin of much of the nation's political class.\nIn support of the Euromaidan movement, Lviv's executive committee declared itself independent of the rule of President Viktor Yanukovych on 19 February 2014.\nIn 2019, the citizens of Lviv strongly supported Petro Poroshenko over Volodymyr Zelenskyy during the 2019 Ukrainian presidential election. The percentage of votes counted for Poroshenko was more than 90%. Despite this level of support in Lviv, he lost the national vote.\nUntil 18 July 2020, Lviv was incorporated as a city of oblast significance and the center of Lviv Municipality. The municipality was abolished in July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Lviv Oblast to seven. The area of Lviv Municipality was merged into the newly established Lviv Raion.\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nDuring the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Lviv became the nation's \"de facto\" western capital in February 2022 as some embassies, government agencies, and media organizations were relocated from Kyiv due to the direct military threat to the capital. Lviv also became a safe haven for the Ukrainians fleeing other parts of the country affected by the invasion, their number exceeding 200,000 by 18 March 2022. A number of them used the city as a stopping point on their way to Poland. Lviv and the larger region around it also served as crucial arms and humanitarian supply route. Bracing for Russian attacks, local government and citizens, helped by Polish and Croatian advisers, worked to protect the city's cultural heritage by erecting makeshift barriers around historical monuments, wrapping statues, and safeguarding art treasures.\nDuring the course of the war, the area in and around Lviv has been struck by Russian missile attacks. Yavoriv military training base was struck on 13 March 2022, the Lviv State Aircraft Repair Plant near the Lviv Danylo Halytskyi International Airport on 18 March 2022, and a fuel depot and other facilities within the city limits on 26 March 2022.\nOn 18 April 2022, the city was hit by five missile strikes, killing seven civilians and wounding 11, according to mayor Andriy Sadovyi. Regional governor Maksym Kozystkiy said that the targets were military factories and a tyre shop. A hotel housing evacuees was also hit, damaging its windows. The Russian Ministry of Defence claimed that all locations were struck by Russian missiles during the night of 18 April were military targets.\nLviv was targeted during the 10 October 2022 missile strikes on Ukraine, resulting in a city-wide blackout. On 11 October 2022, Sadovyi announced that the city was hit by a missile strike, resulting in a power outage and water supply shortage.\nOn October 5th 2025, the russian https:// on Lviv was the largest of the war in the Lviv region, said governor Maksym Kozytskyi, adding it involved 140 drones and 23 missiles. 5 civilians were killed and dozens were injured.\nGeography.\nLviv is on the edge of the Roztochia Upland, about east of the Polish border and north of the eastern Carpathian Mountains. The average altitude of Lviv is above sea level. Its highest point is the \"Vysokyi Zamok\" (High Castle), above sea level. This castle has a commanding view of the historic city centre with its distinctive, green-domed churches and intricate architecture.\nThe old walled city was at the foothills of the High Castle on the banks of the Poltva River. In the 13th century, the river was used to transport goods. In the early 20th century, the Poltva was covered over in areas where it flows through the city; the river flows directly beneath Lviv's central street, Liberty Avenue, and the Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet.\nClimate.\nLviv's climate is humid continental (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\") with cold winters and warm summers. The average temperatures are in January and in July. The average annual rainfall is with the maximum in summer. Mean sunshine duration per year at Lviv is about 1,804 hours.\nAdministrative divisions.\nLviv is divided into six urban districts (raions), each with its own administrative bodies:\nNotable suburbs include Vynnyky (), Briukhovychi (), and Rudno ().\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Lviv residents live 75 years on average, and this age is 7 years longer than the average age in Ukraine and 8 years more than the world average (68 years). In 2010 the average life expectancy was 71 among men and 79.5 years among women. The fertility rates have been steadily increasing between 2001 and 2010; however, the effects of low fertility in the previous years remained noticeable even though the birth rates grew. However, there is an acute shortage of young people under the age of 25. In 2011, 13.7% of Lviv's population consisted of young people under 15 years and 17.6% of persons aged 60 years and over.\nLanguage.\nThe majority of Leopolitans speak Ukrainian. The use of Ukrainian in the city has surged since the 1970s, while the use of Russian has declined since the 1980s. In 2000, it was estimated that 80% of Leopolitans spoke Ukrainian.\nResults of the 2001 census:\nAccording to one survey conducted by the International Republican Institute in mid-2023, 96% of the city's inhabitants spoke Ukrainian at home, while 3% of them spoke Russian.\nEthnic Polish population.\nEthnic Poles and the Polish Jews began to settle in Lw\u00f3w in considerable numbers already in 1349 after the city was conquered by King Casimir of the Piast dynasty. Lw\u00f3w served as Poland's major cultural and economic centre for several centuries, during the Polish Golden Age, and until the partitions of Poland perpetrated by Russia, Prussia, and Austria. In the Second Polish Republic, the Lw\u00f3w Voivodeship (inhabited by 2,789,000 people in 1921) grew to 3,126,300 inhabitants in ten years.\nAs a result of World War II, Lviv was de-Polonised, mainly through Soviet-arranged population exchange in 1944\u20131946 but also by early deportations to Siberia. Those who remained on their own volition after the border shift became a small ethnic minority in Lviv. By 1959 Poles made up only 4% of the local population. A number of families were mixed. During the Soviet decades only two Polish schools continued to function: No. 10 (with 8 grades) and No. 24 (with 10 grades).\nIn the 1980s the process of uniting groups into ethnic associations was allowed. In 1988 a Polish-language newspaper was permitted (\"Gazeta Lwowska\"). The Polish population of the city continues to use the dialect of the Polish language known as \"Lw\u00f3w dialect\" ().\nAn association of Poles named White Eagle was founded in Lviv in 2011.\nJewish population.\nThe first known Jews in Lviv date back to the tenth century. The oldest remaining Jewish tombstone dates back to 1348. Apart from the Rabbanite Jews there were many Karaites who had settled in the city after coming from the East and from Byzantium. After Casimir III conquered Lviv in 1349 the Jewish citizens received a number of privileges equal to that of other citizens of Poland. Lviv had two separate Jewish quarters, one within the city walls and one outside on the outskirts of the city. Each had its separate synagogue, although they shared a cemetery, which was also used by the Crimean Karaite community. Before 1939 there were 97 synagogues.\nBefore the Holocaust about one-third of the city's population was Jewish (more than 140,000 on the eve of World War II). This number swelled to about 240,000 by the end of 1940 as tens of thousands of Jews fled from the Nazi-occupied parts of Poland into the relative (and temporary) sanctuary of Soviet-occupied Poland (including Lviv) following the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact that divided Poland into Nazi and Soviet zones in 1939. Most of the Jewish population was killed in the Holocaust. Meanwhile, the Nazis also destroyed the Jewish cemetery, which was subsequently \"paved over by the Soviets\".\nDue to the Holocaust and migration, the original Jewish population of the city all but vanished. After the war, the remnant was replenished by a newer Jewish population, formed from among the hundreds of thousands of Russians and Ukrainians who migrated to the city. The post-war Jewish population peaked at 30,000 in the 1970s. Currently, the Jewish population has shrunk considerably as a result of emigration (mainly to Israel and the United States) and, to a lesser degree, assimilation, and is estimated to number a few thousand. A number of organisations continue to be active.\nThe Sholem Aleichem Jewish Culture Society in Lviv initiated the construction of a monument to the victims of the ghetto in 1988. On 23 August 1992, the memorial complex to the victims of the Lw\u00f3w ghetto (1941\u20131943) was officially opened. During 2011\u20132012, some antisemitic acts against the memorial took place. On 20 March 2011, it was reported that the slogan \"death to the Jews\" with a swastika was sprayed on the monument. On 21 March 2012, the memorial was vandalized by unknown individuals, in what seemed to be an antisemitic act.\nEconomy.\nLviv is the most important business centre of Western Ukraine. As of 1 January 2011, the city has invested 837.1 million US dollars into the economy, accounting for almost two-thirds of total investment in the Lviv region. In 2015, the companies of Lviv received $14.3 million of foreign direct investment; which is however half as much as a year earlier ($30.9 million in 2014). During January\u2013September 2017 the general amount of direct foreign investment received by the local government in Lviv was $52.4 million. According to the statistics administration, foreign capital was invested by 31 countries (some of the main investors: Poland \u2013 47.7%; Australia \u2013 11.3%; Cyprus \u2013 10.7% and the Netherlands \u2013 6%).\nThe total revenue of the city budget of Lviv for 2015 was set at about UAH 3.81 billion, which was 23% more than a year earlier (UAH 2.91 billion in 2014). As of 10 November 2017, the deputies of the Lviv City Council approved a budget in amount of UAH 5.4 billion ($204 million), most of which (UAH 5.12 billion) was the revenue of the fund of Lviv.\nThe average wage in Lviv in 2015 in the business sector amounted to 14,041 UAH, in the budget sphere \u2013 9,475 UAH. On 1 February 2014, registered unemployment was 0.6%. Lviv is one of the largest cities in Ukraine and is growing rapidly. According to the Ministry of Economy of Ukraine the monthly average salary in Lviv is a little less than the average for Ukraine which in February 2013 was 6050 UAH ($755). According to the World Bank classification Lviv is a middle-income city. In June 2019, the average wage amounted to 23,000 UAH ($920), which was 18.9% more than in the previous year.\nLviv has 218 large industrial enterprises, more than 40 commercial banks, 4 exchanges, 13 investment companies, 80 insurance and 24 leasing companies, 77 audit firms and almost 9,000 small ventures. For a number of years machinery-building and electronics were leading industries in Lviv. The city-based public company Electron, trademark of national television sets manufacturing, produces the 32 and 37-inches liquid-crystal TV-sets. The Electrontrans specializes in design and production of modern electric transport including trams, trolleybuses, electric buses, and spare parts. In 2013 Elektrotrans JV started producing low-floor trams, the first Ukrainian 100% low-floor tramways. LAZ is a bus manufacturing company in Lviv with its own rich history. Founded in 1945, LAZ started bus production in the early 1950s. Innovative design ideas of Lviv engineers have become the world standard in bus manufacturing.\nThe total volume of industrial production sold in 2015 amounted to UAH 24.2 billion, which was 39% more than a year earlier (UAH 14.6 billion in 2014).\nThere are several banks based in Lviv, such as Kredobank, Idea Bank, VS Bank, Oksi Bank and Lviv Bank. None of these banks have bankrupted during the political and economic crisis of 2014\u20132016, which can be explained by the presence of foreign capital in most of them.\nFrom 2015 to 2019, the city experienced a construction boom. In Q1 2019, according to statistical data, growth in the volume of new housing construction was recorded in Lviv (3.2 times, to 377,900 square meters).\nLviv is a major business center between Warsaw and Kyiv. According to the Lviv Economic Development Strategy, the main branches of the city's economy by 2025 were to be tourism and information technologies (IT), with business services and logistics also considered priorities. In addition, the Nestl\u00e9 service center is in Lviv. This center guides the company's divisions in 20 countries of Central and Eastern Europe. Also during 2016 the Global Service Center VimpelCom in Lviv was launched, which serves finance, procurement and HR operations in eight foreign branches of this company.\nThere are multiple restaurants and shops as well as street vendors of food, books, clothes, traditional cultural items and tourist gifts. Banking and money trading are an important part of the economy of Lviv with banks and exchange offices throughout the city. The city is also a home for big food-related companies like Lvivske beer factory, Svitoch cholocate factory, Enzym, Lviv Liquor and Vodka factory, etc.\nInformation technology.\nLviv is also one of the leaders of software export in Eastern Europe, with expected sector growth of 20% by 2020. Over 15% of all IT specialists in Ukraine work in Lviv, with over 4100 new IT graduates coming from local universities each year. About 2,500 tech enthusiasts attended Lviv IT Arena, the largest technology conference in Western Ukraine. Over 24,000 IT specialists work in Lviv as of 2019. Lviv is among top five most popular Ukrainian cities for opening R&amp;D center in IT and IT outsourcing spheres together with Kyiv, Dnipro, Kharkiv and Odesa.\nIn 2009, KPMG, one of the well-known international auditing companies, included Lviv as one of the top 30 cities with the greatest potential of information technology development. As of December 2015, there were 192 IT companies operating in the city, of which 4 were large (with more than 400 employees), 16 were average (150\u2013300 employees), 97 were small (10\u2013110 employees) and 70 were micro companies (3\u20137 employees). From 2017 to 2018 the number of IT companies increased to 317.\nThe turnover of Lviv's IT industry in 2015 amounted to $300 million. About 50% of IT services are exported to the US, 37% to Europe, and the rest to other countries. As of 2015, about 15 thousand specialists were employed in this industry with an average salary of 28 thousand UAH. According to a study of the Economic Effect of the Lviv IT-Market, which was conducted by Lviv IT Cluster and sociological agency \"The Farm\", there were 257 IT companies operating in Lviv in 2017 which employed about 17 thousand specialists. The economic impact of the IT industry in Lviv is $734 million.\nThere are 15 top universities in Lviv, 5 of which prepare highly skilled specialists in computer and IT technologies and supply over 1,000 IT graduates to the market annually.\nLviv IT outsourcing companies gathered all kinds of Ukrainian developers in one place, resulting in multiple front-end interns, JavaScript developers, back-end and full-stack coders with proper qualifications, experience, and good English language skills. Some IT companies in Lviv offer outsourcing software services to international corporations rather than developing their software product.\nCulture.\nLviv is one of Ukraine's most important cultural centres. It is known as a centre of art, literature, music and theatre. Nowadays, the evidence of the city's cultural richness is the number of theatres, concert halls, and creative unions, and the high number of artistic activities (more than 100 festivals annually, 60 museums, and 10 theatres).\nLviv's historic centre has been on the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage list since 1998. UNESCO gave the following reasons for its selection:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Criterion II: In its urban fabric and its architecture, Lviv is an outstanding example of the fusion of the architectural and artistic traditions of central and eastern Europe with those of Italy and Germany.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Criterion V: The political and commercial role of Lviv attracted to it a number of ethnic groups with different cultural and religious traditions, who established separate yet interdependent communities within the city, evidence for which is still discernible in the modern town's landscape.The World Heritage Site consists of Seredmistia (Middletown), Pidzamche, High Castle, and the ensemble of St. George's Cathedral.\nArchitecture.\nLviv's historic churches, buildings and relics date from the 13th century to the early 20th century (Polish and Austro-Hungarian rule). In recent centuries Lviv was spared some of the invasions and wars that destroyed other Ukrainian cities. Its architecture reflects various European styles and periods. After the fires of 1527 and 1556 Lviv lost most of its gothic-style buildings but it retains many buildings in renaissance, baroque and the classic styles. There are works by artists of the Vienna Secession, Art Nouveau and Art Deco.\nThe buildings have multiple stone sculptures and carvings, particularly on large doors, which are hundreds of years old. The remains of old churches dot the central cityscape. Some three- to five-storey buildings have hidden inner courtyards and grottoes in various states of repair. Some cemeteries are of interest: for example, the Lychakivskiy Cemetery where the Polish elite was buried for centuries. Leaving the central area the architectural style changes radically as Soviet-era high-rise blocks dominate. In the centre of the city, the Soviet era is reflected mainly in a few modern-style national monuments and sculptures.\nMonuments.\nOutdoor sculptures in the city commemorate a number of notable individuals and topics reflecting the rich and complex history of Lviv. There are monuments to Adam Mickiewicz, Ivan Franko, King Danylo, Taras Shevchenko, Ivan Fedorov, Solomiya Krushelnytska, Ivan Pidkova, Mykhailo Hrushevskyi, Pope John Paul II, Jan Kili\u0144ski, Ivan Trush, Saint George, Bartosz G\u0142owacki, the monument to the Virgin Mary, to Nikifor, The Good Soldier \u0160vejk, Stepan Bandera, Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, and others.\nDuring the interwar period there were monuments commemorating important figures of Polish history. Some of them were moved to the Polish \"Recovered Territories\" after World War II, like the Monument to Aleksander Fredro, which now is in Wroc\u0142aw, the Monument of King John III Sobieski, which after 1945 was moved to Gda\u0144sk, and the monument of Kornel Ujejski, which is now in Szczecin. A book market takes place around the monument to Ivan F\u0435dorovych, a typographer in the 16th century who fled Moscow and found a new home in Lviv.\nNew ideas came to Lviv during Austro\u2013Hungarian rule. In the 19th century, multiple publishing houses, newspapers and magazines were established. Among these was the Ossolineum which was one of the most important Polish scientific libraries. Most Polish-language books and publications of the Ossolineum library are still kept in a local Jesuit church. In 1997 the Polish government asked the Ukrainian government to return these documents to Poland. In 2003, Ukraine allowed access to these publications for the first time. In 2006, an office of the Ossolineum (now in Wroc\u0142aw) opened in Lviv and began scanning all its documents. Works written in Lviv contributed to Austrian, Ukrainian, Yiddish, and Polish literature, with a multitude of translations.\nThe Stepan Bandera monument in Lviv, which stands in front of the Stele of Ukraine Monument, is a statue dedicated to nationalist leader, Stepan Bandera, a controversial twentieth century Ukrainian symbol of nationalism.\nReligion.\nLviv is a city of religious variety. Religion (2012): Catholic: 57% (Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church 56% and Roman Catholic Church 1%), Orthodox: 32%, Protestantism: 2%, Judaism: 0.1%, Other religion: 3%, Indifferent to religious matters: 4%, Atheism: 1.9%.\nChristianity.\nAt one point, over 60 churches existed in the city. Christian groups have existed in the city since the 13th century. The city has been the episcopal see of three different particular churches of Catholic Church: The Ukrainian Catholic Archeparchy of Lviv of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, the Archdiocese of Lviv of the Latin Church, and formerly the Armenian Catholic Archeparchy of Lviv of the Armenian Catholic Church. Each has had a diocesan seat in Lviv since the 16th century. At the end of the 16th century, the Eastern Orthodox community in Ukraine transferred their allegiance to the Pope in Rome and became the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. This bond was forcibly dissolved in 1946 by the Soviet authorities and the Roman Catholic community was forced out by the expulsion of the Polish population. Since 1989, religious life in Lviv has experienced a revival. About 35 percent of religious buildings belong to the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, 11.5 percent to the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church, 9 per cent to the Ukrainian Orthodox Church \u2013 Kyiv Patriarchate and 6 per cent to the Roman Catholic Church.\nIn June 2001, Pope John Paul II visited the Latin Cathedral, St. George's Cathedral and the Armenian Cathedral.\nJudaism.\nLviv historically had a large and active Jewish community and until 1941, at least 45 synagogues and prayer houses existed. Even in the 16th century, two separate communities existed. One lived in today's old town with the other in the Krakowskie Przedmie\u015bcie. The Golden Rose Synagogue was built in Lviv in 1582. In the 19th century, a more differentiated community started to spread out. Liberal Jews sought more cultural assimilation and spoke German and Polish. On the other hand, Orthodox and Hasidic Jews tried to retain the old traditions. Between 1941 and 1944, the Germans in effect completely destroyed the centuries-old Jewish tradition of Lviv. Most synagogues were destroyed and the Jewish population was forced first into a ghetto before being forcibly transported to concentration camps where they were murdered.\nUnder the Soviet Union, synagogues remained closed and were used as warehouses or cinemas. The last functioning synagogue was closed in the 1960s. Only since the fall of the Iron Curtain, has the remainder of the Jewish community experienced a faint revival.\nCurrently, the only functioning Orthodox Jewish synagogue in Lviv is the Beis Aharon V'Yisrael Synagogue.\nArts.\nThe range of artistic Lviv is impressive. On the one hand, it is the city of classical art. Lviv Opera and Lviv Philharmonic are places that can satisfy the demands of true appraisers of the classical arts. This is the city of one of the most distinguished sculptors in Europe, Johann Georg Pinzel, whose works can be seen on the fa\u00e7ade of the St. George's Cathedral in Lviv and in the Pinzel Museum. This is also the city of Solomiya Krushelnytska, who began her career as a singer in Lviv Opera and later became the prima donna of La Scala Opera in Milan.\nThe \"Group Artes\" was a young movement founded in 1929. A number of the artists studied in Paris and travelled throughout Europe. They worked and experimented in different areas of modern art: Futurism, Cubism, New Objectivity and Surrealism. Co\u2013operation took place between avant-garde musicians and authors. Altogether thirteen exhibitions by \"Artes\" took place in Warsaw, Krak\u00f3w, \u0141\u00f3dz and Lviv. The German occupation put an end to this group. Otto Hahn was executed in 1942 in Lviv and Aleksander Riemer was murdered in Auschwitz in 1943.\nHenryk Streng and Margit Reich-Sielska were able to escape the Holocaust (or Shoah). Most of the surviving members of Artes lived in Poland after 1945. Only Margit Reich-Sielska (1900\u20131980) and Roman Sielski (1903\u20131990) stayed in Soviet Lviv. For years the city was one of the most important cultural centres of Poland with such writers as Aleksander Fredro, Gabriela Zapolska, Leopold Staff, Maria Konopnicka and Jan Kasprowicz living in Lviv.\nToday Lviv is a city of fresh ideas and unusual characters. There are about 20 galleries (Lviv Municipal Art Center, The \"Dzyga\" Gallery, Art-Gallery \"Primus\", Gallery of the History of Ukrainian Military Uniforms, Gallery of Modern Art \"Zelena Kanapa\" and others). Lviv National Art Gallery is the largest museum of arts in Ukraine, with approximately 50,000 artworks, including paintings, sculptures and works of graphic art from Western and Eastern Europe, from the Middle Ages to the modern days.\nTheatre and opera.\nIn 1842 the Skarbek Theatre was opened making it the third-largest theatre in Central Europe. In 1903 the Lviv National Opera house, which at that time was called the City-Theatre, was opened emulating the Vienna State Opera house. The house initially offered a changing repertoire such as classical dramas in German and Polish language, opera, operetta, comedy and theatre.\nThe opera house is named after the Ukrainian opera diva Salomea Krushelnytska who worked here.\nIn the Janowska concentration camp, the Nazis conducted torture and executions to music. To do so they brought almost the whole Lviv National Opera to the camp. Professor Shtriks, opera conductor Mund and other famous Jewish musicians were among the members. From 1941 to 1944 the Nazis massacred 200,000 people including all 40 musicians.\nNowadays Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet has a creative group of performers who strive to maintain traditions of Ukrainian opera and classical ballet. The Theatre is a well-organized creative body where over 500 people work towards a common goal. The repertoire includes 10 Ukrainian music compositions. No other similar theatre in Ukraine has such a large number of Ukrainian productions. There are also multiple operas written by foreign composers, and most of these operas are performed in the original language: \"Othello\", \"Aida\", \"La Traviata\", \"Nabucco\", and \"A Masked Ball\" by G. Verdi, \"Tosca\", \"La Boh\u00e8me\" and \"Madame Butterfly\" by G. Puccini, \"Cavalleria Rusticana\" by P. Mascagni, and \"Pagliacci\" by R. Leoncavallo (in Italian); \"Carmen\" by G. Bizet (in French), \"The Haunted Manor\" by S. Moniuszko (in Polish)\nMuseums and art galleries.\nMuseum Pharmacy \"Pid Chornym Orlom\" (Beneath the Black Eagle) was founded in 1735 \u2013 it is the oldest pharmacy in Lviv. A museum related to pharmaceutical history was opened on the premises of the old pharmacy in 1966. The idea of creating such a museum had already come up in the 19th century. The Galician Association of Pharmacists was created in 1868. Members managed to assemble a small collection of exhibits, thus making the first step towards creating a new museum. The exhibition space has expanded considerably, with 16 exhibit rooms and a general exhibition surface totalling 700 sq. m. There are more than 3,000 exhibits in the museum. This is the only operating Museum Pharmacy in Ukraine and Europe.\nThe most notable of the museums are Lviv National Museum which houses the National Gallery. Its collection includes more than 140,000 unique items. The museum takes special pride in presenting the largest and most complete collection of medieval sacral art of the 12th to 18th centuries: icons, manuscripts, rare ancient books, decoratively carved pieces of art, metal and plastic artworks, and fabrics embroidered with gold and silver. The museum also boasts a unique monument of Ukrainian Baroque style: the Bohorodchansky Iconostasis. Exhibits include Ancient Ukrainian art from the 12th to 15th centuries, Ukrainian art from the 16th to 18th centuries, and Ukrainian art from the end of the 18th to the beginning of the 20th century.\nThe Museum of Ethnography and Crafts includes the Judaica collection of Maksymilian Goldstein.\nThe Museum of Salo opened in 2011.\nMusic.\nLviv has an active musical and cultural life. Apart from the Lviv Opera, it has symphony orchestras, chamber orchestras and the Trembita Chorus. Lviv has one of the most prominent music academies and music colleges in Ukraine, the Lviv Conservatory, and a factory for stringed musical instruments. Lviv has been the home of a number of composers, such as Mozart's son Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart, Stanislav Liudkevych, Wojciech Kilar and Mykola Kolessa.\nFlute virtuoso and composer Albert Franz Doppler (1821\u20131883) was born and spent his formative years here, including flute lessons from his father. The classical pianist Mieczys\u0142aw Horszowski (1892\u20131993) was born here. The opera diva Salomea Kruszelnicka called Lviv her home from the 1920s to 1930s. The classical violinist Adam Han Gorski was born here in 1940. \"\"Polish Radio Lw\u00f3w\" was a Polish radio station that went on air on 15 January 1930. The programme proved popular in Poland. Classical music and entertainment was aired as well as lectures, readings, youth programmes, news and liturgical services on Sunday.\nPopular throughout Poland was the Comic Lw\u00f3w Wave a cabaret-revue with musical pieces. Jewish artists contributed a great part to this artistic activity. Composers such as Henryk Wars, songwriters Emanuel Szlechter and Wiktor Budzy\u0144ski, the actor Mieczys\u0142aw Monderer and Adolf Fleischer (\"Aprikosenkranz und Untenbaum\"\") worked in Lviv. The most notable stars of the shows were Henryk Vogelf\u00e4nger and Kazimierz Wajda who appeared together as the comic duo \"Szczepko and To\u0144ko\" and were similar to Laurel and Hardy.\nThe Lviv Philharmonic is a major cultural centre with a long history and traditions that complement Ukraine's entire culture. From the stage of Lviv Philharmonic began their way to the great art world-famous Ukrainian musicians Oleh Krysa, Oleksandr Slobodyanik, Yuriy Lysychenko, and Maria Chaikovska, as well as the younger musicians E. Chupryk, Y. Ermin, Oksana Rapita, and Olexandr Kozarenko. Lviv Philharmonic is one of Ukraine's leading concert institutions. Its activities include international festivals, cycles of concerts-monographs, and concerts with young musicians.\nThe Chamber Orchestra \"Lviv virtuosos\" was organised by the best Lviv musicians in 1994. The orchestra consists of 16\u201340 persons / it depends on programmes/ and in the repertoire are included the musical compositions from Bach, Corelli to modern Ukrainian and European composers. During the short time of its operation, the orchestra acquired the professional level of the best European standards. It is mentioned in more than 100 positive articles by Ukrainian and foreign musical critics.\nLviv is the hometown of the Vocal formation \"Pikkardiyska Tertsiya\" and Eurovision Song Contest 2004 winner Ruslana who has since become well known in Europe and the rest of the world. PikkardiyskaTertsia was created on 24 September 1992 in Lviv and has won multiple musical awards. It all began with a quartet performing ancient Ukrainian music from the 15th century, along with adaptations of traditional Ukrainian folk songs.\nLviv Organ Hall is a place where classical music (organ, symphonic, cameral) and art meet together. 50,000 visitors each year, dozens of musicians from all over the world. Lviv is also the hometown of one of the most successful and popular Ukrainian rock bands, Okean Elzy.\nUniversities and academia.\nLviv University is one of the oldest in Central Europe and was founded as a Society of Jesus (Jesuit) school in 1608. Its prestige greatly increased through the work of philosopher Kazimierz Twardowski (1866\u20131938) who was one of the founders of the Lw\u00f3w-Warsaw School of Logic. This school of thought set benchmarks for academic research and education in Poland. The Polish politician of the interbellum period Stanis\u0142aw G\u0142\u0105bi\u0144ski had served as dean of the law department (1889\u20131890) and as the university rector (1908\u20131909). In 1901 the city was the seat of the Lw\u00f3w Scientific Society among whose members were major scientific figures. The most well-known were the mathematicians Stefan Banach, Juliusz Schauder and Stanis\u0142aw Ulam who were founders of the Lw\u00f3w School of Mathematics turning Lviv in the 1930s into the \"World Centre of Functional Analysis\" and whose share in Lviv academia was substantial.\nIn 1852 in Dublany, ( from the outskirts of Lviv) the Agricultural Academy was opened and was one of the first Polish agricultural colleges. The academy was merged with the Lviv Polytechnic in 1919. Another important college of the interbellum period was the Academy of Foreign Trade in Lw\u00f3w.\nIn 1873, Lviv has founded Shevchenko Scientific Society from the beginning it attracted the financial and intellectual support of writers and patrons of Ukrainian background.\nIn 1893 due to the change in its statute, the Shevchenko Scientific Society was transformed into a real scholarly multidisciplinary academy of sciences. Under the presidency of the historian, Mykhailo Hrushevsky, it greatly expanded its activities, contributing to both the humanities and the physical sciences, law and medicine, but most specifically once again it was concentrated on Ukrainian studies.\nThe Soviet Union annexed the eastern half of the Second Polish Republic including the city of Lw\u00f3w which capitulated to the Red Army on 22 September 1939. Upon their occupation of Lviv, the Soviets dissolved the Shevchenko society. Many of its members were arrested and either imprisoned or executed.\nThe local administration regularly organizes readings and events in honor of Nazi collaborators in World War II, participants in the Holocaust, such as Roman Shukhevych and the Nachtigall Battalion:\nMathematics.\nLviv was the home of the Scottish Caf\u00e9, where in the 1930s and the early 1940s, Polish mathematicians from the Lw\u00f3w School of Mathematics met and spent their afternoons discussing mathematical problems. Stanis\u0142aw Ulam who was later a participant in the Manhattan Project and the proposer of the Teller-Ulam design of thermonuclear weapons, Stefan Banach one of the founders of functional analysis, Hugo Steinhaus, Karol Borsuk, Kazimierz Kuratowski, Mark Kac and a number of other notable mathematicians would gather there. The caf\u00e9 building now houses the Atlas Deluxe Hotel at 27 Taras Shevchenko Prospekt (prewar Polish street name: \"ulica Akademicka\"). Mathematician Zygmunt Janiszewski died in Lviv on 3 January 1920.\nPrint and media.\nEver since the early 1990s, Lviv has been the spiritual home of the post-independence Ukrainian-language publishing industry.\nLviv Book Forum (International Publishers' Forum) is the biggest book fair in Ukraine. Lviv is the centre of promotion of the Ukrainian Latin alphabet (Latynka).\nThe most popular newspapers in Lviv are \"Vysoky Zamok\", \"Ekspres\", \"Lvivska hazeta\", \"Ratusha\", Subotna poshta\", \"Hazeta po-lvivsky\", \"Postup\" and others. Popular magazines include \"Lviv Today\", \"Chetver\", \"RIA\" and \"\u0407\". \"Lviv Today\" is a Ukrainian English-speaking magazine, whose content includes information about the business, advertisement and entertainment spheres in Lviv, and the country in general.\nThe Lviv oblast television company transmits on channel 12. There are three private television channels operating from Lviv: \"LUKS\", \"NTA\" and \"ZIK\".\nThere are 17 regional and all-Ukrainian radio stations operating in the city.\nA number of information agencies exist in the city such as \"ZIK\", \"Zaxid.net\", \"\u0413\u0430\u043b-info\", \"\u041b\u044c\u0432\u0456\u0432\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u043f\u043e\u0440\u0442\u0430\u043b\" and others.\nLviv is home to one of the oldest Polish-language newspapers which was first published in 1811 and still exists in a bi-weekly form.\nAmong other publications were such titles as\nStarting in the 20th century a new movement started with authors from Central Europe. In Lviv a small neo-romantic group of authors formed around the lyricist Schmuel Jankev Imber. Small print offices produced collections of modern poems and short stories and through emigration a large networkwas established. A second smaller group in the 1930s tried to create a connection between avantgarde art and Yiddish culture. Members of this group were Debora Vogel, Rachel Auerbach and Rachel Korn. The Holocaust destroyed this movement with Debora Vogel amongst a number of other Yiddish authors murdered by the Germans in the 1940s.\nParks.\nLviv's architectural face is complemented and enriched with a number of parks, and public gardens. There are over 20 basic recreation park zones, three botanical gardens and 16 natural monuments. They offer a splendid chance to escape from city life or simply sit for a while among the trees, at a nice fountain or a lake. Each park has its individual character which reflects through various monuments and their individual history.\nSport.\nLviv was an important centre for sport in Central Europe and is regarded as the birthplace of Polish football. Lviv is the Polish birthplace of other sports. In January 1905 the first Polish ice-hockey match took place there and two years later the first ski-jumping competition was organised in nearby S\u0142awsko. In the same year, the first Polish basketball games were organised in Lviv's gymnasiums. In autumn 1887 a gymnasium by Lychakiv Street (pol. \"ulica \u0141yczakowska\") held the first Polish track and field competition with such sports as the long jump and high jump. Lviv's athlete W\u0142adys\u0142aw Ponurski represented Austria in the 1912 Olympic Games in Stockholm. On 9 July 1922 the first official rugby game in Poland took place at the stadium of Pogo\u0144 Lw\u00f3w in which the rugby team of Orze\u0142 Bia\u0142y Lw\u00f3w divided itself into two teams \u2013 \"The Reds\" and \"The Blacks\". The referee of this game was a Frenchman by the name of Robineau.\nAssociation football.\nThe first known official goal in a Polish football match was scored at Pogo\u0144 Lw\u00f3w on 14 July 1894 during the Lw\u00f3w-Krak\u00f3w game. The goal was scored by W\u0142odzimierz Chomicki who represented the team of Lviv. In 1904 Kazimierz Hemerling from Lviv published the first translation of the rules of football into Polish and another native of Lviv, Stanis\u0142aw Polakiewicz, became the first officially recognised Polish referee in 1911 the year in which the first Polish Football Federation was founded in Lviv.\nThe first Polish professional football club, Czarni Lw\u00f3w opened here in 1903 and the first stadium, which belonged to Pogo\u0144, in 1913. Another club, Pogo\u0144 Lw\u00f3w, was four times football champion of Poland (1922, 1923, 1925 and 1926). In the late 1920s, as many as four teams from the city played in the Polish Football League (Pogo\u0144, Czarni, Hasmonea and Lechia). Hasmonea was the first Jewish football club in Poland. Several notable figures of Polish football came from the city including Kazimierz G\u00f3rski, Ryszard Koncewicz, Micha\u0142 Matyas and Wac\u0142aw Kuchar.\nIn the period 1900\u20131911 opened the most famous football clubs in Lviv. Professor Ivan Bobersky has based in the Academic grammar school the first Ukrainian sports circle where schoolboys were engaged in track and field, football, boxing, hockey, skiing, tourism and sledge sports in 1906. He organised the \"Ukrainian Sports circle\" in 1908. Much its pupils in due course in 1911 formed a sports society with the loud name \"Ukraine\" \u2013 the first Ukrainian football club in Lviv.\nLviv now has several major professional football clubs and some smaller clubs. Two teams from the city, FC Rukh Lviv and FC Lviv, currently play in the Ukrainian Premier League, the top level of football in the country. FC Karpaty Lviv, founded in 1963, has historically been the largest club in the city.\nOther sports.\nLviv's chess school enjoys a good reputation; such notable grandmasters as Vasyl Ivanchuk, Leonid Stein, Alexander Beliavsky, Andrei Volokitin used to live in Lviv. Grandmaster Anna Muzychuk lives in Lviv.\nLviv Speedway is a motorcycle speedway team based at the SKA Stadium.\nLviv made a bid to host the 2022 Winter Olympics, which was withdrawn in June 2014.\nTourism.\n Due to a comprehensive cultural programme and tourism infrastructure (having more than 8,000 hotel rooms, over 1,300 cafes and restaurants, free Wi-Fi zones in the city centre, and connection with multiple countries of the world), Lviv is considered one of Ukraine's major tourist destinations. The city had a 40% increase in tourist visits in the early 2010s; the highest rate in Europe.\nThe most popular tourist attractions include the Old Town, and the Market Square () which is an square in the city centre where the City Hall is situated, as well as the Black House (), Armenian Cathedral, the complex of the Dormition Church which is the main Orthodox church in the city; the St. Peter and Paul Church of the Jesuit Order (one of the largest churches in Lviv); along with the Korniakt Palace, now part of the Lviv History Museum.\nOther prominent sites include the Latin Cathedral of the Assumption of Mary; St. George's Cathedral of the Greek-Catholic Church; the Dominican Church of Corpus Christi; Chapel of the Boim family; the Lviv High Castle () on a hill overlooking the centre of the city; the Union of Lublin Mound; the Lychakivskiy Cemetery where the notable people were buried; and the Svobody Prospekt which is Lviv's central street. Other popular places include Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet, the Potocki Palace, and the Bernardine Church.\nPopular culture.\nThe native residents of the city are jokingly known as the Lvivian batiary (someone who's mischievous). Lvivians are also well known for their way of speaking that was greatly influenced by the Lvivian gwara (talk).\n\"Weso\u0142a Lwowska Fala\" (Polish for \"Lw\u00f3w's Merry Wave\") was a weekly radio program of the Polish Radio Lwow with \"Szczepko\" and \"Tonko\", later starring in \"B\u0119dzie lepiej\" and \"The Vagabonds\". \"The Shoes of the Fisherman\", both Morris L. West's novel and its 1968 film adaptation, had the titular pope as having been its former archbishop.\nLviv has established a number of city feasts, such as coffee and chocolate feasts, cheese &amp; wine holiday, the feast of pampukh, the Day of Batyar, Annual Bread Day and others. Over 50 festivals happen in Lviv, such as Leopolis Jazz Fest, an international jazz festival; the Leopolis Grand Prix, an international festival of vintage cars; international festival of academic music Virtuosi; Stare Misto Rock Fest; medieval festival Lviv Legend; international Etnovyr folklore festival, initiated by UNESCO; international festival of visual art Wiz-Art; international theatrical festival Golden Lion; Lviv Lumines Fluorescent Art Festival; Festival of Contemporary Dramaturgy; international contemporary music festival Contrasts; Lviv international literary festival, Krayina Mriy; gastronomic festival Lviv on a Plate; organ music festival Diapason; international independent film festival KinoLev; international festival LvivKlezFest; and international media festival MediaDepo.\nLviv honors the memory of Stepan Bandera and Roman Shukhevych. The Lviv regional council approved an appeal to the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine on March 16, 2021, requesting that the largest stadium here be renamed after these two men. Bandera led the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, which fought alongside Nazi Germany during WWII, killing thousands of Jews and Poles. In 1940, Shukhevych commanded a military unit of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) that actively collaborated with the Nazis.\nPublic transport.\nHistorically, the first horse-drawn tramway lines in Lviv were inaugurated on 5 May 1880. An electric tram was introduced on 31 May 1894. The last horse-drawn line was transferred to electric traction in 1908. In 1922 the tramways were switched to driving on the right-hand side. After the annexation of the city by the Soviet Union, several lines were closed but most of the infrastructure was preserved. The tracks are narrow-gauge, unusual for the Soviet Union, but explained by the fact that the system was built while the city was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and needed to run in narrow medieval streets in the centre of town.\nThe Lviv tramway system now runs about 220 cars on of track. Multiple tracks were reconstructed around 2006. The price in February 2019 of a tram/trolleybus ticket was 5 UAH (the reduced fare ticket was 2.5 UAH, e.g. for students). The ticket may be purchased from the driver.\nAfter World War II the city grew rapidly due to evacuees returning from Russia, and the Soviet Government's vigorous development of heavy industry. This included the transfer of entire factories from the Urals and others to the newly \"liberated\" territories of the USSR. The city centre tramway lines were replaced with trolleybuses on 27 November 1952. New lines were opened to the blocks of flats at the city outskirts.\nThe network now runs about 100 trolleybuses \u2013 mostly of the 1980s Skoda 14Tr and . From 2006 to 2008 11 modern low-floor trolleybuses (LAZ E183) built by the Lviv Bus Factory were purchased. The public bus network is represented by mini-buses (so-called \"marshrutka\") and large buses mainly LAZ and MAN. On 1 January 2013, the city had 52 public bus routes.\nRailways.\nModern Lviv remains a hub on which nine railways converge providing local and international services. Lviv railway is one of the oldest in Ukraine. The first train arrived in Lviv on 4 November 1861. The main Lviv Railway Station, designed by W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sad\u0142owski, was built in 1904 and was considered one of the best in Europe from both the architectural and technical aspects.\nIn the inter-war period, Lviv (known then as Lw\u00f3w) was one of the most important hubs of the Polish State Railways. The Lw\u00f3w junction consisted of four stations in mid-1939 \u2013 main station \"Lw\u00f3w G\u0142\u00f3wny\" (now ), Lw\u00f3w Klepar\u00f3w (now \"Lviv Klepariv\"), \"Lw\u00f3w \u0141yczak\u00f3w\" (now \"Lviv Lychakiv\"), and \"Lw\u00f3w Podzamcze\" (now \"Lviv Pidzamche\"). In August 1939 just before World War II, 73 trains departed daily from the Main Station including 56 local and 17 fast trains. Lw\u00f3w was directly connected with all major centres of the Second Polish Republic as well as such cities as Berlin, Bucharest, and Budapest.\nCurrently, several trains cross the nearby Polish\u2013Ukrainian border (mostly via Przemy\u015bl in Poland). There are good connections to Slovakia (Ko\u0161ice) and Hungary (Budapest). A number of routes have overnight trains with sleeping compartments. Lviv railway is often called the main gateway from Ukraine to Europe although buses are often a cheaper and more convenient way of entering the \"Schengen\" countries.\nLviv used to have a Railbus, which has since been replaced with other means of public transport. It was a motor-rail car that ran from the largest district of Lviv to one of the largest industrial zones going through the central railway station. It made seven trips a day and was meant to provide a faster and more comfortable connection between the remote urban districts. The price in February 2010 of a one-way single ride in the railbus was 1.50 UAH. On 15 June 2010, the route was cancelled as unprofitable.\nAir transport.\nThe beginnings of aviation in Lviv reach back to 1884 when the Aeronautic Society was opened there. The society issued its own magazine \"Astronauta\" but soon ceased to exist. In 1909 on the initiative of Edmund Libanski the Awiata Society was founded. Among its members there was a group of professors and students of the Lviv Polytechnic, including Stefan Drzewiecki and Zygmunt Sochacki. Awiata was the oldest Polish organization of this kind and it concentrated its activities mainly on exhibitions such as the \"First Aviation Exhibition\" which took place in 1910 and featured models of aircraft built by Lviv students.\nIn 1913\u20131914 brothers Tadeusz and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Floria\u0144scy built a two-seater aeroplane. When World War I broke out Austrian authorities confiscated it but did not manage to evacuate the plane in time and it was seized by the Russians who used the plane for intelligence purposes. The Floria\u0144ski brothers' plane was the first Polish-made aircraft. On 5 November 1918, a crew consisting of Stefan Bastyr and Janusz de Beaurain carried out the first-ever flight under the Polish flag taking off from Lviv's Lewand\u00f3wka (now ) airport. In the interbellum period Lw\u00f3w was a major centre of gliding with a notable \"Gliding School\" in Bezmiechowa which opened in 1932. In the same year the Institute of Gliding Technology was opened in Lw\u00f3w and was the second such institute in the world. In 1938 the \"First Polish Aircraft Exhibition\" took place in the city.\nThe interwar Lw\u00f3w was also a major centre of the Polish Air Force with the Sixth Air Regiment located there. The Regiment was based at the Lw\u00f3w airport opened in 1924 in the suburb of Skni\u0142\u00f3w (today ). The airport is located from the city centre. In 2012, after renovation, Lviv Airport got a new official name Lviv Danylo Halytskyi International Airport (LWO). A new terminal and other improvements worth under a $200 million was done in preparation for the 2012 UEFA European Football Championship. The connection from Airport to the city centre is maintained by bus No. 48 and No. 9.\nBicycle lanes.\nCycling is a new but growing mode of transport in Lviv. In 2011 the City of Lviv ratified an ambitious 9-year program for the set-up of cycling infrastructure \u2013 until the year 2019 an overall length of cycle lanes and tracks shall be realized. A working group formally organised within the Lviv City Council, bringing together representatives of the city administration, members of planning and design institutes, local NGOs and other stakeholders. Events like the All-Ukrainian Bikeday or the European Mobility Week show the popularity of cycling among Lviv's citizens.\nBy September 2011, of new cycling infrastructure had been built. It can be expected that until the end of 2011 will be ready for use. The cycling advisor in Lviv \u2013 the first such position in Ukraine \u2013 is supervising and pushing forward the execution of the cycling plan and coordinates with various people in the city. The development of cycling in Ukraine is currently hampered by outdated planning norms and the fact, that most planners didn't yet plan and experience cycling infrastructure. The update of national legislation and training for planners is therefore necessary.\nIn 2015, the first stations have been set up for a new bike-sharing system Nextbike \u2013 the first of its kind in Ukraine. New bike lanes are also under construction, making Lviv the most bike-friendly city in the country. The Lviv City Council plans to build an entire cycling infrastructure by 2020, with cycle lanes () and street bike hire services.\nEducation.\nLviv is an important education centre in Ukraine. The city contains a total of 12 universities, 8 academies and a number of smaller schools of higher education. In addition, within Lviv, there is a total of eight institutes of the National Academy of Science of Ukraine and more than forty research institutes. These research institutes include the Centre of Institute for Space Research; the Institute for Condensed Matter Physics; the Institute of Cell Biology; the National Institute of Strategic Studies; the Institute of Neuro-mathematical Simulation in Power Engineering; and the Institute of Ecology of the Carpathians.\nIn Soviet times, the city of Lviv was the location where the software for the Lunokhod programme was developed. The technology for the Venera series probes and the first orbital shuttle Buran were also developed in Lviv.\nA considerable scientific potential is concentrated in the city: by the number of doctors of sciences, candidates of sciences, scientific organisations Lviv is the fourth city in Ukraine. Lviv is also known for ancient academic traditions, founded by the Assumption Brotherhood School and the Jesuit Collegium. Over 100,000 students annually study in more than 50 higher educational establishments.\nEducational level of residents:\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLviv is twinned with:\nPartner cities.\nOn September 7, 2023, the mayors of Lviv and Kobe signed a cooperation agreement. Frankfurt also signed a cooperation agreement with Lviv on May 13, 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49969", "revid": "14371489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49969", "title": "Leopolis", "text": "Leopolis (from Greek roots meaning \"lion city\") may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "49970", "revid": "40513320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49970", "title": "L'viv", "text": ""}
{"id": "49971", "revid": "40982759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49971", "title": "Lvov", "text": ""}
{"id": "49972", "revid": "50543982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49972", "title": "Rosicrucianism", "text": "17th-century European spiritual movement\nRosicrucianism () is a spiritual and cultural movement influenced by Esoteric Christianity and Hermeticism that arose in early modern Europe in the early 17th century after the publication of several texts announcing to the world a new esoteric order. Rosicrucianism is symbolized by the Rose Cross or Rosy Cross. There have been several Rosicrucian (or Rosicrucian-inspired) organizations since the initial movement was founded, including the Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross (1750s\u20131790s), the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (1865\u2013present), and the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (1887\u20131903).\nHistory.\nBetween 1610 and 1615, two anonymous manifestos appeared in early modern Germany and soon after were published throughout Europe. The \"Fama Fraternitatis Rosae Crucis\" (The Fame of the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross) was circulated in manuscript among German occultists from around 1610, and published at Cassel in 1614. Johannes Valentinus Andreae has been considered the possible author of the work. A literal reading narrates the travels and education of \"Father Brother C.R.C.\" and his founding of a secret brotherhood of similarly prepared men. Names, numbers, and other details have Qabalistic allusions, in which the cognoscenti of that era were well-versed. The \"Confessio Fraternitatis\" (The Confession of the Brotherhood of RC), published in Frankfurt in 1615, responded to confusions and criticisms and elaborated the matter further. Many were attracted to the promise of a \"universal reformation of mankind\" through a science \"built on esoteric truths of the ancient past\", which, \"concealed from the average man, provide insight into nature, the physical universe, and the spiritual realm\", which they say had been kept secret for decades until the intellectual climate was ready to receive it. The manifestos elaborate these matters extensively but cryptically in terms of Qabalah, Hermeticism, alchemy, and Christian mysticism, subjects whose methods, symbolism, and allusions were ardently studied by many intellectuals of the period.\nIn 1616 a third anonymous volume was published, the \"Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz\". In his posthumously published autobiography, Johann Valentine Andreae acknowledged its origin in a romantic fantasy that he wrote before he was 16 years old (1602), among other likewise forgotten juvenilia, and which he elaborated in response to the \"Fame\" and \"Confession\", and said of it that \"the Chymical Wedding, with its fertile brood of monsters, a \"ludibrium\" which surprisingly some esteem and explicate with subtle investigations, is plainly futile and betrays the vanity of the curious\" (\"Nuptiae Chymicae, cum monstrorum foecundo foetu, ludibriu, quod mireris a nonullis aestimatum et subtili indagine explicatum, plane futile et quod inanitatem curiosorum prodat\"). He called Rosicrucianism a \"ludibrium\" (a lampoon or parody) during his lifetime, in writings advocating social and religious reform through a sectarian Christian organization of his design. Some scholars of esotericism suggest that Andreae disowned Rosicrucianism to shield his clerical career from the wrath of the religious and political institutions of the day. \"[I]t is clear from his \u2018\"Turris Babel\"\u2019, \u2018\"Mythologia Christiana\"\u2019, and other works, that he considered the manifestos a reprehensible hoax.\" This augmented controversies as to whether they were a hoax, whether the \"Order of the Rosy Cross\" existed as described in the manifestos, or whether the whole thing was a metaphor disguising a movement that really existed, but in a different form.\nThe promise of a spiritual transformation at a time of great turmoil, the manifestos influenced many figures to seek esoteric knowledge. Seventeenth-century occult philosophers such as Michael Maier, Robert Fludd, and Thomas Vaughan interested themselves in the Rosicrucian worldview. In his work \"Silentium Post Clamores\" (1617), Michael Maier described Rosicrucianism as having arisen from a \"primordial tradition\", saying \"Our origins are Egyptian, Brahminic, derived from the mysteries of Eleusis and Samothrace, the Magi of Persia, the Pythagoreans, and the Arabs\".\nIn later centuries, many esoteric societies claimed to derive from the original Rosicrucians. The most influential of these societies was the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, which derived from Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia and counted many prominent figures among its members. The largest is the Rosicrucian Order, AMORC, a multinational organization based in Rosicrucian Park, San Jose, California, US. Paul Foster Case, founder of the Builders of the Adytum as a successor to the Golden Dawn, published \"The true and invisible Rosicrucian Order\", elaborating the Qabalistic basis and interpretation of the \"Fame\" and \"Confession\".\nRosicrucian manifestos.\nOrigins.\nBetween 1614 and 1617, three anonymous manifestos were published, first in Germany and soon after throughout Europe: the \"Fama Fraternitatis RC\" (\"The Fame of the Brotherhood of RC\", 1614), the \"Confessio Fraternitatis\" (\"The Confession of the Brotherhood of RC\", 1615), and the \"Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosicross anno 1459\" (1616).\nThe \"Fama Fraternitatis\" presents the legend of a German doctor and mystic philosopher referred to as \"Father Brother C.R.C.\" (later identified in a third manifesto as Christian Rosenkreuz, or \"Rose-cross\"). The year 1378 is presented as being the birth year of \"our Christian Father,\" and it is stated that he lived 106 years. It is said that he studied in the Middle East under various masters \u2013 a story implying a possible link to Islamic mysticism or Sufism, which influenced a number of Western esoteric traditions.\nDuring the lifetime of C.R.C., the order was said to comprise no more than eight members, each a doctor and \"all bachelors of vowed virginity.\" Each member undertook an oath to heal the sick without accepting payment, to maintain a secret fellowship, and to find a replacement for himself before he died. Three such generations had supposedly passed between c. 1500 and c. 1600: a time when scientific, philosophical, and religious freedom had grown so that the public might benefit from the Rosicrucians' knowledge, so that they were now seeking good men.\nReception.\nThe manifestos were, and continue to be, not taken literally by many but rather regarded either as hoaxes or as allegorical statements. They state: \"We speak unto you by parables, but would willingly bring you to the right, simple, easy, and ingenuous exposition, understanding, declaration, and knowledge of all secrets.\"\nThe first Rosicrucian manifesto was influenced by the work of the respected hermetic philosopher Heinrich Khunrath, of Hamburg, author of the \"Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Aeternae\" (1609), who was in turn influenced by John Dee, author of the \"Monas Hieroglyphica\" (1564). The invitation to the royal wedding in the \"Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz\" opens with Dee's philosophical key, the \"Monas Hieroglyphica\" symbol. The writer also claimed the brotherhood possessed a book that resembled the works of Paracelsus. Adam Haslmayr, a friend of Karl Widemann, wrote him a letter about Rosicrucian people who revealed the Theophrastiam 24 December 1611.\nIn his autobiography, Johann Valentin Andreae (1586\u20131654) claimed that the anonymously published \"Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz\" was one of his works, and he subsequently described it as a \"ludibrium\". In his later works, he makes alchemy an object of ridicule and places it along with music, art, theater, and astrology in the category of less serious sciences. According to some sources, his role in the origin of the Rosicrucian legend is controversial. But according to others, it was generally accepted.\nRosicrucian Enlightenment.\nIn the early 17th century, the manifestos caused excitement throughout Europe by declaring the existence of a secret brotherhood of alchemists and sages who were preparing to transform the arts and sciences, and religious, political, and intellectual landscapes of Europe. Wars of politics and religion ravaged the continent. The works were re-issued several times, followed by numerous pamphlets, favorable or otherwise. Between 1614 and 1620, about 400 manuscripts and books were published which discussed the Rosicrucian documents.\nThe peak of the \"Rosicrucianism furore\" was reached when two mysterious posters appeared on the walls of Paris in 1622 within a few days of each other. The first said \"We, the Deputies of the Higher College of the Rose-Croix, do make our stay, visibly and invisibly, in this city (...)\", and the second ended with the words \"The thoughts attached to the real desire of the seeker will lead us to him and him to us.\"\nThe legendary first manifesto, \"Fama Fraternitatis Rosae Crucis\" (1614), inspired the works of Michael Maier (1568\u20131622) of Germany; Robert Fludd (1574\u20131637) and Elias Ashmole (1617\u20131692) of England; Teophilus Schweighardt Constantiens, Gotthardus Arthusius, Julius Sperber, Henricus Madathanus, Gabriel Naud\u00e9, Thomas Vaughan and others. Rosicrucianism was associated with Protestantism (Lutheranism in particular).\nIn Elias Ashmole's \"Theatrum Chimicum britannicum\" (1650) he defends the Rosicrucians. Some later works impacting Rosicrucianism were the \"Opus magocabalisticum et theosophicum\" by George von Welling (1719)\u00a0\u2013 of alchemical and paracelsian inspiration\u00a0\u2013 and the \"Aureum Vellus oder Goldenes Vliess\" by Hermann Fictuld in 1749.\nMichael Maier was appointed \"Pfalzgraf\" (Count Palatine) by Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor, King of Hungary and King of Bohemia. He also was one of the most prominent defenders of the Rosicrucians, clearly transmitting details about the \"Brothers of the Rose Cross\" in his writings. Maier made the firm statement that the Brothers of R.C. existed to advance inspired arts and sciences, including alchemy. Researchers of Maier's writings point out that he never claimed to have produced gold, nor did Heinrich Khunrath or any of the other \"Rosicrucianists\". Their writings point toward a symbolic and spiritual alchemy, rather than an operative one. In a combination of direct and veiled styles, these writings conveyed the nine stages of the involutive-evolutive transmutation of the \"threefold body\" of the human being, the \"threefold soul\" and the \"threefold spirit\", among other esoteric knowledge related to the \"Path of Initiation\".\nIn his 1618 pamphlet, \"Pia et Utilissima Admonitio de Fratribus Rosae Crucis\", Henrichus Neuhusius wrote that the Rosicrucians departed for the east due to European instability caused by the start of the Thirty Years' War. In 1710, Sigmund Richter, founder of the secret society of the Golden and Rosy Cross, also suggested the Rosicrucians had migrated eastward. In the first half of the 20th century, Ren\u00e9 Gu\u00e9non, a researcher of the occult, presented this same idea in some of his works. Arthur Edward Waite, an eminent author of the 19th century, presented arguments contradicting this idea. It was in this fertile field of discourse that many Rosicrucian societies arose. They were based on the occult, inspired by the mystery of this \"College of Invisibles\".\nSome modern scholars, for example Adam McLean and Giordano Berti, assume that among the first followers of the Rose Cross there was also the German theologian Daniel Cramer, who in 1617 published a treatise entitled \"Societas Jesus et Rosae Crucis Vera\" (The True Society of Jesus and the Rosy Cross), containing 40 emblematic figures accompanied by biblical quotations.\nThe literary works of the 16th and 17th centuries were full of enigmatic passages containing references to the Rose Cross, as in the following (somewhat modernized):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;For what we do presage is not in grosse,\nFor we are brethren of the Rosie Crosse;\nWe have the Mason Word and second sight,\nThings for to come we can foretell aright.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe idea of such an order, exemplified by the network of astronomers, professors, mathematicians, and natural philosophers in 16th-century Europe promoted by such men as Johannes Kepler, Georg Joachim Rheticus, John Dee and Tycho Brahe, gave rise to the Invisible College. This was the precursor to the Royal Society founded in 1660. It was constituted by a group of scientists who began to hold regular meetings to share and develop knowledge acquired by experimental investigation. Among these were Robert Boyle, who wrote: \"the cornerstones of the Invisible (or as they term themselves the Philosophical) College, do now and then honour me with their company...\";\nJohn Wilkins and John Wallis, who described those meetings in the following terms: \"About the year 1645, while I lived in London (at a time when, by our civil wars, academical studies were much interrupted in both our Universities), ... I had the opportunity of being acquainted with divers worthy persons, inquisitive of natural philosophy, and other parts of human learning; and particularly of what hath been called the New Philosophy or Experimental Philosophy. We did by agreements, divers of us, meet weekly in London on a certain day and hour, under a certain penalty, and a weekly contribution for the charge of experiments, with certain rules agreed amongst us, to treat and discourse of such affairs...\"\nLegacy in esoteric orders.\nRose-Cross Degrees in Freemasonry.\nAccording to Jean Pierre Bayard, two Rosicrucian-inspired Masonic rites emerged toward the end of 18th century, the Rectified Scottish Rite, widespread in Central Europe where there was a strong presence of the \"Golden and Rosy Cross\", and the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, first practiced in France, in which the 18th degree is called \"Knight of the Rose Croix\".\nThe change from \"operative\" to \"speculative\" Masonry occurred between the end of the 16th and the beginning of the 18th century. Two of the earliest speculative Masons for whom a record of initiation exists were Sir Robert Moray and Elias Ashmole. Robert Vanloo states that earlier 17th century Rosicrucianism had a considerable influence on Anglo-Saxon Masonry. Hans Schick sees in the works of Comenius (1592\u20131670) the ideal of the newly born English Masonry before the foundation of the Grand Lodge in 1717. Comenius was in England during 1641.\nThe Gold und Rosenkreuzer (Golden and Rosy Cross) was founded by the alchemist Samuel Richter who in 1710 published \"Die warhhaffte und vollkommene Bereitung des Philosophischen Steins der Br\u00fcderschaft aus dem Orden des G\u00fclden-und Rosen-Creutzes\" (\"The True and Complete Preparation of the Philosopher's Stone by the Brotherhood from the Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross\") in Breslau under the pseudonym Sincerus Renatus in Prague in the early 18th century as a hierarchical secret society composed of internal circles, recognition signs and alchemy treatises. Under the leadership of Hermann Fictuld the group reformed itself extensively in 1767 and again in 1777 because of political pressure. Its members claimed that the leaders of the Rosicrucian Order had invented Freemasonry and only they knew the secret meaning of Masonic symbols. The Rosicrucian Order had been founded by Egyptian \"Ormusse\" or \"Licht-Weise\" who had emigrated to Scotland with the name \"Builders from the East\". In 1785 and 1788 the Golden and Rosy Cross group published the \"Geheime Figuren\" or \"The Secret Symbols of the 16th and 17th century Rosicrucians\".\nLed by Johann Christoph von W\u00f6llner and General Johann Rudolf von Bischoffwerder, the Masonic lodge (later: \"Grand Lodge\") \"Zu den drei Weltkugeln\" (\"The Three Globes\") was infiltrated and came under the influence of the Golden and Rosy Cross. Many Freemasons became Rosicrucianists and Rosicrucianism was established in many lodges. In 1782 at the Convent of Wilhelmsbad the \"Alte schottische Loge Friedrich zum goldenen L\u00f6wen\" (\"Old Scottish Lodge Friedrich at the Golden Lion\") in Berlin strongly requested Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg and all other Freemasons to submit to the Golden and Rosy Cross, without success.\nAfter 1782, this highly secretive society added Egyptian, Greek, and Druidic mysteries to its alchemy system. A comparative study of what is known about the Gold and Rosenkreuzer appears to reveal, on the one hand, that it has influenced the creation of some modern initiatory groups and, on the other hand, that the Nazis (see \"The Occult Roots of Nazism\") may have been inspired by this German group.\nAccording to the writings of the Masonic historian E.J. Marconis de Negre, who together with his father Gabriel M. Marconis is held to be the founder of the \"Rite of Memphis-Misraim\" of Freemasonry, based on earlier conjectures (1784) by a Rosicrucian scholar Baron de Westerode and also promulgated by the 18th century secret society called the \"Golden and Rosy Cross\", the Rosicrucian Order was created in the year 46 when an Alexandrian Gnostic sage named Ormus and his six followers were converted by one of Jesus' disciples, Mark. Their symbol was said to be a red cross surmounted by a rose, thus the designation of Rosy Cross. From this conversion, Rosicrucianism was supposedly born, by purifying Egyptian mysteries with the new higher teachings of early Christianity.\nAnother notable figure for both egyptian freemasonry and rosicrucianism in Italy was Giustiniano Lebano who held high offices in the Memphis Misraim rite and was an influential figure in the later esoteric developments of the peninsula, including influencing Giuliano Kremmerz and the members of the UR Group.\nThe Neapolitan branch of the Memphis-Misraim rite, Grande Oriente Egizio, instructed Giuliano Kremmerz to create the Brotherhood of Myriam with the aim of practising therapeutic magic for those affected by disease, including non-initiates.\nAccording to Maurice Magre (1877\u20131941) in his book \"Magicians, Seers, and Mystics\", Rosenkreutz was the last descendant of the Germelshausen, a German family from the 13th century. Their castle stood in the Thuringian Forest on the border of Hesse, and they embraced Albigensian doctrines. The whole family was put to death by Landgrave Conrad of Thuringia, except for the youngest son, who was then five years old. He was carried away secretly by a monk, an Albigensian adept from Languedoc, and placed in a monastery under the influence of the Albigenses, where he was educated and met the four Brothers later to be associated with him in the founding of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood. Magre's account supposedly derives from oral tradition.\nAround 1530, more than eighty years before the publication of the first manifesto, the association of cross and rose already existed in Portugal in the Convent of the Order of Christ, home of the Knights Templar, later renamed Order of Christ. Three \"bocetes\" were, and still are, on the \"ab\u00f3boda\" (vault) of the initiation room. The rose can clearly be seen at the center of the cross. At the same time, a minor writing by Paracelsus called \"Prognosticatio Eximii Doctoris Paracelsi\" (1530), containing 32 prophecies with allegorical pictures surrounded by enigmatic texts, makes reference to an image of a double cross over an open rose; this is one of the examples used to prove the \"Fraternity of the Rose Cross\" existed far earlier than 1614.\nModern groups.\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th centuries, various groups styled themselves Rosicrucian. The diverse groups who link themselves to a \"Rosicrucian Tradition\" can be divided into three categories: Esoteric Christian Rosicrucian groups, which profess Christ; Masonic Rosicrucian groups such as \"SRIA\", \"Societas Rosicruciana\"; and initiatory groups such as the Golden Dawn and the Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis (AMORC).\nEsoteric Christian Rosicrucian schools provide esoteric knowledge related to the inner teachings of Christianity.\nThe Rosicrucian Fellowship, 1909 at Mount Ecclesia (groundbreaking for first building: 1911). Teachings present the 'mysteries', in the form of esoteric knowledge, of which Christ spoke in Matthew 13:11 and Luke 8:10. The Fellowship seeks to prepare the individual through harmonious development of mind and heart in a spirit of unselfish service to mankind and an all-embracing altruism. According to it the Rosicrucian Order was founded in 1313 and is composed of twelve exalted Beings gathered around a thirteenth, Christian Rosenkreuz. These great adepts have already advanced far beyond the cycle of rebirth. Their mission is to prepare the 'whole wide world' for a new phase in religion, which includes awareness of the inner worlds and the subtle bodies, and to provide safe guidance in the gradual awakening of man's latent spiritual faculties during the next six centuries toward the coming Age of Aquarius.\nSeveral Russians of a mystical mind took advantage of the Edict of Toleration of religion in 1905 to form or resurrect what they considered the ancient forms of esoteric Orders. These were the new Rosicrucians. Their inspired mentors compiled volumes of mystic philosophy which they combined with their personal notions of what the ancient Orders were, and so formed groups. The three principal neo-Rosicrucian Orders of early Soviet Russia were Emesh Redivivus, the Orionist-Manicheans, and the Lux Astralis. Due to suppression by the Soviets they had disbanded by 1933.\nAccording to Masonic writers, the Order of the Rose Cross is expounded in a major Christian literary work that molded the subsequent spiritual beliefs of western civilization: \"The Divine Comedy\" (ca. 1308\u20131321) by Dante Alighieri.\nOther Christian-oriented Rosicrucian bodies include:\nFreemasonic Rosicrucian bodies providing preparation either through direct study and/or through the practice of a symbolic initiatory journey.\nInitiatory groups which follow a degree system of study and initiation include:\nRelated groups.\nMany of these groups generally speak of a linear descent from earlier branches of the ancient Rosicrucian Order in England, France, Egypt, or other countries. However, some groups speak of a spiritual affiliation with a true and invisible Rosicrucian Order. Note that there are other Rosicrucian groups not listed here. Some do not use the name \"Rosicrucian\" to name themselves. Some groups listed have been dissolved or are no longer operating.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n List of general fraternities \nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOld editions\nPublications\nEssays\nFictional literature\nConspiracy literature"}
{"id": "49973", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49973", "title": "Censorship under fascist regimes", "text": ""}
{"id": "49976", "revid": "47220715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49976", "title": "Chrysoberyl", "text": "Mineral or gemstone of beryllium aluminate\nThe mineral or gemstone chrysoberyl is an aluminate of beryllium with the formula BeAl2O4. The name chrysoberyl is derived from the Greek words \u03c7\u03c1\u03c5\u03c3\u03cc\u03c2 \"chrysos\" and \u03b2\u03ae\u03c1\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 \"beryllos\", meaning \"a gold-white spar\". Despite the similarity of their names, chrysoberyl and beryl are two completely different gemstones, although they both contain beryllium. Chrysoberyl is the third-hardest frequently encountered natural gemstone and lies at 8.5 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness, between corundum (9) and topaz (8).\nAn interesting feature of its crystals are the cyclic twins called \"trillings\". These twinned crystals have a hexagonal appearance, but are the result of a triplet of twins with each \"twin\" oriented at 120\u00b0 to its neighbors and taking up 120\u00b0 of the cyclic trilling. If only two of the three possible twin orientations are present, a V-shaped twin results.\nOrdinary chrysoberyl is yellowish-green and transparent to translucent. When the mineral exhibits good pale green to yellow color and is transparent, then it is used as a gemstone. The three main varieties of chrysoberyl are: ordinary yellow-to-green chrysoberyl, cat's eye or cymophane, and alexandrite. Yellow-green chrysoberyl was referred to as \"chrysolite\" during the Victorian and Edwardian eras, which caused confusion since that name has also been used for the mineral olivine (\"peridot\" as a gemstone); that name is no longer used in the gemological nomenclature.\nAlexandrite, a strongly pleochroic (trichroic) gem, will exhibit emerald green, red and orange-yellow colors depending on viewing direction in partially polarised light. However, its most distinctive property is that it also changes color in artificial (tungsten/halogen) light compared to daylight. The color change from red to green is due to strong absorption of light in a narrow yellow portion of the spectrum, while allowing large bands of more blue-green and red wavelengths to be transmitted. Which of these prevails to give the perceived hue depends on the spectral balance of the illumination. Fine-quality alexandrite has a green to bluish-green color in daylight (relatively blue illumination of high color temperature), changing to a red to purplish-red color in incandescent light (relatively yellow illumination). However, fine-color material is extremely rare. Less-desirable stones may have daylight colors of yellowish-green and incandescent colors of brownish red.\nCymophane is popularly known as \"cat's eye\". This variety exhibits pleasing chatoyancy or opalescence that reminds one of the eye of a cat. When cut to produce a cabochon, the mineral forms a light-green specimen with a silky band of light extending across the surface of the stone.\nOccurrence.\nChrysoberyl forms as a result of pegmatitic processes. Melting in the Earth's crust produces relatively low-density molten magma which can rise upwards towards the surface. As the main magma body cools, water originally present in low concentrations became more concentrated in the molten rock because it could not be incorporated into the crystallization of solid minerals. The remnant magma thus becomes richer in water, and also in rare elements that similarly do not fit in the crystal structures of major rock-forming minerals. The water extends the temperature range downwards before the magma becomes completely solid, allowing concentration of rare elements to proceed so far that they produce their own distinctive minerals. The resulting rock is igneous in appearance but formed at a low temperature from a water-rich melt, with large crystals of the common minerals such as quartz and feldspar, but also with elevated concentrations of rare elements such as beryllium, lithium, or niobium, often forming their own minerals; this is called a pegmatite. The high water content of the magma made it possible for the crystals to grow quickly, so pegmatite crystals are often quite large, which increases the likelihood of gem specimens forming.\nChrysoberyl can also grow in the country rocks near to pegmatites, when Be- and Al-rich fluids from the pegmatite react with surrounding minerals. Hence, it can be found in mica schists and in contact with metamorphic deposits of dolomitic marble. Because it is a hard, dense mineral that is resistant to chemical alteration, it can be weathered out of rocks and deposited in river sands and gravels in alluvial deposits with other gem minerals such as diamond, corundum, topaz, spinel, garnet, and tourmaline. When found in such placers, it will have rounded edges instead of sharp, wedge-shape forms. Much of the chrysoberyl mined in Brazil and Sri Lanka is recovered from placers, as the host rocks have been intensely weathered and eroded.\nIf the pegmatite fluid is rich in beryllium, crystals of beryl or chrysoberyl could form. Beryl has a high ratio of beryllium to aluminium, while the opposite is true for chrysoberyl. Both are stable with the common mineral quartz. For alexandrite to form, some chromium would also have had to be present. However, beryllium and chromium do not tend to occur in the same types of rock. Chromium is most common in mafic and ultramafic rocks in which beryllium is extremely rare. Beryllium becomes concentrated in felsic pegmatites in which chromium is almost absent. Therefore, the only situation where an alexandrite can grow is when Be-rich pegmatitic fluids react with Cr-rich country rock. This unusual requirement explains the rarity of this chrysoberyl variety.\nAlexandrite.\nThe alexandrite variety displays a color change dependent upon the nature of ambient lighting. Alexandrite results from small scale replacement of aluminium by chromium ions in the crystal structure, which causes intense absorption of light over a narrow range of wavelengths in the yellow region (520\u2013620\u00a0nm) of the visible light spectrum. Because human vision is most sensitive to green light and least sensitive to red light, alexandrite appears greenish in daylight where the full spectrum of visible light is present, and reddish in incandescent light which emits less green and blue light. This color change is independent of any change of hue with viewing direction through the crystal that would arise from pleochroism.\nAlexandrite from the Ural Mountains in Russia can be green by daylight and red by incandescent light. Other varieties of alexandrite may be yellowish or pink in daylight and a columbine or raspberry red by incandescent light.\nStones that show a dramatic color change and strong colors (e.g., red-to-green) are rare and sought-after, but stones that show less distinct colors (e.g. yellowish green changing to brownish yellow) may also be considered \"alexandrite\" by gem labs such as the Gemological Institute of America.\nAccording to a popular but controversial story, alexandrite was discovered by the Finnish mineralogist Nils Gustaf Nordenski\u00f6ld (1792\u20131866), and named alexandrite in honor of the future Emperor of All Russia Alexander II Romanov. Nordenski\u00f6ld's initial discovery occurred as a result of an examination of a newly found mineral sample he had received from Perovskii, which he identified as emerald at first. The first emerald mine had been opened in 1831. However, recent research suggests that the stone was discovered by Yakov Kokovin.\nAlexandrite and larger were traditionally thought to be found only in the Ural Mountains, but have since been found in larger sizes in Brazil. Other deposits are located in India (Andhra Pradesh), Madagascar, Tanzania and Sri Lanka. Alexandrite in sizes over three carats are very rare. Today, several labs can produce synthetic lab-grown stones with the same chemical and physical properties as natural alexandrite. Several methods can produce flux-grown alexandrite, Czochralski (or pulled) alexandrite, and hydrothermally-produced alexandrite. Flux-grown gems are fairly difficult to distinguish from natural alexandrite as they contain inclusions that seem natural. Czochralski or pulled alexandrite is easier to identify because it is very clean and contains curved striations visible under magnification. Although the color change in pulled stones can be from blue to red, the color change does not truly resemble that of natural alexandrite from any deposit. Hydrothermal lab-grown alexandrite has identical physical and chemical properties to real alexandrite.\nSome gemstones falsely described as lab-grown synthetic alexandrite are actually corundum laced with trace elements (e.g., vanadium) or color-change spinel and are not actually chrysoberyl. As a result, they would be more accurately described as \"simulated alexandrite\" rather than \"synthetic\". This alexandrite-like sapphire material has been around for almost 100\u00a0years and shows a characteristic purple-mauve colour change, which does not really look like alexandrite because there is never any green.\nAlexandrite is also known as one of three official birthstones for the month of June.\nCymophane.\nTranslucent yellowish chatoyant chrysoberyl is called cymophane or cat's eye. Cymophane has its derivation also from the Greek words meaning 'wave' and 'appearance', in reference to the haziness that visually distorts what would normally be viewed as a well defined surface of a cabochon. This effect may be combined with a cat eye effect. In this variety, microscopic tubelike cavities or needle-like inclusions of rutile occur in an orientation parallel to the c-axis, producing a chatoyant effect visible as a single ray of light passing across the crystal. This effect is best seen in gemstones cut in cabochon forms perpendicular to the c-axis. The color in yellow chrysoberyl is due to Fe3+ impurities.\nAlthough other minerals such as tourmaline, scapolite, corundum, spinel and quartz can form \"cat's eye\" stones similar in appearance to cymophane, the jewelry industry designates these stones as \"quartz cat's eyes\", or \"ruby cat's eyes\" and only chrysoberyl can be referred to as \"cat's eye\" with no other designation.\nGems lacking the silky inclusions required to produce the cat's eye effect are usually faceted. An alexandrite cat's eye is a chrysoberyl cat's eye that changes color. \"Milk and honey\" is a term commonly used to describe the color of the best cat's eyes. The effect refers to the sharp milky ray of white light normally crossing the cabochon as a center line along its length and overlying the honey-colored background. The honey color is considered to be top-grade by many gemologists but the lemon yellow colors are also popular and attractive. Cat's eye material is found as a small percentage of the overall chrysoberyl production wherever chrysoberyl is found.\nCat's eye became significantly more popular by the end of the 19th century when the Duke of Connaught gave a ring with a cat's eye as an engagement token; this was sufficient to make the stone more popular and increase its value greatly. Until that time, cat's eye had predominantly been present in gem and mineral collections. The increased demand in turn created an intensified search for it in Sri Lanka.\nIn popular culture.\nGirl group Katseye derived their name from the cymophane variety of chrysoberyl gem stones.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49981", "revid": "1235890934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49981", "title": "Middle House", "text": ""}
{"id": "50007", "revid": "80913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50007", "title": "Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats", "text": "Book of poems by T. S. Eliot\nOld Possum's Book of Practical Cats (1939) is a collection of whimsical light poems by T. S. Eliot about feline psychology and sociology, published by Faber and Faber. It serves as the basis for Andrew Lloyd Webber's 1981 musical \"Cats\".\nEliot wrote the poems in the 1930s and included them, under his assumed name \"Old Possum\", in letters to his godchildren. Eliot tried to persuade the poet Ralph Hodgson to illustrate the poems but failed.\nThey were collected and published in 1939, with cover illustrations by the author, and quickly re-published in 1940, illustrated in full by Nicolas Bentley. They have also been published in versions illustrated by Edward Gorey (1982), Axel Scheffler (2009) and Rebecca Ashdown (2014).\nContents.\nThe contents of \"Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats\", along with the names of the featured cats where appropriate, are:\nAdaptations.\nIn 1954, English composer Alan Rawsthorne set six of the poems in a work for speaker and orchestra entitled \"Practical Cats\", which was recorded soon afterwards, with the actor Robert Donat as the speaker. At about the same time another English composer, Humphrey Searle, composed another narrated piece based on the poems, using flute, piccolo, cello and guitar. This work, \"Two Practical Cats\", consists of settings of the poems about Macavity and Growltiger.\nThe best-known musical adaptation of the poems is Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical \"Cats\", which was premiered in the West End of London in 1981 and on Broadway in 1982. It became the longest-running Broadway show in history until it was overtaken by another musical by Lloyd Webber, \"The Phantom of the Opera\". As well as the characters found in the book, \"Cats\" introduces several additional characters from Eliot's unpublished drafts, most notably Grizabella. The musical was adapted into a direct-to-video film in 1998. A feature film adaptation of \"Cats\" was released on 20 December 2019. As of December, 2019, the feature film's production cost was $100 million but only grossed $38.3 million globally, yielding an approximate $70 million loss.\nCultural references.\nIn the film \"Logan's Run\", Logan and Jessica meet an old man in the ruins of the United States Senate Chamber during their search for Sanctuary. The Old Man has many cats and refers to the poem \"The Naming of Cats\", explaining that each cat has three names: one common, one fancy and one that only the cat knows. Later the Old Man refers to one cat in particular, \"Gus\", short for \"Asparagus\", and goes on to recite parts of \"Macavity: the Mystery Cat\".\nThe British rock band Mungo Jerry derived their name from the book's poem \"Mungojerrie and Rumpleteazer\".\nThe Tombs, a bar and restaurant in Washington, D.C., is named after the fictional establishment mentioned in the poem \"Bustopher Jones: The Cat About Town\".\nComparable work.\nOn 5 June 2009, \"The Times\" revealed that in 1937 Eliot had composed a 34-line poem entitled \"Cows\" for the children of Frank Morley, a friend who, like Eliot, was a director of the publishing company Faber and Faber. Morley's daughter, Susanna Smithson, uncovered the poem as part of the BBC Two programme \"Arena: T.S. Eliot\", broadcast that night as part of the BBC Poetry Season.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50012", "revid": "42845391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50012", "title": "Francis I of France", "text": "King of France from 1515 to 1547\nFrancis I (; ; 12 September 1494 \u2013 31 March 1547) was King of France from 1515 until his death in 1547. He was the son of Charles, Count of Angoul\u00eame, and Louise of Savoy. He succeeded his first cousin once removed and father-in-law Louis XII, who died without a legitimate son.\nA prodigious patron of the arts, Francis promoted the emergent French Renaissance by attracting many Italian artists to work for him, including Leonardo da Vinci, who brought the \"Mona Lisa\", which Francis had acquired. Francis's reign saw important cultural changes with the growth of central power in France, the spread of humanism and Protestantism, and the beginning of French exploration of the New World. Jacques Cartier and others claimed lands in the Americas for France and paved the way for the expansion of the first French colonial empire.\nFor his role in the development and promotion of the French language, Francis became known as (the 'Father and Restorer of Letters'). He was also known as ('Francis of the Large Nose'), the , and the (the 'Knight-King').\nIn keeping with his predecessors, Francis continued the Italian Wars. The succession of his great rival Emperor Charles V to the Habsburg Netherlands and the throne of Spain, followed by the election of Charles as Holy Roman Emperor, led to France being geographically encircled by the Habsburg monarchy. In his struggle against Imperial hegemony, Francis sought the support of Henry VIII of England at the Field of the Cloth of Gold. When this was unsuccessful, he formed a Franco-Ottoman alliance with the Muslim sultan Suleiman the Magnificent, a controversial move for a Christian king at the time.\nEarly life and accession.\nFrancis of Orl\u00e9ans was born on 12 September 1494 at the Ch\u00e2teau de Cognac in the town of Cognac, which at that time lay in the province of Saintonge, a part of the Duchy of Aquitaine. Today the town lies in the department of Charente.\nFrancis was the only son of Charles of Orl\u00e9ans, Count of Angoul\u00eame, and Louise of Savoy, and a great-great-grandson of King Charles V of France. His family was not expected to inherit the throne, as his third cousin King Charles VIII was still young at the time of his birth, as was his father's cousin the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, later King Louis XII. However, Charles VIII died childless in 1498 and was succeeded by Louis XII, who himself had no male heir. The Salic Law prevented women from inheriting the throne. Therefore, the four-year-old Francis (who was already Count of Angoul\u00eame after the death of his own father two years earlier) became the heir presumptive to the throne of France in 1498 and was vested with the title of Duke of Valois.\nIn 1505, Louis XII, having fallen ill, ordered his daughter Claude and Francis to be married immediately, but only through an assembly of nobles were the two engaged. Claude was heir presumptive to the Duchy of Brittany through her mother, Anne of Brittany. Following Anne's death, the marriage took place on 18 May 1514. On 1 January 1515, Louis died, and Francis inherited the throne. He was crowned King of France in Reims Cathedral on 25 January 1515, with Claude as his queen consort.\nReign.\nAs Francis was receiving his education, ideas emerging from the Italian Renaissance were influential in France. Some of his tutors, such as Fran\u00e7ois de Moulins de Rochefort (his Latin instructor, who later during the reign of Francis was named ) and Christophe de Longueil (a Brabantian humanist), were attracted by these new ways of thinking and attempted to influence Francis. His academic education had been in arithmetic, geography, grammar, history, reading, spelling, and writing and he became proficient in Hebrew, Italian, Latin and Spanish. Francis came to learn chivalry, dancing, and music, and he loved archery, falconry, horseback riding, hunting, jousting, real tennis and wrestling. He ended up reading philosophy and theology and he was fascinated with art, literature, poetry and science. His mother, who admired Italian Renaissance art, passed this interest on to her son. Although Francis did not receive a humanist education, he was more influenced by humanism than any previous French king.\nPatron of the arts.\nBy the time he ascended the throne in 1515, the Renaissance had arrived in France, and Francis became an enthusiastic patron of the arts. At the time of his accession, the royal palaces of France were ornamented with only a scattering of great paintings, and not a single sculpture, neither ancient nor modern.\nFrancis patronized many great artists of his time, including Andrea del Sarto and Leonardo da Vinci; the latter of whom was persuaded to make France his home during his last years. While da Vinci painted very little during his years in France, he brought with him many of his greatest works, including the \"Mona Lisa\" (known in France as ), and these remained in France after his death. Other major artists to receive Francis's patronage included the goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini and the painters Rosso Fiorentino, Giulio Romano, and Primaticcio, all of whom were employed in decorating Francis's various palaces. He also invited architect Sebastiano Serlio, who enjoyed a fruitful late career in France. Francis also commissioned a number of agents in Italy to procure notable works of art and ship them to France.\nMan of letters.\nFrancis was also renowned as a man of letters. When he comes up in a conversation among characters in Baldassare Castiglione's \"Book of the Courtier\", it is as the great hope to bring culture to the war-obsessed French nation. Not only did Francis support a number of major writers of the period, but he was also a poet himself, if not one of particular ability. Francis worked diligently at improving the royal library. He appointed the French humanist Guillaume Bud\u00e9 as chief librarian and began to expand the collection. Francis employed agents in Italy to look for rare books and manuscripts, just as he had agents looking for artworks. During his reign, the size of the library greatly increased. Not only did he expand the library, but there is also evidence that he read the books he bought for it, a much rarer event in the royal annals. Francis set an important precedent by opening his library to scholars from around the world in order to facilitate the diffusion of knowledge.\nIn 1537, Francis signed the , which decreed that his library be given a copy of every book to be sold in France. Francis's older sister, Marguerite, Queen of Navarre, was an accomplished writer who produced the classic collection of short stories known as the \"Heptam\u00e9ron\". Francis corresponded with the abbess and philosopher Claude de Bectoz, of whose letters he was so fond that he would carry them around and show them to the ladies of his court. Together with his sister, he visited her in Tarascon.\nConstruction.\nFrancis poured vast amounts of money into new structures. He continued the work of his predecessors on the and also started renovations on the . Early in his reign, he began construction of the magnificent , inspired by the architectural styles of the Italian Renaissance, and perhaps even designed by Leonardo da Vinci. Francis rebuilt the Louvre Palace, transforming it from a medieval fortress into a building of Renaissance splendour. He financed the building of a new City Hall (the ) for Paris in order to have control over the building's design. He constructed the in the and rebuilt the . The largest of Francis's building projects was the reconstruction and expansion of the , which quickly became his favourite place of residence, as well as the residence of his official mistress, Anne, Duchess of \u00c9tampes.\nMilitary action.\nAlthough the Italian Wars (1494\u20131559) came to dominate the reign of Francis I, which he constantly participated in at the forefront as le Roi-Chevalier, the wars were not the sole focus of his policies. He merely continued the wars that he succeeded from his predecessors and that his heir and successor on the throne, Henry II of France, would inherit after Francis's death. Indeed, the Italian Wars had begun when Milan sent a plea to King Charles VIII of France for protection against the aggressive actions of the King of Naples. \nMuch of the military activity of Francis's reign was focused on his sworn enemy, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. Francis and Charles maintained an intense personal rivalry. In addition to the Holy Roman Empire, Charles personally ruled Spain, Austria, and a number of smaller possessions neighbouring France. He was thus a constant threat to Francis\u00a0I's kingdom.\nMilitarily and diplomatically, the reign of Francis\u00a0I was a mixed bag of success and failure. Francis had tried and failed to become Holy Roman Emperor at the Imperial election of 1519, primarily due to his adversary Charles having threatened the electors with violence. However, there were also temporary victories, such as in the portion of the Italian Wars called the War of the League of Cambrai (1508\u20131516) and, more specifically, to the final stage of that war, which history refers to simply as \"Francis's First Italian War\" (1515\u20131516), when Francis routed the combined forces of the Papal States and the Old Swiss Confederacy at Marignano on 13\u201315 September 1515. This grand victory allowed Francis to capture the Italian city-state of Duchy of Milan. However, in November 1521, during the Four Years' War (1521\u20131526), Francis was forced to abandon Milan in the face of the advancing Imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire and open revolt within the duchy.\nFrancis I attempted to arrange an alliance with Henry\u00a0VIII at the famous meeting at the Field of Cloth of Gold on 7 June 1520, but despite a lavish fortnight of diplomacy they failed to reach an agreement. Francis and Henry VIII both shared the dreams of power and chivalric glory; however their relationship featured intense personal and dynastic rivalry. Francis was driven by his intense eagerness to retake Milan, despite the strong opposition of other powers. Henry VIII was likewise determined to recapture northern France, which Francis could not allow.\nHowever, the situation was grave; Francis had to face not only the whole might of Western Europe, but also internal hostility in the form of Charles III de Bourbon, a capable commander who fought alongside Francis as his constable at the great battle of Marignano, but defected to Charles V after his conflict with Francis's mother over inheritance of Bourbon estates. Despite all this, the Kingdom of France still held the balance of power in its favour. Nevertheless, the defeat suffered from the cataclysmic battle of Pavia on 24 February 1525, during part of the continuing Italian Wars known as the Four Years' War upheaved the political ground of Europe. He was actually taken prisoner: Cesare Hercolani injured his horse, and Francis himself was subsequently captured by Charles de Lannoy. Some claim he was captured by Diego D\u00e1vila, Alonso Pita da Veiga, and Juan de Urbieta, from Guip\u00fazcoa. For this reason, Hercolani was named \"Victor of the battle of Pavia\". was supposedly invented on the spot to feed the captive king after the battle.\nFrancis was held captive in Madrid. In a letter to his mother, he wrote, \"Of all things, nothing remains to me but honour and life, which is safe.\" This line has come down in history famously as \"All is lost save honour.\" Francis was compelled to make major concessions to Charles in the Treaty of Madrid (1526), signed on 14 January, before he was freed on 17 March. An ultimatum from Ottoman Sultan Suleiman to Charles additionally played a role in his release. Francis was forced to surrender any claims to Naples and Milan in Italy. He was forced to recognise the independence of the Duchy of Burgundy, which had been part of France since the death of Charles the Bold in 1477. And finally, Francis was betrothed to Charles' sister Eleanor. Francis returned to France in exchange for his two sons, Francis and Henry, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, the future Henry II of France, but once he was free he revoked the forced concessions as his agreement with Charles was made under duress. He also proclaimed that the agreement was void because his sons were taken hostage with the implication that his word alone could not be trusted. Thus he firmly repudiated it. A renewed alliance with England enabled Francis to repudiate the treaty of Madrid.\nFrancis persevered in his rivalry against Charles and his intent to control Italy. By the mid-1520s, Pope Clement VII wished to liberate Italy from foreign domination, especially that of Charles, so he allied with Venice to form the League of Cognac. Francis joined the League in May 1526, in the War of the League of Cognac of 1526\u201330. Francis's allies proved weak, and the war was ended by the Treaty of Cambrai (1529; \"the Peace of the Ladies\", negotiated by Francis's mother and Charles' aunt). The two princes were released, and Francis married Eleanor.\nOn 24 July 1534, Francis, inspired by the Spanish tercios and the Roman legions, issued an edict to form seven infantry L\u00e9gions of 6,000 troops each, of which 12,000 of the 42,000 were to be arquebusiers, testifying to the growing importance of gunpowder. The force was a national standing army, where any soldier could be promoted on the basis of vacancies, was paid wages by grade and granted exemptions from the taille and other taxes up to 20 \"sous\", a heavy burden on the state budget.\nAfter the League of Cognac failed, Francis concluded a secret alliance with Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse on 27 January 1534. This was directed against Charles on the pretext of assisting the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg to regain his traditional seat, from which Charles had removed him in 1519. Francis also obtained the help of the Ottoman Empire and after the death of Francesco II Sforza, ruler of Milan, renewed the contest in Italy in the Italian War of 1536\u20131538. This round of fighting, which had little result, was ended by the Truce of Nice. The agreement collapsed, however, which led to Francis's final attempt on Italy in the Italian War of 1542\u20131546. Francis\u00a0I managed to hold off the forces of Charles and Henry\u00a0VIII, with Charles being forced to sign the Treaty of Cr\u00e9py because of his financial difficulties and conflicts with the Schmalkaldic League.\nRelations with the Americas and Asia.\nFrancis had been much aggrieved at the papal bull : in June 1481 Portuguese rule over Africa and the Indies was confirmed by Pope Sixtus IV. Thirteen years later, on 7 June 1494, Portugal and the Crown of Castille signed the Treaty of Tordesillas under which the newly discovered lands would be divided between the two signatories. All this prompted Francis to declare, \"The sun shines for me as it does for others. I would very much like to see the clause of Adam's will by which I should be denied my share of the world.\"\nIn order to counterbalance the power of the Habsburg Empire under Charles V, especially its control of large parts of the New World through the Crown of Spain, Francis endeavoured to develop contacts with the New World and Asia. Fleets were sent to the Americas and the Far East, and close contacts were developed with the Ottoman Empire permitting the development of French Mediterranean trade as well as the establishment of a strategic military alliance.\nThe port city now known as Le Havre was founded in 1517 during the early years of Francis's reign. The construction of a new port was urgently needed in order to replace the ancient harbours of Honfleur and Harfleur, whose utility had decreased due to silting. Le Havre was originally named \"Franciscopolis\" after the king who founded it, but this name did not survive into later reigns.\nAmericas.\nIn 1524, Francis assisted the citizens of Lyon in financing the expedition of Giovanni da Verrazzano to North America. On this expedition, Verrazzano visited the present site of New York City, naming it New Angoul\u00eame, and claimed Newfoundland for the French crown. Verrazzano's letter to Francis of 8 July 1524 is known as the \"C\u00e8llere Codex\".\nIn 1531, Bertrand d'Ornesan tried to establish a French trading post at Pernambuco, Brazil.\nIn 1534, Francis sent Jacques Cartier to explore the St. Lawrence River in Quebec to find \"certain islands and lands where it is said there must be great quantities of gold and other riches\". In 1541, Francis sent Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Roberval to settle Canada and to provide for the spread of \"the Holy Catholic faith.\"\nAsia.\nFrench trade with East Asia was initiated during the reign of Francis\u00a0I with the help of shipowner Jean Ango. In July 1527, a French Norman trading ship from the city of Rouen is recorded by the Portuguese Jo\u00e3o de Barros as having arrived in the Indian city of Diu. In 1529, Jean Parmentier, on board the and the , reached Sumatra. Upon its return, the expedition triggered the development of the Dieppe maps, influencing the work of Dieppe cartographers such as Jean Rotz.\nOttoman Empire.\nUnder the reign of Francis I, France became the first country in Europe to establish formal relations with the Ottoman Empire and to set up instruction in the Arabic language under the guidance of Guillaume Postel at the .\nIn a watershed moment in European diplomacy, Francis came to an understanding with the Ottoman Empire that developed into a Franco-Ottoman alliance. The objective for Francis was to find an ally against the House of Habsburg. The pretext used by Francis was the protection of the Christians in Ottoman lands. The alliance has been called \"the first nonideological diplomatic alliance of its kind between a Christian and non-Christian empire\". It did, however, cause quite a scandal in the Christian world and was designated \"the impious alliance\", or \"the sacrilegious union of the [French]\u00a0Lily and the [Ottoman]\u00a0Crescent.\" Nevertheless, it endured for many years, since it served the objective interests of both parties. The two powers colluded against Charles V, and in 1543 they even combined for a joint naval assault in the siege of Nice.\nIn 1533, Francis I sent colonel Pierre de Piton as ambassador to Morocco, initiating official France\u2013Morocco relations. In a letter to Francis\u00a0I dated 13 August 1533, the Wattassid ruler of Fez, Ahmed ben Mohammed, welcomed French overtures and granted freedom of shipping and protection of French traders.\nBureaucratic reform and language policy.\nFrancis took several steps to eradicate the monopoly of Latin as the language of knowledge. In 1530, he declared French the national language of the kingdom, and that same year opened the Coll\u00e8ge des trois langues, or , following the recommendation of humanist Guillaume Bud\u00e9. Students at the Coll\u00e8ge could study Greek, Hebrew and Aramaic, then Arabic under Guillaume Postel beginning in 1539.\nIn 1539, in his castle in Villers-Cotter\u00eats, Francis signed the important edict known as Ordinance of Villers-Cotter\u00eats, which, among other reforms, made French the administrative language of the kingdom as a replacement for Latin. This same edict required priests to register births, marriages, and deaths, and to establish a registry office in every parish. This initiated the first records of vital statistics with filiations available in Europe.\nReligious policies.\nDivisions in Christianity in Western Europe during Francis's reign created lasting international rifts. Martin Luther's preaching and writing sparked the Protestant Reformation, which spread through much of Europe, including France.\nInitially, Francis was relatively tolerant of the new movement, despite burning several heretics at the Place Maubert in 1523. He was influenced by his beloved sister Marguerite de Navarre, who was genuinely attracted by Luther's theology. Francis even considered it politically useful, as it caused many German princes to turn against his enemy Charles V.\nFrancis's attitude towards Protestantism changed for the worse following the \"Affair of the Placards\", on the night of 17 October 1534, in which notices appeared on the streets of Paris and other major cities denouncing the Catholic mass. The most fervent Catholics were outraged by the notice's allegations. Francis himself came to view the movement as a plot against him and began to persecute its followers. Protestants were jailed and executed. In some areas, whole villages were destroyed. In Paris, after 1540, Francis had heretics such as \u00c9tienne Dolet tortured and burned. Printing was censored and leading Protestant Reformers such as John Calvin were forced into exile. The persecutions soon numbered thousands of dead and tens of thousands of homeless.\nPersecutions against Protestants were codified in the Edict of Fontainebleau issued by Francis. Major acts of violence continued, as when Francis ordered the extirpation of one of the historical pre-Lutheran groups, the Waldensians, at the Massacre of M\u00e9rindol in 1545.\nDeath.\nFrancis died at the on 31 March 1547, on his son and successor's 28th birthday. It is said that \"he died complaining about the weight of a crown that he had first perceived as a gift from God\". He was interred with his first wife, Claude, Duchess of Brittany, in Saint Denis Basilica. He was succeeded by his son, Henry\u00a0II.\nFrancis's tomb and that of his wife and mother, along with the tombs of other French kings and members of the royal family, were desecrated on 20 October 1793 during the Reign of Terror at the height of the French Revolution.\nImage and reputation.\nFrancis I has a poor reputation in France\u2014his 500th birthday was little noted in 1994. Popular and scholarly historical memory ignores his building of so many chateaux, his art collection, and his patronage of scholars and artists. He is seen as a playboy who disgraced France by allowing himself to be defeated and taken prisoner at Pavia. The historian Jules Michelet set the negative image.\nFrancis's personal emblem was the salamander and his Latin motto was (\"I nourish [the good] and extinguish [the bad]\"). His long nose earned him the nickname ('Francis of the Big Nose'), and he was also colloquially known as the or . For his personal involvement in battles, he was known as ('the Knight-King') or ('the Warrior-King').\nBritish historian Glenn Richardson considers Francis a success:\nHe was a king who ruled as well as reigned. He knew the importance of war and a high international profile in staking his claim to be a great warrior-king of France. In battle, he was brave, if impetuous, which led equally to triumph and disaster. Domestically, Francis exercised the spirit and letter of the royal prerogative to its fullest extent. He bargained hard over taxation and other issues with interest groups, often by appearing not to bargain at all. He enhanced royal power and concentrated decision-making in a tight personal executive but used a wide range of offices, gifts and his own personal charisma to build up an elective personal affinity among the ranks of the nobility upon whom his reign depended\u00a0... Under Francis, the court of France was at the height of its prestige and international influence during the 16th century. Although opinion has varied considerably over the centuries since his death, his cultural legacy to France, to its Renaissance, was immense and ought to secure his reputation as among the greatest of its kings.\nMarriage and issue.\nOn 18 May 1514, Francis married his second cousin Claude, the daughter of King Louis XII and Duchess Anne of Brittany. The couple had seven children:\nOn 4 July 1530, Francis I married his second wife Eleanor of Austria, Queen (widow) of Portugal and the sister of Emperor Charles V. The couple had no children.\nDuring his reign, Francis kept two official mistresses at court, and he was the first king to officially give the title of \"ma\u00eetresse-en-titre\" to his favorite mistress. The first was Fran\u00e7oise de Foix, Countess of Ch\u00e2teaubriant. In 1526, she was replaced by the blonde-haired, cultured Anne de Pisseleu d'Heilly, Duchess of \u00c9tampes, who, with the death of Queen Claude two years earlier, wielded far more political power at court than her predecessor had done. Another of his earlier mistresses was allegedly Mary Boleyn, mistress of King Henry\u00a0VIII and sister of Henry's future wife, Anne Boleyn.\nWith Jacquette de Lanssac he was reputed to have had the following illegitimate child:\nPortrayals.\nFrancis was the subject of several portraits. A 1525\u201330 work by Jean Clouet is now housed at the Louvre in Paris. A portrait dated to 1532\u201333 by Joos van Cleve may have been commissioned either for the occasion of a meeting with Henry VIII of England or Francis's second marriage. The workshop of van Cleve produced copies of this work to be distributed to other courts.\nThe amorous exploits of Francis inspired the 1832 play by Fanny Kemble, \"Francis the First\", and the 1832 play by Victor Hugo, (\"The King's Amusement\"), which featured the jester Triboulet, the inspiration for the 1851 opera \"Rigoletto\" by Giuseppe Verdi. Francis was first played in the George M\u00e9li\u00e8s short (1907) by an unknown actor, possibly M\u00e9li\u00e8s. He has been since played by Claude Garry (1910), William Powell (1922), Aim\u00e9 Simon-Girard (1937), Sacha Guitry (1937), G\u00e9rard Oury (1953), Jean Marais (1955), Pedro Armend\u00e1riz (1956), Claude Titre (1962), Bernard Pierre Donnadieu (1990), Timothy West (1998), Emmanuel Leconte (2007\u20132010), Alfonso Bassave (2015\u20132016) and Colm Meaney (2022).\nFrench composer Jeanne Rivet used Francis' text for her song \"Ou estes-vous allez?\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50014", "revid": "50358007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50014", "title": "Yosemite Valley", "text": "Glacial valley in California, United States\nYosemite Valley ( ; \"Yosemite\", Miwok for \"killer\") is a glacial valley in Yosemite National Park in the western Sierra Nevada mountains of Central California, United States. The valley is about long and deep, surrounded by high granite summits such as Half Dome and El Capitan, and densely forested with pines. The valley is drained by the Merced River, and a multitude of streams and waterfalls flow into it, including Tenaya, Illilouette, Yosemite and Bridalveil Creeks. Yosemite Falls is the highest waterfall in North America and is a big attraction, especially in the spring, when the water flow is at its peak. The valley is renowned for its natural environment and is regarded as the centerpiece of Yosemite National Park.\nThe valley is the main attraction in the park for the majority of visitors and a bustling hub of activity during tourist season in the summer months. Most visitors enter the valley from roads to the west and pass through the Tunnel View entrance. Visitor facilities are in the center of the valley. There are both hiking trail loops that stay within the valley and trailheads that lead to higher elevations.\nDescriptions.\nYosemite Valley is on the western slope of the Sierra Nevada mountains, east of San Francisco. It stretches for in a roughly east\u2013west direction, with an average width of about .\nYosemite Valley represents only one percent of the park area, but it is where most visitors arrive and stay. More than half a dozen creeks tumble from hanging valleys at the top of granite cliffs that can rise above the valley floor, which itself is above sea level. These streams combine into the Merced River, which flows out from the western end of the valley, down the rest of its canyon to the San Joaquin Valley. The flat floor of Yosemite Valley holds both forest and large open meadows, which have views of the surrounding crests and waterfalls.\nBelow is a description of these features, looking first at the walls above, moving west to east as a visitor does when entering the valley, then visiting the waterfalls and other water features, returning east to west with the flow of water.\nThe first view of Yosemite Valley many visitors see is the Tunnel View. So many paintings were made from a viewpoint nearby that the National Park Service named that viewpoint Artist Point. The view from the lower (western) end of the Valley contains the great granite monolith El Capitan on the left, and Cathedral Rocks on the right with Bridalveil Fall. Just past this spot the Valley suddenly widens with the Cathedral Spires, then the pointed obelisk of Sentinel Rock to the south. Across the Valley on the northern side are the Three Brothers, rising one above the other like gables built on the same angle \u2013 the highest crest is Eagle Peak, with the two below known as the Middle and Lower Brothers.\nTo this point the Valley has been curving gently to the left (north). Now a grand curve back to the right begins, with Yosemite Falls on the north, followed by the Royal Arches, topped by North Dome. Opposite, to the south, is Glacier Point, above the Valley floor. At this point the Valley splits in two, one section slanting northeast, with the other curving from south to southeast. Between them, at the eastern end of the valley, is Half Dome, among the most prominent natural features in the Sierra Nevada. Above and to the northeast of Half Dome is Clouds Rest, at ; it is the highest point near Yosemite Valley.\nWater.\nSnow melting in the Sierra forms creeks and lakes. In the surrounding region, these creeks flow to the edge of the Valley to form cataracts and waterfalls.\nA fan of creeks and forks of the Merced River take drainage from the Sierra crest and combine at Merced Lake. The Merced then flows down to the end of its canyon (Little Yosemite Valley), where it begins what is often called the \"Giant Staircase\". The first drop is Nevada Fall, which drops , bouncing off the granite slope below it. Below is Vernal Fall, high, one of the most picturesque waterfalls in the Valley. The Merced then descends rapids to meet Illilouette Creek, which drops from the valley rim to form Illilouette Fall. They combine at the base of the gorges that contain each stream, and then flow around the Happy Isles to meet Tenaya Creek at the eastern end of Yosemite Valley proper.\nTenaya Creek flows southwest from Tenaya Lake and down Tenaya Canyon, finally flowing between Half Dome and North Dome before joining the Merced River. The following falls tumble from the Valley rim to join it at various points:\nNatural Yosemite Valley.\nGeology.\nThe features in Yosemite Valley are made of granitic rock emplaced as plutons miles deep during the late Cretaceous. Over time the Sierra Nevada was uplifted, exposing this rock to erosion at the surface.\nThere are many types of granite found in Yosemite Valley with the most prominent being El Capitan Granite, Sentinel Granodiorite, Taft Granite, and Half Dome Granodiorite. \u00a0Majority of the minerals found in the granite include quartz, potassium and plagioclase feldspar, biotite, and hornsblende. The oldest of these granitic rocks, at 114\u00a0million years, occur along the Merced River Gorge west of the valley. The El Capitan pluton intruded the valley, forming most of the granitic rock that makes up much of the central part of the valley, including Cathedral Rocks, Three Brothers, and El Capitan. The youngest Yosemite Valley pluton is the 87-million-year-old Half Dome granodiorite, which makes up most of the rock at Glacier Point, the Royal Arches, and its namesake, Half Dome.\nBefore Yosemite Valley was a valley, it was formed by sediment deposits, streams, rock uplift and falls, volcanoes, and glaciers.(1,2)\u00a0 The formation of the valley can be divided into four stages differentiated by exposure of granite, depth of the valley, and water features. (1) Streams were largely responsible for the deepening of the area into a valley and eroding metamorphic and sedimentary rock to reveal granite. (3) For the last 30\u00a0million years, glaciers have periodically filled much of the valley. The most current glaciation, the Wisconsinian was not, however, the most severe. Ice ages previous to the Wisconsinian were colder and lasted longer. Their glaciers were huge and covered nearly all the landmarks around Yosemite Valley except Half Dome, Eagle Peak, Sentinel Dome, and the top of El Capitan. Wisconsinian glaciers, however, only reached Bridalveil Fall in the valley. \nAfter the retreat of many of these glaciers, a stand of Ancient Lake Yosemite developed. The valley floor owes its flatness to sediment deposited by these stands (the last glaciers in the valley were small and did not remove much old lake sediment). The last stand of Lake Yosemite was about long and was impounded by a terminal moraine near the base of El Capitan. It was later filled by sediment, becoming a swampy meadow.\nThe parallel Tenaya Canyon and Little Yosemite Canyon glaciers were, at their largest, deep where they flowed into the Yosemite Valley near the base of Half Dome. They also formed Clouds Rest behind Half Dome as an ar\u00eate.\nNear Glacier Point there are of mostly glacial sediment with at least six separate sequences of Lake Yosemite sediments. Here, huge and highly erosive pre-Wisconsinian glaciers excavated the bedrock valley floor, and much smaller Wisconsinian glaciers deposited glacial debris.\nEcology.\nThe biological community of Yosemite Valley is a diverse one. The valley can be divided into two regions, the lower mountain forest with hot, dry summers and cool, moist winters where there can be a couple feet of snow fall, and the upper mountain forest with short moist summers and cool wet winters with snow lasting from November through June. \nThe animals that make up the community include various birds, mammals, fish, amphibians, reptiles, and insects. There are over 142 species of birds, prominently the California Warbler, Western Robin, and the Western Chipping Sparrow. There are approximately 90 species of mammals including shrews, bats, mice and rats, squirrels and chipmunks, rabbits, bears, large cats, and foxes. Few reptiles and amphibians are in the area due to the altitude. There are several animals that are listed as threatened species such as the Sierra Nevada red fox, Wolverine, Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep, and the pacific fisher.\nMany plants have been identified in Yosemite Valley ranging from wildflowers to trees. Common trees in the area include the California Black Oak, Ponderosa Pine, Incense Cedar, Red Fir, Lodgepole Pine, Jefferey Pine, and Western Juniper. \u00a0 Sugar pine, white fir,\u00a0 interior live oak, coast Douglas-fir, California laurel, bigleaf maple, Scouler's willow, Pacific dogwood, white alder, and western balsam poplar can also be found.\nShrubs commonly found in the area include whiteleaf manzanita, mountain misery, western azalea, American dogwood, buckbrush, deer brush, sierra gooseberry. \nMany wildflowers can be found throughout the year, but are most prominent from June through August. Prevalent wildflowers include the Sierra Lessingia, Monkey Flower, Beardtongue, Parasitic flowers, Shooting Stars, Lupines, and Buttercups. Other forms of flora include those of the Buckwheat, Purslane, Pink, Mustard, Pea, Evening Primrose, Mint, Figwort, and Composite families. \nTourism.\nYosemite National Park had a record number of 5\u00a0million visitors in 2016. In 2020 visitation dropped to 2,268,313 visitors. A reservation system was implemented in 2020, which required a reservation in order to enter the park. The reservation system has been periodically lifted and reimplemented since 2021.\nOn July 24, 2018, several areas of the park, including the Valley, were closed due to wildfires in the area.\nHiking.\nSeveral trails lead out of the Valley, including\nClimbing.\nYosemite is now a world rock climbing attraction. The massive 'big walls' of granite have been climbed countless times since the 1950s and have pushed climbers' abilities to new heights. While climbers traditionally take several days to climb the monoliths, bivvying on the rock faces, modern climbing techniques help climbers ascend the cliffs in mere hours. Many climbers stay at Camp 4 before beginning big wall climbs, which became notable after World War II as \"a birthplace of rock climbing\u2019s modern age\" and was introduced into the National Register of Historic Places in 2003.\nHalf Dome figures prominently on the reverse side of the California state quarter. Hiking to the top of Half Dome is one of the most popular hikes from the valley, and very crowded. The park now requires permits to use the trail, and in 2011 the permits sold out very quickly after becoming available. The park now uses a lottery system for hikers to apply for permits.\nHistory.\nNative Americans in Yosemite.\nHabitation of the Yosemite Valley proper can be traced to about 3,000 years ago when vegetation and game in the region was similar to that present today; the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada had acorns, deer, and salmon, while the eastern Sierra had pinyon nuts and obsidian.\nThe prehistory of the area is divided into three cultural phases on archaeological grounds: the \"Crane Flat\" phase, (1000\u00a0BCE to 500\u00a0CE) is marked by hunting with the atl atl and the use of grinding stones; the \"Tarmarack\" phase (500 to 1200 CE), marked by a shift to using smaller rock points, indicating development and use of the bow and arrow; and the \"Mariposa\" phase, from 1200 until European contact in the mid-19th century.\nIn the 19th century, it was inhabited by a Miwok band who called the Valley \"Ah-wah-nee\" and themselves the Ahwahnechee. \nThis group had trading and family ties to Mono Lake Paiutes from the eastern side of the Sierra Nevada. They annually burned the vegetation on the Valley floor, which promoted the black oak and kept the meadows and forests open. This protected the supply of their principal food, acorns, and reduced the chance of ambush. At the time of first European contact, this band was led by Chief Tenaya (Teneiya), who was raised by his mother among the Mono Lake Paiutes.\nThe Mariposa Battalion and the first tourists.\nThe first non-Native Americans to see Yosemite Valley were probably members of the 1833 Joseph Walker Party, which was the first to cross the Sierra Nevada from east to west. The first descriptions of Yosemite, however, came nearly 20 years later. The 1849 California Gold Rush led to conflicts between miners and Native Americans, and the state formed the volunteer Mariposa Battalion as a punitive expedition against the Native Americans living in the Yosemite area. In 1851, the Battalion was led by Major Jim Savage, whose trading post on the Merced River the Awaneechee had raided. This and other missions (the Mariposa Wars) resulted in Chief Teneiya and the Awaneechee spending months on a reservation in the San Joaquin Valley. The band returned the next year to the Valley but took refuge among the Mono Paiutes after further conflicts with miners. Most of the Awaneechee (along with Teneiya) were chased back to the Valley and killed by the Paiutes after violating hospitality by stealing horses.\nWhile the members of that first expedition of the Mariposa Battalion had heard rumors of what could be found up the Merced River, none were prepared for what they saw March 27, 1851, from what is now called Old Inspiration Point (close to the better-visited Tunnel View). Dr. Lafayette Bunnell later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The grandeur of the scene was but softened by the haze that hung over the valley \u2013 light as gossamer \u2013 and by the clouds which partially dimmed the higher cliffs and mountains. This obscurity of vision but increased the awe with which I beheld it, and as I looked, a peculiar exalted sensation seemed to fill my whole being, and I found my eyes in tears with emotion.\nCamping that night on the Valley floor, the group agreed with the suggestion of Dr. Bunnell to call it \"Yo-sem-i-ty\", mistakenly believing that was the native name. The term is from the Southern Sierra Miwok word Yohhe'meti, meaning \"those who kill,\" which surrounding tribes used to refer to the tribe inhabiting the valley. \nJames Hutchings\u2014who organized the first tourist party to the Valley in 1855\u2014and artist Thomas Ayers generated much of the earliest publicity about Yosemite, creating articles and entire magazine issues about the Valley. Ayres' highly detailed angularly exaggerated artwork and his written accounts were distributed nationally and an art exhibition of his drawings was held in New York City.\nTwo of Hutchings' first group of tourists, Milton and Houston Mann, built the first toll route into the valley, with the development of the first hotels in the area and other trails quickly following. Many of the early pioneers in the valley of European descent, and a few Native Americans, are buried in Yosemite Cemetery.\nYosemite: The first park.\nThe work of Ayres gave Easterners an appreciation for Yosemite Valley and started a movement to preserve it. Influential figures such as Galen Clark, clergyman Thomas Starr King and leading landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted were among those who urged Senator John Conness of California to try to preserve Yosemite.\nPresident Abraham Lincoln signed a bill on June 30, 1864, granting Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove of giant sequoias to the State of California \"for public use, resort and recreation,\" the two tracts \"shall be inalienable for all time\". This was the first time in history that a federal government had set aside scenic lands simply to protect them and to allow for their enjoyment by all people.\nSimply designating an area a park isn't sufficient to protect it. California did not set up an administration for the park until 1866 when the state appointed Galen Clark as the park's guardian. An 11-year struggle followed to resolve homesteading claims in the valley. The challenge of increasing tourism, with the need to first build stagecoach roads, then the Yosemite Valley Railroad, along with hotels and other facilities in and around the Valley was met during the rest of the 19th century. But much environmental damage was caused to the valley itself at that time. The problems that Yosemite Park had under state control was one of the factors in establishing Yellowstone National Park as the first completely national park in 1872.\nDue to the difficulty of traveling there, early visitors to the valley came for several weeks to a couple of months, often as entire families with many possessions. Early hotels were therefore set up for extended stays and catered primarily to wealthy patrons who could spend extended periods away from home. One of these hotels\u2014the Wawona Hotel, built in the 1880s\u2014still operates.\nAfter the Valley became a park, the surrounding territory was still subject to logging, mining, and grazing. John Muir publicized the damage to the subalpine meadows that surround the Valley and in 1890, the government created a national park that included a much larger territory\u2014enclosing Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove.\n20th century.\nAs with Yellowstone, the new federal park was under U.S. Army jurisdiction until 1914. In 1906, the state ceded the Valley and Mariposa Grove to the federal government. The National Park Service, on its creation in 1916, took over Yosemite.\nYosemite Valley is listed as a National Historic District and as a California Historical Landmark. After the creation of the Park Service, many separate hotel owners held separate concession contracts. The Yosemite Park Company had built the Yosemite Lodge and Yosemite Village had its own group of merchants. Fire had destroyed a number of the original valley hotels and concession owners came and went until Park Service forced the two largest companies to merge in order that one single concession contract could be given. In 1925 the two family-run companies became the Yosemite Park and Curry Company and went on to build and run the Ahwahnee Hotel as the company headquarters for years, introducing a number of traditions, including the Bracebridge dinner.\nCurry Village was the site from where villagers and visitors watched the Yosemite Firefall. This \"fall\" was large batches of red hot embers dropped from Glacier Point. The Park Service stopped this practice in 1969 as part of their long process of de-emphasizing artificial park attractions.\nOn July 6, 1996, a massive rock slide, weighing an estimated 60,000\u201380,000 tons, crashed into the valley from the east side of Glacier Point, traveling at over . Dust blanketed that part of the valley for days, and the wind speed in front of the slide is estimated to have been . One person was killed in the slide.\nMerced River Plan.\nIn 1987, Congress designated 122 miles of the Merced as a Wild and Scenic River. Yosemite National Park contains 81 of these miles, and the valley contains eight of those miles. This designation will \"...\u00a0preserve the Merced River in free-flowing condition and to protect the water quality and the outstandingly remarkable values (ORVs) that make the river worthy of designation.\"\nIn March 2014, the park system released the \"Merced Wild and Scenic River Comprehensive Management Plan/EIS \"to address the preservation of the river, safety, and to improve the visitor experience in the park. The plan will restore meadows and river bank areas and remove non-essential roads. Camping capacity will increase by 37%, and recreational services will be expanded. The plan calls for an 8% increase in parking for day use visitors to Yosemite Valley, including a new 300-car parking lot. The plan will allow the valley to accommodate a peak of 20,100 visitors per day.\nThe plan has been criticized for prioritizing park visitors over the preservation of the river and the valley. Some believe there should be further limitations to the number of cars and parking lots in the valley, and more focus on public transportation. On busy summer days, there can be long delays and traffic gridlock at the entrance to Yosemite.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50015", "revid": "38439247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50015", "title": "Regina Protmann", "text": "Regina Protmann (1552 \u2013 18 January 1613) was a Roman Catholic religious sister. She founded the Sisters of Saint Catherine and was a pioneer in the establishment of hospitals as well as schools for girls. Her first biographer was the Jesuit Engelbert Keilert who described her as an intelligent and well-versed woman with a deep faith and sense of conviction.\nHer beatification was celebrated on 13 June 1999 in Warsaw.\nLife.\nRegina Protmann was born in Braniewo (Braunsberg) in 1552 and to Peter Protmann and Regina n\u00e9e Tingel. Her father was a merchant and local patrician. Her uncle was a councilman.\nProtmann became familiarized with religious and political matters during the time of the Protestant Reformation and the Counter Reformation. She joined a Marian group that the Jesuits had set up and she entrusted herself to their spiritual care. In 1571, she explained to her parents that she could not be married as expected but was devoting herself to religious studies and taking care of the sick and poor.\nDespite the opposition of her parents Protmann moved out on her own and with two other women lived in an abandoned house. The group made a living in taking care of and nursing the sick and also doing housework. During a time of witch-hunt and strict counter-measures from the Roman Catholic Church it was unheard of for women to live on their own. There were no convents for women in the area at that time. \nProtmann persevered and, inspired by Saint Catherine of Alexandria, founded one which became the congregation of the Sisters of Saint Catherine. Protmann helped to nurse the sick and educated nurses while seeing to it that nurses themselves received care when it was needed. Under the government of the prince-bishops schools for males existed alone but Protmann founded schools for girls as well.\nProtmann died in 1613 after a painful illness she contracted that winter while on a travel trip.\nWorld War II and after.\nThe Saint Catherine of Alexandria church in Braunsberg was ruined in 1945 during its capture by the Soviet forces during World War II. Braniewo was assigned to Poland. During the expulsion of the inhabitants of East Prussia, including the sisters of her congregation, over 100 sisters died. It was rebuilt after 1979 and in 2001 dedicated as a Minor Basilica. On 28 June 2000, Protmann was declared the patroness of Braniewo.\nBeatification.\nThe beatification process opened in Warmia and in Frascati in an informative that opened in 1957 and closed sometime later before it received the validation needed from the Congregation for the Causes of Saints on 19 September 1991. The Congregation for the Causes of Saints approved the cause on 27 October 1992. Pope John Paul II confirmed Protmann's heroic virtue and name her as venerable on 17 December 1996. A miracle due to her intercession was a healing that originated in Brazil. John Paul II beatified Protmann in Warsaw on 13 June 1999. The postulator for this cause is Sr. J\u00f3zefa Krause.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50016", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50016", "title": "Lenny Bruce", "text": "American comedian and social critic (1925\u20131966)\nLeonard Alfred Schneider (October 13, 1925 \u2013 August 3, 1966), better known by his stage name Lenny Bruce, was an American stand-up comedian, social critic, and satirist. He was renowned for his open, free-wheeling, and critical style of comedy that combined satire, politics, religion, sex, and vulgarity. His 1964 conviction in an obscenity trial was followed by a posthumous pardon in 2003.\nBruce forged new paths in comedy and counterculture. His trial for obscenity was a landmark of freedom of speech in the United States. In 2017, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked Bruce third (behind Richard Pryor and George Carlin) on its list of the 50 best stand-up comics of all time.\nEarly life.\nBruce was born Leonard Alfred Schneider in Mineola, New York, to a Jewish family. His British-born father, Myron (Mickey) Schneider, was a shoe clerk; they saw each other very infrequently. His mother, Sally Marr (legal name Sadie Schneider, born Sadie Kitchenberg), was a stage performer and dancer who had an enormous influence on his career. Bruce grew up in Bellmore, New York, and attended Wellington C. Mepham High School. For some of his high school years, he lived at Dengler's Farm on Wantagh Avenue in Wantagh, New York. Bruce's parents divorced before he was 10, and he lived with various relatives over the next decade.\nAfter spending time working on a farm, Bruce joined the United States Navy at the age of 16 in 1942, with active service during World War II aboard the in Northern Africa, Palermo in 1943, and Anzio, Italy, in 1944. In May 1945, after a comedic performance for his shipmates in which he was dressed in drag, his commanding officers became upset. He defiantly convinced his ship's medical officer that he was experiencing homosexual urges, leading to his undesirable discharge in July 1945. However, he had not admitted to or been found guilty of any breach of naval regulations, and successfully applied to change his discharge to \"Under Honorable Conditions ... by reason of unsuitability for the naval service\".\nDuring the Korean War era, Bruce served in the United States Merchant Marine, ferrying troops from the US to Europe and back. In 1959, while videotaping the first episode of Hugh Hefner's \"Playboy's Penthouse\", Bruce talked about his Navy experience and showed a tattoo he received in Malta in 1942. After a short period of time living with his father in California, Bruce settled in New York City, hoping to establish himself as a comedian. However, he found it difficult to differentiate himself from the thousands of other show business hopefuls who populated the city. One place where they congregated was Hanson's, a diner where Bruce met Joe Ancis, who had a profound influence on Bruce's approach to comedy. Many of Bruce's later routines reflected his meticulous schooling at the hands of Ancis. According to Bruce's biographer Albert Goldman, Ancis's humor involved stream-of-consciousness sexual fantasies and references to jazz. He also gained notoriety for his focus on controversial subjects, black humour, obscenity, and criticism of organized religion and the establishment.\nBruce took the stage as \"Lenny Marsalle\" one evening at the Victory Club as a stand-in master of ceremonies for one of his mother's shows. His ad-libs earned him some laughs. Soon afterward, in 1947, just after changing his last name to Bruce, he earned $12 and a free spaghetti dinner for his first stand-up performance in Brooklyn. He was later a guest\u2014and was introduced by his mother, calling herself Sally Bruce\u2014on the \"Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts\" radio program. Lenny did a piece inspired by Sid Caesar, \"The Bavarian Mimic\", featuring impressions of American movie stars (e.g., Humphrey Bogart, James Cagney, and Edward G. Robinson).\nCareer.\nBruce's early comedy career included writing the screenplays for \"Dance Hall Racket\" in 1953, which featured Bruce, his wife Honey Harlow, and mother Sally Marr; \"Dream Follies\" in 1954, a low-budget burlesque romp; and a children's film, \"The Rocket Man\", in 1954. In 1956, Frank Ray Perilli, a fellow nightclub comedian who later wrote two dozen successful films and plays, became Bruce's mentor and part-time manager. Through Perilli, Lenny Bruce met and collaborated with photojournalist William Karl Thomas on three screenplays (\"Leather Jacket\", \"Killer's Grave\" and \"The Degenerate\"), none of which made it to the screen, and the comedy material on his first three comedy albums.\nBruce was a roommate of comedian Buddy Hackett in the 1950s. The two appeared on the \"Patrice Munsel Show\" (1957\u20131958), calling their comedy duo the \"Not Ready for Prime Time Players\", 20 years before the cast of \"Saturday Night Live\" used the same name. In 1957, Thomas booked Bruce into the Slate Brothers nightclub, where he was fired the first night for what \"Variety\" headlined as \"blue material\". This led to the theme of Bruce's first solo album on Berkeley-based Fantasy Records, \"The Sick Humor of Lenny Bruce\", for which Thomas photographed the album cover. Thomas also photographed Bruce's other covers, acted as cinematographer on abortive attempts to film their screenplays, and in 1989 wrote a memoir of their ten-year collaboration, \"Lenny Bruce: The Making of a Prophet\". The 2016 biography of Frank Ray Perilli, \"The Candy Butcher\", devotes a chapter to Perilli's ten-year collaboration with Bruce.\nBruce released four albums of original material on Fantasy Records, later compiled and re-released as \"The Lenny Bruce Originals\". Two later records were produced and sold by Bruce himself, including a 10-inch album of the 1961 San Francisco performances that started his legal troubles. Starting in the late 1960s, other unissued Bruce material was released by Alan Douglas, Frank Zappa and Phil Spector, as well as Fantasy. Bruce developed the complexity and tone of his material in Enrico Banducci's North Beach nightclub, the hungry i, where Mort Sahl had earlier made a name for himself.\nBranded a \"sick comic\", Bruce was essentially blacklisted from television, and when he did appear, thanks to sympathetic fans like Hefner and Steve Allen, it was with great concessions to Broadcast Standards and Practices. Jokes that might offend, like a routine on airplane-glue-sniffing teenagers that was done live for \"The Steve Allen Show\" in 1959, had to be typed out and pre-approved by network officials. On his debut on Allen's show, Bruce made an unscripted comment on the recent marriage of Elizabeth Taylor to Eddie Fisher, wondering, \"Will Elizabeth Taylor become bar mitzvahed?\"\nIn the midst of a severe blizzard, Bruce gave a famous performance at Carnegie Hall at midnight on February 4, 1961. It was recorded and later released as the three-disc set \"The Carnegie Hall Concert\". In his posthumous biography of Bruce, Albert Goldman described that night:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's all a trip\u2014and the best of it is you haven't the faintest idea where you're going! Lenny worshiped the gods of Spontaneity, Candor and Free Association. His greatest fear was getting his act down pat. On this night, he rose to every chance stimulus, every interruption and noise and distraction, with a mad volleying of mental images that suggested the fantastic riches of Charlie Parker's horn. The first flash was simply the spectacle of people piled up in America's most famous concert hall.\nIn August 1965, a year before his death, Bruce gave his penultimate performance at San Francisco's Basin Street West, mainly talking about his legal troubles. The filmed performance was released by Rhino Home Video in 1992 as \"The Lenny Bruce Performance Film\".\nPersonal life.\nIn 1951, Bruce met Honey Harlow, a stripper from Manila, Arkansas. They were married that year, and Bruce was determined to see her stop working as a stripper. The couple left New York in 1953 for the West Coast, where they found work as a double act at the Cup and Saucer in Los Angeles. Bruce joined a bill at the club Strip City. Harlow found employment at the Colony Club, widely known as the best burlesque club in Los Angeles at the time.\nBruce left Strip City in late 1954 and found work at various strip clubs in the San Fernando Valley. As master of ceremonies, he introduced strippers while performing his material. The Valley clubs provided the perfect environment for him to create new routines. According to his primary biographer, Albert Goldman, it was \"precisely at the moment when he sank to the bottom of the barrel and started working the places that were the lowest of the low\" that he suddenly broke free of \"all the restraints and inhibitions and disabilities that formerly had kept him just mediocre and began to blow with a spontaneous freedom and resourcefulness that resembled the style and inspiration of his new friends and admirers, the jazz musicians of the modernist school.\"\nHoney and Lenny's daughter Kathleen (\"Kitty\") Bruce was born in 1955. Honey and Lenny had a tumultuous relationship with many serious domestic disputes, usually the result of serious drug use. They broke up and reunited over and over again between 1956 and Lenny's death in 1966. They first separated in March 1956, and were back together by July of that year when they traveled to Honolulu for a nightclub tour. During the trip, Honey was arrested for marijuana possession and prevented from leaving the island due to her parole conditions. Lenny took this opportunity to leave her again, this time kidnapping one-year-old Kitty. In her autobiography, Honey claimed Lenny turned her in to the police. She was later sentenced to two years in federal prison.\nBruce's divorce from Honey was finalized in 1959. He had an affair with jazz singer Annie Ross in the late 1950s. Comedian Lotus Weinstock was Bruce's girlfriend and fiancee at the time of his death. Bruce had a severe drug addiction in the final decade of his life, using heroin, methamphetamine and Dilaudid daily, and suffering numerous health problems and personal strife as a result. His death was caused by an overdose.\nLegal troubles.\nBruce's desire to help his wife stop working as a stripper led him to pursue schemes designed to make as much money as possible. The most notable was the Brother Mathias Foundation scam, which resulted in Bruce's arrest in Miami, Florida, in 1951 for impersonating a priest. He was soliciting donations for a leper colony in British Guiana (now Guyana) under the auspices of the \"Brother Mathias Foundation\", which he had legally chartered\u2014the name was his own invention, but possibly referred to the actual Brother Matthias who had befriended Babe Ruth at the Baltimore orphanage where Ruth had been confined as a child.\nWhile posing as a laundry man, Bruce stole several priests' clergy shirts and a clerical collar. He was acquitted because of the legality of the New York state-chartered foundation, the actual existence of the Guiana leper colony, and the local clergy's inability to expose him as an impostor. Later, in his semifictional autobiography \"How to Talk Dirty and Influence People\", Bruce said that he had made about $8,000 in three weeks, sending $2,500 to the leper colony and keeping the rest.\nObscenity arrests.\nOn October 4, 1961, Bruce was arrested for obscenity at the Jazz Workshop in San Francisco, where he had used the word \"cocksucker\", and said that \"to is a preposition, come is a verb\"; that the sexual context of 'come' was so common that it bore no weight; and that if someone hearing it became upset, he \"probably can't come\". Although the jury acquitted him, other law enforcement agencies began monitoring his appearances, resulting in frequent arrests under obscenity charges.\nBruce was arrested again in 1961 in Philadelphia for drug possession, and again in Los Angeles two years later. The latter arrest took place in then-unincorporated West Hollywood, and the arresting officer was a deputy named Sherman Block, who later became county sheriff. The charge this time was that the comedian had used the word \"schmuck\", an insulting Yiddish word that was also considered a term for \"penis\". The Hollywood charges were later dismissed.\nOn December 5, 1962, Bruce was arrested on stage at the Gate of Horn folk club in Chicago. That year, he played at Peter Cook's The Establishment club in London, and in April the next year he was barred from entering the United Kingdom by the Home Office as an \"undesirable alien\".\nIn April 1964, he appeared twice at the Cafe Au Go Go in Greenwich Village, with undercover police detectives in the audience. He was arrested along with club owners Howard and Elly Solomon, who were arrested for allowing an obscene performance. On both occasions, Bruce was arrested after leaving the stage.\nA three-judge panel presided over his widely publicized six-month trial, prosecuted by Manhattan Assistant District Attorney Richard Kuh, with Ephraim London and Martin Garbus as the defense attorneys. Bruce and Howard Solomon were found guilty of obscenity on November 4, 1964. The conviction was announced despite positive testimony and petitions of support from\u2014among other artists, writers and educators\u2014Woody Allen, Bob Dylan, Jules Feiffer, Allen Ginsberg, Norman Mailer, William Styron, and James Baldwin, and Manhattan journalist and television personality Dorothy Kilgallen and sociologist Herbert Gans. Bruce was sentenced on December 21, 1964, to four months in a workhouse; he was set free on bail during the appeals process and died before the appeal was decided. Solomon, the owner of the club where Lenny was arrested, later saw Bruce's conviction overturned.\nLater years.\nBruce appeared on network television only six times. In his later club performances, he was known for relating the details of his encounters with the police directly in his comedy routine. These performances often included rants about his court battles over obscenity charges, tirades against fascism, and complaints that he was being denied his right to freedom of speech. He was blacklisted from several clubs in some U.S. cities.\nIn September 1962, his only visit to Australia caused a media storm, although he was neither banned nor forced to leave the country. He was booked for a two-week engagement at Aaron's Exchange Hotel, a small pub in central Sydney, by American-born, Australia-based promoter Lee Gordon, who was by then deeply in debt, nearing the end of his formerly successful career, and desperate to save his business. Bruce's first show at 9:00 p.m. on September 6 was uneventful, but his second show at 11:00 p.m. led to major public controversy. Bruce was heckled by audience members, and when local actress Barbara Wyndon stood up and complained that Bruce was only talking about America and asked him to talk about something different, a clearly annoyed Bruce responded, \"Fuck you, madam. That's different, isn't it?\" Bruce's remark shocked some audience members and several walked out.\nBy the next day, several Sydney papers denounced Bruce as \"sick\"; one illustrated their story with a retouched photograph appearing to show Bruce giving a fascist salute. The venue owners canceled the rest of Bruce's performances, and he retreated to his Kings Cross hotel room. Local university students (including future \"OZ\" magazine editor Richard Neville), who were fans of Bruce's humor, tried to arrange a performance at the Roundhouse at the University of New South Wales, but at the last minute the university's vice-chancellor rescinded permission to use the venue, with no reason given, and an interview Bruce was scheduled to give on Australian television was cancelled by the Australian Broadcasting Commission.\nBruce remained largely confined to his hotel, but eight days later gave his third and last Australian concert at the Wintergarden Theatre in Sydney's eastern suburbs. Although it had a capacity of 2,100, only 200 people attended, including a strong police presence, and Bruce gave what was described as a \"subdued\" performance. It was long rumored that a tape recording of the historic performance was made by police, but it was in fact recorded by local jazz saxophonist Sid Powell, who brought a portable tape recorder to the show. The tape was rediscovered in 2011 in the possession of Australian singer Sammy Gaha, who had acted as Bruce's chauffeur during his visit; it was subsequently donated to the Lenny Bruce audio collection at Brandeis University. Bruce left the country a few days later and spoke little about the experience.\nIncreasing drug use also affected Bruce's health and repeated arrests further caused deterioration to his mental health. By 1966, he had been blacklisted by nearly every nightclub in the U.S. as owners feared prosecution for obscenity. He gave a famous performance at the Berkeley Community Theatre in December 1965, which was recorded and became his last live album, \"The Berkeley Concert\". The performance has been described as lucid, clear and calm, and one of his best. His last performance took place on June 25, 1966, at The Fillmore Auditorium in San Francisco, on a bill with Frank Zappa and The Mothers of Invention. The performance was not remembered fondly by Bill Graham, whose memoir describes Bruce as \"whacked out on amphetamine\"; Graham thought that Bruce finished his set emotionally disturbed. Zappa asked Bruce to sign his draft card, but the suspicious Bruce refused.\nAt the request of Hefner and with the aid of Paul Krassner, Bruce wrote an autobiography that was serialized in \"Playboy\" in 1964 and 1965. It was later published as \"How to Talk Dirty and Influence People\". During this time, Bruce also contributed a number of articles to Krassner's satirical magazine \"The Realist\".\nDeath and posthumous pardon.\nOn August 3, 1966, Bruce was found dead in the bathroom of his Hollywood Hills home. The official photo taken at the scene showed him lying naked on the floor, a syringe and burned bottle cap nearby, along with various other narcotics paraphernalia. Record producer Phil Spector, a friend of Bruce's, bought the negatives of the photographs \"to keep them from the press\". The official cause of death was \"acute morphine poisoning caused by an overdose\".\nBruce's remains were interred in Eden Memorial Park Cemetery in Mission Hills, California, but an unconventional memorial on August 21 was controversial enough to keep his name in the spotlight. Over 500 people came to the service to pay their respects, led by Spector. Cemetery officials tried to block the ceremony after ads for it encouraged attendees to bring box lunches and noisemakers. Delivering the eulogy, featured at the end of the documentary \"Lenny Bruce: Without Tears\", the Rev. William Glenesk said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was in a sense an evangelist, on a street corner. He was a man\u2014up tight against an artificial world ... who shattered its fa\u00e7ades, and its hypocrisy, and\u2014if you will pardon the phrase which seems to become a clich\u00e9\u2014he saw life as it is.\nBruce's epitaph reads: \"Beloved father\u2014devoted son / Peace at last\". Dick Schaap concluded his eulogy to Bruce in \"Playboy\" with the words: \"One last four-letter word for Lenny: Dead. At forty. \"That's\" obscene\". A memorial event was held at the Judson Memorial Church in New York City on August 12, which was \"packed to overflowing\" an hour before it was due to get underway. It was attended by prominent members of the arts community, many of whom also performed, and included Allen Ginsberg, Joe Lee Wilson, Jean Shepherd, Charlie Haden, and The Fugs; Paul Krassner officiated. On December 23, 2003, 37 years after Bruce's death, New York Governor George Pataki granted him a posthumous pardon for his obscenity conviction.\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Perhaps the most profound and cataclysmic change in our popular culture the last few years\u2014matching the \"new sound\" in music\u2014has been the kind of humor exemplified by the Smothers Brothers, \"Laugh-In\", Woody Allen, and that whole breed, whose secret source of strength was the late dark angel, Lenny Bruce.\nBruce was the Gertrude Stein of comedians. Never popular himself\u2014because he was too cryptic and too scatological for popular taste\u2014he nevertheless influenced a whole generation of comics, just as Stein influenced Hemingway and that generation of writers. Her own work was a dead end (so was Bruce's), but out of that compost grew the buds of a flourishing school.\n \u2013 Syndicated columnist Sydney J. Harris, November 5, 1969.\nBruce was the subject of the 1974 biographical drama \"Lenny\", directed by Bob Fosse and starring Dustin Hoffman, who was nominated for a Best Actor Academy Award for the role. It was based on the Broadway stage play of the same name by Julian Barry, which starred Cliff Gorman in his 1972 Tony Award-winning role. The main character's editing of a fictionalized film version of \"Lenny\" was also a major part of Fosse's own autobiopic, the 1979 Academy Award-nominated \"All That Jazz\", where Gorman again played Bruce.\nThe documentary film \"\" (1998), directed by Robert B. Weide and narrated by Robert De Niro, was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature.\nEpisode 12 of season 1 of \"Liberty on Trial in America: Cases That Defined Freedom\", aired on January 3, 2020, explored the ways in which Bruce and the First Amendment affected each other.\nIn 2004, Comedy Central placed Bruce at number three on its list of the 100 greatest stand-ups of all time, above Woody Allen (4th) and below Richard Pryor (1st) and George Carlin (2nd). Both comedians who ranked higher than Bruce considered him a major influence. Pryor said that hearing Bruce for the first time \"changed my life\"; while Carlin said that Bruce was a \"brilliant comedian\" who influenced him as much as a man in his moral thinking and attitudes as he did as a comedian. Carlin was arrested along with Bruce after refusing to provide identification when police raided a Bruce performance.\nBibliography.\nBy others:\nDiscography.\nCompilations.\nThe later compilations are released in the European Union under various oldies labels, as the content used is public domain in the EU.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArticles\n Audio/video "}
{"id": "50019", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50019", "title": "Stoic", "text": "Stoic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50020", "revid": "50022150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50020", "title": "Hope", "text": "Optimistic state of mind\nHope is an optimistic state of mind that is based on an expectation of positive outcomes with respect to events and circumstances in one's own life, or the world at large. As a verb, Merriam-Webster defines \"hope\" as \"to expect with confidence\" or \"to cherish a desire with anticipation\".\nAmong its opposites are dejection, hopelessness, and despair.\nHope finds expression through many dimensions of human life, including practical reasoning, the religious virtue of hope, legal doctrine, and literature, alongside cultural and mythological aspects.\nIn psychology.\nAmerican professor of psychology Barbara Fredrickson argues that hope comes into its own when crisis looms, opening us to new creative possibilities. Frederickson argues that with great need comes an unusually wide range of ideas, as well as such positive emotions as happiness and joy, courage, and empowerment, drawn from four different areas of one's self: from a cognitive, psychological, social, or physical perspective. Such positive thinking bears fruit when based on a realistic sense of optimism, not on a naive \"false hope\".\nThe psychologist Charles R. Snyder linked hope to the existence of a goal, combined with a determined plan for reaching that goal. Alfred Adler had similarly argued for the centrality of goal-seeking in human psychology, as too had philosophical anthropologists like Ernst Bloch. Snyder also stressed the link between hope and mental willpower (hardiness), as well as the need for realistic perception of goals (problem orientation), arguing that the difference between hope and optimism was that the former can look like wishful thinking but the latter provides the energy to find practical pathways for an improved future. D. W. Winnicott saw a child's antisocial behavior as expressing as a cry for help, an unconscious hope, meaning an unspoken desire for a positive outcome for those who are in control in the wider society, when containment within the immediate family had failed. Object relations theory similarly sees the analytic transference as motivated in part by an unconscious hope that past conflicts and traumas can be dealt with anew.\nHope Theory.\nAs a specialist in positive psychology, Snyder studied how hope and forgiveness can impact several aspects of life such as health, work, education, and personal meaning. He postulated that three main things make up hopeful thinking:\nIn other words, hope was defined as the perceived capability to derive pathways to desired goals and motivate oneself via agency thinking to use those pathways.\nSnyder argues that individuals who are able to realize these three components and develop a belief in their ability are hopeful people who can establish clear goals, imagine multiple workable pathways toward those goals, and persevere, even when obstacles get in their way.\nSnyder proposed a \"Hope Scale\" which considered that a person's determination to achieve their goal is their measured hope. Snyder differentiates between adult-measured hope and child-measured hope. The Adult Hope Scale by Snyder contains 12 questions: 4 measuring 'pathways thinking', 4 measuring 'agency thinking', and 4 that are simply fillers. Each subject responds to each question using an 8-point scale. Fibel and Hale measure hope by combining Snyder's Hope Scale with their own Generalized Expectancy for Success Scale (GESS) to empirically measure hope. Snyder regarded that psychotherapy can help focus attention on one's goals, drawing on tacit knowledge of how to reach them. Similarly, there is an \"outlook\" and a \"grasp of reality\" to hope, distinguishing No Hope, Lost Hope, False Hope and Real Hope, which differ in terms of viewpoint and realism.\nContemporary philosopher Richard Rorty understands hope as more than goal setting, rather as a metanarrative, a story that serves as a promise or reason for expecting a better future. Rorty as postmodernist believes past meta-narratives, including the Christian story, utilitarianism, and Marxism have proved false hopes; that theory cannot offer social hope; and that liberal man must learn to live without a consensual theory of social hope. Rorty says a new document of promise is needed for social hope to exist again.\nIn healthcare.\nMajor theories.\nOf the countless models that examine the importance of hope in an individual's life, two major theories have gained a significant amount of recognition in the field of psychology. One of these theories, developed by Charles R. Snyder, argues that hope should be viewed as a cognitive skill that demonstrates an individual's ability to maintain drive in the pursuit of a particular goal. This model reasons that an individual's ability to be hopeful depends on two types of thinking: agency thinking and pathway thinking. Agency thinking refers to an individual's determination to achieve their goals despite possible obstacles, while pathway thinking refers to the ways in which an individual believes they can achieve these personal goals.\nSnyder's theory uses hope as a mechanism that is most often seen in psychotherapy. In these instances, the therapist helps their client overcome barriers that have prevented them from achieving goals. The therapist would then help the client set realistic and relevant personal goals (i.e. \"I am going to find something I am passionate about and that makes me feel good about myself\"), and would help them remain hopeful of their ability to achieve these goals, and suggest the correct pathways to do so.\nWhereas Snyder's theory focuses on hope as a mechanism to overcome an individual's lack of motivation to achieve goals, the other major theory developed by Kaye A. Herth deals more specifically with an individual's future goals as they relate to coping with illnesses. Herth views hope as \"a motivational and cognitive attribute that is theoretically necessary to initiate and sustain action toward goal attainment\". Establishing realistic and attainable goals in this situation is more difficult, as the individual most likely does not have direct control over the future of their health. Instead, Herth suggests that the goals should be concerned with how the individual is going to personally deal with the illness\u2014\"Instead of drinking to ease the pain of my illness, I am going to surround myself with friends and family\".\nWhile the nature of the goals in Snyder's model differ with those in Herth's model, they both view hope as a way to maintain personal motivation, which ultimately will result in a greater sense of optimism.\nMajor empirical findings.\nHope, and more specifically, particularized hope, has been shown to be an important part of the recovery process from illness; it has strong psychological benefits for patients, helping them to cope more effectively with their disease. For example, hope motivates people to pursue healthy behaviors for recovery, such as eating fruits and vegetables, quitting smoking, and engaging in regular physical activity. This not only helps to enhance people's recovery from illnesses but also helps prevent illness from developing in the first place. Patients who maintain high levels of hope have an improved prognosis for life-threatening illness and an enhanced quality of life. Belief and expectation, which are key elements of hope, block pain in patients suffering from chronic illness by releasing endorphins and mimicking the effects of morphine. Consequently, through this process, belief and expectation can set off a chain reaction in the body that can make recovery from chronic illness more likely. This chain reaction is especially evident with studies demonstrating the placebo effect, a situation when hope is the only variable aiding in these patients' recovery.\nOverall, studies have demonstrated that maintaining a sense of hope during a period of recovery from illness is beneficial. A sense of hopelessness during the recovery period has, in many instances, resulted in adverse health conditions for the patient (i.e. depression and anxiety following the recovery process). Additionally, having a greater amount of hope before and during cognitive therapy has led to decreased PTSD-related depression symptoms in war veterans. Hope has also been found to be associated with more positive perceptions of subjective health. However, reviews of research literature have noted that the connections between hope and symptom severity in other mental health disorders are less clear, such as in cases of individuals with schizophrenia.\nHope is a powerful protector against chronic or life-threatening illnesses. A person's hope (even when facing an illness that will likely end their life) can be helpful by finding joy or comfort. It can be created and focused on achieving life goals, such as meeting grandchildren or attending a child's wedding. Hope can be an opportunity for us to process and go through events, that can be traumatic. A setback in life, an accident, or our own final months of living can be times when hope is comfort and serves as a pathway from one stage to the next.\nHope is a powerful emotion that drives us to keep working and moving forward. It gives us the power to survive. In a study conducted by Harvard, Curt Richter experimented with 12 wild rats and 12 domesticated rats. The wild rats, known for their great swimming abilities, survived for only about two minutes when placed in a glass container of water with no way of escape. In contrast, the domesticated rats survived for days. Curt attributed this difference to hope. The domesticated rats hoped to be saved from drowning, but the wild rats had no such hope, as they had never experienced rescue.\nCurt decided to run another experiment with 12 wild rats. He placed them in water, and when they were about to drown, he took them out and held them briefly, creating an experience of hope. He then returned the rats to the water to observe how long they would tread water. Remarkably, they survived just as long as the domesticated rats\u2014about 60 hours. With hope, the rats went from surviving for 2 minutes to treading water for 60 hours.\nHope is a powerful emotion. It drives us to move faster, further, and longer than we thought possible. But for hope to thrive, it must be anchored in something more powerful than ourselves. The rats had hope that a saving hand would come and lift them out of the water.\nApplications.\nThe inclusion of hope in treatment programs has potential in both physical and mental health settings. Hope as a mechanism for improved treatment has been studied in the contexts of PTSD, chronic physical illness, and terminal illness, among other disorders and ailments. Within mental health practice, clinicians have suggested using hope interventions as a supplement to more traditional cognitive behavioral therapies. In terms of support for physical illness, research suggests that hope can encourage the release of endorphins and enkephalins, which help to block pain.\nImpediments.\nThere are two main arguments based on judgment against those who are advocates of using hope to help treat severe illnesses. The first of which is that if physicians have too much hope, they may aggressively treat the patient. The physician will hold on to a small shred of hope that the patient may get better. Thus, this causes them to try methods that are costly and may have many side effects. One physician noted that she regretted having hope for her patient; it resulted in her patient suffering through three more years of pain that the patient would not have endured if the physician had realized recovery was unfeasible.\nThe second argument is the division between hope and wishing. Those that are hopeful are actively trying to investigate the best path of action while taking into consideration the obstacles. Research has shown though that many of those who have \"hope\" are wishfully thinking and passively going through the motions, as if they are in denial about their actual circumstances. Being in denial and having too much hope may negatively impact both the patient and the physician.\nBenefits.\nThe impact that hope can have on a patient's recovery process is strongly supported through both empirical research and theoretical approaches. However, reviews of literature also maintain that more longitudinal and methodologically sound research is needed to establish which hope interventions are actually the most effective, and in what setting (i.e. chronic illness vs. terminal illness).\nIn culture.\nIn the matter of globalization, hope is focused on economic and social empowerment.\nFocusing on parts of Asia, hope has taken on a secular or materialistic form in relation to the pursuit of economic growth. Primary examples are the rise of the economies of China and India, correlating with the notion of Chindia. A secondary relevant example is the increased use of contemporary architecture in rising economies, such as the building of the Shanghai World Financial Center, Burj Khalifa and Taipei 101, which has given rise to a prevailing hope within the countries of origin. In chaotic environments hope is transcended without cultural boundaries, Syrian refugee children are supported by UNESCO's education project through creative education and psycho-social assistance. Other inter-cultural support for instilling hope involve food culture, disengaging refugees from trauma through immersing them in their rich cultural past.\nIn literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hope is the thing with feathers that perches in the soul and sings the tune without the words and never stops at all.\u2014\u200a\nA classic reference to hope which has entered modern language is the concept that \"Hope springs eternal\" taken from Alexander Pope's \"Essay on Man\", the phrase reading \"Hope springs eternal in the human breast, Man never is, but always \"to be\" blest:\" Another popular reference, \"Hope is the thing with feathers,\" is from a poem by Emily Dickinson.\nHope can be used as an artistic plot device and is often a motivating force for change in dynamic characters. A commonly understood reference from western popular culture is the subtitle \"A New Hope\" from the original first installment (now considered Episode IV) in the \"Star Wars\" science fiction space opera. The subtitle refers to one of the lead characters, Luke Skywalker, who is expected in the future to allow good to triumph over evil within the plot of the films.\nThe swallow has been a symbol of hope, in Aesop's fables and numerous other historic literature. It symbolizes hope, in part because it is among the first birds to appear at the end of winter and the start of spring. Other symbols of hope include the anchor and the dove.\nNietzsche took a contrarian but coherent view of hope:-\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... Zeus did not wish man, however much he might be tormented by the other evils, to fling away his life, but to go on letting himself be tormented again and again. Therefore he gives Man hope,\u2014in reality it is the worst of all evils, because it prolongs the torments of Man.\u2014\u200a\nIn mythology.\nElpis (Hope) appears in ancient Greek mythology with the story of Zeus and Prometheus. Prometheus stole fire from the god Zeus, which infuriated the supreme god. In turn, Zeus created a box that contained all manners of evil, unbeknownst to the receiver of the box. Pandora opened the box after being warned not to, and unleashed a multitude of harmful spirits that inflicted plagues, diseases, and illnesses on mankind. Spirits of greed, envy, hatred, mistrust, sorrow, anger, revenge, lust, and despair scattered far and wide looking for humans to torment. Inside the box, however, there was also an unreleased healing spirit named Hope. From ancient times, people have recognized that a spirit of hope had the power to heal afflictions and helps them bear times of great suffering, illnesses, disasters, loss, and pain caused by the malevolent spirits and events. In Hesiod's \"Works and Days\", the personification of hope is named Elpis.\nNorse mythology however considered Hope (\"V\u00f6n\") to be the slobber dripping from the mouth of Fenris Wolf: their concept of courage rated most highly a cheerful bravery in the \"absence\" of hope.\nIn religion.\nHope is a key concept in most major world religions, often signifying the \"hoper\" believes an individual or a collective group will reach a concept of heaven. Depending on the religion, hope can be seen as a prerequisite for and/or byproduct of spiritual attainment.\nJudaism.\nThe Jewish Encyclopedia notes \"ti\u1e33wah\" (\u05ea\u05e7\u05d5\u05d5\u05d4) and \"seber\" as terms for hope, adding that \"mi\u1e33weh\" and \"kislah\" denote the related concept of \"trust\" and that \"to\u1e25elet\" signifies \"expectation\".\nChristianity.\nHope is one of the three theological virtues of the Christian religion, alongside faith and love. \"Hope\" in the Holy Bible means \"a strong and confident expectation\" of future reward (see Titus 1:2). In modern terms, hope is akin to trust and a confident expectation\". Paul the Apostle argued that Christ was a source of hope for Christians: \"For in this hope we have been saved\" (see Romans 8:24).\nAccording to the \"Holman Bible Dictionary\", hope is a \"trustful expectation...the anticipation of a favorable outcome under God's guidance.\" In \"The Pilgrim's Progress\", it is Hopeful who comforts Christian in Doubting Castle; while conversely at the entrance to Dante's Hell were the words, \"Lay down all hope, you that go in by me\".\nHinduism.\nIn historic literature of Hinduism, hope is referred to with \"Pratidhi\" (Sanskrit: \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u0927\u0940), or \"Ap\u00eaksh\" (Sanskrit: \u0905\u092a\u0947\u0915\u094d\u0937). It is discussed with the concepts of desire and wish. In Vedic philosophy, \"karma\" was linked to ritual sacrifices (\"yajna\"), hope and success linked to correct performance of these rituals. In Vishnu Smriti, the image of hope, morals and work is represented as the virtuous man who rides in a chariot directed by his hopeful mind to his desired wishes, drawn by his five senses, who keeps the chariot on the path of the virtuous, and thus is not distracted by the wrongs such as wrath, greed, and other vices.\nIn the centuries that followed, the concept of \"karma\" changed from sacramental rituals to actual human action that builds and serves society and human existence\u2013a philosophy epitomized in the Bhagavad Gita. Hope, in the structure of beliefs and motivations, is a long-term \"karmic\" concept. In Hindu belief, actions have consequences, and while one's effort and work may or may not bear near term fruits, it will serve the good, that the journey of one's diligent efforts (karma) and how one pursues the journey, sooner or later leads to bliss and moksha.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism's teachings are centered around the concept of hope. It puts those who are suffering on a path to a more harmonious world and better well-being. Hope acts as a light to those who are lost or suffering. Factors of Saddha (faith), wisdom, and aspiration work together to form practical hope. Practical hope is the foundation of putting those suffering on a path toward inner freedom and holistic well-being. It instills the belief in positive outcomes even in the midst of suffering and adversity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50021", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50021", "title": "Gift", "text": "Item given to someone without the expectation of anything in return\nA gift or present is an item given to someone (who is not already the owner) without the expectation of payment or anything in return. Although gift-giving might involve an expectation of reciprocity, a gift is intended to be free. In many countries, the act of mutually exchanging money, goods, etc., may sustain social relationships and contribute to social cohesion. Economists have elaborated the economics of gift-giving into the notion of a gift economy. By extension, the term \"gift\" can refer to any item or act of service that makes the other happier or less sad, especially as a favor, including forgiveness and kindness. Gifts are often presented on occasions such as birthdays and holidays.\nHistory.\nThe history of gift-giving is a longstanding human tradition that predates recorded history. The practice has evolved across different cultures and eras, serving various purposes ranging from expressions of love and respect to political allegiance and social obligation. Gift-giving has been documented in archaeological records, ancient literature, religious texts, and historical accounts. Gift-giving has played a central role in social and economic systems throughout human history. Anthropologist Marcel Mauss argued in \"The Gift\" (1925) that gifts in archaic societies were embedded in systems of obligation, where the act of giving, receiving, and reciprocating created enduring social bonds. In many early civilizations, gifts were used for religious offerings, royal tribute, diplomatic negotiations, and public displays of generosity by elites. \nArchaeological evidence suggests that gift-giving existed among early hominins. Anthropologists believe that the exchange of items, such as tools, food, and ornamental objects, played a role in social bonding and the establishment of alliances among hunter-gatherer communities. For example, the Khoisan people of southern Africa practiced gift exchange as part of social interaction and conflict avoidance mechanisms. Over time, gift-giving evolved into a broader practice encompassing both ceremonial and personal exchanges.\nAncient.\nIn Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, gifts were presented to rulers and deities as symbols of devotion or allegiance. Archaeological records and cuneiform tablets describe tributes of grain, livestock, and precious metals given as offerings or tokens of loyalty. Similarly, in Mesopotamian and Sumerian societies, gifts played a role in diplomacy and religious offerings. Kings exchanged gifts to reinforce alliances and display wealth.\nIn ancient Greece and Rome, gift-giving was integral to social and political life. The practice was governed by social norms and expectations, often involving reciprocal obligations. The Roman concept of \"donum\" (gift) extended to both personal and state affairs, including patron-client relationships, religious donations, and diplomatic exchanges.\nIn Homeric epics such as the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\", the giving of gifts, such as weapons, garments, and livestock, was portrayed as a mark of honor and friendship. Greek city-states also exchanged ceremonial gifts during festivals and religious observances.\nIn Ancient Greece, the institution of \"xenia\" (guest-friendship) involved ritualized gift exchanges between hosts and guests. These practices, frequently described in Homeric epics such as the \"Odyssey\", served to strengthen social ties and demonstrate respect.\nIn the Roman world, elites gave \"munera\" (public gifts or services), including gladiatorial games and food distributions, as acts of civic generosity and to enhance political reputation.\nIn Ancient China, gift-giving was guided by the Confucian ideal of \"li\" (ritual propriety). Formal exchanges of gifts\u2014such as jade, scrolls, or tea\u2014were common among the aristocracy and scholars and symbolized respect and social hierarchy.\nMany ancient religious traditions also incorporated gift-giving. In the Rigveda, patrons offered cattle, gold, and horses to priests as part of ritual sacrifices. In Christian tradition, the Magi's presentation of gold, frankincense, and myrrh to the infant Jesus is an early example of symbolic religious gift-giving, commemorated in modern Christmas customs.\nMedieval.\nDuring the Middle Ages in Europe, gift-giving was closely tied to feudal obligations, religious observances, and courtly traditions. Nobles presented gifts to their monarchs as a sign of loyalty, while monarchs rewarded their vassals with land and titles. The Christian Church promoted charitable giving, especially during religious festivals such as Christmas and Easter, which later influenced the development of holiday gifting traditions.\nIn Islamic cultures, gift-giving (\"hiba\") was also significant, both as a religious act and as a practice in hospitality. The Qur'an and Hadith literature encourage believers to give generously to others, particularly the needy and travelers.\nIn the 760s, Bregowin (archbishop of Canterbury) gave a bone casket to Lul (the bishop of Mainz). This was the only known instance of gift-giving between 8th-century missionaries.\nDonations to monasteries in medieval Europe peaked between the 9th and 12th centuries. Eventually, people began to explain this by claiming that monks or other holy people contributed disproportionately to a \"treasure of merit\".\nBy the Renaissance and early modern era, gift-giving in Europe expanded among the merchant and upper classes. The rise of personal letters and tokens, including jewelry and manuscripts, became popular among the literate elite. In royal courts, the exchange of luxury gifts was part of diplomatic protocol.\nIn China, Confucian teachings emphasized the importance of \"li\" (ritual propriety), which included the appropriate giving and receiving of gifts. Elaborate ceremonies and strict etiquette governed imperial gift exchanges and family rituals.\nIn sixteenth and seventeenth century France, gift-giving was often patronage in disguise.131 This was hidden by terms like gr\u00e2ces, bont\u00e9, and bienveillance.137 Sometimes actual gifts were given with patron-client letters. These often included money, hunting birds, food, and cloth, and occasionally messengers as well.140\nModern.\nThe Industrial Revolution significantly transformed gift-giving by introducing mass production and consumer goods. With increased accessibility and affordability, gift-giving became more widespread across socioeconomic classes. The emergence of department stores and catalogs in the 19th century, especially in Western Europe and North America, facilitated the commercial aspect of gifting.\nHoliday gift-giving became institutionalized with events such as Christmas, Valentine's Day, and Mother's Day. Influenced by Victorian customs and Christian traditions, Christmas became a major gift-exchange occasion, particularly in the United Kingdom and the United States.\nGift-giving during Christmas celebrations in the U.S. began in the early 19th century, initially in the Mid-Atlantic region.xvi This kind of celebration was Northern European and had its roots in Lutheran theology.xvi During this era, gifts were usually small and handmade.xvi\nIn the late 19th century, U.S. Christmas celebrations began to grow in scale, with more manufacturing of goods.xvii As early as 1880, the country's businesspeople had begun taking advantage of the holiday to sell more.xix\nIn Japan, Valentine's Day gift giving was introduced by Morozoff Ltd. in 1936, and initially targeted foreigners living near Kobe. The holiday was then reintroduced in the 1950s, but was not popular. It only became popular in the 1970s, when it was framed as a time for women to give gifts to men. To fix the gender imbalance, White Day was introduced for the men to give back to women. The typical gift on Valentine's Day in Japan is \"giri choko\" (\"obligation chocolate\"). Typical gifts on White Day include chocolate, jewelry, and clothes. \nRecent changes in gift-giving have been influenced by technology, consumer preferences, and cultural shifts. In the 20th and 21st centuries, globalized commerce, advertising, and cultural exchange have further diversified gift-giving practices. The expansion of e-commerce and digital platforms has introduced new forms of gifting, such as electronic gift cards and subscription services. There is a growing preference for personalized, handmade, or digitally delivered gifts over traditional store-bought items. Customized gifts like hand-drawn portraits and personalized books are increasingly popular, offering more emotional and cultural significance. E-commerce has played a key role in this transformation, with online platforms providing a convenient way to order personalized and virtual gifts. \nThe article from ScienceDaily discusses research by the University of Bath showing that personalized gifts create lasting emotional connections and boost self-esteem. The study found that recipients of personalized gifts, such as custom portraits, mugs or clothing, feel more cherished and are more likely to value and care for these items. The emotional impact is enhanced when the thought and effort behind the personalization are communicated. Personalized gifts foster deeper relationships and contribute to sustainability. Various online platforms have contributed to this trend by offering personalized gifts like hand-drawn portraits and customized books. University gift shops, such as The Duck Store and The Harvard Shop, have also embraced this trend, offering customized items that reflect their institutions' traditions. \nAdditional gift types that reflect modern personalization trends include custom jewelry or accessories featuring engraved names, initials, or birthstones; personalized greeting cards or art prints; digital gifts such as NFTs or tailored online experiences like personalized video messages; handcrafted wellness products including soaps or candles with custom labels; and themed experience kits, for example, cooking kits with personalized recipes.\nPresentation.\nIn many cultures gifts are traditionally packaged in some way. For example, in Western cultures, gifts are often wrapped in wrapping paper and accompanied by a gift note which may note the occasion, the recipient's name and the giver's name. In Chinese culture, red wrapping connotes luck. Although inexpensive gifts are common among colleagues, associates and acquaintances, expensive or amorous gifts are considered more appropriate among close friends, romantic interests or relatives.\nGift-giving occasions.\nGift-giving occasions may be:\nPromotional gifts.\nPromotional gifts differ from regular gifts. Recipients may include employees or clients. These gifts are primarily used for advertising. They help promote the brand name and increase its awareness. In promotional gifting, the quality and presentation of the gifts are more important than the gifts themselves, as they serve as a gateway to acquire new clients or associates. \nAs reinforcement and manipulation.\nGiving a gift to someone is not necessarily just an altruistic act. It may be given in the hope that the receiver reciprocates in a particular way. It may take the form of positive reinforcement as a reward for compliance, possibly for an underhand manipulative and abusive purpose.\nUnwanted gifts.\nGiving the appropriate gift that aligns with the recipient's preferences poses a formidable challenge. Gift givers commonly err in the process of gift selection, either by offering gifts that the recipients' do not wish to receive or by failing to provide gifts that recipients earnestly desired. For example, givers avoid giving the same gifts more than once while recipients are more open to receiving a repeated gift, givers prefer to avoid giving self-improvement products (e.g., self-help books) as gifts while recipients are more open to receiving such gifts, when choosing between giving digital and physical gift cards, givers opt for the latter more often than recipients want, and many receivers prefer a future experience instead of an object, or a practical gift that they have requested over a more expensive, showier gift chosen by the giver. One cause of the mismatch between the giver's and receiver's view is that the giver is focused on the act of giving the gift, while the receiver is more interested in the long-term utilitarian value of the gift.\nDue to the mismatch between givers' and recipients' gift preferences, a significant fraction of gifts are unwanted, or the giver pays more for the item than the recipient values it, resulting in a misallocation of economic resources known as a deadweight loss. Unwanted gifts are often \"regifted\", donated to charity, or thrown away. A gift that actually imposes a burden on the recipient, either due to maintenance or storage or disposal costs, is known as a white elephant.\nOne means of reducing the mismatch between the buyer and receivers' tastes is advance coordination, often undertaken in the form of a wedding registry or Christmas list. Wedding registries in particular are often kept at a single store, which can designate the exact items to be purchased (resulting in matching housewares), and to coordinate purchases so the same gift is not purchased by different guests. One study found that wedding guests who departed from the registry typically did so because they wished to signal a closer relationship to the couple by personalizing a gift, and also found that as a result of not abiding by the recipients' preferences, their gifts were appreciated less often. \nAn estimated $3.4 billion was spent on unwanted Christmas gifts in the United States in 2017 and $10.1 billion in 2024 .The day after Christmas is typically the busiest day for returns in countries with large Christmas gift giving traditions. The total unredeemed value of gift cards purchased in the U.S. each year is estimated to be about a billion dollars.\nIn some cases, people know the preferences of recipients very well, and can give highly valued gifts. Some value in gift-giving comes from assisted preference discovery - people receiving gifts they did not know they would like, or which they did not know were available. Behavioral economists propose that the non-material value of gifts lies in strengthening relationships by signalling the giver was thoughtful, or spent time and effort on the gift.\nLegal aspects.\nAt common law, for a gift to have legal effect, it was required that there be (1) intent by the donor to give a gift, and (2) delivery to the recipient of the item to be given as a gift.\nIn some countries, certain types of gifts above a certain monetary amount are subject to taxation. For the United States, see Gift tax in the United States.\nIn some contexts, gift giving can be construed as bribery. This tends to occur in situations where the gift is given with an implicit or explicit agreement between the giver of the gift and its receiver that some type of service will be rendered (often outside of normal legitimate methods) because of the gift. Some groups, such as government workers, may have strict rules concerning gift giving and receiving so as to avoid the appearance of impropriety.\nCross border monetary gifts are subject to taxation in both source and destination countries based on the treaty between the two countries.\nReligious views.\nLewis Hyde claims in \"The Gift\" that Christianity considers the Incarnation and subsequent death of Jesus to be the greatest gift to humankind, and that the Jataka contains a tale of the Buddha in his incarnation as the Wise Hare giving the ultimate alms by offering himself up as a meal for Sakka. (Hyde, 1983, 58\u201360)\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, the bread and wine that are consecrated during the Divine Liturgy are referred to as \"the Gifts.\" They are first of all the gifts of the community (both individually and corporately) to God, and then, after the epiklesis, the Gifts of the Body and Blood of Christ to the Church.\nRitual sacrifices can be seen as return gifts to a deity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50022", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50022", "title": "Lancaster, Ohio", "text": "Lancaster ( ) is a city in Fairfield County, Ohio, and its county seat. The population was 40,552 at the 2020 United States census, making it Ohio's 30th largest city, having surpassed Warren and Findlay due to its own growth while the latter two cities declined. The city is near the Hocking River in the south-central part of the state, about southeast of Columbus and southwest of Zanesville. It is part of the Columbus metropolitan area.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known inhabitants of the southeastern and central Ohio region were the Hopewell, Adena, and Fort Ancient Native Americans, of whom little evidence survived, beyond the burial and ceremonial mounds built throughout the Ohio and Mississippi Valleys. Many mounds and burial sites have also yielded archaeological artifacts. Serpent Mound and Hopewell Culture National Historical Park, though not in Fairfield County, are nearby.\nBefore and immediately after European settlement, the land today comprising Lancaster and Fairfield County was inhabited by the Shawnee, nations of the Iroquois, Wyandot, and other Native American tribes. It served as a natural crossroads for the inter- and intra-tribal wars fought at various times. Frontier explorer Christopher Gist reached Lancaster's vicinity on January 19, 1751, when he visited the small Delaware town of Hockhocking nearby. Leaving the area the next day, Gist rode southwest to Maguck, another Delaware town near Circleville.\nHaving been ceded to the United States by Great Britain after the American Revolution in the Treaty of Paris, the lands north of the Ohio River and west of the Appalachian Mountains were incorporated into the Northwest Territory in 1787. White settlers began to encroach on Native American lands in the Northwest Territory. As the new United States government began to cast its eye westward, the stage was set for the series of campaigns that culminated in the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 and the Treaty of Greenville in 1795. With pioneer settlement within Ohio made legal and safe from Indian raids, developers began to speculate in land sales in earnest.\nKnowing that such speculation, combined with congressional grants of land sections to veterans of the Revolution, could result in a lucrative opportunity, in 1796 Ebenezer Zane petitioned Congress to grant him a contract to blaze a trail through Ohio, from Wheeling, West Virginia, to Limestone, Kentucky (near modern Maysville, Kentucky), a distance of . As part of the deal, Zane was awarded square-mile tracts of land at the points where his trace crossed the Hocking, Muskingum, and Scioto Rivers. Zane's Trace, as it is now known, was completed by 1797. As Zane's sons began to carve the square-mile tract astride the Hocking into saleable plots, the village of Lancaster was founded in 1800. Lancaster antedated the formal establishment of the state of Ohio by three years. Many villages and townships right outside Lancaster, such as Lithopolis, Royalton, and Greencastle, were settled around the same time, which contributed to the village's success.\nInitially known as New Lancaster, and later shortened by city ordinance (1805), the town quickly grew; formal incorporation as a city came in 1831. The connection of the Hocking Canal to the Ohio and Erie Canal in this era provided a way for the region's rich agricultural produce to reach eastern markets.\nThe initial settlers were predominantly German immigrants and their descendants, many from Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Ohio's longest continuously operating newspaper, the \"Lancaster Eagle-Gazette\", was born of a merger of the early \"Ohio Adler\", founded around 1807, with the \"Ohio Gazette\", founded in the 1830s. The two papers were ferocious competitors since they were on opposite sides of the American Civil War, with the \"Adler\" antislavery and pro-Union. The city also had numerous migrants from the Upper South who sympathized with the Confederacy. The papers merged in 1937, 72 years after the war's end. This was shortly after the \"Gazette\" was acquired by glassmaker Anchor-Hocking. The newspaper is currently part of the Newspaper Network of Central Ohio, a unit of Gannett Company, Inc.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is covered by water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city's median household income was $44,794 and median family income was $59,930. Males had a median income of $36,169 versus $24,549 for females. The city's per capita income was $25,230. About 12.0% of all families (4.4% of married-couple families), and 16.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.0% of those under age 18 and 10.0% of those over 65.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, 40,438 people, 16,451 households, and 9,951 families were residing in the city. The population density was . The 18,250 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 92.5% White, 1.8% African American, 0.3% Asian, 0.20% Native American, 0.2% from other races, and 5.0% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 1.8% of the population.\nOf the 16,451 households, 30.9% had children under 18 living with them, 43.7% were married couples living together, 12.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.5% were not families. About 31.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.3% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.39, and the average family size was 2.97.\nIn the city, the age distribution was 22.3% under 18, and 17.4% who were 65 or older. The median age was 39.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 88.6 males.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, 38,780 people, 16,048 households, and 9,937 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 17,685 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 95.9% White, 1.0% African American, 0.5% Asian, 0.30% Native American, 0.6% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 1.6% of the population.\nOf the 16,048 households, 27.8% had children under 18 living with them, 42.4% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.1% were not families. About 31.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.8% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.36, and the average family size was 2.95.\nIn the city, the age distribution was 24% under the age of 18 and 15.7% who were 65 or older. The median age was 37.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.6 males.\nEconomy.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2021 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, Lancaster's top employers are:\nArts and culture.\nLancaster is home to the Fairfield County Fair, a weeklong fair and the last (88th) county fair in Ohio each year, always in the second week of October. It features a variety of attractions, including truck, tractor, and horse pulls, demolition derbies, concerts, bands, and horse races. The Fairfield County Fair also includes food, animals, exhibits, games, and rides for people of all ages.\nAHA! A Hands-on Adventure.\nAHA! is a children's museum founded in 2006. Its mission is to provide a hands-on, interactive, playful, and educational environment that invites curiosity, allows exploration, encourages participation, and celebrates the child-like wonder in everyone.\nGeorgian Museum.\nOriginally built in 1832 for the Maccracken Family, this Federal-style home is constructed predominantly of brick and local limestone. Converted into a museum, it is now furnished as it would have been in the 1830s with some original pieces and numerous early Fairfield County items. Located in one of Lancaster's three national historic districts, the structure mixes elements of American, Georgian, and Regency architecture.\nThe Decorative Arts Center of Ohio.\nThe Decorative Arts Center of Ohio is a nonprofit museum whose mission is to foster knowledge and appreciation of the decorative arts, celebrate the architecture and heritage of the Reese-Peters House, and enhance historic Lancaster's vitality and integrity. It provides exhibitions, public programs, art classes, and workshops for all ages, and a focus for research and communication about the decorative arts of Ohio.\nOhio Glass Museum.\nOpened in 2002, the Ohio Glass Museum is in historic downtown Lancaster and dedicated to recording the history of the glass industry, which for over 100 years has been one of the mainstays of Fairfield County's economy.\nSherman House.\nLancaster was the birthplace of Civil War General William Tecumseh Sherman and his brother, Senator John Sherman. The house where they were born, built in 1811, has been converted into a museum, housing articles related to General Sherman's life and Civil War artifacts. The Sherman family expanded the frame house in 1816 and again, with an additional brick front, in 1870.\nRobert K Fox Family YMCA Swim Team.\nThe Robert K Fox Family YMCA Swim Team (LYST, or Lancaster YMCA Swim Team), is a competitive, year-round swim team coached by Axel Birnbrich and a team of experienced assistant coaches. Birnbirch is in his 39th year of coaching and his second year at LYST. The team has swimmers from ages 5\u201318 and around 130 members per year. They regularly attend the YMCA Short Course and Long Course national meets. They are also a USA Swimming team, attending many USA meets per season.\nShopping.\nThe city's main shopping district is centered around River Valley Mall, or downtown Lancaster.\nEducation.\nLancaster City School District operates Lancaster High School. Lancaster has a public library, a branch of the Fairfield County District Library. Additionally, Ohio University-Lancaster is a branch campus of Ohio University that operates in the area.\nMedia.\nLancaster has a daily newspaper, the \"Lancaster Eagle-Gazette\".\nLancaster has a monthly magazine, the \"Lancaster Living Magazine,\" published by Cher Jaurigue.\nNotable people.\nLancaster is the birthplace and/or hometown of:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50023", "revid": "50263362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50023", "title": "Apostasy", "text": "Formal disaffiliation of a religious belief\nApostasy (; ) is the formal disaffiliation from, abandonment of, or renunciation of a religion by a person. It can also be defined within the broader context of embracing an opinion that is contrary to one's previous religious beliefs. One who undertakes apostasy is known as an apostate. Undertaking apostasy is called apostatizing (or apostasizing \u2013 also spelled apostacizing). The term \"apostasy\" is used by sociologists to mean the renunciation \"and\" criticism of, or opposition to, a person's former religion, in a technical sense, with no pejorative connotation.\nOccasionally, the term is also used metaphorically to refer to the renunciation of a non-religious belief or cause, such as a political party, social movement, or sports team.\nApostasy is generally not a self-definition: few former believers call themselves apostates due to the term's negative connotation.\nMany religious groups and some states punish apostates; this may be the official policy of a particular religious group or it may simply be the voluntary action of its members. Such punishments may include shunning, excommunication, verbal abuse, physical violence, or even execution.\nSociological definitions.\nThe American sociologist Lewis A. Coser (following the German philosopher and sociologist Max Scheler) defines an apostate as not just a person who experienced a dramatic change in conviction but \"a man who, even in his new state of belief, is spiritually living not primarily in the content of that faith, in the pursuit of goals appropriate to it, but only in the struggle against the old faith and for the sake of its negation.\"\nThe American sociologist David G. Bromley defined the apostate role as follows and distinguished it from the defector and whistleblower roles.\nStuart A. Wright, an American sociologist and author, asserts that apostasy is a unique phenomenon and a distinct type of religious defection in which the apostate is a defector \"who is aligned with an oppositional coalition in an effort to broaden the dispute, and embraces public claims-making activities to attack his or her former group.\"\nHuman rights.\nThe United Nations Commission on Human Rights, considers the recanting of a person's religion a human right legally protected by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Committee observes that the freedom to 'have or to adopt' a religion or belief necessarily entails the freedom to choose a religion or belief, including the right to replace one's current religion or belief with another or to adopt atheistic views\u00a0... Article 18.2 bars coercion that would impair the right to have or adopt a religion or belief, including the use of threat of physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion or belief or to convert.\nHistory.\nAs early as the 3rd century AD, apostasy against the Zoroastrian faith in the Sasanian Empire was criminalized. The high priest, Kidir, instigated pogroms against Jews, Christians, Buddhists, and others in an effort to solidify the hold of the state religion.\nAs the Roman Empire adopted Christianity as its state religion, apostasy became formally criminalized in the Theodosian Code, followed by the Corpus Juris Civilis (the Justinian Code). The Justinian Code went on to form the basis of law in most of Western Europe during the Middle Ages and so apostasy was similarly persecuted to varying degrees in Europe throughout this period and into the early modern period. Eastern Europe similarly inherited many of its legal traditions regarding apostasy from the Romans, but not from the Justinian Code. Medieval sects deemed heretical such as the Waldensians were considered apostates by the Church.\nAtrocity story.\nThe term atrocity story, also referred to as an atrocity tale, as it is defined by the American sociologists David G. Bromley and Anson D. Shupe refers to the symbolic presentation of action or events (real or imaginary) in such a context that they are made flagrantly to violate the (presumably) shared premises upon which a given set of social relationships should be conducted. The recounting of such tales is intended as a means of reaffirming normative boundaries. By sharing the reporter's disapproval or horror, an audience reasserts normative prescription and clearly locates the violator beyond the limits of public morality. The term was coined in 1979 by Bromley, Shupe, and Joseph Ventimiglia.\nBromley and others define an atrocity as an event that is perceived as a flagrant violation of a fundamental value. It contains the following three elements:\nThe term \"atrocity story\" is controversial as it relates to the differing views amongst scholars about the credibility of the accounts of former members.\nBryan R. Wilson, Reader Emeritus of Sociology of the University of Oxford, says apostates of new religious movements are generally in need of self-justification, seeking to reconstruct their past and to excuse their former affiliations, while blaming those who were formerly their closest associates. Wilson, thus, challenges the reliability of the apostate's testimony by saying that the apostate\nand\nWilson also asserts that some apostates or defectors from religious organisations rehearse atrocity stories to explain how, by manipulation, coercion or deceit, they were recruited to groups that they now condemn.\nJean Duhaime of the Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al writes, referring to Wilson, based on his analysis of three books by apostates of new religious movements, that stories of apostates cannot be dismissed only because they are subjective.\nDanny Jorgensen, Professor at the Department of Religious Studies of the University of Florida, in his book \"The Social Construction and Interpretation of Deviance: Jonestown and the Mass Media\" argues that the role of the media in constructing and reflecting reality is particularly apparent in its coverage of cults. He asserts that this complicity exists partly because apostates with an atrocity story to tell make themselves readily available to reporters and partly because new religious movements have learned to be suspicious of the media and, therefore, have not been open to investigative reporters writing stories on their movement from an insider's perspective. Besides this lack of information about the experiences of people within new religious movements, the media is attracted to sensational stories featuring accusations of food and sleep deprivation, sexual and physical abuse, and excesses of spiritual and emotional authority by the charismatic leader.\nMichael Langone argues that some will accept uncritically the positive reports of current members without calling such reports, for example, \"benevolence tales\" or \"personal growth tales\". He asserts that only the critical reports of ex-members are called \"tales\", which he considers to be a term that clearly implies falsehood or fiction. He states that it wasn't until 1996 that a researcher conducted a study to assess the extent to which so called \"atrocity tales\" might be based on fact.\nApostasy and contemporary criminal law.\nApostasy is a criminal offence in the following countries:\nFrom 1985 to 2006, the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom listed a total of four cases of execution for apostasy in the Muslim world: one in Sudan (1985), two in Iran (1989, 1998), and one in Saudi Arabia (1992).\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nBoth marginal and apostate Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have existed in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith community who are known as \"n\u0101qe\u017c\u012bn\".\nMuslims often regard adherents of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith as apostates from Islam, and there have been cases in some Muslim countries where Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have been harassed and persecuted.\nChristianity.\nThe Christian understanding of apostasy is \"a willful falling away from, or rebellion against, Christian 'truth.' Apostasy is the rejection of Christ by one who has been a Christian\u00a0...\", but the Reformed Churches teach that, in contrast to the conditional salvation of Lutheran, Roman Catholic, Methodist, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox theology, salvation cannot be lost once accepted (perseverance of the saints).\n\"Apostasy is the antonym of conversion; it is deconversion.\" B. J. Oropeza states that apostasy is a \"phenomenon that occurs when a religious follower or group of followers turn away from or otherwise repudiate the central beliefs and practices they once embraced in a respective religious community.\" The Ancient Greek noun \u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 \"apostasia\" (\"rebellion, abandonment, state of apostasy, defection\") is found only twice in the New Testament (Acts 21:21; 2 Thessalonians 2:3). However, \"the concept of apostasy is found throughout Scripture.\" \"The Dictionary of Biblical Imagery\" states that \"There are at least four distinct images in Scripture of the concept of apostasy. All connote an intentional defection from the faith.\" These images are: Rebellion; Turning Away; Falling Away; Adultery.\nSpeaking with specific regard to apostasy in Christianity, Michael Fink writes:\nApostasy is certainly a biblical concept, but the implications of the teaching have been hotly debated. The debate has centered on the issue of apostasy and salvation. Based on the concept of God's sovereign grace, some hold that, though true believers may stray, they never totally fall away. Others affirm that any who fall away were never really saved. Though they may have \"believed\" for a while, they never experienced regeneration. Still others argue that the biblical warnings against apostasy are real and that believers maintain the freedom, at least potentially, to reject God's salvation.\nIn the recent past, in the Roman Catholic Church the word was also applied to the renunciation of monastic vows (\"apostasis a monachatu\"), and to the abandonment of the clerical profession for the life of the world (\"apostasis a clericatu\") without necessarily amounting to a rejection of Christianity.\nPenalties.\nApostasy was one of the sins for which the early church imposed perpetual penance and excommunication. Christianity rejected the removal of heretics and apostates by force, leaving the final punishment to God. As a result, the first millennium saw only one single official execution of a heretic, the Priscillian case. Classical canon law viewed apostasy as distinct from heresy and schism. Apostasy \"a fide\", defined as total repudiation of the Christian faith, was considered as different from a theological standpoint and from heresy, but subject to the same penalty of death by fire by decretist jurists. The influential 13th-century theologian Hostiensis recognized three types of apostasy. The first was conversion to another faith, which was considered traitorous and could bring confiscation of property or even the death penalty. The second and third, which was punishable by expulsion from home and imprisonment, consisted of breaking major commandments and breaking the vows of religious orders, respectively.\nA decretal by Boniface VIII (pope between 1294-1303) classified apostates together with heretics with respect to the penalties incurred. Although it mentioned only apostate Jews explicitly, it was applied to all apostates, and the Spanish Inquisition used it to persecute both the Marrano Jews, who had been converted to Christianity by force, and to the Moriscos who had professed to convert to Christianity from Islam under pressure.\nTemporal penalties for Christian apostates have fallen into disuse in the modern era.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witness publications define \"apostasy\" as the abandonment of the worship and service of God, constituting rebellion against God, or rejecting \"Jehovah's organization\". They apply the term to a range of conduct, including open dissent with the denomination's doctrines, celebration of \"false religious holidays\" (including Christmas and Easter), and participation in activities and worship of other religions. A member of the denomination who is accused of apostasy is typically required to appear before a committee of elders that decides whether the individual is to be shunned by all congregants including immediate family members not living in the same home. Baptized individuals who leave the organization because they disagree with the denomination's teachings are also regarded as apostates and are shunned.\nWatch Tower Society literature describes apostates as \"mentally diseased\" individuals who can \"infect others with their disloyal teachings\". Former members who are defined as apostates are said to have become part of the antichrist and are regarded as more reprehensible than non-Witnesses.\nLatter-day Saints (Mormonism).\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) are considered by church leadership to engage in apostasy when they publicly teach or espouse opinions and doctrines contrary to the teachings of the church, or act in clear and deliberate public opposition to the LDS Church, its doctrines and policies, or its leaders. This includes advocating for or practicing doctrines like those followed in apostate sects, such as plural marriage, more commonly known as polygamy. In such circumstances the church will frequently subject the non-conforming member to a church membership council which may result in membership restrictions (a temporary loss of church participation privileges) or membership withdrawal (a loss of church membership).\nHinduism.\nHinduism does not have a \"unified system of belief encoded in a declaration of faith or a creed\", but is rather an umbrella term comprising the plurality of religious phenomena of India. In general Hinduism is more tolerant to apostasy than other faiths based on a scripture or commandments with a lower emphasis on orthodoxy and has a more open view on how a person chooses their faith. Some Hindu sects believe that ethical conversion, without force or reward is completely acceptable, though deserting ones clan guru is considered sinful (Guru droham).\nThe Vashistha Dharmasastra, the Apastamba Dharmasutra and Yajnavalkya state that a son of an apostate is also considered an apostate. Smr\u0325ticandrik\u0101 lists apostates as one group of people upon touching whom, one should take a bath. K\u0101ty\u0101yana condemns a Brahmin who has apostatised to banishment while a Vaishya or a Shudra to serve the king as a slave. N\u0101radasm\u1e5bti and Parasara-samhita states that a wife can remarry if her husband becomes an apostate. The saint Parashara commented that religious rites are disturbed if an apostate witnesses them. He also comments that those who forgo the Rig Veda, Samaveda and Yajurveda are \"nagna\" (naked) or an apostate.\nBuddhism.\nApostasy is generally not acknowledged in orthodox Buddhism. People are free to leave Buddhism and renounce the religion without any consequence enacted by the Buddhist community.\nDespite this marked tolerance, some Buddhist circles hold to a notion of heresy (\u5916\u9053, pinyin: \"W\u00e0id\u00e0o\"; romaji: \"ged\u014d\"; lit. \"outside path\") and teach that one who renounces the Buddha's teachings has the potential of inflicting suffering on themselves.\nMany Buddhists take the view that there is no absolute basis for anything. The ideas from some of the Tath\u0101gata schools has been referred to as \"hypostasising an absolute\", meaning specifically not apostasy (losing belief); hypostasy in that context means \"falling into belief\".\nIslam.\nIn Islamic literature, apostasy is called \"irtid\u0101d\" or \"ridda\"; an apostate is called \"murtadd\", which literally means 'one who turns back' from Islam. Someone born to a Muslim parent, or who has previously converted to Islam, becomes a \"murtadd\" if he or she verbally denies any principle of belief prescribed by the Quran or a Hadith, deviates from approved Islamic belief (\"ilhad\"), or if he or she commits an action such as treating a copy of the Qur\u02bean with disrespect. A person born to a Muslim parent who later rejects Islam is called a \"murtad fitri\", and a person who converted to Islam and later rejects the religion is called a \"murtad milli\".\nOrigin.\nThere are multiple verses in the Quran that condemn apostasy. In addition, there are multiple verses in the Hadith that condemn apostasy. Example quote from the Quran: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They wish you would disbelieve as they disbelieved so you would be alike. So do not take from among them allies until they emigrate for the cause of All\u0101h. But if they turn away [i.e., refuse], then seize them and kill them [for their betrayal] wherever you find them and take not from among them any ally or helper\u2014\u200a\nThe concept and punishment of Apostasy has been extensively covered in Islamic literature since the 7th century. A person is considered apostate if he or she converts from Islam to another religion. A person is an apostate even if he or she believes in most of Islam, but denies one or more of its principles or precepts, both verbally or in writing. \nSunan an-Nasa'i \u00bbThe Book of Fighting [The Prohibition of Bloodshed] \u2013 \u0643\u062a\u0627\u0628 \u062a\u062d\u0631\u064a\u0645 \u0627\u0644\u062f\u0645 (14) Chapter: The Ruling on Apostates (14)\u0628\u0627\u0628 \u0627\u0644\u0652\u062d\u064f\u0643\u0652\u0645\u0650 \u0641\u0650\u064a \u0627\u0644\u0652\u0645\u064f\u0631\u0652\u062a\u064e\u062f\u0650\u0651 Ibn 'Abbas said: \"The Messenger of Allah [SAW] said: 'Whoever changes his religion, kill him.'\"Grade: Sahih (Darussalam) Reference : Sunan an-Nasa'i 4059 In-book reference : Book 37, Hadith 94 English translation Vol. 5, Book 37, Hadith 4064.\nMuslim historians recognize 632\u00a0AD as the year when the first regional apostasy from Islam emerged, immediately after the death of Muhammed. The civil wars that followed are now called the Riddah wars (Wars of Islamic Apostasy).\nDoubting the existence of Allah, making offerings to and worshipping an idol, a stupa or any other image of God, confessing a belief in the rebirth or incarnation of God, disrespecting the Quran or Islam's Prophets are all considered sufficient evidence of apostasy.\nAccording to some scholars, if a Muslim consciously and without coercion declares their rejection of Islam and does not change their mind after the time allocated by a judge for research, then the penalty for apostasy is; for males, death, and for females, life imprisonment. However, a Federal Sharia court judge in Pakistan stated \"...persecuting any citizen of an Islamic State\u00a0\u2013 whether he is a Muslim, or a dhimmi**\u00a0\u2013 is construed as waging a war against Allah and His Messenger.\"\nPublic opinion.\nAccording to the Ahmadiyya Muslim sect, there is no punishment for apostasy, neither in the Quran nor as it was taught by Muhammad. The Ahmadiyya Muslim sect's position is not widely accepted by clerics in other sects of Islam, and the Ahmadiyya sect of Islam acknowledges that major sects have a different interpretation and definition of apostasy in Islam. Ulama of major sects of Islam consider the Ahmadi Muslim sect as \"kafirs\" (infidels) and apostates.\nApostasy laws.\nApostasy is subject to the death penalty in some countries, such as Iran and Saudi Arabia, although executions for apostasy are rare. Apostasy is legal in secular Muslim countries such as Turkey. In numerous Islamic majority countries, many individuals have been arrested and punished for the crime of apostasy without any associated capital crimes.\nIn an effort to circumvent the United Nations Commission on Human Rights's ruling on an individual's right to conversion from and denunciation of a religion, some offenders of the ruling have argued that their \"obligations to Islam are irreconcilable with international law.\" United Nations Special Rapporteur Heiner Bielefeldt recommended to the United Nations Human Rights Council on the issues of freedom of religion or belief that \"States should repeal any criminal law provisions that penalize apostasy, blasphemy and proselytism as they may prevent persons belonging to religious or belief minorities from fully enjoying their freedom of religion or belief.\"\nMany Muslims consider the Islamic law on apostasy and the punishment for it to be one of the immutable laws under Islam. It is a \"hudud\" crime, which means it is a crime against God, and the punishment has been fixed by God. The punishment for apostasy includes state enforced annulment of his or her marriage, seizure of the person's children and property with automatic assignment to guardians and heirs, and death for the apostate.\nPublic opinion.\nAccording to a Pew Research study up to 15% of Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Russia, Kosovo, Albania, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan were in favor of a death penalty for converts, 15\u201330% in Turkey, Thailand, Tajikistan, and Tunisia, 30\u201350% in Bangladesh, Lebanon, and Iraq, and 50\u201386% in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Palestine, Jordan, and Egypt. The study included percentages only for Muslims in favor of sharia law and did not include Azerbaijan because it had a small sample size. A similar survey of the Muslim population in the United Kingdom, in 2007, found nearly a third of 16 to 24-year-old faithful believed that Muslims who convert to another religion should be executed, while less than a fifth of those over 55 believed the same. There is disagreement among contemporary Islamic scholars about whether the death penalty is an appropriate punishment for apostasy in the 21st century. A belief among more liberal Islamic scholars is that the apostasy laws were created and are still implemented as a means to consolidate \"religio-political\" power.\nJudaism.\nThe term apostasy is derived from Ancient Greek \u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 from \u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03c3\u03c4\u03ac\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2, meaning \"political rebel\", as applied to rebellion against God, its law and the faith of Israel (in Hebrew \u05de\u05e8\u05d3) in the Hebrew Bible. Other expressions for apostate as used by rabbinical scholars are \"mumar\" (\u05de\u05d5\u05de\u05e8, literally \"the one that is changed\") and \"poshea yisrael\" (\u05e4\u05d5\u05e9\u05e2 \u05d9\u05e9\u05e8\u05d0\u05dc, literally, \"transgressor of Israel\"), or simply \"kofer\" (\u05db\u05d5\u05e4\u05e8, literally \"denier\" and heretic).\nThe Torah states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If your brother, the son of your mother, your son or your daughter, the wife of your bosom, or your friend who is as your own soul, secretly entices you, saying, 'Let us go and serve other gods,' which you have not known, neither you nor your fathers, of the gods of the people which are all around you, near to you or far off from you, from one end of the earth to the other end of the earth, you shall not consent to him or listen to him, nor shall your eye pity him, nor shall you spare him or conceal him; but you shall surely kill him; your hand shall be first against him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. And you shall stone him with stones until he dies, because he sought to entice you away from the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.\nIn 1 Kings, King Solomon is warned in a dream which \"darkly portray[s] the ruin that would be caused by departure from God\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you or your sons at all turn from following Me, and do not keep My commandments and My statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods and worship them, then I will cut off Israel from the land which I have given them; and this house which I have consecrated for My name I will cast out of My sight. Israel will be a proverb and a byword among all peoples.\nThe prophetic writings of Isaiah and Jeremiah provide many examples of defections of faith found among the Israelites (e.g., Isaiah 1:2\u20134 or Jeremiah 2:19), as do the writings of the prophet Ezekiel (e.g., Ezekiel 16 or 18). Israelite kings were often guilty of apostasy, examples including Ahab (I Kings 16:30\u201333), Ahaziah (I Kings 22:51\u201353), Jehoram (2 Chronicles 21:6, 10), Ahaz (2 Chronicles 28:1\u20134), or Amon (2 Chronicles 33:21\u201323) among others. Amon's father Manasseh was also apostate for many years of his long reign, although towards the end of his life he renounced his apostasy (cf. 2 Chronicles 33:1\u201319).\nIn the Talmud, Elisha ben Abuyah is singled out as an apostate and \"Epikoros\" (Epicurean) by the Pharisees.\nDuring the Spanish Inquisition, a systematic conversion of Jews to Christianity took place to avoid expulsion from the crowns of Castille and Aragon as had been the case previously elsewhere in medieval Europe. Although the vast majority of \"conversos\" simply assimilated into the Catholic dominant culture, a minority continued to practice Judaism in secret, gradually migrated throughout Europe, North Africa, and the Ottoman Empire, mainly to areas where Sephardic communities were already present as a result of the Alhambra Decree. Tens of thousands of Jews were baptised in the three months before the deadline for expulsion, some 40,000 if one accepts the totals given by Kamen, most of these undoubtedly to avoid expulsion, rather than as a sincere change of faith. These \"conversos\" were the principal concern of the Inquisition; being suspected of continuing to practice Judaism put them at risk of denunciation and trial.\nSeveral notorious Inquisitors, such as Tom\u00e1s de Torquemada, and Don Francisco the archbishop of Coria, were descendants of apostate Jews. Other apostates who made their mark in history by attempting the conversion of other Jews in the 14th century include Juan de Valladolid and Astruc Remoch.\nAbraham Isaac Kook, first Chief Rabbi of the Jewish community in Palestine, held that atheists were not actually denying God: rather, they were denying one of man's many images of God. Since any man-made image of God can be considered an idol, Kook held that, in practice, one could consider atheists as helping true religion burn away false images of god, thus in the end serving the purpose of true monotheism.\nMedieval Judaism was more lenient toward apostasy than the other monotheistic religions. According to Maimonides, converts to other faiths were to be regarded as sinners, but still Jewish. Forced converts were subject to special prayers and Rashi admonished those who rebuked or humiliated them.\nThere is no punishment today for leaving Judaism, other than being excluded from participating in the rituals of the Jewish community \u2013 including leading worship, Jewish marriage or divorce, being called to the Torah and being buried in a Jewish cemetery.\nSikhism.\nPatit is a term in Sikhism for a Sikh who violates the Sikh Code of Conduct. The term is sometimes translated as apostate. Persecution of apostates is prohibited in Sikhism. An apostate can re-initiate into Sikhism by being \"tankhata\" (chastised) followed by re-going through the process of Amrit Sanskar. \nIn Section Six of the Sikh Rehat Maryada (Code of Conduct), it states the four transgressions (\"kurahit\") which lead to a Sikh becoming a \"patit\".\nThese four transgressions which lead to apostasy were first listed by Guru Gobind Singh, the final human guru of Sikhs.\nOther religious movements.\nControversies over new religious movements (NRMs) have often involved apostates, some of whom join organizations or web sites opposed to their former religions. A number of scholars have debated the reliability of apostates and their stories, often called \"apostate narratives\".\nThe role of former members, or \"apostates\", has been widely studied by social scientists. At times, these individuals become outspoken public critics of the groups they leave. Their motivations, the roles they play in the anti-cult movement, the validity of their testimony, and the kinds of narratives they construct, are controversial. Some scholars like David G. Bromley, Anson Shupe, and Brian R. Wilson have challenged the validity of the testimonies presented by critical former members. Wilson discusses the use of the atrocity story that is rehearsed by the apostate to explain how, by manipulation, coercion, or deceit, he was recruited to a group that he now condemns.\nSociologist Stuart A. Wright explores the distinction between the apostate narrative and the role of the apostate, asserting that the former follows a predictable pattern, in which the apostate uses a \"captivity narrative\" that emphasizes manipulation, entrapment and being victims of \"sinister cult practices\". These narratives provide a rationale for a \"hostage-rescue\" motif, in which cults are likened to POW camps and deprogramming as heroic hostage rescue efforts. He also makes a distinction between \"leavetakers\" and \"apostates\", asserting that despite the popular literature and lurid media accounts of stories of \"rescued or recovering 'ex-cultists'\", empirical studies of defectors from NRMs \"generally indicate favorable, sympathetic or at the very least mixed responses toward their former group\".\nOne camp that broadly speaking questions apostate narratives includes David G. Bromley, Daniel Carson Johnson,\nDr. Lonnie D. Kliever (1932\u20132004), Gordon Melton, and Bryan R. Wilson. An opposing camp less critical of apostate narratives as a group includes Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, Dr. Phillip Charles Lucas, Jean Duhaime, Mark Dunlop, Michael Langone, and Benjamin Zablocki.\nSome scholars have attempted to classify apostates of NRMs. James T. Richardson proposes a theory related to a logical relationship between apostates and whistleblowers, using Bromley's definitions, in which the former predates the latter. A person becomes an apostate and then seeks the role of whistleblower, which is then rewarded for playing that role by groups that are in conflict with the original group of membership such as anti-cult organizations. These organizations further cultivate the apostate, seeking to turn him or her into a whistleblower. He also describes how in this context, apostates' accusations of \"brainwashing\" are designed to attract perceptions of threats against the well-being of young adults on the part of their families to further establish their newfound role as whistleblowers. Armand L. Mauss, defines true apostates as those exiters that have access to oppositional organizations that sponsor their careers as such, and validate the retrospective accounts of their past and their outrageous experiences in new religions\u00a0\u2013 making a distinction between these and whistleblowers or defectors in this context. Donald Richter, a current member of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (FLDS) writes that this can explain the writings of Carolyn Jessop and Flora Jessop, former members of the FLDS church who consistently sided with authorities when children of the YFZ ranch were removed over charges of child abuse.\nRonald Burks, a psychology assistant at the Wellspring Retreat and Resource Center, in a study comparing Group Psychological Abuse Scale (GPA) and Neurological Impairment Scale (NIS) scores in 132 former members of cults and cultic relationships, found a positive correlation between intensity of reform environment as measured by the GPA and cognitive impairment as measured by the NIS. Additional findings were a reduced earning potential in view of the education level that corroborates earlier studies of cult critics (Martin 1993; Singer &amp; Ofshe, 1990; West &amp; Martin, 1994) and significant levels of depression and dissociation agreeing with Conway &amp; Siegelman, (1982), Lewis &amp; Bromley, (1987) and Martin, et al. (1992). \nSociologists Bromley and Hadden note a lack of empirical support for claimed consequences of having been a member of a \"cult\" or \"sect\", and substantial empirical evidence against it. These include the fact that the overwhelming proportion of people who get involved in NRMs leave, most short of two years; the overwhelming proportion of people who leave do so of their own volition; and that two-thirds (67%) felt \"wiser for the experience\".\nAccording to F. Derks and psychologist of religion Jan van der Lans, there is no uniform post-cult trauma. While psychological and social problems upon resignation are not uncommon, their character and intensity are greatly dependent on the personal history and on the traits of the ex-member, and on the reasons for and way of resignation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50024", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50024", "title": "Lust", "text": "Human emotion\nLust is an intense desire for something. Lust can take any form such as the lust for sexual activity (see libido), money, or power; but it can also take such mundane forms as the lust for food (see gluttony; as distinct from the need for food) or the lust for redolence (when one is lusting for a particular smell that brings back memories). Lust is similar to, but distinguished from, passion, in that properly ordered passion propels individuals to achieve benevolent goals whilst lust does not.\nIn religion.\nReligions tend to draw a distinction between passion and lust by further categorizing lust as an immoral desire and passion as morally accepted.\nLust is defined as immoral because its object or action of affection is improperly ordered according to natural law and/or the appetite for the particular object (eg sexual desire) is governing the person's will and intellect rather than the will and intellect governing the appetite for that object.\nWhereas passion, regardless of its strength, is maintained to be something God-given and moral, because the purpose, actions and intentions behind it are benevolent and ordered toward creation, while also being governed by the person's intellect and will. A primary school of thought on this is Thomism, which speaks on the intellect, will and appetite, and draws from principles defined by Aristotle. However, the exact definitions assigned to what is morally definite and ordered toward creation depend on the religion. For example, religions based in pantheism and theism will differ on what is moral according to the nature of the \"God\" acknowledged or worshipped.\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nIn Judaism, all evil inclinations and lusts of the flesh are characterized by \"Yetzer hara\" (Hebrew, \u05d9\u05e6\u05e8 \u05d4\u05e8\u05e2, the evil inclination). Yetzer hara is not a demonic force; rather, it is man's misuse of the things which the physical body needs to survive, and is often contrasted with \"yetzer hatov\" (Hebrew, \u05d9\u05e6\u05e8\u00a0\u05d4\u05d8\u05d5\u05d1, the positive desire).\n\"Yetzer Hara\" is often identified with Satan and the angel of death, and there is sometimes a tendency to give a personality and separate activity to the \"yetzer\". For the \"yetzer\", like Satan, misleads man in this world, and testifies against him in the world to come. The \"yetzer\" is, however, clearly distinguished from Satan, and on other occasions is made exactly parallel to sin. The Torah is considered the great antidote against this force. Though, like all things which God has made, the \"yetzer hara\" (evil inclination) can be manipulated into doing good: for without it, man would never marry, beget a child, build a house, or occupy himself in a trade.\nChristianity.\nNew Testament.\nIn many translations of the New Testament, the word \"lust\" translates the Koine Greek word \u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c9 (epith\u016bm\u00e9\u014d), particularly in :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust (\u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c9) after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.\nIn English-speaking countries, the term \"lust\" is often associated with sexual desire, probably because of this verse. However, just as the English word was originally a general term for 'desire', the Greek word \u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c9 was also a general term for desire. The LSJ lexicon suggests \"set one's heart upon a thing, long for, covet, desire\" as glosses for \u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c9, which is used in verses that clearly have nothing to do with sexual desire. In the Septuagint, \"\u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c9\" is the word used in the commandment to not covet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You shall not covet your neighbour's wife; you shall not covet your neighbour's house or his field or his male slave or his female slave or his ox or his draft animal or any animal of his or whatever belongs to your neighbour.\u2014\u200a\nWhile coveting your neighbour's wife may involve sexual desire, it's unlikely that coveting a neighbour's house or field is sexual in nature. And in most New Testament uses, the same Greek word, \"\u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03c5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c9\", does not have a clear sexual connotation. For example, from the American Standard Version the same word is used outside of any sexual connotation:\nCatholicism.\nAccording to the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", a Christian's heart is lustful when \"venereal satisfaction is sought for either outside wedlock or, at any rate, in a manner which is contrary to the laws that govern marital intercourse\". Pope John Paul II said that lust devalues the eternal attraction of male and female, reducing personal riches of the opposite sex to an object for gratification of sexuality.\nLust is considered by Catholicism to be a disordered desire for sexual pleasure, where sexual pleasure is \"sought for itself, isolated from its procreative and unitive purposes\". In Catholicism, sexual desire in itself is good, and is considered part of God's plan for humanity. However, when sexual desire is separated from God's love, it becomes disordered and self-seeking. This is seen as lust.\nSt. Thomas Aquinas differentiates between sexual intercourse within marriage, which is seen as meritorious through giving justice to one's spouse, and sins of lust which can themselves be differentiated in magnitude of immorality according to intention and action. For example, Aquinas says in the Summa Theologica II-II, q. 154, a. 12 \"I answer that, In every genus, worst of all is the corruption of the principle on which the rest depend. Now the principles of reason are those things that are according to nature, because reason presupposes things as determined by nature, before disposing of other things according as it is fitting.\" He uses St. Augustine as his source writing \"Augustine says that 'of all these,' namely the sins belonging to lust, 'that which is against nature is the worst.'\" Which St. Thomas clarifies means that they are greater than sins against justice pertaining to the genus of lust, such as rape or incest, in his statement \"Reply to Objection 3: The nature of the species is more intimately united to each individual, than any other individual is. Wherefore sins against the specific nature are more grievous.\" Thus St. Thomas gives the order of magnitude of lustful acts as: \"The most grievous is the sin of bestiality, because use of the due species is not observed...(Then) the sin of sodomy, because use of the right sex is not observed...(Then) the sin of not observing the right manner of copulation (or the unatural act or masturbation)... (Then) incest... is contrary to the natural respect which we owe persons related to us... Then, it is a greater injustice to have intercourse with a woman who is subject to another's authority as regards the act of generation, than as regards merely her guardianship. Wherefore adultery is more grievous than seduction. And both of these are aggravated by the use of violence.\"\nThe Latin for \"extravagance\" (Latin: \"luxuria\") was used by St. Jerome to translate a variety of biblical sins, including drunkenness and sexual excess. Gregory the Great placed \"luxuria\" as one of the seven capital sins (it is often considered the least serious of the seven deadly sins), narrowing its scope to disordered desire, and it was in this sense that the Middle Ages generally took \"luxuria\", (although the Old French cognate was adopted into English as \"luxury\" without its sexual meaning by the 14th century).\nIn Romanesque art, the personified Luxuria is generally feminine, often represented by a siren or a naked woman with breasts being bitten by snakes. Prudentius in his \"Psychomachia\" or 'Battle of the Soul' had described\nLuxury, lavish of her ruined fame, Loose-haired, wild-eyed, her voice a dying fall, Lost in delight...\nFor Dante, Luxuria was both the first of the circles of incontinence (or self-indulgence) on the descent into hell, and the last of the cornices of Mount Purgatory, representing the excessive (disordered) love of individuals; while for Edmund Spenser, \"luxuria\" was synonymous with the power of desire.\nFor Gregory and subsequent Thomists, the 'daughters' (by-products) of Luxuria included mental blindness, self-love, haste, and excessive attachment to the present. Marianne Dashwood has been seen as embodying such characteristics for a later age \u2013 as a daughter of Luxuria.\nThe Catholic Church defines lust as the idolatry of sexual pleasure, in all of its forms: contraception, masturbation, adultery, premarital relations, relations between persons of the same sex, etc, which destroys the human capacity of loving, that is, of the person to give themselves to God and to others.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, lust is considered one of the primitive states of the self, called the \"nafs\". In sufi psychology, according to Robert Frager, \"nafs\" is an aspect of psyche that begins as our worst adversary but can develop into an invaluable tool.\nIn the Quran there is a passage when Zuleikha admits that she sought to seduce prophet Joseph (Arabic: Yousuf), and then prophet Joseph said: \"\"Yet I claim not that my soul was innocent\"\u2014\"surely the soul of man [nafs] incites to evil\"\u2014\"except inasmuch as my Lord had mercy; truly my Lord is All-forgiving, All-compassionate\".\" (Qur'an 12:53). Al-Ghazali, in his major works \"Ihya' Ulum al-Din\" (The Revival of Religious Sciences), stated that \"nafs\" in this passage is the lowest state of the soul, called \"nafs al-ammara\" (evil soul); while the other states of the soul are \"nafs al-mulhama\" (questioning soul), \"nafs al-lawwama\" (self-accusing soul), and \"nafs al-mutmainna\" (contented soul).\nMuslims are encouraged to overcome their baser instincts and intentional lascivious glances are forbidden. Lascivious thoughts are disliked, for they are the first step towards adultery, rape, and other antisocial behaviors. The Islamic prophet Muhammad also stressed the magnitude of the \"second glance\", as while the first glance towards an attractive member of the opposite sex could be just accidental or observatory, the second glance could be that gate into lustful thinking.\nIndian religions.\nHinduism.\nIn the \"Bhagavad Gita\", Krishna, an Avatar of Vishnu, declared in chapter 16, verse 21 that lust is one of the gates to Naraka or hell.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by what is one impelled to sinful acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged by force? Then Krishna said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed into wrath, and which is the all-devouring sinful enemy of this world. As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the embryo is covered by the womb, the living entity is similarly covered by different degrees of this lust. Thus the wise living entity's pure consciousness becomes covered by his eternal enemy in the form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire. The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of this lust. Through them lust covers the real knowledge of the living entity and bewilders him. Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb this great symbol of sin\u2014(lust) by regulating the senses, and slay this destroyer of knowledge and self-realization. The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul] is even higher than the intelligence. Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to the material senses, mind and intelligence, O mighty-armed Arjuna, one should steady the mind by deliberate spiritual intelligence and thus\u2014by spiritual strength\u2014conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust. (Bhagavad-Gita, 3.36\u201343)\nIn this ancient manuscript the idea behind the word 'Lust' is best comprehended as the psychological force called 'Wanting'.\nBuddhism.\nLust holds a critical position in the philosophical underpinnings of Buddhist reality. It is named in the second of the Four Noble Truths, which are that\nLust is the attachment to, identification with, and passionate desire for certain things in existence, all of which relate to the form, sensation, perception, mentality, and consciousness that certain combinations of these things engender within us. Lust is thus the ultimate cause of general imperfection and the most immediate \"root\" cause of a certain suffering.\nThe passionate desire for either non-existence or for freedom from lust is a common misunderstanding. For example, the headlong pursuit of lust (or other \"deadly sin\") in order to fulfill a desire for death is followed by a reincarnation accompanied by a self-fulfilling karma, resulting in an endless wheel of life, until the right way to live, the right worldview, is somehow discovered and practiced. Beholding an endless knot puts one, symbolically, in the position of the one with the right worldview, representing that person who attains freedom from lust.\nIn existence there are four kinds of things that engender clinging (attachment): rituals, worldviews, pleasures, and the self. The way to eliminate lust is to learn of its unintended effects and to pursue righteousness as concerns a worldview, intention, speech, behavior, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration, in the place where lust formerly sat.\nSikhism.\nIn Sikhism, lust is counted among the five cardinal sins or sinful propensities, the others being wrath, ego, greed and attachment. Uncontrollable expression of sexual lust, as in rape or sexual addiction, is an evil.\nIndian spirituality.\nBrahma Kumaris.\nAccording to Brahma Kumaris, a spiritual organization which is based on Karmic philosophy, sexual lust is the greatest enemy to all mankind.\nFor this reason followers do not eat onions, garlic, eggs, or non-vegetarian food, as the \"sulphur\" in them can excite sexual lust in the body, otherwise bound to celibacy.\nThe physical act of sex is \"impure\", leading to body-consciousness and other crimes. This impurity \"poisons\" the body and leads to many kinds of \"diseases\".\nThe Brahma Kumaris teaches that sexuality is foraging about in a dark sewer. Students at Spiritual University must conquer lust, to prevent sin, and in order to be closer to god.\nThey describe the differences between lust and love thus:\nIn lust there is reliance upon the object of sense and consequent spiritual subordination of the soul to it, but love puts the soul into direct and co-ordinate relation with the reality which is behind the form. Therefore, lust is experienced as being heavy and love is experienced as being light. In lust there is a narrowing down of life and in love there is an expansion in being...If you love the whole world you vicariously live in the whole world, but in lust there is an ebbing down of life and a general sense of hopeless dependence upon a form which is regarded as another. Thus, in lust there is the accentuation of separateness and suffering, but in love there is the feeling of unity and joy...\nPaganism.\nThe most famous example of a widespread religious movement practicing lechery as a ritual is the Bacchanalia of the Ancient Roman Bacchantes. However, this activity was soon outlawed by the Roman Senate in 186 BC in the decree \"Senatus consultum de Bacchanalibus\". The practice of sacred prostitution, however, continued to be an activity practiced often by the Dionysians.\nIn culture.\nMedieval prostitutes.\nMedieval prostitutes lived in officially sanctioned \"red light districts\". In Ruth Mazo Karras' book \"Common Women\", the author discusses the meaning of prostitution and how people thought the proper use of prostitutes by unmarried men helped contain male lust. Prostitution was thought to have a beneficial effect by reducing sexual frustration in the community. Inquisitors accused the Waldensians of believing that satisfying lust was better than being harassed by fleshly temptation.\nIn art.\nLiterature.\nFrom Ovid to the works of \"les po\u00e8tes maudits\", characters have always been faced with scenes of lechery, and for time out of mind lust has been a common motif in world literature. Many writers, such as Georges Bataille, Casanova and Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, have written works wherein scenes take place at bordellos and other unseemly locales.\nBaudelaire, author of \"Les fleurs du mal\", had once remarked, in regard to the artist, that:\nThe most notable work to touch upon the sin of lust, (and also upon the other Seven Deadly Sins), is Dante's \"Divine Comedy\". Dante's criterion for lust was an \"excessive love of others\", insofar as an excessive love for man would render one's love of God secondary. In the first canticle of the Divine Comedy\u2014the Inferno\u2014the lustful are punished by being continuously swept around in a whirlwind, symbolizing their ungovernable passions. The damned who are guilty of lust, like the two famous lovers, Paolo and Francesca, receive in Hell exactly what they desired most in their mortal lives, only to find that their passions will give them no rest for all eternity. In \"Purgatorio\", of the selfsame work, the penitents choose to walk through flames in order to purge themselves of their lustful inclinations.\nIn philosophy.\nThe link between love and lust has always been a problematic question in philosophy.\nSchopenhauer.\nSchopenhauer notes the misery which results from sexual relationships. According to him, this directly explains the sentiments of shame and sadness which tend to follow the act of sexual intercourse; for, he states, the only power that reigns is the inextinguishable desire to face, at any price, the blind love present in human existence without any consideration of the outcome. He estimates that a genius of his species is an industrial being who wants only to produce, and wants only to think. The theme of lust for Schopenhauer is thus to consider the horrors which will almost certainly follow the culmination of lust.\nSt Thomas Aquinas.\nSt Thomas Aquinas defines the sin of lust in questions 153 and 154 of his \"Summa Theologica\". Aquinas says the sin of lust is of \"voluptuous emotions\", and makes the point that sexual pleasures, \"unloosen the human spirit\", and set aside right reason (p. 191). Aquinas restricts lust's subject matter to physical desires specifically arising from sexual acts, but he does not assume all sex-acts are sinful. Sex is not a sin in marriage, because sex is the only way for humans to reproduce. If sex is used naturally and the end purpose is reproduction there is no sin. Aquinas says, \"if the end be good and if what is done is well-adapted to that, then no sin is present\" (p. 193). However, sex simply for the sake of pleasure is lustful, and therefore a sin. A man who uses his body for lechery wrongs the Lord.\nSex may have the attributes of being sinless; however, when a person seeks sex for pleasure, he or she is sinning with lust. Lust is best defined by its specific attribute of rape, adultery, wet dreams, seduction, unnatural vice, and simple fornication.\nWet dreams: St Thomas Aquinas defined and discussed the topic of nocturnal emission, which occurs when one dreams of physical pleasure. Aquinas argues those who say that wet dreams are a sin and comparable to the actual experience of sex are wrong. Aquinas believes that such an action is sinless, for a dream is not under a person's control or free judgment. When one has a \"nocturnal orgasm\", it is not a sin, but it can lead to sins (p. 227). Aquinas says that wet dreams come from a physical cause of inappropriate pictures within your imagination, a psychological cause when thinking of sex while you fall asleep and a demonical cause whereby demons act upon the sleeper's body, \"stirring the sleeper's imagination to bring about a orgasm\" (p. 225). In the end, though, dreaming of lustful acts is not sinful. The \"mind's awareness is less hindered\", as the sleeper lacks right reason; therefore, a person cannot be accountable for what they dream while sleeping (p. 227).\nAdultery: One of the main forms of lust seen frequently during the Middle Ages was the sin of adultery. The sin of adultery occurs when a person is unfaithful to his or her spouse, hence \"invading of a bed not one's own\" (p. 235). Adultery is a special kind of ugliness and many difficulties arise from it. When a man enters the bed of a married woman it not only is a sin, but it \"wrongs the offspring\", because the woman now calls into question the legitimacy of children (p. 235). If a wife has committed adultery before, then, her husband will question if all his wife's children are his offspring. \nSimple fornication: Simple fornication is having sex with one's spouse for enjoyment rather than for bearing children. Fornication is also sex between two unmarried people, which is also a mortal sin. Aquinas says that \"fornication is a deadly crime\" (p. 213). Fornication is a mortal sin, but as Aquinas notes, \"Pope Gregory treated sins of the flesh as less grievous than those of the spirit\" (p. 217). Fornication was a grave sin such as that against property. Fornication, however, is not as grave as a sin directly against God and human life; therefore, murder is much worse than fornication. Property in this case means that a daughter is the property of her father, and if one does wrong to her, one then does wrong to him; therefore seducing a virgin or seeking pleasure from an unmarried woman is an invasion of a father's property.\nSeduction: Seduction is a type of lust, because seduction is a sex act, which ravishes a virgin. Lust is a sin of sexual activity, and \"...a special quality of wrong that appears if a maid still under her father's care is debauched\" (p. 229). Seduction involves a discussion of property, as an unmarried girl is property of her father. A virgin, even though free from the bond of marriage, is not free from the bond of her family. When a virgin is violated without a promise of engagement, she is prevented from having honorable marriage, which is shameful to herself and her family. A man who performs sexual acts with a virgin must \"endow her and have her to wife\", and if the father, who is responsible for her, says no, then a man must pay a dowry to compensate for her loss of virginity and future chance of marriage (p. 229).\nUnnatural vice: Unnatural vice is the worst kind of lust because it is unnatural in act and purpose. Many varieties of unnatural vice exist; Aquinas provides several examples, including bestiality or intercourse with a \"thing of another species\" (for example, an animal), incest, sodomy and \"not observing the right manner of copulation\".\nIn psychoanalysis and psychology.\nLust, in the domain of psychoanalysis and psychology, is often treated as a case of \"heightened libido\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50026", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50026", "title": "578", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 578 (DLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. The denomination 578 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50027", "revid": "8480552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50027", "title": "Bay of Pigs", "text": "Bay on the island of Cuba\nThe Bay of Pigs () is an inlet of the Gulf of Cazones, located on the southern coast of Cuba. By 1910 it was included in Santa Clara Province, and then to Las Villas Province by 1961, but in 1976, it was reassigned to Matanzas Province, when the original six provinces of Cuba were re-organized into 14 new Provinces of Cuba.\nThe bay is historically important for the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961. The area is a site known for its diving, with an abundance of marine fauna, e.g. 30 species of sponges belonging to 19 families and 21 genera, to be found in the bay.\nEtymology.\nIn Cuban Spanish, \"cochinos\" may also mean the queen triggerfish (\"Balistes vetula\"), which inhabit coral reefs in Bah\u00eda de Cochinos, in addition to the literal meaning, pigs (\"Sus scrofa\"). \nGeography.\nThis bay is approximately south of Jag\u00fcey Grande, west of the city of Cienfuegos, and southeast from the capital city Havana. On the western side of the bay, coral reefs border the main Zapata Swamp, part of the Zapata Peninsula. On the eastern side, beaches border margins of firm ground with mangroves and extensive areas of swampland to the north and east. At the north end of the bay, the village of Buena Ventura is adjacent to Playa Larga (Long Beach). southeast of that, Playa Gir\u00f3n (Giron Beach) at the village of Gir\u00f3n, named after the notorious French pirate Gilberto Giron (c. 1604).\nHistory.\nPlaya Gir\u00f3n and Playa Larga were the landing sites for seaborne forces of armed Cuban exiles and the land strip for some American planes (but not many as America did not want Cuba to realize that it was American sponsored) in the Bay of Pigs Invasion, an American CIA-sponsored attempt to overthrow the new government of Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro in April 1961.\nAccording to Fidel Castro's former bodyguard, the late Juan Reinaldo S\u00e1nchez, Castro lived in great luxury and had a private island called Cayo Piedra in the Bay of Pigs, replete with \"mansions, guest houses, a heliport, dolphinarium, turtle lagoon, his luxury yacht \"Aquarama\" \u2013 a gift from Leonid Brezhnev \u2013 and deep-sea fishing speedboat\".\nDiving.\nThe Bay of Pigs is a relatively quiet site for diving. Dive centers exist in Playa Larga, Playa Gir\u00f3n and Caleta Buena. Twelve dive sites in the bay display excellent visibility of , an average water temperature of in December and in July. Walls of coral, caverns, and a variety of fish (including the barracuda, lionfish, and groupers, among others), coral, and sponges can be found in the Bay of Pigs.\nThe Caves of the Fishes (), with depth the deepest cenote of Cuba, is located at south of Playa Larga.\nBiodiversity.\nSurrounding the Bay of Pigs, the endemic wormlizards \"Amphisbaena barbouri\" and \"A. cubana\" have been noted. The following marine species have been registered along the eastern coast of the Bay of Pigs:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50029", "revid": "8273231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50029", "title": "La Salle County", "text": "La Salle County refers to two counties and one parish in the United States, each named for French explorer Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "50030", "revid": "50829018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50030", "title": "La Marseillaise", "text": "National anthem of France\n\"'\" is the national anthem of France. It was written in 1792 by Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle in Strasbourg after the declaration of war by the First French Republic against Austria, and was originally titled \"'\" (War Song for the Army of the Rhine).\nThe French National Convention adopted it as the First Republic's anthem in 1795. The song acquired its nickname after being sung in Paris by \"F\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9\" (volunteers) from Marseille marching to the capital. The anthem's evocative melody and lyrics have led to its widespread use as a song of revolution and its incorporation into many pieces of classical and popular music.\nThe Italian violinist Guido Rimonda pointed out in 2013 that the incipit of \"Tema e variazioni in Do maggiore\" of Giovanni Battista Viotti has a strong resemblance to the anthem. This incipit was first thought to have been published before La Marseillaise, but it appeared to be a misconception as Viotti published several variations of \"La Marseillaise\" in 1795 and wrote as a note \"I have never composed the quartets below\" ().\nHistory.\nAs the French Revolution continued, the monarchies of Europe became concerned that revolutionary fervor would spread to their countries. The War of the First Coalition was an effort to stop the revolution, or at least contain it to France. Initially, the French army did not distinguish itself, and Coalition armies invaded France. On 25 April 1792, Baron Philippe-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric de Dietrich, the Mayor of Strasbourg and Worshipful Master of the local Masonic lodge, asked his Freemason guest Rouget de Lisle to compose a song \"that will rally our soldiers from all over to defend their homeland that is under threat\". That evening, Rouget de Lisle wrote \"\" (\"War Song for the Army of the Rhine\"), and dedicated the song to Marshal Nicolas Luckner, a Bavarian freemason in French service from Cham. A plaque on the building on Place Broglie where De Dietrich's house once stood commemorates the event. De Dietrich was executed the next year during the Reign of Terror.\nThe melody soon became the rallying call to the French Revolution and was adopted as \"La Marseillaise\" after the melody was first sung on the streets by volunteers (\"f\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9s\" in French) from Marseille by the end of May. These \"f\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9s\" were making their entrance into the city of Paris on 30 July 1792 after a young volunteer from Montpellier called Fran\u00e7ois Mireur had sung it at a patriotic gathering in Marseille, and the troops adopted it as the marching song of the National Guard of Marseille. The song quickly became a form of musical propaganda, spreading revolutionary ideals and uniting citizens through its patriotic lyrics and rousing melody. A newly graduated medical doctor, Mireur later became a general under Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte and died in Egypt at age 28.\nThe song's lyrics reflect the invasion of France by foreign armies (from Prussia and Austria) that was under way when it was written. Strasbourg itself was attacked just a few days later. The invading forces were repulsed from France following their defeat in the Battle of Valmy. As the vast majority of Alsatians did not speak French, a German version (\u201eAuf, Br\u00fcder, auf dem Tag entgegen\") was published in October 1792 in Colmar.\nThe Convention accepted it as the French national anthem in a decree passed on 14 July 1795, making it France's first anthem. It later lost this status under Napoleon I, and the song was banned outright by Louis XVIII and Charles X, being re-instated only briefly after the July Revolution of 1830. During Napoleon I's reign, \"Veillons au salut de l'Empire\" was the unofficial anthem of the regime, and in Napoleon III's reign, it was \"Partant pour la Syrie\", but the government brought back the iconic anthem in an attempt to motivate the French people during the Franco-Prussian War. During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, \"La Marseillaise\" was recognized as the anthem of the international revolutionary movement; as such, it was adopted by the Paris Commune in 1871, albeit with new lyrics under the title \"La Marseillaise de la Commune\". Eight years later, in 1879, it was restored as France's national anthem, and has remained so ever since.\nThe refrain is reminscent of its time, simple wording in revolutionary songs allowed the general uneducated population to participate in the singing.\nMusic.\nSeveral musical antecedents have been cited for the melody:\nOther attributions (the \"credo\" of the fourth Mass of Holtzmann of Mursberg) have been refuted.\nLyrics.\nGenerally only the first verse is sung.\nCultural impact and musical adaptations.\n\"La Marseillaise\" was arranged for soprano, chorus and orchestra by Hector Berlioz in about 1830.\nFranz Liszt wrote a piano transcription of the anthem.\nDuring World War I, bandleader James Reese Europe played a jazz version of \"La Marseillaise\".\nThe anthem was used as a protest song in the Korean March First Movement protests against Japanese rule in 1919.\nHistorical Russian use.\nIn Russia, \"La Marseillaise\" was used as a republican revolutionary anthem by those who knew French starting in the 18th century, almost simultaneously with its adoption in France. In 1875 Peter Lavrov, a narodnik revolutionary and theorist, wrote a Russian-language text (not a translation of the French one) to the same melody. This \"Worker's Marseillaise\" became one of the most popular revolutionary songs in Russia and was used in the Revolution of 1905. After the February Revolution of 1917, it was used as the semi-official national anthem of the new Russian republic. Even after the October Revolution, it remained in use for a while alongside \"The Internationale\".\nCritique.\nThe English philosopher and reformer Jeremy Bentham, who was declared an honorary citizen of France in 1791 in recognition of his sympathies for the ideals of the French Revolution, was not enamoured of \"La Marseillaise\". Contrasting its qualities with the \"beauty\" and \"simplicity\" of \"God Save the King\", he wrote in 1796:\nThe War whoop of anarchy, the Marseillais Hymn, is to my ear, I must confess, independently of all moral association, a most dismal, flat, and unpleasing ditty: and to any ear it is at any rate a long winded and complicated one. In the instance of a melody so mischievous in its application, it is a fortunate incident, if, in itself, it should be doomed neither in point of universality, nor permanence, to gain equal hold on the affections of the people.\nVal\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing, President of France for most of the 1970s, said that it is ridiculous to sing about drenching French fields with impure Prussian blood as a Chancellor of the modern democratic Germany takes the salute in Paris. A 1992 campaign to change the words of the song involving more than 100 prominent French citizens, including Danielle Mitterrand, wife of then-President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, was unsuccessful.\nThe British historian Simon Schama discussed \"La Marseillaise\" on BBC Radio 4's \"Today\" programme on 17 November 2015 (in the immediate aftermath of the Paris attacks), saying it was \"... the great example of courage and solidarity when facing danger; that's why it is so invigorating, that's why it really is the greatest national anthem in the world, ever. Most national anthems are pompous, brassy, ceremonious, but this is genuinely thrilling. Very important in the song ... is the line 'before us is tyranny, the bloody standard of tyranny has risen'. There is no more ferocious tyranny right now than ISIS, so it's extremely easy for the tragically and desperately grieving French to identify with that\".\nIn 1979, a reggae version, \"Aux armes et c\u00e6tera\" by Serge Gainsbourg, was received poorly by some in France, particularly in \"Le Figaro\", where Michel Droit accused Gainsbourg of making money from the national anthem and suggesting that he was feeding antisemitism. Gainsbourg was also criticised for removing some of the military-focused aspects of the song.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50032", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50032", "title": "Squat", "text": "Squat, squatter or squatting may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50033", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50033", "title": "903", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 903 (CMIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50034", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50034", "title": "580", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 580 (DLXXX) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. The denomination 580 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50035", "revid": "49191770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50035", "title": "1 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1 BC was a common year starting on Friday or Saturday in the Julian calendar (the sources differ; see leap year error for further information) and a leap year starting on Thursday in the proleptic Julian calendar. It was also a leap year starting on Saturday in the Proleptic Gregorian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Piso (or, less frequently, year 753 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 1 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. The following year is AD 1 in the widely used Julian calendar and the proleptic Gregorian calendar, neither of which have a \"year zero\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50037", "revid": "49745431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50037", "title": "23rd century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 2300 BC to 2201 BC\nThe 23rd century BC was a century that lasted from the year 2300 BC to 2201 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "50038", "revid": "8248200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50038", "title": "Johan Rudolf Thorbecke", "text": ""}
{"id": "50039", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50039", "title": "Mosaic browser", "text": ""}
{"id": "50040", "revid": "15944804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50040", "title": "Lawrence Livermore Laboratory", "text": ""}
{"id": "50041", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50041", "title": "Back of Keppoch", "text": "Back of Keppoch (Gaelic: \"C\u00f9l na Ceapaich\") is a small coastal settlement in the northwest Scottish Highlands, west of Fort William near to the A830 road to Mallaig.\nThe Back of Keppoch is north of Arisaig and south of Morar. Most of the houses on this road are crofts and their land is used as campsites in the summer months. A number of beaches line the road.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50042", "revid": "46035344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50042", "title": "Lockheed Corporation", "text": "American aerospace company (1926\u20131995)\nThe Lockheed Corporation was an American aerospace manufacturer. Lockheed was founded in 1926 and merged in 1995 with Martin Marietta to form Lockheed Martin. Its founder, Allan Lockheed, had earlier founded the similarly named but otherwise-unrelated Loughead Aircraft Manufacturing Company, which was operational from 1912 to 1920.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nAllan Loughead and his brother Malcolm Loughead had operated an earlier aircraft company, Loughead Aircraft Manufacturing Company, which was operational from 1912 to 1920. The company built and operated aircraft for paying passengers on sightseeing tours in California and had developed a prototype for the civil market, but folded in 1920 due to the flood of surplus aircraft deflating the market after World War I. Allan went into the real estate market while Malcolm had meanwhile formed a successful company marketing brake systems for automobiles.\nOn December 13, 1926, Allan Loughead, John Northrop, Kenneth Kay and Fred Keeler secured funding to form the Lockheed Aircraft Company (spelled phonetically to prevent mispronunciation) in Hollywood. This new company used some of the same technology originally developed for the Model S-1 to design the Vega Model. In March 1928, the company relocated to Burbank, California, and by year's end reported sales exceeding one million dollars. From 1926 to 1928 the company produced over 80 aircraft and employed more than 300 workers who by April 1929 were building five aircraft per week. In July 1929, majority shareholder Fred Keeler sold 87% of the Lockheed Aircraft Company to Detroit Aircraft Corporation. In August 1929, Allan Loughead resigned.\nThe Great Depression ruined the aircraft market, and Detroit Aircraft went bankrupt. A group of investors headed by brothers Robert and Courtland Gross, and Walter Varney, bought the company out of receivership in 1932. The syndicate bought the company for a mere $40,000 ($ in 2023). Ironically, Allan Loughead himself had planned to bid for his own company, but had raised only $50,000 ($), which he felt was too small a sum for a serious bid.\nIn 1934, Robert E. Gross was named chairman of the new company, the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, which was headquartered at what is now the airport in Burbank, California. His brother Courtlandt S. Gross was a co-founder and executive, succeeding Robert as chairman following his death in 1961. The company was named the Lockheed Corporation in 1977.\nThe first successful construction that was built in any number (141 aircraft) was the Vega first built in 1927, best known for its several first- and record-setting flights by, among others, Amelia Earhart, Wiley Post, and George Hubert Wilkins. In the 1930s, Lockheed spent $139,400 ($) to develop the Model 10 Electra, a small twin-engined transport. The company sold 40 in the first year of production. Amelia Earhart and her navigator, Fred Noonan, flew it in their failed attempt to circumnavigate the world in 1937. Subsequent designs, the Lockheed Model 12 Electra Junior and the Lockheed Model 14 Super Electra expanded their market.\nPrewar production.\nThe Lockheed Model 14 formed the basis for the Hudson bomber, which was supplied to both the British Royal Air Force and the United States military before and during World War II. Its primary role was submarine hunting. The Model 14 Super Electra were sold abroad, and more than 100 were license-built in Japan for use by the Imperial Japanese Army.\nProduction during World War II.\nAt the beginning of World War II, Lockheed \u2013 under the guidance of Clarence (Kelly) Johnson, who is considered one of the best-known American aircraft designers \u2013 answered a specification for an interceptor by submitting the P-38 Lightning fighter aircraft, a twin-engined, twin-boom design. The P-38 was the only American fighter aircraft in production throughout the entirety of American involvement in the war, from Pearl Harbor to Victory over Japan Day. It filled ground-attack, air-to-air, and even tactical bombing roles in all theaters of the war in which the United States operated. The P-38 was responsible for shooting down more Japanese aircraft than any other U.S. Army Air Forces type during the war; it is particularly famous for being the aircraft type that shot down Japanese Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto's airplane.\nThe Lockheed Vega factory was located next to Burbank's Union Airport which it had purchased in 1940. During the war, the entire area was camouflaged in case of enemy reconnaissance. The factory was hidden beneath a huge burlap tarpaulin painted to depict a peaceful semi-rural neighborhood, replete with rubber automobiles. Hundreds of fake trees, shrubs, buildings, and even fire hydrants were positioned to give a three-dimensional appearance. The trees and shrubs were created from chicken wire treated with an adhesive and covered with feathers to provide a leafy texture.\nLockheed ranked tenth among United States corporations in the value of wartime production contracts. All told, Lockheed and its subsidiary Vega produced 19,278 aircraft during World War II, representing six percent of war production, including 2,600 Venturas, 2,750 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress bombers (built under license from Boeing), 2,900 Hudson bombers, and 9,000 Lightnings.\nPostwar production.\nDuring World War II, Lockheed, in cooperation with Trans-World Airlines (TWA), had developed the L-049 Constellation, a radical new airliner capable of flying 43 passengers between New York and London at a speed of in 13 hours.\nOnce the Constellation (nicknamed \"Connie\") went into production, the military received the first production models; after the war, the airlines received their original orders, giving Lockheed more than a year's head-start over other aircraft manufacturers in what was easily foreseen as the post-war modernization of civilian air travel. The Constellation's performance set new standards which transformed the civilian transportation market. Its signature tri-tail was the result of many initial customers not having hangars tall enough for a conventional tail. Lockheed produced a larger transport, the double-decked R6V Constitution, which was intended to make the Constellation obsolete. However, the design proved underpowered.\nThe company sought to purchase Convair in 1946, but the sale was blocked by the SEC.\nSkunk Works.\nIn 1939 when Lockheed was expanding rapidly with war work, the P-38 Lightning prototype construction project was moved to a newly purchased distillery building, the secret project off-limits to all but a core group of engineers. This tight-knit group, led by Kelly Johnson, acted on their own initiative to incorporate advanced technology into the YP-38 prototype. As a result, it was the first fighter airplane to fly 400\u00a0mph (644 kph). Many of these engineers moved with Johnson from the smelly former distillery to the P-80 Shooting Star project. Johnson said in 1964 that the YP-38 was the inception of the Skunk Works concept.\nIn 1943, Lockheed began, in secrecy, development of a new jet fighter at its Burbank facility. This fighter, the P-80, became the first American jet fighter to score a kill. It also recorded the first jet-to-jet aerial kill, downing a Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 in Korea, although by this time the F-80 (as it was redesignated in June 1948) was already considered obsolete.\nStarting with the P-80, Lockheed's secret development work was conducted by its Advanced Development Division, more commonly known as the Skunk Works. The name was taken from Al Capp's comic strip Li'l Abner. This organization has become famous and spawned many successful Lockheed designs, including the U-2 (late 1950s), SR-71 Blackbird (1962) and F-117 Nighthawk stealth fighter (1978). The Skunk Works often created high-quality designs in a short time and sometimes with limited resources.\nProjects during the Cold War.\nIn 1954, the Lockheed C-130 Hercules, a durable four-engined transport, flew for the first time. This type remains in production today. In 1956, Lockheed received a contract for the development of the Polaris Submarine Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM); it would be followed by the Poseidon and Trident nuclear missiles. Lockheed developed the F-104 Starfighter in the late 1950s, the world's first Mach 2 fighter jet. In the early 1960s, the company introduced the C-141 Starlifter four-engine jet transport.\nDuring the 1960s, Lockheed began development for two large aircraft: the C-5 Galaxy military transport and the L-1011 TriStar wide-body civil airliner. Both projects encountered delays and cost overruns. The C-5 was built to vague initial requirements and suffered from structural weaknesses, which Lockheed was forced to correct at its own expense. The TriStar competed for the same market as the McDonnell Douglas DC-10; delays in Rolls-Royce engine development caused the TriStar to fall behind the DC-10. The C-5 and L-1011 projects, the canceled U.S. Army AH-56 Cheyenne helicopter program, and embroiled shipbuilding contracts caused Lockheed to lose large sums of money during the 1970s.\nLoan guarantee.\nDrowning in debt, in 1971 Lockheed (then the largest US defense contractor) asked the US government for a loan guarantee, to avoid insolvency. Lockheed argued that a government bailout was necessary due to the company's value for U.S. national security. On May 13, 1971, the Richard Nixon administration sent a bill titled \"The Emergency Loan Guarantee Act\" to Congress requesting a $250 million loan guarantee for Lockheed and its L-1011 Tristar airbus program. The measure was hotly debated in the US Senate. The chief antagonist was Senator William Proxmire (D-Wis), the nemesis of Lockheed and its chairman, Daniel J. Haughton. Some of the debate in Congress developed over what conditions should be attached to the bailout. Senator Alan Cranston demanded that the management be forced to step down, lest it set a precedent rewarding wasteful spending. Others argued that the company should be allowed to go into bankruptcy citing the recent decision to leave Penn Central railroad to that fate, and the fact that the airbus program at issue was commercial rather than military.\nNaval scholar Thomas Paul Stanton notes that the opposition to the bill held it was \"the beginning of the socialization of the American aircraft and aerospace industry.\" Proponents responded by claiming \"this socializing process had taken place many years before\", and some witnesses before Congress discounted \"the very notion of 'free enterprise'.\" Treasury Secretary Connally pointed to the faltering economy and worries about unemployment while testifying \"the time has come within the United States when we have to look at things differently. Free enterprise is just not all that free.\" Questions arose whether letting Lockheed fail would be bad for the market due to decreased competition or good by screening out inefficient competitors and mismanagement. Lockheed's competitors, McDonnell Douglas and General Electric (collaborators on the DC-10) strongly opposed the bill and they feared the government would steer contracts to Lockheed to insure loan payments. Admiral Hyman G. Rickover condemned the bill saying it represented \"a new philosophy where we privatize profits and socialize losses.\" The New York Times editorial board held that the Nixon administration was violating its own free enterprise principles by advocating for the loan. (Later, historian Stephen J. Whitfield viewed the passage of the loan guarantee as a support for the argument that America was shifting away from Lockean liberalism.)\nFollowing a fierce debate, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew cast a tie-breaking vote in favor of the measure on August 2, 1971. President Nixon signed the bill into law on August 9, 1971 - which became colloquially known as the \"Lockheed Loan\". Even after its adoption, a further controversy developed when the Emergency Loan Guarantee Board set up by the Executive branch to oversee the loan refused to allow Congress' General Accounting Office to examine its records. They argued that the office was attempting \"interference in the decision-making process\" amounting to an effort to \"bully\" and \"harass\" the board. This claim was denied by Comptroller General Elmer B. Staats, and efforts were made by Senator William Proxmire to get Treasury Secretary John Connally to testify due to the suspicion that the loan guarantee was in jeopardy. The editorial board of \"The New York Times\" blasted the situation, citing it as another argument against the propriety of the loan guarantee and the precedent it set for other failing companies. The debate around the ramifications of the Lockheed loan guarantee soon resurfaced in late 1975 with discussions on possible aid to New York City during its fiscal crisis.\nLockheed finished paying off the $1.4 billion loan in 1977, along with about $112.22 million in loan guarantee fees.\nBribery scandals.\nThe Lockheed bribery scandals were a series of illegal bribes and contributions made by Lockheed officials from the late 1950s to the 1970s. In late 1975 and early 1976, a subcommittee of the U.S. Senate led by Senator Frank Church concluded that members of the Lockheed board had paid members of friendly governments to guarantee contracts for military aircraft. In 1976, it was publicly revealed that Lockheed had paid $22\u00a0million in bribes to foreign officials in the process of negotiating the sale of aircraft including the F-104 Starfighter, the so-called Deal of the Century.\nThe scandal caused considerable political controversy in West Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, and Japan. In the US, the scandal led to passage of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and nearly led to the ailing corporation's downfall (it was already struggling due to the poor sales of the L-1011 airliner). Haughton resigned his post as chairman.\nAttempted leveraged buyout.\nIn the late 1980s, leveraged buyout specialist Harold Simmons conducted a widely publicized but unsuccessful takeover attempt on the Lockheed Corporation, having gradually acquired almost 20 percent of its stock. Lockheed was attractive to Simmons because one of its primary investors was the California Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS), the pension fund of the state of California. At the time, the \"New York Times\" said, \"Much of Mr. Simmons's interest in Lockheed is believed to stem from its pension plan, which is over funded by more than $1.4\u00a0billion. Analysts said he might want to liquidate the plan and pay out the excess funds to shareholders, including himself.\" Citing the mismanagement by its chairman, Daniel M. Tellep, Simmons stated a wish to replace its board with a slate of his own choosing, since he was the largest investor. His board nominations included former Texas Senator John Tower, the onetime chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and Admiral Elmo Zumwalt Jr., a former Chief of Naval Operations. Simmons had first begun accumulating Lockheed stock in early 1989 when deep Pentagon cuts to the defense budget had driven down prices of military contractor stocks, and analysts had not believed he would attempt the takeover since he was also at the time pursuing control of Georgia Gulf.\nMerger with Martin Marietta.\nMerger talks between Lockheed and Martin Marietta began in March 1994, with the companies announcing their $10\u00a0billion planned merger on August 30, 1994. The headquarters for the combined companies would be at Martin Marietta headquarters in North Bethesda, Maryland. The deal was finalized on March 15, 1995, when the two companies' shareholders approved the merger. The segments of the two companies not retained by the new company formed the basis for L-3 Communications, a mid-size defense contractor in its own right. Lockheed Martin also later spun off the materials company Martin Marietta Materials.\nThe company's executives received large bonuses directly from the government as a result of the merger. Norman R. Augustine who was at the time CEO of Martin Marietta received an $8.2 million bonus.\nBoth companies contributed important products to the new portfolio. Lockheed products included the Trident missile, P-3 Orion maritime patrol aircraft, U-2 and SR-71 reconnaissance airplanes, F-117 Nighthawk, F-16 Fighting Falcon, F-22 Raptor, C-130 Hercules, A-4AR Fightinghawk and the DSCS-3 satellite. Martin Marietta products included Titan rockets, Sandia National Laboratories (management contract acquired in 1993), Space Shuttle External Tank, Viking 1 and Viking 2 landers, the Transfer Orbit Stage (under subcontract to Orbital Sciences Corporation) and various satellite models.\nDivisions.\nIn 1984 Lockheed's operations were divided between several groups and divisions, many of which continue to operate within Lockheed\nProducts.\nA partial listing of aircraft and other vehicles produced by Lockheed.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50047", "revid": "12149463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50047", "title": "Rainforest", "text": "Type of forest with high rainfall\nRainforests are forests characterized by a closed and continuous tree canopy, moisture-dependent vegetation, the presence of epiphytes and lianas and the absence of wildfire. Rainforests can be generally classified as tropical rainforests or temperate rainforests, but other types have been described.\nEstimates vary from 40% to 75% of all biotic species being indigenous to the rainforests. There may be many millions of species of plants, insects and microorganisms still undiscovered in tropical rainforests. Tropical rainforests have been called the \"jewels of the Earth\" and the \"world's largest pharmacy\", because over one quarter of natural medicines have been discovered there.\nRainforests as well as endemic rainforest species are rapidly disappearing due to deforestation, the resulting habitat loss and pollution of the atmosphere.\nDefinition.\nRainforests are characterized by a closed and continuous tree canopy, high humidity, the presence of moisture-dependent vegetation, a moist layer of leaf litter, the presence of epiphytes and lianas and the absence of wildfire. The largest areas of rainforest are tropical or temperate rainforests, but other vegetation associations including subtropical rainforest, littoral rainforest, cloud forest, vine thicket and even dry rainforest have been described.\nTropical rainforest.\nTropical rainforests are characterized by a warm and wet climate with no substantial dry season: typically found within 10 degrees north and south of the equator. Mean monthly temperatures exceed during all months of the year. Average annual rainfall is no less than and can exceed although it typically lies between and .\nMany of the world's tropical forests are associated with the location of the monsoon trough, also known as the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The broader category of tropical moist forests are located in the equatorial zone between the Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn. Tropical rainforests exist in Southeast Asia (from Myanmar (Burma)) to the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and Sri Lanka; also in Sub-Saharan Africa from the Cameroon to the Congo (Congo Rainforest), South America (e.g. the Amazon rainforest), Central America (e.g. Bosaw\u00e1s, the southern Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula-El Peten-Belize-Calakmul), Australia, and on Pacific Islands (such as Hawai\u02bbi). Tropical forests have been called the \"Earth's lungs\", although it is now known that rainforests contribute little net oxygen addition to the atmosphere through photosynthesis.\nTemperate rainforest.\nTropical forests cover a large part of the globe, but temperate rainforests only occur in a few regions around the world. Temperate rainforests are rainforests in temperate regions. They occur in North America (in the Pacific Northwest in Alaska, British Columbia, Washington, Oregon as well as California and the Appalachian Mountains), in Europe (parts of the British Isles such as the coastal areas of Ireland and Scotland, southern Norway, parts of the western Balkans along the Adriatic coast, as well as in Galicia and coastal areas of the eastern Black Sea, including Georgia and coastal Turkey), in East Asia (in southern China, Highlands of Taiwan, much of Japan and Korea, and on Sakhalin Island and the adjacent Russian Far East coast), in South America (southern Chile) and also in Australia and New Zealand.\nDry rainforest.\nDry rainforests have a more open canopy layer than other rainforests, and are found in areas of lower rainfall (. Dry rainforests typically occur in the rain-shadow of mountainous areas. In Australia, dry rainforests have structurally complex species composition. These species can have various adaptations such as deciduousness or semi-deciduousness, reduced leaf size, thick leathery leaves (sclerophylly), sharp thorns or leaf margins and prickles. Dry rainforests containing a dense vine understory can be split up into different sub-types which include low microphyll vine forest, Araucarian vine forest, Semi-evergreen vine thicket, and deciduous vine thicket. These can further split up into either microphyll or notophyll depending on their leaf sizes. \nLayers.\nA tropical rainforest typically has a number of layers, each with different plants and animals adapted for life in that particular area. Examples include the emergent, canopy, understory and forest floor layers.\nEmergent layer.\nThe emergent layer contains a small number of very large trees called emergents, which grow above the general canopy, reaching heights of 45\u201355 m, although on occasion a few species will grow to 70\u201380 m tall. They need to be able to withstand the hot temperatures and strong winds that occur above the canopy in some areas. Eagles, butterflies, bats and certain monkeys inhabit this layer.\nCanopy layer.\nThe canopy layer contains the majority of the largest trees, typically to tall. The densest areas of biodiversity are found in the forest canopy, a more or less continuous cover of foliage formed by adjacent treetops. The canopy, by some estimates, is home to 50 percent of all plant species. Epiphytic plants attach to trunks and branches, and obtain water and minerals from rain and debris that collects on the supporting plants. The fauna is similar to that found in the emergent layer but more diverse. A quarter of all insect species are believed to exist in the rainforest canopy. Scientists have long suspected the richness of the canopy as a habitat, but have only recently developed practical methods of exploring it. As long ago as 1917, naturalist William Beebe declared that \"another continent of life remains to be discovered, not upon the Earth, but one to two hundred feet above it, extending over thousands of square miles.\" A true exploration of this habitat only began in the 1980s, when scientists developed methods to reach the canopy, such as firing ropes into the trees using crossbows. Exploration of the canopy is still in its infancy, but other methods include the use of balloons and airships to float above the highest branches and the building of cranes and walkways planted on the forest floor. The science of accessing tropical forest canopy using airships or similar aerial platforms is called dendronautics.\nUnderstory layer.\nThe understory or understorey layer lies between the canopy and the forest floor. It is home to a number of birds, snakes and lizards, as well as predators such as jaguars, boa constrictors and leopards. The leaves are much larger at this level and insect life is abundant. Many seedlings that will grow to the canopy level are present in the understory. Only about 5% of the sunlight shining on the rainforest canopy reaches the understory. This layer can be called a \"shrub layer\", although the shrub layer may also be considered a separate layer.\nForest floor.\nThe forest floor, the bottom-most layer, receives only 2% of the sunlight. Only plants adapted to low light can grow in this region. Away from riverbanks, swamps and clearings, where dense undergrowth is found, the forest floor is relatively clear of vegetation because of the low sunlight penetration. It also contains decaying plant and animal matter, which disappears quickly, because the warm, humid conditions promote rapid decay. Many forms of fungi growing here help decay the animal and plant waste.\nFlora and fauna.\nIt is unknown how many species are found in the world's tropical rainforests, however a very large proportion of the vascular plants are native to them. Rainforests support a very broad array of fauna, including mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds and invertebrates. Mammals may include primates, felids and other families. Reptiles include snakes, turtles, chameleons and other families; while birds include such families as Vangidae and Cuculidae. Dozens of families of invertebrates are found in rainforests. Fungi are also very common in rainforest areas as they can feed on the decomposing remains of plants and animals.\nThe great diversity in rainforest species is in large part the result of diverse and numerous physical refuges, i.e. places in which plants are inaccessible to many herbivores, or in which animals can hide from predators. Having numerous refuges available also results in much higher total biomass than would otherwise be possible.\nSome species of fauna show a trend towards declining populations in rainforests, for example, reptiles that feed on amphibians and reptiles. This trend requires close monitoring. The seasonality of rainforests affects the reproductive patterns of amphibians, and this in turn can directly affect the species of reptiles that feed on these groups, particularly species with specialized feeding, since these are less likely to use alternative resources.\nSoils.\nDespite the growth of vegetation in a tropical rainforest, soil quality is often quite poor. Rapid bacterial decay prevents the accumulation of humus. The concentration of iron and aluminium oxides by the laterization process gives the oxisols a bright red colour and sometimes produces mineral deposits such as bauxite. Most trees have roots near the surface because there are insufficient nutrients below the surface; most of the trees' minerals come from the top layer of decomposing leaves and animals. On younger substrates, especially of volcanic origin, tropical soils may be quite fertile. If rainforest trees are cleared, rain can accumulate on the exposed soil surfaces, creating run-off, and beginning a process of soil erosion. Eventually, streams and rivers form and flooding becomes possible. There are several reasons for the poor soil quality. First is that the soil is highly acidic. The roots of plants rely on an acidity difference between the roots and the soil in order to absorb nutrients. When the soil is acidic, there is little difference, and therefore little absorption of nutrients from the soil. Second, the type of clay particles present in tropical rainforest soil has a poor ability to trap nutrients and stop them from washing away. Even if humans artificially add nutrients to the soil, the nutrients mostly wash away and are not absorbed by the plants. Finally, these soils are poor due to the high volume of rain in tropical rainforests washes nutrients out of the soil more quickly than in other climates.\nEffect on global climate.\nA natural rainforest emits and absorbs vast quantities of carbon dioxide. On a global scale, long-term fluxes are approximately in balance, so that an undisturbed rainforest would have a small net impact on atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, though they may have other climatic effects (on cloud formation, for example, by recycling water vapour). No rainforest today can be considered to be undisturbed. Human-induced deforestation plays a significant role in causing rainforests to release carbon dioxide, as do other factors, whether human-induced or natural, which result in tree death, such as burning and drought. Some climate models operating with interactive vegetation predict a large loss of Amazonian rainforest around 2050 due to drought, forest dieback and the subsequent release of more carbon dioxide.\nHuman uses.\nTropical rainforests provide timber as well as animal products such as meat and hides. Rainforests also have value as tourism destinations and for the ecosystem services provided. Many foods originally came from tropical forests, and are still mostly grown on plantations in regions that were formerly primary forest. Also, plant-derived medicines are commonly used for fever, fungal infections, burns, gastrointestinal problems, pain, respiratory problems, and wound treatment. At the same time, rainforests are usually not used sustainably by non-native peoples but are being exploited or removed for agricultural purposes.\nNative people.\nOn 18 January 2007, FUNAI reported also that it had confirmed the presence of 67 different uncontacted tribes in Brazil, up from 40 in 2005. With this addition, Brazil has now overtaken the island of New Guinea as the country having the largest number of uncontacted tribes. The province of Irian Jaya or West Papua in the island of New Guinea is home to an estimated 44 uncontacted tribal groups. The tribes are in danger because of the deforestation, especially in Brazil.\nCentral African rainforest is home of the Mbuti pygmies, one of the hunter-gatherer peoples living in equatorial rainforests characterised by their short height (below one and a half metres, or 59inches, on average). They were the subject of a study by Colin Turnbull, \"The Forest People\", in 1962. Pygmies who live in Southeast Asia are, amongst others, referred to as \"Negrito\".\nThere are many tribes in the rainforests of the Malaysian state of Sarawak. Sarawak is part of Borneo, the third largest island in the world. Some of the other tribes in Sarawak are: the Kayan, Kenyah, Kejaman, Kelabit, Punan Bah, Tanjong, Sekapan, and the Lahanan. Collectively, they are referred to as Dayaks or Orangulu which means \"people of the interior\".\nAbout half of Sarawak's 1.5 million people are Dayaks. Most Dayaks, it is believed by anthropologists, came originally from the South-East Asian mainland. Their mythologies support this.\nDeforestation.\nTropical and temperate rainforests have been subjected to heavy legal and illegal logging for their valuable hardwoods and agricultural clearance (slash-and-burn, clearcutting) throughout the 20th century and the area covered by rainforests around the world is shrinking. Biologists have estimated that large numbers of species are being driven to extinction (possibly more than 50,000 a year; at that rate, says E. O. Wilson of Harvard University, a quarter or more of all species on Earth could be exterminated within 50 years) due to the removal of habitat with destruction of the rainforests.\nAnother factor causing the loss of rainforest is expanding urban areas. Littoral rainforest growing along coastal areas of eastern Australia is now rare due to ribbon development to accommodate the demand for seachange lifestyles.\nForests are being destroyed at a rapid pace. Almost 90% of West Africa's rainforest has been destroyed. Since the arrival of humans, Madagascar has lost two thirds of its original rainforest. At present rates, tropical rainforests in Indonesia would be logged out in 10 years and Papua New Guinea in 13 to 16 years. According to Rainforest Rescue, an important reason for the increasing deforestation rate, especially in Indonesia, is the expansion of oil palm plantations to meet growing demand for cheap vegetable fats and biofuels. In Indonesia, palm oil is already cultivated on nine million hectares and, together with Malaysia, the island nation produces about 85 percent of the world's palm oil.\nSeveral countries, notably Brazil, have declared their deforestation a national emergency. Amazon deforestation jumped by 69% in 2008 compared to 2007's twelve\nmonths, according to official government data.\nHowever, a 30 January 2009 \"New York Times\" article stated, \"By one estimate, for every acre of rainforest cut down each year, more than 50 acres of new forest are growing in the tropics.\" The new forest includes secondary forest on former farmland and so-called degraded forest.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "50048", "revid": "50969646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50048", "title": "Polar climate", "text": "Climate classification\nThe polar climate regions are characterized by a lack of warm summers but with varying winters. Every month a polar climate has an average temperature of less than . Regions with a polar climate cover more than 20% of the Earth's area. Most of these regions are far from the equator and near the poles, and in this case, winter days are extremely short and summer days are extremely long. They could last for the entirety of each season or longer. \nA polar climate consists of cool summers and very cold winters, or, in the case of ice cap climates, no real summer at all, which results in treeless tundras, glaciers, or a permanent or semi-permanent layer of ice. It is identified with the letter E in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification.\nSubtypes.\nThere are two types of polar climate: ET, or tundra climate; and EF, or ice cap climate. A tundra climate is characterized by having at least one month whose average temperature is above , while an ice cap climate has no months averaging above . In a tundra climate, even coniferous trees cannot grow, but other specialized plants such as the arctic poppy can grow. \nIn an ice cap climate, no plants can grow, and ice gradually accumulates until it flows or slides elsewhere. Many high altitude locations on Earth have a climate where no month has an average temperature of or higher, but as this is due to elevation, this climate is referred to as Alpine climate. Alpine climate can mimic either tundra or ice cap climate.\nLocations.\nOn Earth, the only continent where the ice cap polar climate is predominant is Antarctica. All but a few isolated coastal areas on the island of Greenland also have the ice cap climate. Summits of many high mountains also have ice cap climate due to their high elevation. Coastal regions of Greenland that do not have permanent ice sheets have the less extreme tundra climates. \nThe northernmost part of the Eurasian land mass, from the extreme northeastern coast of Scandinavia and eastwards to the Bering Strait, large areas of northern Siberia and northern Iceland have tundra climate as well. Large areas in northern Canada and northern Alaska have tundra climate, changing to ice cap climate in the most northern parts of Canada. \nSouthernmost Argentina (Tierra del Fuego where it abuts the Drake Passage) and such subantarctic islands such as the South Shetland Islands and the Falkland Islands have tundra climates of slight temperature range, in which no month is as warm as . These subantarctic lowlands are found closer to the equator than the coastal tundras of the Arctic basin. Summits of many mountains of Earth also have polar climates, due to their higher elevations.\nArctic.\nSome parts of the Arctic are covered by ice (sea ice, glacial ice, or snow) year-round, especially at the most poleward parts; and nearly all parts of the Arctic experience long periods with some form of ice or snow on the surface. Average January temperatures range from about , and winter temperatures can drop below over large parts of the Arctic. Average July temperatures range from about , with some land areas occasionally exceeding in summer.\nThe Arctic consists of an ocean that is almost surrounded by landmasses like Russia and Canada. As such, the climate of much of the Arctic is moderated by the ocean water, which can never have a temperature below . In winter, this relatively warm water, even though covered by the polar ice pack, keeps the North Pole from being the coldest place in the Northern Hemisphere, and it is also part of the reason that Antarctica is so much colder than the Arctic. In summer, the presence of the nearby water keeps coastal areas from warming as much as they might otherwise, just as it does in temperate regions with maritime climates.\nAntarctica.\nThe climate of Antarctica is the coldest on Earth. Antarctica has the lowest naturally occurring temperature ever recorded: at Vostok Station in 1983. It is also extremely dry, technically a desert, or so called polar desert, averaging of precipitation per year, as weather fronts rarely penetrate far into the continent.\nMountains.\nSummits of most mountains also have polar climates, despite being in lower latitudes, due to their high elevations. The highest mountains of the Rocky Mountains, Alps, and the Caucasus have tundra climate. Some mountains of the Andes, the Saint Elias Mountains, and most mountains of the Himalayas, the Karakoram, the Hindu Kush Range, Pamir Mountains, the Tian Shan Mountains, and the Alaska Range also have ice cap climates at extremely high elevations, in addition to tundra climates at relatively lower elevations. Only the summit of Mount Rainier has an ice cap climate in the Cascade Range.\nQuantifying polar climate.\nThere have been several attempts at quantifying what constitutes a polar climate.\nClimatologist Wladimir K\u00f6ppen demonstrated a relationship between the Arctic and Antarctic tree lines and the summer isotherm; i.e., places where the average temperature in the warmest calendar month of the year is below the fixed threshold of cannot support forests. See K\u00f6ppen climate classification for more information.\nOtto Nordenskj\u00f6ld theorized that winter conditions also play a role: His formula is \"W\" = 9 \u2212 0.1 \"C\", where \"W\" is the average temperature in the warmest month and \"C\" the average of the coldest month, both in degrees Celsius. For example, if a particular location had an average temperature of in its coldest month, the warmest month would need to average or higher for trees to be able to survive there as 9 \u2212 0.1(\u221220) = 11. \nNordenski\u00f6ld's line tends to run to the north of K\u00f6ppen's near the west coasts of the Northern Hemisphere continents, south of it in the interior sections, and at about the same latitude along the east coasts of both Asia and North America. In the Southern Hemisphere, all of Tierra del Fuego lies outside the polar region in Nordenski\u00f6ld's system, but part of the island (including Ushuaia, Argentina) is reckoned as being within the Antarctic under K\u00f6ppen's.\nIn 1947, Holdridge improved on these schemes, by defining biotemperature: the mean annual temperature, where all temperatures below (and above ) are treated as 0\u00a0\u00b0C, because it makes no difference to plant life, being dormant. If the mean biotemperature is between , Holdridge quantifies the climate as subpolar, or alpine, if the low temperature is caused by elevation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50049", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50049", "title": "Subarctic climate", "text": "Climate characterised by long, usually very cold winters, and short, cool summers\nThe subarctic climate (also called subpolar climate, or boreal climate) is a continental climate with long, cold (often very cold) winters, and short, warm to cool summers. It is found on large landmasses, often away from the moderating effects of an ocean, generally at latitudes from 50\u00b0N to 70\u00b0N, poleward of the humid continental climates. Like other Class D climates, they are rare in the Southern Hemisphere, only found at some isolated highland elevations. Subarctic or boreal climates are the source regions for the cold air that affects temperate latitudes to the south in winter. These climates represent K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfc\", \"Dwc\", \"Dsc\", \"Dfd\", \"Dwd\" and \"Dsd\".\nDescription.\nThis type of climate offers some of the most extreme seasonal temperature variations found on the planet: in winter, temperatures can drop to below and in summer, the temperature may exceed . However, the summers are short; no more than three months of the year (but at least one month) must have a 24-hour average temperature of at least to fall into this category of climate, and the coldest month should average below (or ). Record low temperatures can approach .\nWith 5\u20137 consecutive months when the average temperature is below freezing, all moisture in the soil and subsoil freezes solidly to depths of many feet. Summer warmth is insufficient to thaw more than a few surface feet, so permafrost prevails under most areas not near the southern boundary of this climate zone. Seasonal thaw penetrates from , depending on latitude, aspect, and type of ground. Some northern areas with subarctic climates located near oceans (southern Alaska, northern Norway, Sakhalin Oblast and Kamchatka Oblast), have milder winters and no permafrost, and are more suited for farming unless precipitation is excessive. The frost-free season is very short, varying from about 45 to 100 days at most, and a freeze can occur anytime outside the summer months in many areas.\nDescription.\nThe first D indicates continentality, with the coldest month below (or ).\nThe second letter denotes precipitation patterns:\nThe third letter denotes temperature:\nPrecipitation.\nMost subarctic climates have little precipitation, typically no more than over an entire year due to the low temperatures and evapotranspiration. Away from the coasts, precipitation occurs mostly in the summer months, while in coastal areas with subarctic climates the heaviest precipitation is usually during the autumn months when the relative warmth of sea vis-\u00e0-vis land is greatest. Low precipitation, by the standards of more temperate regions with longer summers and warmer winters, is typically sufficient in view of the very low evapotranspiration to allow a water-logged terrain in many areas of subarctic climate and to permit snow cover during winter, which is generally persistent for an extended period.\nA notable exception to this pattern is that subarctic climates occurring at high elevations in otherwise temperate regions have extremely high precipitation due to orographic lift. Mount Washington, with temperatures typical of a subarctic climate, receives an average rain-equivalent of of precipitation per year. Coastal areas of Khabarovsk Krai also have much higher precipitation in summer due to orographic influences (up to in July in some areas), whilst the mountainous Kamchatka peninsula and Sakhalin island are even wetter, since orographic moisture isn't confined to the warmer months and creates large glaciers in Kamchatka. Labrador, in eastern Canada, is similarly wet throughout the year due to the semi-permanent Icelandic Low and can receive up to of rainfall equivalent per year, creating a snow cover of up to that does not melt until June.\nVegetation and land use.\nVegetation in regions with subarctic climates is generally of low diversity, as only hardy tree species can survive the long winters and make use of the short summers. Trees are mostly limited to conifers, as few broadleaved trees are able to survive the very low temperatures in winter. This type of forest is also known as taiga, a term which is sometimes applied to the climate found therein as well. Even though the diversity may be low, the area and numbers are high, and the taiga (boreal) forest is the largest forest biome on the planet, with most of the forests located in Russia and Canada. The process by which plants become acclimated to cold temperatures is called hardening.\nAgricultural potential is generally poor, due to the natural infertility of soils and the prevalence of swamps and lakes left by departing ice sheets, and short growing seasons prohibit all but the hardiest of crops. Despite the short season, the long summer days at such latitudes do permit some agriculture. In some areas, ice has scoured rock surfaces bare, entirely stripping off the overburden. Elsewhere, rock basins have been formed and stream courses dammed, creating countless lakes.\nNeighboring regions.\nShould one go northward or even toward a polar sea, one finds that the warmest month has an average temperature of less than , and the subarctic climate grades into a tundra climate not at all suitable for trees. Southward, this climate grades into the humid continental climates with longer summers (and usually less-severe winters) allowing broadleaf trees; in a few locations close to a temperate sea (as in northern Norway and southern Alaska), this climate can grade into a short-summer version of an oceanic climate, the subpolar oceanic climate, as the sea is approached where winter temperatures average near or above freezing despite maintaining the short, cool summers. In China and Mongolia, as one moves southwestwards or towards lower elevations, temperatures increase but precipitation is so low that the subarctic climate grades into a cold semi-arid climate.\nDistribution.\n\"Dfc\" and \"Dfd\" distribution.\nThe \"Dfc\" climate, by far the most common subarctic type, is found in the following areas:\nFurther north and east in Siberia, continentality increases so much that winters can be exceptionally severe, averaging below , even though the hottest month still averages more than . This creates \"Dfd\" climates, which are mostly found in the Sakha Republic:\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, the \"Dfc\" climate is found only in small, isolated pockets in the Snowy Mountains of Australia, the Southern Alps of New Zealand, and the Lesotho Highlands. In South America, this climate occurs on the western slope of the central Andes in Chile and Argentina, where climatic conditions are notably more humid compared to the eastern slope. The presence of the Andes mountain range contributes to a wetter climate on the western slope by capturing moisture from the Pacific Ocean, resulting in increased precipitation, especially during the winter months. This climate zone supports the presence of temperate rainforests, mostly on highest areas of the Valdivian rainforest in Chile and the subantarctic forest in Argentina.\n\"Dsc\" and \"Dsd\" distribution.\nClimates classified as \"Dsc\" or \"Dsd\", with a dry summer, are rare, occurring in very small areas at high elevation around the Mediterranean Basin; Iran; Kyrgyzstan; Tajikistan; Alaska and other parts of the northwestern United States (Eastern Washington, Eastern Oregon, Southern Idaho, California's Eastern Sierra); the Russian Far East; Akureyri, Iceland; Seneca, Oregon; and Atlin, British Columbia. Turkey and Afghanistan are exceptions; \"Dsc\" climates are common in Northeast Anatolia, in the Taurus and K\u00f6ro\u011flu Mountains, and the Central Afghan highlands.\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, the Dsc climate is present in South America as a subarctic climate influenced by Mediterranean characteristics, often considered a high-altitude variant of the Mediterranean climate. It is located on the eastern slopes of the central Argentine Andes and in some sections on the Chilean side. While there are no major settlements exhibiting this climate, several localities in the vicinity experience it, such as San Carlos de Bariloche, Villa La Angostura, San Mart\u00edn de los Andes, Balmaceda, Punta de Vacas, and Termas del Flaco.\n\"Dwc\" and \"Dwd\" distribution.\nClimates classified as \"Dwc\" or \"Dwd\", with a dry winter, are found in parts of East Asia, like China, where the Siberian High makes the winters colder than places like Scandinavia or Alaska interior but extremely dry (typically with around of rainfall equivalent per month), meaning that winter snow cover is very limited. The \"Dwc\" climate can be found in:\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, small pockets of the Lesotho Highlands and the Drakensberg Mountains have a \"Dwc\" classification.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50050", "revid": "543434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50050", "title": "Alfred Rosenberg", "text": "Nazi theorist and war criminal (1893\u20131946)\nAlfred Ernst Rosenberg (12 January\u00a0[O.S. 31 December 1892]\u00a01893\u00a0\u2013 16 October 1946) was a Baltic German Nazi theorist, theologian, ideologue and convicted war criminal. Rosenberg was first introduced to Adolf Hitler by Dietrich Eckart, and he held several important posts in the Nazi government. He was the head of the NSDAP Office of Foreign Affairs during the entire rule of Nazi Germany (1933\u20131945), and led Amt Rosenberg (\"Rosenberg's bureau\"), an official Nazi body for cultural policy and surveillance, between 1934 and 1945. During World War II, Rosenberg was the head of the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories (1941\u20131945). He helped direct the mass murder of the Slavs. After the war, he was convicted of crimes against peace; planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression; war crimes; and crimes against humanity at the Nuremberg trials in 1946. He was sentenced to death by hanging and executed on 16 October 1946.\nThe author of a seminal work of Nazi ideology, \"The Myth of the Twentieth Century\" (1930), Rosenberg is considered one of the main authors of key Nazi ideological creeds, including its racial theory and its hatred of the Jewish people, the need for \"Lebensraum\", abrogation of the Treaty of Versailles, and opposition to what was considered \"degenerate\" modern art. He was also known for his hatred and rejection of what he regarded as \"negative\" Christianity; however, he played an important role in the development of German nationalist Positive Christianity, which rejected the Old Testament.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nRosenberg was born on 12 January 1893 in Reval (now Tallinn, Estonia), then in the Governorate of Estonia of the Russian Empire. His mother Elfriede (n\u00e9e Sir\u00e9), who had French and German ancestry, was the daughter of Louise Rosalie (n\u00e9e Fabricius), born near Leal (modern Lihula, Estonia) in 1842, and of the railway official Friedrich August Sir\u00e9, born in Saint Petersburg, Russia, in 1843. Born in the same city in 1868, Elfriede Sir\u00e9 received the Christian sacrament of Confirmation in Reval at 17 in 1885. She married Woldemar Wilhelm Rosenberg, a wealthy merchant from Reval, in the Lutheran Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul (St-Petersburg) in 1886. The young Rosenberg's mother died two months after his birth.\nHis paternal grandfather, Martin Rosenberg, was a master shoemaker and elder of his guild. Born in Riga in 1820, and probably partly of Latvian descent, he had moved to Reval in the 1850s, where he met Julie Elisabeth Stramm, born in J\u00f6rden (now Estonia) in 1835. The two married in the German St. Nicholas parish of Reval in 1856.\nThe Hungarian-Jewish journalist Franz Szell, who was apparently residing in Tilsit, Prussia, Germany, spent a year researching in Latvian and Estonian archives before publishing an open letter in 1936, with copies to Hermann G\u00f6ring, Joseph Goebbels, Foreign Minister Konstantin von Neurath and others, accusing Rosenberg of having \"no drop of German blood\" flowing in his veins. Szell wrote that among Rosenberg's ancestors were only \"Latvians, Jews, Mongols, and French.\" As a result of his open letter, Szell was deported by Lithuanian authorities on 15 September 1936. His claims were repeated in the 15 September 1937 issue of the Vatican newspaper \"L'Osservatore Romano\".\nEducation and early career.\nThe young Rosenberg graduated from the Petri-Realschule (currently Tallinna Reaalkool) and enrolled in architecture studies at the Riga Polytechnical Institute in the autumn of 1910. In 1915, as the German army was approaching Riga, the entire school evacuated to the Moscow Imperial Higher Technical School (), where he completed his PhD studies in 1917. During his stays at home in Reval, he attended the art studio of the famed painter Ants Laikmaa\u2014though he showed promise, there are no records that he ever exhibited.\nDuring the German occupation of Estonia in 1918, Rosenberg served as a drawing teacher at the Gustav Adolf Gymnasium and Tallinna II Reaalkool (current Tallinn Polytechnic School). He gave his first speech on \"Jewish Marxism\" on 30 November, at the House of the Blackheads, after the 28 November 1918 outbreak of the Estonian War of Independence. He emigrated to Germany with the retreating Imperial German army, along with Max Scheubner-Richter, who served as something of a mentor to Rosenberg and to his ideology. Arriving in Munich, he contributed to Dietrich Eckart's publication, the \"V\u00f6lkischer Beobachter\" (\"Ethnic/Nationalist Observer\"). By this time, he was both an antisemite \u2013 influenced by Houston Stewart Chamberlain's book \"The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century\", one of the key proto-Nazi books of racial theory \u2013 and an anti-Bolshevik. Rosenberg became one of the earliest members of the German Workers' Party \u2013 later renamed the National Socialist German Workers' Party, better known as the Nazi Party \u2013 joining in January 1919, eight months before Adolf Hitler joined in September. According to some historians, Rosenberg had also been a member of the Thule Society, along with Eckart, although Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke contends that they were only guests. The \"V\u00f6lkischer Beobachter\" became the Nazi party newspaper in December 1920. Eckart was its first editor and after his bout with alcoholism, Rosenberg became its editor in 1923. Rosenberg was a leading member of Aufbau Vereinigung, Reconstruction Organisation, a conspiratorial organisation of White Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9s which had a critical influence on early Nazi policy.\nRosenberg sympathized and identified with Talaat Pasha and the Committee of Union and Progress that carried out the Armenian genocide, also claiming that there was \"a deliberately Jewish policy which had always protected the Armenians\" and that \"during the world war, the Armenians have led the espionage against the Turks, similar to the Jews against Germany\".\nPre-war years.\nIn November 1923, after the failed Beer Hall Putsch, Hitler, who had been imprisoned for treason, appointed Rosenberg as the leader of the Nazi movement. Hitler remarked privately in later years that his choice of Rosenberg, whom he regarded as weak and lazy, was strategic; Hitler did not want the temporary leader of the Nazis to become too popular or hungry for power, because a person with either of those two qualities might not want to cede the party leadership after Hitler's release. However, at the time of the appointment Hitler had no reason to believe that he would soon be released, and Rosenberg had not appeared weak, so this may have been Hitler reading back into history his dissatisfaction with Rosenberg for the job he did.\nOn 1 January 1924, Rosenberg founded the Greater German People's Community, a Nazi front organization. Headquartered in Munich, it was largely limited to Bavaria, the birthplace of National Socialism, had no substantial presence outside that State and became a haven for Nazi Party members from that area. Prominent members included Max Amann, Phillip Bouhler, Hermann Esser, Franz Xaver Schwarz and Julius Streicher. Rosenberg, one of the least charismatic of the Nazi leaders and lacking in leadership qualities, was soon pushed aside by Streicher, a far more ruthless and abrasive personality, who was elected Chairman on 9 July 1924 with Esser, also a coarse, bullying sort, as his Deputy Chairman.\nRosenberg was on the rostrum at the refoundation of the NSDAP in February 1925.\nIn 1929 Rosenberg founded the Militant League for German Culture. He later formed the \"Institute for Research on the Jewish Question\", the first branch of a projected Advanced School of the NSDAP, dedicated to identifying and attacking supposed Jewish influence in German culture and to recording the history of Judaism from a radical nationalist perspective. In 1930, he published his book on racial theory \"The Myth of the Twentieth Century\" (\"Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts\") which deals with key issues in the Nazi ideology, such as the \"Jewish question\". He condemned Islam in the book as well which he described as being against European races and as anti-Christian. Rosenberg intended his book as a sequel to Houston Stewart Chamberlain's above-cited book. Despite selling more than a million copies by 1945, its influence within Nazism remains doubtful. It is often said to have been a book that was officially venerated within Nazism, but one that few had actually read beyond the first chapter or even found comprehensible. According to Albert Speer, Hitler called it \"stuff nobody can understand\" and disapproved of its pseudo-religious tone. Contradicting this, other authors noted that Hitler considered it the most important book of party ideology. Rosenberg also played a key role in developing Hitler\u2019s belief in Jewish conspiracies by introducing him to The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.\nRosenberg was elected as a \"Reichstag\" deputy at the September 1930 parliamentary election as a representative of the Nazi Party electoral list. He would continue to serve in this capacity until the end of the Nazi regime, representing electoral constituency 33, Hesse-Darmstadt, from July 1932.\nRosenberg helped convince Hitler, whose early speeches focused on revenge against France and Britain, that communism was a serious threat to Germany. \"Jewish-Bolshevism\" became an ideological target for Nazism during the early 1920s.\nIn Rome during November 1932 Rosenberg participated in the Volta Conference about Europe. British historian Sir Charles Petrie met him there and regarded him with great distaste; Petrie was a Catholic and strongly objected to Rosenberg's anti-Jewish and anti-Catholic sentiments.\nThe following year, following the Nazi seizure of power, Rosenberg was named leader of the Nazi Party's Foreign Policy Office in April, and on 2 June 1933 he was named a \"Reichsleiter\", the second highest political rank in the Nazi Party. In May 1933 Rosenberg visited Britain, to give the impression that the Nazis would not be a threat and to encourage links between the new regime and the British Empire. It was a notable failure. When Rosenberg laid a wreath bearing a swastika at the Cenotaph, James Edmond Sears, a Labour Party candidate, slashed it, later threw it in the Thames and was fined 40 shillings for willful damage at Bow Street magistrate's court.\nIn October 1933, Rosenberg was named as a member of Hans Frank's Academy for German Law.\nOn 27 January 1934, Hitler made Rosenberg the \"F\u00fchrer's Representative for the Supervision of Intellectual and Ideological Education of the NSDAP.\" This was the origin of the Amt Rosenberg, or Rosenberg Office, which was an official body for cultural policy and surveillance within the Nazi party. It was also known as the Reich surveillance office.\nWartime activities.\nIn 1940 Rosenberg was made head of the \"Hohe Schule\" (literally \"high school\", but the German phrase refers to a college), the Centre of National Socialist Ideological and Educational Research, out of which the \"Einsatzstab Reichsleiter Rosenberg\" (Reichsleiter Rosenberg Taskforce) developed for the purpose of looting art and cultural goods. The ERR were especially active in Paris in looting art stolen from famous Jewish families such as the Rothschilds and that of Paul Rosenberg. Hermann G\u00f6ring used the ERR to collect art for his own personal gratification.\nHe created a \"Special Task Force for Music\" (\"Sonderstab Musik\") to collect the best musical instruments and scores for use in a university to be built in Hitler's home town of Linz, Austria. The orders given to the \"Sonderstab Musik\" were to loot all forms of Jewish property in Germany and of those found in any country taken over by the German army, and any musical instruments or scores were to be immediately shipped to Berlin.\nReich Minister for the Occupied Eastern Territories.\nFollowing the invasion of the USSR, Rosenberg was appointed head of the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories (\"Reichsministerium f\u00fcr die besetzten Ostgebiete\") on 17 July 1941. Alfred Meyer served as his deputy and represented him at the Wannsee Conference. Another official of the Ministry, Georg Leibbrandt, also attended the conference, at Rosenberg's request.\nRosenberg had presented Hitler with his plan for the organization of the conquered Eastern territories, suggesting the establishment of new administrative districts, to replace the previously Soviet-controlled territories with new Reichskommissariats. These would be:\nAlthough Rosenberg believed that all of the peoples of the Soviet Union were subhumans because of their communist beliefs, such suggestions were intended to encourage certain non-Russian forms of nationalism and promote German interests for the benefit of future Aryan generations, in accord with geopolitical \"Lebensraum im Osten\" plans. They would provide a buffer against Soviet expansion in preparation for the total eradication of Communism and Bolshevism by decisive pre-emptive military action.\nFollowing these plans, when Wehrmacht forces invaded Soviet-controlled territory, they immediately implemented the first of the proposed Reichskommissariats of Ostland and Ukraine, under the leadership of Hinrich Lohse and Erich Koch, respectively. The organization of these administrative territories led to conflict between Rosenberg and the SS over the treatment of Slavs under German occupation. As Nazi Germany's chief racial theorist, Rosenberg considered Slavs, though lesser than Germans, to be Aryan. Rosenberg often complained to Hitler and Himmler about the treatment of non-Jewish occupied peoples. He proposed the creation of buffer satellite states made out of Greater Finland, Baltica, Ukraine, and Caucasus.\nDuring an 18 November 1941 press conference, he made the following statements about the Jewish question:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some six million Jews still live in the East, and this question can only be solved by a biological extermination of the whole of Jewry in Europe. The Jewish Question will only be solved for Germany when the last Jew has left German territory, and it will only be solved for Europe when not a single Jew stands on the European continent as far as the Urals... And to this end, it is necessary to force them beyond the Urals or otherwise bring about their eradication.\nAt the Nuremberg trials he said he was ignorant of the Holocaust, despite the fact that Leibbrandt and Meyer were present at the Wannsee conference.\nWartime propaganda efforts.\nSince the invasion of the Soviet Union intended to impose the New Order, it was essentially a war of conquest. German propaganda efforts designed to win over Russian opinion were, at best, patchy and inconsistent. Alfred Rosenberg was one of the few in the Nazi hierarchy who advocated a policy designed to encourage anti-Communist opinion among the population of the occupied territories. His interest here was mainly in the non-Russian areas such as Ukraine and the Baltic States; however, supporters of the Russian Liberation Army were somewhat able to win him over.\nAmongst other things, Rosenberg issued a series of posters announcing the end of the Soviet collective farms (\"kolkhoz\"). He also issued an Agrarian Law in February 1942, annulling all Soviet legislation on farming and restoring family farms for those willing to collaborate with the occupiers. But decollectivisation conflicted with the wider demands of wartime food production, and Hermann G\u00f6ring demanded that the collective farms be retained, save for a change of name. Hitler himself denounced the redistribution of land as \"stupid\".\nThere were numerous German armed forces (\"Wehrmacht\") posters asking for assistance in the \"Bandenkrieg,\" the war against the Soviet partisans, though, once again, German policy had the effect of adding to their problems. Posters for \"volunteer\" labour, with inscriptions such as \"Come work with us to shorten the war\", hid the appalling realities faced by Russian workers in Germany. Rosenberg noted that many joined the partisans when volunteers for work details declined and the Germans resorted to force to acquire workers from the East.\nCapture, trial and execution.\nRosenberg was captured by Allied troops on 19 May 1945 in Flensburg-M\u00fcrwik. He was tried at Nuremberg and found guilty of all four counts: conspiracy to commit crimes against peace; planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression; war crimes; and crimes against humanity. The final judgment against him named him one of the principal planners of the invasion of Norway and the invasion of the Soviet Union. It also held him directly responsible for the systematic plunder of the occupied countries of Europe, as well as the brutal conditions in Eastern Europe. During his trial he wrote his memoirs, which were published posthumously and with analytical commentary by Serge Lang and Ernst von Schenck.\nHe was sentenced to death and executed with other condemned co-defendants at Nuremberg Prison on the morning of 16 October 1946. His body, like those of the other nine executed men and that of Hermann G\u00f6ring, was cremated at Ostfriedhof (Munich) and the ashes were scattered in the river Isar.\nThroughout the trial, it was agreed that Rosenberg had a decisive role in shaping Nazi philosophy and ideology. Examples include: his book \"The Myth of the Twentieth Century\", which was published in 1930, where he incited hatred against \"Liberal Imperialism\" and \"Bolshevik Marxism\"; furthering the influence of the \"Lebensraum\" idea in Germany during the war; facilitating the persecution of Christian churches and the Jews in particular; and opposition to the Versailles Treaty.\nAccording to Joseph Kingsbury-Smith, who covered the executions for the International News Service, Rosenberg was the only condemned man who, when asked at the gallows if he had any last statement to make, replied with only one word: \"No\".\nViews and influence on Nazi policy.\nHitler was a leader oriented towards practical politics, whereas, for Rosenberg, religion and philosophy were key and he was the most culturally influential within the party. Several accounts of the time before the Nazi ascension to power speak of Hitler as being a mouthpiece for Rosenberg's views, and he clearly exerted a great deal of intellectual influence.\nThe question of Rosenberg's influence in the Nazi Party is controversial. He was perceived as lacking the charisma and political skills of the other Nazi leaders, and was somewhat isolated. In some of his speeches Hitler appeared to be close to Rosenberg's views, rejecting traditional Christianity as a religion based on Jewish culture, preferring an ethnically and culturally pure \"Race\" whose destiny was supposed to be assigned to the German people by \"Providence\". But Hitler rejected Rosenberg's spiritual views on race and instead based his views on biology.\nAfter Hitler's assumption of power he moved to unify the churches into a national church which could be manipulated and controlled. He placed himself in the position of being the man to save Positive Christianity from utter destruction at the hands of the atheistic antitheist Communists of the Soviet Union. This was especially true immediately before and after the elections of 1932; Hitler wanted to appear non-threatening to major Christian faiths and consolidate his power.\nSome Nazi leaders, such as Martin Bormann, were anti-Christian and sympathetic to Rosenberg. Once in power, Hitler and most Nazi leaders sought to unify the Christian denominations in favor of \"positive Christianity\". Hitler privately condemned mystical and pseudoreligious interests as \"nonsense\", and maintained that National Socialism was based on science and should avoid mystic and cultic practices. However, he and Joseph Goebbels agreed that after the \"Endsieg\" (Final Victory) the Reich Church should be pressed into evolving into a German social evolutionist organisation proclaiming the cult of race, blood and battle, instead of Redemption and the Ten Commandments of Moses, which they deemed outdated and Jewish.\nHeinrich Himmler's views were among the closest to Rosenberg's, and their estrangement was perhaps created by Himmler's abilities to put into action what Rosenberg had only written. Also, while Rosenberg thought Christianity should be allowed to die out, Himmler actively set out to create countering pagan rituals.\nLieutenant Colonel William Harold Dunn (1898\u20131955) wrote a medical and psychiatric report on him in prison to evaluate him as a suicide risk: He gave the impression of clinging to his own theories in a fanatical and unyielding fashion and to have been little influenced by the unfolding during the trial of the cruelty and crimes of the party.\nSummarizing the unresolved conflict between the personal views of Rosenberg and the pragmatism of the Nazi elite:\nThe ruthless pursuit of Nazi aims turned out to mean not, as Rosenberg had hoped, the permeation of German life with the new ideology; it meant concentration of the combined resources of party and state on total war.\nRacial theories.\nAs the Nazi Party's chief racial theorist, Rosenberg oversaw the construction of a human racial \"ladder\" that justified Hitler's racial and ethnic policies. Rosenberg built on the works of Arthur de Gobineau, Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Madison Grant and the Klansman Lothrop Stoddard as well as on the beliefs of Hitler. Rosenberg placed Blacks and Jews at the very bottom of the ladder, while at the very top stood the \"Aryan\" race. Rosenberg promoted the Nordic theory which considered the Nordic race the \"master race\", superior to all others, including to other Aryans (Indo-Europeans). He was also influenced by the Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory promoted by the Catholic counter-revolutionary tradition, such as the book \"Le Juif, le juda\u00efsme et la juda\u00efsation des peuples chr\u00e9tiens\" (1869) by Roger Gougenot des Mousseaux, which he translated into German under the title \"The Eternal Jew\".\nRosenberg got the racial term \"Untermensch\" from the title of Stoddard's 1922 book \"The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-men\", which had been adopted by the Nazis from that book's German version \"Der Kulturumsturz: Die Drohung des Untermenschen\" (1925).\nRosenberg reshaped the Nazi racial policy over the years, but it always consisted of Aryan supremacy, extreme German nationalism and rabid antisemitism. Rosenberg also outspokenly opposed homosexuality \u2013 notably in his pamphlet \"Der Sumpf\" (\"The Swamp\", 1927). He viewed homosexuality as a hindrance to the expansion of the \"racially pure\" Nordic population.\nRosenberg's attitude towards Slavs was flexible because it depended on the particular nation which he referred to. As a result of the ideology of \"Drang nach Osten\" (\"Drive to the East\"), Rosenberg saw his mission as the conquest and colonization of the Slavic East. In \"The Myth of the Twentieth Century\", Rosenberg describes Russian Slavs as being overwhelmed by Bolshevism. Regarding Ukrainians, he favoured setting up a buffer state to ease the pressure on the German eastern frontier, while agreeing with the notion that Russia could be exploited for the benefit of Germany. During the war, Rosenberg was in favour of collaboration with the East Slavs against Bolshevism and offering them national independence unlike other Nazis such as Hitler and Himmler who dismissed such ideas.\nRosenberg criticised those who did not subscribe to his racial theories. For example, he attacked Fascist Italy for what he perceived as its incorrect and improper stance on race and Jewishness.\nReligious theories.\nRosenberg was raised as a Lutheran, but he rejected what he called \"negative\" Christianity later in life. Instead, Rosenberg argued for a new \"religion of the blood\", which was based on the supposed innate promptings of the Nordic soul to defend its noble character against racial and cultural degeneration.\nIn his 1920 book \"Immorality in the Talmud\", Rosenberg identified Jews with the antichrist. He rejected negative Christianity because of its universality, for its doctrine of original sin (as he believed that all ethnic Germans were born noble), and for its teachings on the immortality of the soul, saying, \"indeed, absorbing Christianity enfeebled our people.\" Publicly, Rosenberg affected to deplore Christianity's degeneration owing to its Jewish influence. He took inspiration from Houston Stewart Chamberlain's ideas and condemned what he called \"Negative Christianity\" (which was conventional Christianity preached by Protestantism and Catholicism), instead Rosenberg was arguing for a so-called \"Positive\" Christianity which was based on the argument that Jesus was not a Jew but a member of an Indo-European enclave which was resident in ancient Galilee who fought against Judaism. Significantly, in his work explicating the Nazi intellectual belief system, \"The Myth of the Twentieth Century\", Rosenberg cryptically applauds the early Christian heretic Marcion (who rejected the Old Testament as well as the notion of Christ as the Jewish Messiah) and the Manichaean-inspired, \"Aryo-Iranian\" Cathari, as being the more authentic interpreters of Christianity versus historically dominant Judaeo-Christianity; moreover these ancient, externally Christian metaphysical forms were more \"organically compatible with the Nordic sense of the spiritual and the Nordic 'blood-soul'.\" For Rosenberg, the anti-intellectual, religious doctrine was inseparable from serving the interests of the Nordic race, connecting the individual to his racial nature. Rosenberg stated that \"The general ideas of the Roman and of the Protestant churches are negative Christianity and do not, therefore, accord with our (German) soul.\" His support for Luther as a great German figure was always ambivalent.\nIn January 1934, Hitler appointed Rosenberg cultural and educational leader of the Reich. The \"Sanctum Officium\" in Rome recommended that Rosenberg's \"Myth of the Twentieth Century\" be put on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" (list of books forbidden by the Catholic Church) for scorning and rejecting \"all dogmas of the Catholic Church, and the very fundamentals of the Christian religion\".\nRosenberg has been described as an atheist by some people, including Henry F. Gerecke, the Lutheran chaplain who communed with some of the Nuremberg prisoners with Lutheran backgrounds, like Joachim von Ribbentrop and Wilhelm Keitel. Gustave Mark Gilbert, Rosenberg's prison psychologist during his trial, reports that Rosenberg described himself having \"always been anti-Catholic\" and criticised the Church's power. Due to his criticism of traditional Christianity, some polemical texts have called him a neo-pagan.\nDiary.\nDuring the Nuremberg trials, Rosenberg's handwritten diary was translated by Harry Fiss, Chief of Documentation for the American prosecution. After its use in evidence during the Nuremberg trials, the diary went missing, along with other material which had been given to the prosecutor Robert Kempner (1899\u20131993). Kempner had taken the diary, along with several other documents pertaining to the Nazi prosecutions back to his home. This was considered to be against standard government procedure, and illegal. It was recovered in Lewiston, N.Y., on 13 June 2013 after a lengthy investigation by the United States Department of Homeland Security. Written on 425 loose-leaf pages, with entries dating from 1936 through 1944, it is now the property of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM) in Washington. Henry Mayer, the museum's senior archivist, and the son of a Holocaust survivor, was able to access the material and while \"not given enough time to read [the] diary entry from beginning to end,\" he \"could see that Rosenberg focused on certain subjects, including brutality against Jews and other ethnic groups and forcing the civilian population of occupied Russia to serve Germany.\" Meyer also noted Rosenberg's \"hostile comments about Nazi leaders,\" which he described as \"unvarnished.\" While some parts of the manuscript had been previously published, the majority had been lost for decades. Former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent Robert King Wittman, who helped track down the diary, said, \"there is no place in the diary where we have Rosenberg or Hitler saying the Jews should be exterminated, all it said was 'move them out of Europe'\". \"The New York Times\" said of the search for the missing manuscript that \"the tangled journey of the diary could itself be the subject of a television mini-series.\"\nSince the end of 2013, the USHMM has shown the 425-page document (photos and transcripts) on its homepage.\nPersonal life.\nRosenberg was married twice. In 1915, he married Hilda Leesmann, an ethnic Estonian; they divorced in 1923. Two years later, in 1925 he married Hedwig Kramer, to whom he remained wed until his execution by the Allies. He and Kramer had two children: a son who died in infancy and a daughter, Irene, who was born in 1930. His wife died in 1947.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "50051", "revid": "46298011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50051", "title": "Temperate climate", "text": "Main climate class\nIn geography, the temperate climates of Earth occur in the middle latitudes (approximately 23.5\u00b0 to 66.5\u00b0 N/S of the Equator), which span between the tropics and the polar regions of Earth. These zones generally have wider temperature ranges throughout the year and more distinct seasonal changes compared to tropical climates, where such variations are often small; they usually differ only in the amount of precipitation.\nIn temperate climates, not only do latitudinal positions influence temperature changes, but various sea currents, prevailing wind direction, continentality (how large a landmass is) and altitude also shape temperate climates.\nThe K\u00f6ppen climate classification defines a climate as \"temperate\" C, when the mean temperature is above but below in the coldest month to account for the persistence of frost. However, some adaptations of K\u00f6ppen set the minimum at . Continental climates are classified as D and considered to be varieties of temperate climates, having more extreme temperatures, with mean temperatures in the coldest month usually being below .\nZones and climates.\nThe north temperate zone extends from the Tropic of Cancer (approximately 23.5\u00b0 north latitude) to the Arctic Circle (approximately 66.5\u00b0 north latitude). The south temperate zone extends from the Tropic of Capricorn (approximately 23.5\u00b0 south latitude) to the Antarctic Circle (at approximately 66.5\u00b0 south latitude).\nIn some climate classifications, the temperate zone may be divided into several smaller climate zones, based on monthly temperatures, the coldest month, and rainfall. These can include the subtropical zone (humid subtropical and Mediterranean climate), and the cool temperate zone (oceanic and continental climates).\nSubtropical zone.\nThese climates are typically found in the more equatorial regions of the temperate zone, between 23.5\u00b0 and 35\u00b0 north or south. They are influenced more by the tropics than by other temperate climate types, usually experiencing warmer temperatures throughout the year, with longer, hotter summers and shorter, milder winters. Freezing precipitation is uncommon in this part of the temperate zone.\nHumid subtropical (Cfa) and monsoon subtropical (Cwa) climates.\nHumid subtropical climates generally have long, hot and humid summers with frequent convective showers in summer, and a peak seasonal rainfall in the hottest months. Winters are normally mild and above freezing in the humid subtropics. Warm ocean currents are usually found in coastal areas with humid subtropical climates. This type of climate is normally located along leeward lower east coasts of continents such as in the Pampas region of South America, Northern Vietnam, the southeast portions of East Asia, southern and portions of the northeast and midwestern United States and portions of, South Africa, Ethiopia, and eastern Australia. In some areas with a humid subtropical climate (most notably southeast China and North India), there is an even sharper wet-dry season, called a monsoon subtropical climate or subtropical monsoon (Cwa). In these regions, winters are quite chilly and dry and summers have very heavy rainfall. Some Cwa areas in southern China report more than 80% of annual precipitation in the five warmest months (southwest monsoon).\nMediterranean climates (Csa, Csb).\nMediterranean climates have the opposite rainfall pattern to dry-winter climates, with a dry summer and wet winter. This climate occurs mostly at the western edges and coasts of the continents and are bounded by arid deserts on their equatorward sides that brings dry winds causing the dry season of summer, and oceanic climates to the poleward sides that are influenced by cool ocean currents and air masses that bring the rainfall of winter. The five main Mediterranean regions of the world are the Mediterranean basin in North Africa, Southern Europe, and West Asia, coastal California in the United States, the South and West states of Australia, the Western Cape of South Africa, and central Chile.\nSubtropical highland climates (Cwb, Cfb).\nSubtropical highland climates are climate variants often grouped together with oceanic climates found in some mountainous areas of either the tropics or subtropics. They have characteristically mild temperatures year-round, featuring the four seasons in the subtropics and no marked seasons in the tropics, the latter usually remaining mild to cool through most of the year. Subtropical highland climates under the Cfb classification usually have rainfall spread relatively evenly in all months of the year similar to most oceanic climates while climates under the Cwb classification have significant monsoon influence, usually having dry winters and wet summers.\nMiddle latitude zone.\nThese climates occur in the middle latitudes, between approximately 35\u00b0 and 66.5\u00b0 north and south of the equator. There is an equal climatic influence from both the polar and tropical zones in this climate region. Two types of climates are in this zone, a milder oceanic one and more severe seasonal continental one. Most prototypical temperate climates have a distinct four-season pattern, especially in the continental climate sector. \nOceanic climates (Cfb).\nOceanic climates are created by the on-shore flow from the cool high latitude oceans to their west. This causes the climate to have mild summers and cool (but not cold) winters, and relative humidity and precipitation evenly distributed throughout the year. These climates are frequently cloudy and cool, and winters are milder than those in the continental climate. \nRegions with oceanic climates include northwestern Europe, northwestern North America, southeastern and southwestern South America, southeastern Australia and most of New Zealand.\nHumid continental climates (Dfa, Dfb, Dwa, Dwb, Dsa, Dsb).\nHumid continental climates are considered as a variety of temperate climates due to lying in the temperate zones, although they are classified separately from other temperate climates in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. In contrast to oceanic climates, they are created by large land masses and seasonal changes in wind direction. This causes humid continental climates to have severe temperatures for the season compared to other temperate climates, meaning a hot summer and cold winter. Precipitation may be evenly distributed throughout the year, while in some locations there is a summer accent on rainfall. \nRegions with humid continental climates include southeastern Canada, the upper portions of the eastern United States, portions of eastern Europe, parts of China, Japan and the Korean Peninsula.\nSubpolar zone.\nThese are temperate climates that compared to the subtropics are on the poleward edge of the temperate zone. Therefore, they still have four marked seasons including a warmer one, but are far more influenced by the polar zones than any other but the very polar climates (tundra and ice cap climate).\nSubpolar oceanic and cold subtropical highland climates (Cfc, Cwc).\nAreas with subpolar oceanic climates feature an oceanic climate but are usually located closer to polar regions. As a result of their location, these regions tend to be on the cool end of oceanic climates. Snowfall tends to be more common here than in other oceanic climates. Subpolar oceanic climates are less prone to temperature extremes than subarctic climates or continental climates, featuring milder winters than these climates but still with similar summers. This variant of an oceanic climate is found in parts of coastal Iceland, the Faroe Islands, parts of Scotland, northwestern coastal areas of Norway such as Lofoten and reaching to 70\u00b0 north on some islands, uplands near the coast of southwestern Norway, the Aleutian Islands of Alaska and northern parts of the Alaskan Panhandle, some parts of Southern Argentina and Chile (though most regions are still classified as continental subantarctic), and a few highland areas of Tasmania, the Australian Alps and Southern Alps of New Zealand. This type of climate is even found in tropical areas such as the Papuan Highlands in Indonesia. Cfc is the categorization for this regime. Even in the middle of summer, temperatures exceeding 20\u00b0C (68 \u00b0F) are exceptional weather events in the most maritime of those locations impacted by this regime. In some parts of this climate, temperatures as high as 30\u00b0C (86\u00b0F) have been recorded on rare occasions, while temperatures as low as have still been recorded on rare occasions.\nA cold variant of the monsoon-influenced subtropical highland climate similar to subpolar oceanic climates occurs in small areas in the Chinese provinces of Sichuan and Yunnan, and parts of the Altiplano between Bolivia, Peru and Chile, where summers are sufficiently short to be \"Cwc\" with fewer than four months over due to the high altitudes at these locations. El Alto, Bolivia is one of the few confirmed cities that features this variation of a cold subtropical highland climate.\nCold summer mediterranean climates (Csc).\nCold summer mediterranean climates (\"Csc\") are present in high-elevation areas around coastal \"Csb\" climate areas, where the strong maritime influence prevents the average winter monthly temperature from dropping below 0\u00a0\u00b0C. Despite the maritime influence, they are classified alongside other mediterranean climates in the K\u00f6ppen classification rather than oceanic climates like subtropical highland climates due to the opposite rainfall pattern. This climate is rare and is predominantly found in climate fringes and isolated areas of the Cascades and Andes Mountains, as the dry-summer climate extends further poleward in the Americas than elsewhere.\nHuman aspects.\nDemography, fauna and flora.\nThe vast majority of the world's human population resides in temperate zones, especially in the Northern Hemisphere, due to its greater mass of land and lack of extreme temperatures. The biggest described number of taxa in a temperate region is found in southern Africa, where some 24,000 taxa (species and infraspecific taxa) have been described.\nAgriculture.\nFarming is a large-scale practice in the temperate regions (except for boreal/subarctic regions) due to the plentiful rainfall and warm summers. Because most agricultural activity occurs in the spring and summer, cold winters have a small effect on agricultural production. Extreme winters or summers have a huge impact on the productivity of agriculture which is less common.\nUrbanization.\nTemperate regions have the majority of the world's population, which leads to large cities. There are a couple of factors why the climate of large city landscapes differs from the climate of rural areas. One factor is the strength of the absorption rate of buildings and asphalt, which is higher than that of natural land. The other large factor is the burning of fossil fuels from buildings and vehicles. These factors have led to the average climate of cities to be warmer than surrounding areas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50052", "revid": "47404959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50052", "title": "Adam Wi\u015bniewski-Snerg", "text": "Polish writer\nAdam Wi\u015bniewski-Snerg (1 January 1937 \u2013 30 August 1995) was a Polish science fiction author, born in P\u0142ock, Poland.\nAlthough unpopular during his life, after his suicide he became recognized as one of the most significant authors of Polish SF.\nHis novel \"Robot\" was first published in English in 2021 in a translation by Tomasz Mirkowicz, who died in 2003. He was the prototype of Sneer, the main character of \"Limes inferior\", one of the novels by Janusz A. Zajdel.\nPublications.\nPosthumous\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50053", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50053", "title": "King Gaiseric", "text": ""}
{"id": "50054", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50054", "title": "Celje", "text": "Celje (; ) is the third-largest city in Slovenia. It is a regional center of the traditional Slovenian region of Styria and the administrative seat of the City Municipality of Celje. The town is located below Upper Celje Castle at the confluence of the Savinja, Hudinja, Lo\u017enica, and Voglajna rivers in the lower Savinja Valley, and at the crossing of the roads connecting Ljubljana, Maribor, Velenje, and the Central Sava Valley.\nName.\nCelje was known as \"Celeia\" during the Roman period. Early attestations of the name during or following Slavic settlement include \"Cylia\" in 452, \"ecclesiae Celejanae\" in 579, \"Zellia\" in 824, \"in Cilia\" in 1310, \"Cilli\" in 1311, and \"Celee\" in 1575. The proto-Slovene name \"*Ce\u013ee\" or \"*Cel\u044cje\", from which modern Slovene \"Celje\" developed, was borrowed from Vulgar Latin \"Celeae\". The name is of pre-Roman origin and its further etymology is unclear. In the local Slovene dialect, Celje is called \"Cjele\" or \"Cele\". In German it is called \"Cilli\", and it is known in Italian as \"Cilli\" or \"Celie\".\nHistory.\nBronze Age to 18th century.\nThe first settlement in the area of Celje appeared during the Hallstatt era. The settlement was known in the Celtic times and to Ancient Greek historians as \"Kelea\"; findings suggest that Celts coined Noric money in the region.\nOnce the area was incorporated in the Roman Empire in 15 BC, it was known as \"Civitas Celeia\". It received municipal rights in AD 45 under the name \"municipium Claudia Celeia\" during the reign of the Roman Emperor Claudius (41\u201354). Records suggest that the town was rich and densely populated, secured with the walls and towers, containing multi-storied marble palaces, wide squares, and streets. It was called \"Troia secunda\", the second; or small Troy. A Roman road through Celeia led from Aquileia (Sln. \"Oglej\") to Pannonia. Celeia soon became a flourishing Roman colony, and many great buildings were constructed, such as the temple of Mars, which was known across the Empire. Celeia was incorporated into Aquileia c. 320 under the Roman Emperor Constantine I (272\u2013337).\nThe city was razed by Slavic tribes during the Migration period of the 5th and 6th centuries, but was rebuilt in the Early Middle Ages. The first mention of Celje in the Middle Ages was under the name of \"Cylie\" in Wolfhold von Admont's Chronicle, which was written between 1122 and 1137. The town was the seat of the Counts of Celje from 1341 to 1456, with princely status from 1436. It acquired market-town status in the first half of the 14th century and town privileges from Count Frederick\u00a0II on 11\u00a0April\u00a01451.\nAfter the Counts of Celje died out in 1456, the region was inherited by the Habsburgs of Austria and administered by the Duchy of Styria. The city walls and defensive moat were built in 1473. The town defended itself against Turks and in 1515 during great Slovene peasant revolt against peasants, who had taken Old Castle.\nMany local nobles converted to Protestantism during the Protestant Reformation, but the region was converted back to Roman Catholicism during the Counter-Reformation.\n19th century to Second World War.\nCelje became part of the Habsburgs' Austrian Empire during the Napoleonic Wars. In 1867, after the defeat of Austria in the Austro-Prussian War and the ensuing Austro-Hungarian Compromise, the town became part of the Austrian-ruled section of Austria-Hungary.\nThe first service on the Vienna-Trieste railway line came through Celje on 27 April 1846. In 1895, Celje secondary school, established in 1808, began to teach in Slovene.\nAt the end of the 19th century and in the early 20th century, Celje was a center of German nationalism which had repercussions for Slovenes. The 1910 census showed that 66.8% of the population was German. A symbol of this was the German Cultural Center (), built in 1906 and opened on 15 May 1907, today the Celje Hall (). The centuries-old German name of the town, \"Cilli\", sounded no longer German enough to some German residents, the form \"Celle\" being preferred by many.\nPopulation growth was steady during this period. In 1900, Celje had 6,743 inhabitants and by 1924 this had grown to 7,750. The National Hall (\"Narodni dom\"), which hosts the mayor's office and town council today, was built in 1896. The first telephone line was installed in 1902 and the city received electric power in 1913.\nSlovene and German ethnic nationalism increased during the 19th and early 20th centuries. With the collapse of Austria-Hungary in 1918 as a result of World War I, Celje became part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later known as Yugoslavia). During this period, the town experienced a rapid industrialization and a substantial growth in population.\nSecond World War.\nCelje was occupied by Nazi Germany in April 1941. The Gestapo arrived in Celje on 16 April 1941 and were followed three days later by SS leader Heinrich Himmler, who inspected \"Stari pisker\" prison. During the war, the city suffered from allied bombing, aimed at important communication lines and military installations. The National Hall was severely damaged.\nThe toll of the war on the city was heavy. The city (including nearby towns) had a pre-war population of 20,000 and lost 575 people during the war, mostly between the ages of 20 and 30. More than 1,500 people were deported to Serbia or into the German interior of the Third Reich. Around 300 people were interned and around 1,000 people imprisoned in Celje's prisons. An unknown number of citizens were forcibly conscripted into the German army. Around 600 \"stolen children\" were taken to Nazi Germany for Germanization. A monument in Celje called \"Vojna in mir\" (War and Peace) by the sculptor Jakob Savin\u0161ek, commemorates the World War II era.\nAfter the end of the war, the remaining German-speaking portion of the populace was expelled or executed. Anti-tank trenches and other sites were used to create 25 mass graves in Celje and its immediate surroundings and were filled with Croatian, Serbian, and Slovenian militia members that had collaborated with the Germans, as well as ethnic German civilians from Celje and surrounding areas.\nIndependent Slovenia.\nCelje became part of independent Slovenia following the Ten-Day War in 1991. On 7 April 2006, Celje became the seat of a new Diocese of Celje, created by Pope Benedict XVI within the Archdiocese of Maribor.\nSights.\nThe town's tourist sights include a Grayfriars' monastery founded in 1241 and a palace from the 16th century.\nThe parish church, dating from the 14th century, with its Gothic chapel, is a specimen of medieval architecture. The so-called German church, in Romanesque style, belonged to the monastery, which was closed in 1808. The throne of the counts of Cilli is preserved here, and also the tombs of several members of the family.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nCelje has a continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\").\nSymbols.\nThe coat of arms of Celje are based on the coat of arms of the Counts of Celje.\nThe coat-of-arms of Celje was selected for the national arms immediately after World War I in 1918, when Slovenia together with Croatia and Serbia formed the original Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia). A similar coat of arms was integrated into the Slovenian national arms in 1991.\nDistricts and local communities.\nThe city of Celje is divided into 10 districts (\"mestne \u010detrti\") and the municipality has 9 local communities (\"krajevne skupnosti\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1991 the population consisted of:\nEducation.\nCelje does not have its own university, although some college-level education has been established in the city.\nLaw and government.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of Celje is Matija Kova\u010d.\nVice mayors.\nThe current vice mayors of Celje are Sa\u0161a Kundih, Samo Seni\u010dar and Uro\u0161 Lesjak.\nCourts.\nIn Celje there are three courts of general jurisdiction:\nIn addition to that there are also Celje Labour Court for resolving labour law disputes and an external department of Administrative Court for resolving disputes arising from administrative procedures.\nCommunications.\nPostal number: SI-3000 (from 1991). (Old one: 63000 (between 1945\u20131991)).\nSports.\nSports clubs based in Celje include football club NK Celje, basketball club KK Celje, handball club RK Celje, ice hockey club HK Celje.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nCelje is twinned with\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCelje also cooperates with Cherepovets in Russia and has informal friendly relations with Graz and Spittal an der Drau in Austria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50058", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50058", "title": "Opera Buffa", "text": ""}
{"id": "50059", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50059", "title": "Opera buffa", "text": "Italian opera genre associated with humor\nOpera buffa (, \"comic opera\"; pl.: \"opere buffe\") is a genre of opera. It was first used as an informal description of Italian comic operas variously classified by their authors as \"commedia in musica\", \"commedia per musica\", \"dramma bernesco\", \"dramma comico\", \"divertimento giocoso\".\nEspecially associated with developments in Naples in the first half of the 18th century, whence its popularity spread to Rome and northern Italy, \"buffa\" was at first characterized by everyday settings, local dialects, and simple vocal writing (the basso buffo is the associated voice type), the main requirement being clear diction and facility with patter.\n\"The New Grove Dictionary of Opera\" considers \"La Cilla\" (music by Michelangelo Faggioli, text by Francesco Antonio Tullio, 1706) and Luigi and Federico Ricci's\" Crispino e la comare\" (1850) to be the first and last appearances of the genre, although the term is still occasionally applied to newer work (for example Ernst Krenek's \"Zeitoper\" \"Schwergewicht\"). High points in this history are the 80 or so libretti by Carlindo Grolo, Loran Glodici, Sogol Cardoni and various other approximate anagrams of Carlo Goldoni, the three Mozart/Da Ponte collaborations, and the comedies of Gioachino Rossini and Gaetano Donizetti.\nSimilar foreign genres such as French \"op\u00e9ra comique\", English \"ballad opera\", Spanish \"zarzuela\" or German \"Singspiel\" differed as well in having spoken dialogue in place of \"recitativo secco\", although one of the most influential examples, Pergolesi's (which is an intermezzo, not opera buffa), sparked the \"querelle des bouffons\" in Paris as an adaptation without sung recitatives.\nOp\u00e9ra bouffon.\nOp\u00e9ra bouffon is the French term for the Italian genre of opera buffa (comic opera) performed in 18th-century France, either in the original language or in French translation. It was also applied to original French op\u00e9ras comiques having Italianate or near-farcical plots.\nThe term was also later used by Jacques Offenbach for five of his operettas (\"Orph\u00e9e aux enfers\", \"Le pont des soupirs\", \"Genevi\u00e8ve de Brabant\", \"Le roman comique\" and \"Le voyage de MM. Dunanan p\u00e8re et fils\"), and is sometimes confused with the French op\u00e9ra comique and op\u00e9ra bouffe.\nHistory.\nComic characters had been a part of opera until the early 18th century, when opera buffa began to emerge as a separate genre, an early precursor having been the operatic comedy, \"Il Trespolo tutore\", by Alessandro Stradella, in 1679. Opera buffa was a parallel development to \"opera seria\", and arose in reaction to the so-called first reform of Apostolo Zeno and Pietro Metastasio. It was, in part, intended as a genre that the common man could relate to more easily. Whereas \"opera seria\" was an entertainment that was both made for and depicted kings and nobility, opera buffa was made for and depicted common people with more common problems. High-flown language was generally avoided in favor of dialogue that the lower class would relate to, often in the local dialect, and the stock characters were often derived from those of the Italian commedia dell'arte. The 1701 \"scherzo drammatico\" (dramatic jest), \"Il mondo abbattuto\" by Nicola Sabini was particularly influential in Naples, creating a popular model due to its use of both Tuscan and Neapolitan dialects.\nIn the early 18th century, comic operas often appeared as short, one-act interludes known as intermezzi that were performed in between acts of opera seria. There also existed, however, self-contained operatic comedies. (1733) by Giovanni Battista Pergolesi (1710\u20131736), is the one intermezzo still performed with any regularity today, and provides an excellent example of the style. \"Lo frate 'nnamorato\" (1732) and \"Il Flaminio\" (1735), by Pergolesi as well, are examples of the three-act \"commedia per musica\".\nApart from Pergolesi, the first major composers of opera buffa were Alessandro Scarlatti (\"Il trionfo dell'onore\", 1718), Nicola Logroscino (\"Il governatore\", 1747) and Baldassare Galuppi (\"Il filosofo di campagna\", 1754), all of them based in Naples or Venice. The work of these was then resumed and expanded by Niccol\u00f2 Piccinni (\"La Cecchina\", 1760), Giovanni Paisiello (\"Nina\", 1789) and Domenico Cimarosa (\"Il matrimonio segreto\", 1792). The genre declined in the mid-19th century, despite Giuseppe Verdi's \"Falstaff\" staged in 1893.\nThe importance of opera buffa diminished during the Romantic period. Here, the forms were freer and less extended than in the serious genre and the set numbers were linked by recitativo secco, the exception being Donizetti's \"Don Pasquale\" in 1843. With Rossini, a standard distribution of four characters is reached: a prima donna soubrette (soprano or mezzo); a light, amorous tenor; a or baritone capable of lyrical, mostly ironical expression; and a whose vocal skills, largely confined to clear articulation and the ability to \"patter\", must also extend to the baritone for the purposes of comic duets.\nThe type of comedy could vary, and the range was great: from Rossini's \"The Barber of Seville\" in 1816 which was purely comedic, to Mozart's \"The Marriage of Figaro\" in 1786 which added drama and pathos. Another example of Romantic opera buffa would be Donizetti's \"The Elixir of Love\" of 1832.\nRelation to and differences from \"opera seria\".\nWhile \"opera seria\" deals with gods and ancient heroes and only occasionally contained comic scenes, opera buffa involves the predominant use of comic scenes, characters, and plot lines in a contemporary setting. The traditional model for \"opera seria\" had three acts, dealt with serious subjects in mythical settings, as stated above, and used high voices (both sopranos and castrati) for principal characters, often even for monarchs.\nIn contrast, the model that generally held for opera buffa was having two acts (as, for example, \"The Barber of Seville\"), presenting comic scenes and situations as earlier stated and using the lower male voices to the exclusion of the castrati. This led to the creation of the characteristic \"basso buffo\", a specialist in patter who was the center of most of the comic action. (A well-known basso buffo role is Leporello in Mozart's \"Don Giovanni\".)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "50060", "revid": "869916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50060", "title": "Nord-Pas-de-Calais", "text": "Former administrative region of France\nNord-Pas-de-Calais (; ; West Flemish: \"N\u00f4ord-Nauw van Kales\") was a former administrative region of France. Since 1 January 2016, it has been part of the new region Hauts-de-France. It consisted of the departments of Nord and Pas-de-Calais. Nord-Pas-de-Calais bordered the English Channel (west), the North Sea (northwest), Belgium (north and east), and Picardy (south). Until the 17th century, the history of the North was largely shared with the history of Belgium (the Celtic Belgians during Antiquity were a multitude of Celtic peoples from the north of Gaul), that of a land that \"for almost a thousand years served as a battlefield for all of Europe.\" \nThe majority of the region was once part of the historical Southern Netherlands, but gradually became part of France between 1477 and 1678, particularly during the reign of King Louis XIV. The historical French provinces that preceded Nord-Pas-de-Calais are Artois, French Flanders, French Hainaut, and (partially) Picardy (part of Hainaut and Flanders is in the Kingdom of Belgium). These provincial designations are still frequently used by the inhabitants. The former administrative region was created in 1956 under the name \"Nord\" and maintained that name until 1972, when \"Pas-de-Calais\" was added. This remained unchanged until its dissolution in 2016.\nWith a population density of 330.8 people per km2 on just over 12,414\u00a0km2, it was a densely populated region inhabited by 4.1\u00a0million people, 7% of France's total population, making it the fourth most populous region in the country, 83% of whom live in urban communities. Its administrative centre and largest city is Lille. The second largest city is Calais, which serves as a major continental economic/transportation hub with Dover of Great Britain away; this makes Nord-Pas-de-Calais the closest continental European connection to the island of Great Britain. Other major towns include Valenciennes, Lens, Douai, B\u00e9thune, Dunkirk, Maubeuge, Boulogne, Arras, Cambrai, and Saint-Omer. The region is featured in numerous films, including \"Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis\".\nName.\n\"Nord-Pas-de-Calais\" combines the names of the constituent departments of Nord (literally 'North', the northernmost department of France) and Pas-de-Calais ('Strait of Calais', the French name of the Strait of Dover). The regional council, however, spells the name \"Nord-Pas-de-Calais\".\nThe northern part of the region was historically a part of the County of Flanders, with Lille as its capital. Those who wish to highlight the historical links the region has with Belgium and the Netherlands prefer to call this region the French Low Countries, which also means \"French Netherlands\" in French (French: \"Pays-Bas fran\u00e7ais\"; Dutch: \"Franse Nederlanden\" or \"Franse Lage Landen\"). Other alternative names are \"R\u00e9gion Flandre(s)-Artois\", \"Hauts-de-France\", ('Upper France') and \"Picardie-du-Nord\" ('Northern Picardy').\nHistory.\nInhabited since prehistoric times, the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region has always been a strategic (and hence a highly fought-over) region in Europe. French President Charles de Gaulle, who was born in Lille, called the region a \"fatal avenue\" through which invading armies repeatedly passed. Over the centuries, it was conquered in turn by the Celtic Belgae, the Romans, the Germanic Franks, England, the Spanish and Austrian Netherlands, and the Dutch Republic. After the final French annexation in the early 18th century, much of the region was again occupied by Germany during the First and Second World Wars.\nDuring the 4th and 5th centuries, the Roman practice of co-opting Germanic tribes to provide military and defense services along the route from Boulogne to Cologne created a Germanic\u2013Romance linguistic border in the region that persisted until the 8th century. By the 9th century, most inhabitants north of Lille spoke a dialect of Middle Dutch, while the inhabitants to the south spoke a variety of Romance dialects. This linguistic border is still evident today in the place names of the region. Beginning in the 9th century, the linguistic border began a steady move to the north and the east. By the end of the 13th century, the linguistic border had shifted to the river Lys in the south and Cap Gris-Nez in the west.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Pas-de-Calais department comprised the County of Boulogne and the County of Artois, while the Nord department was mostly made up of the southern portions of the County of Flanders and the County of Hainaut. Boulogne, Artois, and Flanders were fiefs of the French crown, while Hainaut and (after 1493) Flanders were within the Holy Roman Empire. Calais was an English possession from 1347 to 1558, when it was recovered by the French throne. In the 15th century, all of the territories, except Calais, were united under the rule of the Dukes of Burgundy, along with other territories in northern France and areas in what is now Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. With the death of the Burgundian duke Charles the Bold in 1477, the Boulonnais and Artois were seized by the French crown, while Flanders and Hainaut were inherited by Charles's daughter Marie. Shortly thereafter, in 1492, Artois was ceded back to Marie's son Philip the Handsome, as part of an attempt to keep Philip's father, Emperor Maximilian I, neutral in French King Charles VIII's prospective invasion of Italy.\nThus, most of the territories of what is now Nord-Pas-de-Calais were reunited with the Burgundian inheritance, which had passed through Marie's marriage to the House of Habsburg. These territories formed an integral part of the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands as they were defined during the reign of Philip's son, Emperor Charles V, and passed to Charles's son, Philip\u00a0II of Spain. During the Italian Wars, much of the conflict between France and Spain occurred in the region. When the Netherlands revolted against Spanish rule, beginning in 1566, the territories in what is now Nord-Pas-de-Calais were those most loyal to the throne and proved the base from which the Duke of Parma was able to bring the whole southern part of the Netherlands back under Spanish control. It was also a base for Spanish support of French Catholics in the French Wars of Religion.\nDuring the wars between France and Spain in the 17th century (1635\u20131659, 1667\u20131668, 1672\u20131678, 1688\u20131697), these territories became the principal seat of conflict between the two states, and French control over the area was gradually established. Beginning with the annexation of Artois in 1659, most of the current Nord department territory had been acquired by the time of the Treaty of Nijmegen in 1678. The current borders were mostly established by the time of the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697.\nThe area, previously divided among the French provinces of Flanders, Artois, and Picardy, was divided into its two present departments following the French Revolution of 1789. Under Napoleon, the French boundary was extended to include all of Flanders and present-day Belgium until the Congress of Vienna in 1815 restored the original French boundary.\nDuring the 19th century, the region underwent major industrialisation and became one of the leading industrial regions of France, second only to Alsace-Lorraine. Nord-Pas-de-Calais was barely touched by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870; the war actually helped it to cement its leading role in French industry due to the loss of Alsace-Lorraine to Germany. However, it suffered catastrophic damage in the two World Wars of the 20th century.\nPrehistory.\nThe earliest evidence of man's presence in the region dates from the Pleistocene to the Middle Ages. Evidence of early human presence includes bifaces dating back to around 700,000 BC found in Wimereux and 500,000 BC in Qui\u00e9vy. During the Pleistocene, human activity was intermittent due to the harsh climate caused by expanding Nordic glaciers. Occupation sites are noted from around 60,000 BC in Marcoing and 50,000\u201340,000 BC in Busigny and Hamel, with the first Homo sapiens identified in Rouvroy.\nAfter the last Ice age, the region, now covered in forests, saw the emergence of hunter-gatherer societies using microliths for hunting. The Neolithic period marked the beginning of agriculture and animal husbandry, influenced by the Cerny and Michelsberg cultures. Evidence of trade and tool use from outside the region highlights interactions with other areas. Additionally, the Neolithic era left behind megalithic structures, such as dolmens and menhirs, which were likely used for religious purposes, though their exact functions remain unclear.\n\"Gallia Belgica\" and the Roman Empire.\nThe Gallic War.\nDuring the Gallic War in 56\u00a0BC, Julius Caesar expanded his conquests toward the North Sea after defeating the Atrebates and Nervians at the Battle of Sabis. The Belgians, a collective of various tribes such as the Menapiens, Morins, Atr\u00e9bates, and Nervians, had settled in the region between the 5th and 1st centuries BC. These tribes, described by Caesar, were not homogeneous and occupied different parts of the land. Settlements were mainly hamlets around farms, with few fortified camps like Etrun. The Roman invasion began in 57\u00a0BC, leading to significant battles, including a decisive one on the banks of the Sabis. Despite initial resistance, by 50\u00a0BC, Gaul-Belgium was conquered and remained under military occupation until 27\u00a0BC.\n\"Pax Romana\".\nFollowing their victory, the Romans implemented policies of pacification and Romanization, transforming the region administratively and economically. They established numerous cities, incorporating ancient Celtic tribes into the prosperous Roman province of Belgium. Key cities included Bagacum Nerviorum (Bavay), Namur (Aduatuca), Castellum Menapiorum (Cassel), Nemetocenna (Arras), and Tervanna (Th\u00e9rouanne). The region flourished through agriculture, particularly sheep breeding and wheat cultivation, and the development of a sophisticated road network known as the \"Brunehaut causeways\". This network facilitated trade within the empire, allowing for the import and export of various goods, including ceramics, pottery, wine, olive oil, linen cloth, and ham. Vici (hamlets) emerged along these routes, and many modern communes in the Scarpe and Escaut valleys trace their origins to Gallo-Roman settlements.\nDecline and Barbarian Invasions.\nBy the end of the 1st century, Germanic tribes began encroaching on the region, leading to periods of pillaging and instability. The Franks crossed the Rhine in 253\u2013254 and again between 259 and 263, followed by the Alamanni in 275. During brief periods of peace, new capitals like Tournai and Cambrai emerged, replacing older ones such as Cassel and Bavay. The region also saw the initial stages of Christianization, although it remained limited until the 3rd and 5th centuries. In 406, a frozen Rhine allowed a flood of barbarian groups, including the Franks and Germans driven by the Huns, to invade, ultimately leading to the collapse of the remaining Roman authority in the region.\nThe Frankish kingdoms.\nChristianization in the Merovingian Period.\nDuring the Merovingian period, the Salian Franks initially maintained their pagan beliefs, unlike other Germanic tribes who converted to Arianism. Clovis's conversion to Nicene Christianity was significant as it aligned with the remaining Roman Empire's religion, providing sacred legitimacy. This period saw a renewal of urbanization and the establishment of ecclesiastical authorities. Vaast became bishop of Arras and Cambrai early in the century. By 511, however, the region was not sufficiently Christianized to be represented at the Council of Orleans.\nBetween Neustria and Austrasia.\nThe Merovingians did not have a concept of statehood; instead, fiefdoms were private domains. After Clovis's death, his kingdom was divided among his sons, leading to dynastic struggles, notably between queens Brunehaut and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9gonde. Around 630\u00a0AD, during Dagobert's reign, significant Christianization efforts began with the establishment of numerous monasteries, such as Marchiennes, Cond\u00e9, and Maroilles. These monasteries, supported by the Frankish aristocracy, played crucial roles in land development and extending royal power. Coastal areas saw less interest from the Franks, with the first bishop, Audomar (Saint Omer), arriving only in the 6th century.\nThe Scheldt as a New Frontier.\nThe Treaty of Verdun.\nThe Treaty of Verdun in 843 divided Charlemagne's empire into three kingdoms, establishing the Scheldt River as the natural boundary between West Francia and Middle Francia. This division split what is now the Nord d\u00e9partement into two parts: one under what would become France and the other under the Holy Roman Empire. This new border marked a significant shift in territorial and political dynamics in the region.\nCounties of Flanders, Cambr\u00e9sis, and Hainaut.\nIn the early Middle Ages, the feudal system shaped the region's political landscape. The County of Flanders emerged in the late 9th century as a semi-autonomous entity with regular insubordination to the French King. Similarly, the County of Hainaut took shape by the mid-11th century, with the Duchy of Brabant reflecting Flemish traditions. The influence of the Catholic Church also grew, with the Bishop of Cambrai becoming Count of Cambr\u00e9sis. The importance of waterways led to the growth of towns such as Lille and Arras, which gained privileges and self-governance, especially in the 12th century when Arras became renowned for its cloth industry.\nThe Battle of Bouvines.\nIn 1180, Isabelle de Hainaut's marriage to Philippe Auguste brought the Artois region to the French crown. The complex succession issues surrounding the County of Flanders led to a coalition against the King of France, involving the Emperor, the King of England, and the Count of Flanders, Ferrand of Portugal. The decisive Battle of Bouvines in 1214 saw Philippe Auguste emerge victorious, enabling him to implement administrative reforms to consolidate royal power. These changes, along with the support of his successor Saint Louis, allowed the French monarchy to exert influence over Flanders and Hainaut. The early 13th century also saw significant religious expansion in these regions with the establishment of monasteries and beguinages, fostering religious movements like Rheno-Flemish mysticism.\nHundred Years' War.\nThe 14th century brought the crisis of the late Middle Ages and rising tensions between France and England, particularly over Flanders, Guyenne, and Scotland. The Count of Flanders, though serving the French King, had economic ties with England, while the Count of Hainaut aligned with the Emperor, an English ally. Edward\u00a0III's campaign in 1346 led to the protracted siege of Calais. The Hundred Years' War, while destructive, was overshadowed by devastating epidemics like the Black Death, which struck southern Hainaut in 1316, killing a third of the population, and reoccurred several times, including a severe outbreak in Calais in 1348.\nFrom the Revolution to the First Empire.\nContext in 1789.\nNorthern France, described by Jean-Cl\u00e9ment Martin as the \"aborted Vend\u00e9e\", was notably hostile to the French Revolution. The local peasants, deeply affected by the king's execution in January 1793, resisted the new revolutionary order. Liberty trees were cut down in the Cambrai district, and parishioners refused sacraments from constitutional priests. In villages like Morbecque, peasants rebelled against conscription and faced persecution by the republican authorities.\nThe Creation of the Nord and Pas-de-Calais D\u00e9partements.\nOn September 29, 1789, the Constituent Assembly decided to reorganize France into departments of approximately 324 square leagues each. The northern provinces were to form four departments, but various projects clashed. Ultimately, the National Assembly decided in 1790 to create the Nord and Pas-de-Calais departments. Douai was initially chosen as the prefecture of Nord due to Merlin de Douai's influence, but it was later moved to Lille by the First Consul on 3 Thermidor IX. The Nord department consisted of eight districts: Bergues, Hazebrouck, Lille, Douai, Cambray, Valenciennes, Le Quesnoy, and Avesnes, while Pas-de-Calais comprised Arras, Bapaume, B\u00e9thune, Boulogne, Calais, Montreuil, Saint-Omer, and Saint-Pol.\nFranco-Austrian War and the First Empire.\nThe Franco-Austrian War saw Northern France as a significant battleground following the Brabant and Li\u00e8ge revolutions. France declared war on Austria in April 1792, leading to the destruction of cities like Lille, Dunkirk, and Valenciennes. Austrian armies occupied French Hainaut from 1793 to 1794 until the French Revolutionary Army conquered the region and annexed Belgium. The Terror further devastated the area, dismantling structures like the Saint-Amand Abbey and depriving Cambrai of its cathedral and Gothic churches. Under Napoleon, the Nord department made substantial efforts to rebuild and unify administratively and socially. However, after Napoleon's defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, the region was occupied by British troops until November 1818.\nThe industrial revolution.\nThe economic boom.\nIn the early 19th century, Northern France experienced significant economic development, propelled into the Industrial Revolution by several key factors. Napoleon's continental blockade against the United Kingdom forced the region to produce goods locally that had previously been imported, fostering the birth of industries such as sugar production. The introduction of British steam engines into spinning mills also accelerated production. Central areas rich in coal, from B\u00e9thune to Valenciennes, became crucial energy sources, further boosted by the protectionist policies of the Restoration era after Belgium's emergence in 1830.\nThe Working Class.\nWhile the industrial boom turned Northern France into an economic powerhouse for over a century, it brought severe hardships for the working class. Miners, as depicted in \u00c9mile Zola's \"Germinal\", faced grueling conditions and meager wages, risking their health underground. Textile workers also endured harsh conditions. The 19th century added to their suffering with extreme weather events and five cholera epidemics between 1832 and 1866, the last of which claimed 10,584 lives in the Nord d\u00e9partement alone.\nWorld War I.\nWhen the First World War started, the region became a strategic target for the Allies and the Central Powers, mostly because of the coal and mining resources. When the German troops launched their attack from Belgium, the region was one of the first to fall under German occupation. Nevertheless, when the Allies stopped Germany at the Battle of Marne, the front moved back to the area and stabilized near Arras.\nDuring the next four years, the region was split in two: the German holding the French Flanders and Cambrai area, the Allied controlling Arras and the Area of Lens. Nevertheless, the combat did not stop, each side wanting the total control of the area.\nThe Nord-pas-de-Calais was one of the main theaters of the conflict, with many battles occurring between 1914 and 1918, including the Battle of Vimy Ridge assault during the Battle of Arras (1917), the Battle of Artois, Battle of Loos, and the Battle of Cambrai. By the time the region was finally liberated by the Canadian Expeditionary Forces, the entire country was devastated, and Arras had been 90% destroyed. Currently, there are 650 military cemeteries throughout the Nord-Pas-de-Calais, mostly British and Canadian, as well as large memorials such as the Canadian National Vimy Memorial and Notre Dame de Lorette, the world's largest French military cemetery.\nBetween the wars.\nAfter the war, the industrial region of Nord-Pas-de-Calais was devastated, and in 1919 was classified as a red or yellow zone for around two-thirds of its surface area.\nThe reconstruction movement made massive use of immigration, particularly from Poland, to compensate for the decline in population due to the war, and to adapt to the new legislation limiting the working day to eight hours. But the economic crisis of the 1930s soon prevented any real economic or cultural renaissance. It also led to downsizing, with recent immigrants the first to be affected.\nThe region saw a breakthrough of the extreme right, including the \"green shirts\" among the peasants, which prompted Le-Nord-Pas-de-Calais to unite. When the Front Populaire came to power in France in 1936, three deputies from the Nord were in government, including Roger Salengro. Factories went on strike en masse during the Matignon Accords.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the occupation of France, it was attached to the Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France, ruled from the Wehrmacht \"kommandantur\" in Brussels. The Nord-Pas-de-Calais region was used for vengeance weapon installations, including extensive V-1 \"ski sites\" that launched attacks on England and massive bunkers for the V-2 rocket and V-3 cannon. Operation Crossbow counteroffensive bombing by the Allies devastated many of the region's towns. Although most of the region was liberated in September 1944, Dunkirk was the last Franco Nord-Pas-de-Calais German occupation (on 9 May 1945).\nPostwar period.\nSince the war, the region has suffered from severe economic difficulties (see Economy below) but has benefited from the opening of the Channel Tunnel and the growth in cross-Channel traffic in general.\nThe Post-War Effort and Economic Expansion.\nFollowing World War II, France embarked on a significant recovery effort termed \"Union sacr\u00e9e\", aiming to rebuild the nation under a managed economy. General de Gaulle's speech in Lille emphasized the state's role in national economic development. In 1946, the nationalization of companies in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region led to the formation of Houill\u00e8res du Nord-Pas-de-Calais, with miners receiving special privileges. The steel industry also expanded, benefiting from modernization efforts funded by the Marshall Plan.\nEconomic Reconstruction and Television.\nBy the early 1950s, Nord-Pas-de-Calais had regained its industrial strength, primarily in traditional sectors like textiles, coal, and steel, which were starting to decline. This period also marked the advent of regional television with the creation of T\u00e9l\u00e9-Lille in 1950, the first regional television station in France. Despite technological advancements, the region faced economic challenges due to a lack of diversification.\nAlgerian War and Social Tensions.\nThe Algerian War in the mid-20th century significantly impacted the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region, home to a large population of Algerian immigrants. This led to social tensions and conflicts between French and Algerian communities, exacerbated by internal strife among Algerians supporting different nationalist movements. The war's impact was felt through numerous violent incidents, including attacks and street shootings, resulting in significant casualties and social unrest.\nIndustrial Decline and Economic Transition.\nFrom the 1950s to the 1980s, Nord-Pas-de-Calais experienced a gradual decline in coal mining, textiles, and steel industries, resulting in substantial job losses. The government attempted to revitalize the region's economy by promoting the automotive industry and attracting plastics companies, which created new employment opportunities. Despite these efforts, the transition highlighted the challenges of shifting from traditional industries to more diversified economic activities.\nDemographics.\nWhile the region is predominantly French-speaking, it also has two significant minority language communities: the western Flemings, whose presence is evident in the many Dutch place names in the area and who speak West Flemish, a dialect of Dutch (perhaps 20,000 inhabitants of Nord-Pas-de-Calais use Flemish daily and an estimated 40,000 use it occasionally, both primarily in and around the arrondissement of Dunkirk); and the Picards, who speak the Picard language, or \"Ch'ti\" (speakers, \"chitimi\", have been working to revive the nearly-extinct regional speech since the 1980s). Although neighbouring Belgium currently recognizes and fosters both Picard and Dutch, and a few city-level governments within Nord-Pas-de-Calais have introduced initiatives to encourage both languages, the national French government maintains a policy of linguistic unity and generally ignores both languages, as it does with other regional languages in France.\nThe region's ethnic diversity has been affected by repeated waves of immigrant workers from abroad: Belgians and Welsh before 1910; Poles and Italians in the 1920s and 1930s; Eastern European groups and Germans since 1945; and North Africans and Portuguese since 1960; and large cities like Lille, Calais, and Boulogne-sur-Mer are home to sizable communities of British, Dutch, Scandinavian, Greek and Balkans, Sub-Saharan African, and Latin American immigrants and their descendants.\nThe French state has sought to boost the region's relatively neglected culture. In 2004, it was announced that a branch of the Louvre would be opened in the city of Lens. For decades, the Nord-Pas-de-Calais has been viewed as a conservative region when compared culturally to the rest of France, but recently the region has at times displayed left-wing tendencies. In the early 2000s, the leftist Green Party won the largest number of votes to nearly carry a majority in regional and local representation. The Greens managed to attract many conservative voters from small towns and farmers moved by the Greens' commitment to boosting agri-industry.\nThe region's religious profile is representative of France as a whole, with the majority being Roman Catholic. Other Christian groups are found in the region: Protestants have a few churches. North Africans have introduced Islam to the region, and small but growing communities of Buddhists have been established in recent years. Prior to World War\u00a0II, around 4,000 Jews lived in Nord-Pas-de-Calais. A small Jewish community remains active as it has been for hundreds of years.\nEconomy.\nGeneral data.\nIn 2014, the Nord-Pas de Calais GDP reached \u20ac140\u00a0billion making it the 4th biggest French economy, although this figure has to be put in the context of the large population of the region. The region was only in 16th place out of 24 for GDP per capita in 2014 with \u20ac34,422.\nThe unemployment rate is higher than the national average. About 11% of the population was unemployed in 2014, particularly people aged between 18 and 25.\nThe economy is essentially led by the service sector, which employs 75% of the working population, followed by manufacturing (23%) and agriculture (2%).\nAgriculture and fishing.\nDue to its location close to the North Sea, the Nord-Pas de Calais region has a strong fishing industry.\nThe Boulogne-sur-Mer harbor is the biggest French port in terms of capacity with more than 150 boats. 45,000 tons of fish were traded there in 2012. The harbor is also a leading European seafood processing center with 380,000 tons of shellfish, fish and seaweed traded every year. Some 140 companies are present in the port.\nThe agricultural sector comprises 13,800 farm businesses using of farmland. The temperate climate as well as great fertility makes the region a leading production center. The Nord-Pas de Calais region supplied 26.1\u00a0million tons of wheat (approximately 7% of the national production) and a third of the French potato production.\nIndustry.\nThe region's industry was originally focused on coal and textile production, and was one of the cradles of the Industrial Revolution on the continent. After the end of the Second World War, migrant workers from all over Europe came to the region, making up for population losses due to the war. In the 1970s, the leading coal and textile industries began to fade away and unemployment rates increased rapidly. The region started a process of restructuring which still continues today. Nowadays, the manufacturing sector is led by the automobile industry.\nThe Nord-Pas de Calais Mining Basin was the leading region of coal production in France in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. For its three-hundred-year history of mining and its testimony to the advent of industrialization in France, the mining basin was listed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2012.\nAutomobile industry.\nIn the 1970s, the sector represented a small part of the working population. Some 40 years later, it is the main industry in the region, employing 55,000 people. In terms of productivity, the Nord-Pas de Calais region is ranked second nationwide and is one of the main export areas.\nThree main worldwide car manufacturers operate plants in the region: Toyota produce the Yaris in Valenciennes, Renault build the Sc\u00e9nic in Douai, and PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn operate a plant in Lieu-Saint-Amand where Peugeot 807, Citro\u00ebn C8, Fiat Scudo, Peugeot Expert and Citro\u00ebn Jumpy are fabricated. In addition, automotive equipment manufacturers such as Faurecia employ 6,200 workers in the region. Small-scale manufacturers have also been based in the region, such as microcar manufacturers ERAD, Savel, and Secma.\nNord-Pas de Calais is the second main region for the automotive industry in France after \u00cele de France (Paris region). The sector trade fair, the Forum on European Automotive Industry in Lille Region (FEAL), takes place biennially to showcase the industry of the region and its importance for France and Europe.\nFood industry.\nThe food industry in Nord-Pas de Calais draws on the agricultural sector of the region. By income, this is the most important industry of the region due to strong exports (\u20ac3.2bn in 2006). More than 27,000 employees were employed in the sector in 2007. Many global corporations such as McCain Foods, Roquette Freres, Bonduelle, Pasquier or Boulangeries Paul are present in the Nord-Pas de Calais region.\nServices.\nMulliez Family.\nThe services sector of the Nord-Pas de Calais region is dominated by the multi-billionaire Mulliez family, who own the main superstore chains of the region, some of which are known worldwide: Auchan, Decathlon or Leroy Merlin as well as the Flunch restaurant chain. The family also holds a stake in 3 Suisses, Norauto and many other companies.\nTransport infrastructures.\nAs most of its population is urbanized, the region has a dense and complex transport system of highways, railways, airport and seaports.\nHighways.\nNine highways are passing through the region; most of them are free:\nRailways.\nEurotunnel.\nSince 1994, the Nord-Pas de Calais region is linked to the United Kingdom by the Eurotunnel. The structure comprises three tunnels (one single-track railway tunnel each way and a service road tunnel for maintenance and emergency use) and has the longest undersea tunnel section of the world (). The whole structure is long and connects Coquelles, France with Folkestone, UK. Between its official opening and 2012, 300 million passengers have crossed the English Channel aboard Eurostar trains. In addition to Eurostar services, the tunnel is used by trains carrying road vehicles, branded as Le Shuttle, as well as freight trains.\nTER-Nord.\nThe TER-Nord is the regional rail network operated by the SNCF. It links the major cities and villages throughout Nord-Pas de Calais. The network is controlled by the Conseil r\u00e9gional.\nAir transportation.\nThe main airport of Nord-Pas de Calais is Lesquin Airport near Lille. Originally a regional hub, the airport now has several international routes to destinations in Europe and the Maghreb.\nInland and international freight transport.\nDunkirk Harbour.\nDunkirk Harbour is one of the biggest seaports of France. It is the third-largest port nationally in terms of total volume but first in fruit and copper imports. A terminal able to handle LNG carriers is built by TotalEnergies.\nCanal Seine-Nord.\nThe Canal Seine-Nord is a future high-capacity canal between the Seine and Arleux to connect the former to the other northern canals in Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany. It is due to open in 2016. The project has attracted controversy mostly because of its huge cost (\u20ac4.6bn).\nSports and culture.\nTraining base for the Olympics.\nBefore London 2012, the region had been chosen by the Organising Committee as a training base for the participating delegations. During the months ahead of the Olympics, several countries sent their athletes to the region to prepare for the competitions. Among the teams training in Nord-Pas de Calais were the UK Gymnastics team in Arques, the New Zealand Rowing team in Gravelines and France's national basketball and handball teams.\nSports in Nord-Pas de Calais.\nFootball is the most developed sport of the region. More than 145,000 players are members of a football club. Four clubs have professional status and play at the highest levels: Lille OSC and RC Lens in Ligue 1 and Valenciennes FC in Ligue 2 and USBCO in the Championnat National. Arras Football's ladies play in Division 1.\nEducation.\nThe regional education system of the Acad\u00e9mie de Lille includes one million pupils and students. Higher education and research are supported within the Community of Universities and Institutions (COMUE) Lille Nord de France \u2013 (University of Lille).\nAn invitation to tender for a school construction and maintenance contract let by the region and the D\u00e9partement du Nord in 1998 included provision for employment generation to be included as an evaluation criterion for the award of the contract. The European Court of Justice held that the award criterion was illegal, but also ruled that where a contracting authority had to assess two or more economically equivalent bids, they could adopt employment opportunities as an \"accessory criterion\" as long as the use of this criterion was not discriminatory.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50063", "revid": "49636717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50063", "title": "Beefalo", "text": "Hybrid of cattle and bison\nBeefalo constitutes a hybrid offspring of domestic cattle (\"Bos taurus\"), usually a male, and the American bison (\"Bison bison\"), usually a female, in managed breeding programs. The breed was created to combine the characteristics of both animals for beef production.\nBeefalo are primarily cattle in genetics and appearance, with the breed association defining a full Beefalo as one with three-eighths (37.5%) bison genetics, while animals with higher percentages of bison genetics are called bison hybrids. However, genomic analysis has found that the vast majority of Beefalo, even those considered pedigree by the breed association, have no detectable bison ancestry, with no sampled Beefalo having higher than 18% bison ancestry, with most Beefalo consisting of a mixture of taurine cattle and zebu cattle ancestry.\nHistory and genomics.\nAccidental crosses were noticed as long ago as 1749 in the Southern Colonies of North America, during British colonization. Cattle and bison were first intentionally crossbred during the mid-19th century.\nOne of the first efforts to cross-breed bison and domestic cattle was in 1815 by Robert Wickliffe of Lexington, Kentucky. Mr. Wickliffe's experiments continued for up to 30 years.\nAnother early deliberate attempt to cross-breed bison with cattle was made by Colonel Samuel Bedson, warden of Stoney Mountain Penitentiary, Winnipeg, in 1880. Bedson bought eight bison from a captive herd of James McKay and inter-bred them with Durham cattle. The hybrids raised by Bedson were described by naturalist Ernest Thompson Seton:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The hybrid animal is [claimed] to be a great improvement on both of its progenitors, as it is more docile and a better milker than the Buffalo, but retains its hardihood, while the robe is finer, darker and more even, and the general shape of the animal is improved by the reduction of the hump and increased proportion of the hind-quarters.\"\nAfter seeing thousands of cattle die in a blizzard in 1886, Charles \"Buffalo\" Jones, a co-founder of Garden City, Kansas, also worked to cross bison and cattle at a ranch near the future Grand Canyon National Park, with the hope the animals could survive the harsh winters. He called the result \"cattalo\" in 1888. Mossom Martin Boyd of Bobcaygeon, Ontario first started the practice in Canada, publishing about some of his outcomes in the Journal of Heredity. After his death in 1914, the Canadian government continued experiments in crossbreeding up to 1964, with little success. For example, in 1936 the Canadian government had successfully cross-bred only 30 cattalos.\nIt was found early on that crossing a male bison with a domestic cow would produce few offspring, but that crossing a domestic bull with a bison cow apparently solved the problem. The female offspring proved fertile, but rarely so for the males. Although the cattalo performed well, the mating problems meant the breeder had to maintain a herd of wild and difficult-to-handle bison cows.\nIn 1965, Jim Burnett of Montana produced a hybrid bull that was fertile. Californian cattle rancher D.C. \"Bud\" Basolo developed the Beefalo breed in the 1970s. He did not reveal the precise pedigree of the breed.\nThe breed is defined by The American Beefalo Association as being genetically at least five-eighths \"Bos taurus\" and at most three-eighths \"Bison bison\".\nIn 2024, a genetic study, including historical samples from Basolo's foundational herd, found that the majority of Beefalo cattle who were genomically sequenced (39 out of 47 sampled), including those from Basolo's original herd, had no detectable bison ancestry. Of the 8 that did have some bison ancestry, this was no higher than 18% (and as low as 2% in some individuals), which is much lower than that of the supposed pedigree. Most Beefalo were instead found to be either entirely of taurine cattle ancestry or more commonly, mixed with varying levels of zebu ancestry in proportions of 2% to 38%.\nNutrition characteristics.\nA United States Department of Agriculture study found Beefalo meat, like bison meat, to be lower in fat and cholesterol than standard beef cattle.\nRegistration.\nIn 1983, the three main Beefalo registration groups reorganized under the American Beefalo World Registry. Until November 2008, there were two Beefalo associations, the American Beefalo World Registry and American Beefalo International. These organizations jointly formed the American Beefalo Association, Inc., which currently operates as the registering body for Beefalo in the United States.\nEffect on bison conservation.\nMost current bison herds are \"genetically polluted\", meaning that they are partly crossbred with cattle. There are only four genetically unmixed American bison herds left, and only two that are also free of brucellosis: the Wind Cave bison herd that roams Wind Cave National Park, South Dakota; and the Henry Mountains herd in the Henry Mountains of Utah.\nDr. Dirk Van Vuren, formerly of the University of Kansas, however, points out that \"The bison today that carry cattle DNA look exactly like bison, function exactly like bison and in fact are bison. For conservation groups, the interest is that they are not totally pure.\"\nEnvironmental impacts.\nAlthough popular with tourists and hunters, escaped beefalo have been destroying parts of the ecosystem, as well as ancient stone ruins, in the Grand Canyon and threatening native species. By 2015, numbers were growing by 50% per year and there were at least 600 animals roaming the park. Grand Canyon National Park was reporting an accident a day due to tourist interactions with beefalo. In 2018, the park began trapping the animals and giving them to Native American tribes outside the state. In addition, volunteer hunters were enlisted to cull the herds, with a goal of reducing the population to 200 animals. As of 2022, the herd was down to 216 individuals, with only 4 having been taken by hunters.\nCattalo.\nThe term \"cattalo\", a portmanteau of \"cattle\" and \"buffalo\", is defined by United States law as a cross of bison and cattle which have a bison appearance.\nIn some American states, cattalo are regulated as exotic animals, along with pure bison and deer. However, in most states, bison and hybrids which are raised solely for livestock purposes similar to cattle, are considered domestic animals like cattle, and do not require special permits.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50069", "revid": "50750008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50069", "title": "Takoma Park, Maryland", "text": "City in Maryland, United States\nTakoma Park is a city in Montgomery County, Maryland, United States. It is a suburb of Washington, and part of the Washington metropolitan area. Founded in 1883 and incorporated in 1890, Takoma Park, informally called \"Azalea City\", is a Tree City USA and a nuclear-free zone. A planned commuter suburb, it is situated along the Metropolitan Branch of the historic Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, just northeast of Washington, D.C., and it shares a border and history with the adjacent Washington, D.C. neighborhood of Takoma. It is governed by an elected mayor and six elected councilmembers, who form the city council, and an appointed city manager, under a council-manager style of government. The city's population was 17,629 at the 2020 United States census.\nSince 2013, residents of Takoma Park can vote in municipal elections when they turn sixteen. It was the first city in the United States to extend voting rights to 16- and 17-year-olds in city elections. Since then, the City of Hyattsville has followed suit.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nTakoma Park was founded by Benjamin Franklin Gilbert in 1883. It was one of the first planned Victorian commuter suburbs, centered on the B&amp;O railroad station in Takoma, D.C., and bore aspects of a spa and trolley park.\n\"Takoma\" was originally the name of Mount Rainier, from Lushootseed (earlier ), \"snow-covered mountain\". At Gilbert's suggestion, the name was chosen in 1883 by DC resident Ida Summy, who believed it to mean \"high up\" or \"near heaven\". The city of Tacoma in Washington state is also named after the mountain.\nGilbert first purchased land in spring 1884: A plot called Robert's Choice from G.C. Grammar. The plot, which included land on both sides of the B&amp;O's Metropolitan Branch rail line, was roughly bounded by today's Sixth Street on the west, Aspen Street on the south, Willow Avenue on the east, and Takoma Avenue on the north. At the time, much of the land was covered by thick forest. Gilbert cleared some of it to lay out and grade streets and housing lots. Most lots measured and were sold for $327 to $653 per acre. By August 1885, about 100 people were living in Takoma Park, including temporary summer residents and permanent residents. Gilbert lived in a wooden house on a stone foundation, with 20 rooms and a tower.\nIn 1886, Gilbert purchased another plot of land, roughly bounded by Carroll Avenue to the Big Spring (now Takoma Junction) and what is now Woodland Avenue. Gilbert named this land New Takoma. Gilbert later purchased the Jones farm and the Naughton farm, which together he named North Takoma. He also purchased land from Francis P. Blair, Richard L. T. Beale, and the Riggs family.\nGilbert hired contractor Fred E. Dudley to build many of the homes in Takoma Park. A house designed by Leon E. Dessez at Piney Branch Road and Eastern Avenue became the home of Cady Lee. Dudley's son Wentworth was the first child born in Takoma Park.\nThe community had 75 houses by 1888 and 235 homes by 1889. That year, Gilbert purchased several acres of land along Sligo Creek from a Dr. R.C. Flower, a Boston physician, to build a sanitarium. By this point, Takoma Park stretched .\nThe deed of each of the original houses prohibited alcohol from being made or sold on the property, a prohibition that continued in the city until 1983. Takoma Park incorporated as a town on April 3, 1890. The first town election was held on May 5, 1890, and Gilbert was elected mayor and J. Vance Lewis, George H. Bailey, Daniel Smith, and Frederick J. Lung were elected to the town council.\nThe Watkins Hotel was built in 1892. A fire destroyed the town's recently built commercial district and the Watkins Hotel in 1893. Gilbert's North Takoma Hotel was built later that year, advertising the pure spring water nearby its 160 rooms.\nMany of the streets were originally known as avenues. When the Commissioners of the District of Columbia mandated a District-wide street-naming system, those on the District side were renamed streets but retained their names otherwise. Other streets in Takoma, D.C., were renamed entirely. Susquehanna Avenue became Whittier Street. Tahoe Street was renamed Aspen Street. Umatilla Street became Aspen Street. Vermilion Street became Cedar Street. Wabash Street was renamed Dahlia Street. Aspin became Elder Street. Magnolia Street became Eastern Avenue.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn 1904, the Seventh-day Adventist Church purchased five acres of land in Takoma Park along Carroll Avenue, Laurel Avenue, and Willow Avenue. The land was located on both sides of the Maryland-District of Columbia border. The land was intended for a church, office building, printer, and residences for prominent members of the church. In 1903, the Seventh-day Adventist Church decided to move their headquarters to the Washington area after its headquarters' publishing house in Battle Creek, Michigan, had burned to the ground. The church decided that moving to a more urban setting would be a more appropriate place from which to increase the church's presence in the southern states. The church purchased fifty acres of land along Sligo Creek in Takoma Park to build the new headquarters. The land was away from downtown Washington and had clean water available from a natural spring located at present-day Spring Park. For many decades Takoma Park served as the world headquarters of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, until it moved to northern Silver Spring in 1989.\nIn 1908, North Takoma Hotel was bought by Louis Denton Bliss, who turned it into Bliss Electrical School. Months later, a fire destroyed the building, and Bliss rebuilt the school at another site. The school was eventually bought by Montgomery County where it became the site of Montgomery College's Takoma Park/Silver Spring campus.\nMid 20th century.\nIn 1964, an inside-the-Capital-Beltway extension of Interstate 70S, also known as the North Central Freeway, was proposed via a route known as \"Option #11 Railroad Sligo East,\" up to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 mile parallel to the B&amp;O railroad upon a swath of land displacing 471 houses, that would have cut the city in two. In the mid-to-late 1960s, the future mayor and civil rights activist Sammie Abbott led a campaign to halt freeway construction and replace it with a Metrorail line to the site of the former train station, and worked with other neighborhood groups to halt plans for a wider system of freeways going into and out of DC.\nThis controversy also raised the profile of Takoma Park at a time in the late 1960s and 1970s when it was becoming noted regionally and nationally for political activism outside the Nation's capital, with newspaper commentators describing it as \"The People's Republic of Takoma Park\" or \"The Berkeley of the East\". This era of activism extended into the 1980s, when Takoma Park declared itself a Nuclear-free zone and a sanctuary for Salvadoran and Guatemalan refugees.\nPrior to the passage of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, restrictive covenants were used in Takoma Park to exclude African Americans, Jews, and others. Many Takoma Park subdivisions used anti-Black covenants and at least one subdivision used antisemitic covenants. A 1939 deed for the New Hampshire Avenue Highlands subdivision of Takoma Park reads: \"No lot shall be leased, transferred, sold, occupied or conveyed to or for the use of any person or persons not wholly of Caucasian Race or blood, excluding Semites; but this covenant shall not prevent casual occupancy by domestic servants of a different race, employed by an owner or tenant.\" The first known restrictive covenant in Takoma Park was for a property in the Hillcrest subdivision in 1911. Subdivisions with restrictive covenants included Bonnie View, Carroll Farm, Carroll Manor, Fletcher's Addition, Flower Avenue Park, Green Hill Farms, Hampshire Knolls, Hillwood Manor, Wildwood and others.\nMuch of the old town Takoma Park was incorporated into the Takoma Park Historic District; listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1976.\nLate 20th and early 21st century.\nBefore 1995, the eastern boundary of the city of Takoma Park was in Prince George's County, Maryland, causing the community to be divided across two counties and the Maryland/D.C. line (where the original downtown area is located). For several years, Takoma Park lobbied the State of Maryland for legislation allowing county boundaries to be adjusted. The State finally agreed to this change, with the stipulation that cross-county municipalities would no longer be allowed; the new municipal boundary would forever remain within the county of its choosing. In August 1995, after passage of the law, the city held a public referendum asking registered voters living in three Prince George's County neighborhoods north of New Hampshire Avenue whether they wanted to be annexed to the city of Takoma Park. There was a majority of votes, 219 out of 313, in favor of annexation to the city.\nIn November 1995, the state-sponsored referendum was held asking whether the portions of the city in Prince George's County should be annexed to Montgomery County, or vice versa. The majority of votes in the referendum were in favor of unification of the entire city in Montgomery County. Following subsequent approval by both counties' councils and the Maryland General Assembly, the county line was moved to include the entire city into Montgomery County (including territory in Prince George's County newly annexed by the city) on July 1, 1997. This process became known as Unification.\nIn 1981, Takoma Park passed the Rent stabilization Law, which limits the rent increase to a percentage set by the city and applies to all individual condominium units and multi-family rental facilities. This led to Takoma Park featuring some of the lowest rents in the D.C. region while similarly discouraging new multi-family housing construction, as evidenced by the lack of any new development in the city after the law passed.\nThe city experienced substantial gentrification in the 1990s and early 2000s (decade), with many houses containing apartments converted back into single-family homes. This process was encouraged by an M-NCPPC \"phase back\", effectively eliminating scattered-site multifamily housing and implementing single-use zoning in a majority of city neighborhoods. Nearly half of the city's population are tenants, 47.2% according to the Census Bureau's 2019 population estimate, many of whom live in a cluster of high-rise and mid-rise apartment buildings surrounding Sligo Creek, which cuts a deep valley through the community.\nThe City Council adopted the Takoma Park Safe Grow Act of 2013, which went into effect March 1, 2014, and bans synthetic pesticides and requires organic lawn management on all city lands.\nIn 2018, the City of Takoma Park proposed renaming streets that were named after generals who fought on either side in the United States Civil War, namely Grant Avenue, Lee Avenue, Sherman Avenue, Sheridan Avenue, and Jackson Avenue, though by 2024, no action had been taken.\nGeography.\nTakoma Park sits on the edge of the Mid-Atlantic fall line and is thus quite hilly, with many narrow, gridded streets. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, is land and is water. Sligo Creek and Long Branch (both tributaries of the Northwest Branch of the Anacostia River) flow through the area. Sligo Creek Park and the Sligo Creek Trail bisect the area. The main street, Carroll Avenue, and the main state highway, Route 410/East West Highway, narrow to two lanes within city limits. Takoma Park has an extensive hardwood tree canopy which is protected by local ordinance.\nTakoma Park is bounded by downtown Silver Spring, a major urban center to the northwest, by Montgomery College campus; East Silver Spring, a community of houses, apartments and small shops, along Flower Avenue and Piney Branch Road, to the north; Langley Park, a community of apartments and shopping centers, along University Boulevard to the northeast; Chillum, in Prince George's County to the southeast, bounded by New Hampshire Avenue, a state highway; and Takoma to the southwest, separated by Eastern Avenue, which follows the District of Columbia line.\nThe corner of Eastern and Carroll Avenues roughly marks the center of the old commercial district. Other town centers include: \"Takoma Junction\", the corner of Carroll Avenue and Route 410 in the geographic center of town, home to the city's large food co-op; Takoma-Langley Crossroads in downtown Langley Park, and the Flower shopping district, both of which are home to many immigrant-owned establishments. Takoma Park's municipal center is located at the corner of Maple Avenue and Route 410. Washington Adventist University marks the corner of Carroll and Flower Avenues.\nNeighborhoods by ward.\nTakoma Park has many small neighborhoods. There are approximately fifty neighborhood listservs.\nTakoma Avenue Historic District.\nThe \"Takoma Avenue Historic District\" is a national historic district. All five houses were constructed in 1951, are identical in their layout and construction, and were designed by Charles M. Goodman.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 16,715 people, 6,569 households, and 3,904 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7,162 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 49.0% White, 35.0% African American, 0.3% Native American, 4.4% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 6.5% from other races, and 4.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 14.5% of the population.\nThere were 6,569 households, of which 33.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.9% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 40.6% were non-families. 31.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.49 and the average family size was 3.12.\nThe median age in the city was 38 years. 22.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 8.1% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 30.8% were from 25 to 44; 28.7% were from 45 to 64; and 10% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 46.6% male and 53.4% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 17,299 people, 6,893 households, and 3,949 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7,187 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 48.79% White, 33.97% African American, 0.44% Native American, 4.36% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 7.44% from other races, and 4.97% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 14.42% of the population.\nThere were 6,893 households, out of which 30.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.5% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.7% were non-families. Approximately 4.5% of all couples were unmarried same sex couples. 32.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.13.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 23.6% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 35.9% from 25 to 44, 23.0% from 45 to 64, and 8.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $48,490, and the median income for a family was $63,434. Males had a median income of $40,668 versus $35,073 for females. The per capita income for the city was $26,437. About 8.4% of families and 10.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.5% of those under age 18 and 20.5% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nAccording to the City's fiscal year 2023 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are the following.\nArts and culture.\nTakoma Park is known for a variety of cultural events, most notable of which is the Takoma Park Folk Festival, which attracts an audience from across the Mid-Atlantic region.\nThe Takoma Park Folk Festival is a free annual festival featuring music by local musicians on six stages. Performers range from well-seasoned stage veterans to youngsters on stage for the first time, and the music spans genres from old-time fiddle and bluegrass to acoustic folk-rock to Afro-Latin fusion, and more. The festival also includes children's activities, a juried crafts show, and community tables where local organizations and politicians reach out to the community. It has been in existence since 1978, founded by Sam Abbott, former mayor of the city and civil-rights activist.\nTakoma Park is notable for being the home of blues guitarist John Fahey, who (together with other local music institutions) popularized the city as a haven for folk musicians. He named his label, Takoma Records, for the city, and many of his songs reference local landmarks. Mary Chapin Carpenter, Al Petteway (composer of \"\") and many other prominent local and national artists have made their home in and around Takoma Park. Root Boy Slim and Goldie Hawn are from Takoma Park.\nOther annual festivals include the mildly countercultural Takoma Park Street Festival, the Takoma Jazz Fest, the Takoma Park Independent Film Festival, and the Takoma Park Fourth of July Parade, which is attended by residents and neighboring politicians from across the metropolitan region. The parade typically includes ethnic musical troupes representing a wide variety of global cultures, neighborhood performance troupes, and groups supporting causes, such as LGBTQ and fair trade, reflecting Takoma Park's historic reputation for activism.\nImmediately adjacent to the downtown, Takoma, D.C. is home to the A.Salon Building, a large art studio warehouse and former printing plant, which is home to the backstage office and rehearsal center for the Washington Opera. Two (currently vacant) freestanding theaters, the Takoma Theater and the Flower Theater, anchor either end of town. Takoma Park is also home to the Dance Exchange (founded by Liz Lerman) and the Institute of Musical Traditions, a performance society founded by the House of Musical Traditions. Kinetic Artistry, a notable theatre supplier for the Washington area, is also located in Takoma Park. The Takoma Theatre Conservancy is an organization attempting to renovate the 500-seat Takoma Theatre for multiuse purposes. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) awarded a Construction Permit to Historic Takoma Inc (HTI) for Takoma Radio. The hyper-local neighborhood station will be identified on the air as WOWD-LP, 94.3FM, and has plans to debut in mid-2016.\nTakoma Park has been home to a variety of local characters who have contributed to the city's sense of identity and culture, including \"Catman\" and Motor Cat, Roscoe the Rooster, The Banjo Man, and \"Fox Man\", a local animal rights activist and founder of the city's Tool Library. Takoma Park also has a year-round farmer's market and two other farmers markets which sell local produce and free range meats.\nSeveral local newspapers have served the community including \"The Voice\" and the satirical \"Takoma Torch.\"\nInstitutions.\nThe Sam Abbott Citizens Center, Takoma Park's former city auditorium, has been refurbished as a community theater and gallery. The municipal center, which includes the Takoma Park City Hall, Citizens Center and the Takoma Park Maryland Library, was expanded into a community center from 2003\u20132007. A gymnasium was requested by the city's youth sports leagues after lobbying from Steve Francis, the NBA basketball player, who grew up in Takoma Park; but funding was not identified. A small fenced-in basketball court has since been built adjacent to the community center.\nIn 2010, the Seventh-Day Adventist Church received authorization to relocate the regional Washington Adventist Hospital from the center of town to an outlying area of nearby Silver Spring, Maryland, alongside its international headquarters and the Adventist Book and Health Food Store, which had also been located within city limits. This had followed an effort by county officials to close or relocate the city's fire station, located on the side of a steep hill. Due to resulting controversy, the City Council lobbied to retain the old Hospital facility as a \"health campus.\" The hospital had been in operation for over a century, having been founded as the Washington Sanitarium overlooking Sligo Creek in 1907. Officials also successfully lobbied to retain a university located on the same campus, which has been renamed Washington Adventist University.\nIn the 1970s, the city experienced controversy over plans to expand or relocate Montgomery College, which has a campus located in the historic district of North Takoma, an area of large old homes adjacent to downtown Silver Spring. This debate was subsequently resolved when the County agreed to preserve the existing campus, and expand in the direction of downtown Silver Spring by building a bridge across the B&amp;O railroad tracks. It was renamed the \"Takoma Park-Silver Spring Campus,\" focused on health, nursing and the arts. The expanded campus included a major new arts center located in South Silver Spring, near the boundary between the three jurisdictions. After more than 100 years in Takoma Park, a city on the northern edge of Washington DC, Washington Adventist Hospital has relocated to Silver Spring, Maryland and has been renamed Adventist Healthcare White Oak Medical Center.\nThe Takoma Park-Silver Spring Food Co-op is one of the Washington area's largest food co-ops. The Takoma Park Presbyterian Church has been a bulwark of civic activism throughout its history. The TPPC helped to found CASA de Maryland.\nIn the late 2000s, regional and national debate occurred over the decision to close Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Takoma, D.C., and relocate its operations to the Bethesda Naval Medical Center. Takoma Park Soccer Club is the sponsor of many youth soccer teams in the Takoma Park area; such as the TAPK United, coached by professional Brazilian coach Manilton Santos. A successful team, they have earned the affectionate nickname Tapioca United.\nGovernment.\nTakoma Park's electorate and its elected officials are known for their liberal and left-of-liberal values, which have led to the enactment of several municipal laws. For instance, Takoma Park has allowed non-U.S.-citizen residents to vote in its own municipal elections since 1993,A10 and has lowered the voting age for city elections to 16. The city was also forbidden, by statute, from doing business with any entity having commercial ties with the government of Burma (Myanmar), though after a U.S. Supreme Court decision struck down a similar Massachusetts law, enforcement of the provision was suspended in the year 2000. As of 2007[ [update]], the Free Burma Committee is inactive. In 2008, the city unanimously approved a resolution to oppose foie gras. Takoma Park is the only Maryland municipality with a rent control law.\nLike a handful of other U.S. municipalities, Takoma Park has declared itself a \"nuclear free zone\"; under a 1983 law, contractors working for the city must also sign a notarized document that they are not \"knowingly or intentionally\" \"engaged in the development, research, production, maintenance, storage, transportation and/or disposal of nuclear weapons or their components.\" Waivers have been given in the past, including a 2012 waiver to purchase a library system from Userful Corporation that includes computers made by Hewlett-Packard, a company that has also worked on nuclear weapons programs for the federal government. \nUnder a local ordinance, Takoma Park residents must obtain a permit or waiver from the City arborist (\"urban forest manager\") to cut down any tree on their property with a diameter of 7 5/8 inches or greater. The minutes of all Takoma Park City Council meetings are available on the Takoma Park City website.\nMayor.\nTakoma Park is governed by a city council composed of a mayor and council members for each of six wards. The current mayor of Takoma Park (the 24th) is Talisha Searcy (mayor since 2022).\nVoting.\nIn the November 5, 1991, election the voters approved a referendum (1,199 for and 1,107 against) to change the Takoma Park City Charter \"to permit residents of Takoma Park who are not U.S. citizens to vote in Takoma Park elections.\"\nIn the 2005 election, an advisory referendum to adopt instant-runoff voting (IRV, also called \"ranked choice voting\") for municipal elections passed with 84% approval. In 2006, the City Council amended the City Charter to incorporate IRV, making Takoma Park one of a small but growing number of municipalities across the nation to adopt IRV (and the first in Maryland to do so).\nIn the 2009 election, Takoma Park used the Scantegrity voting system. This marked the first time an open source voting system was used in a public sector election in the United States, as well as the first time a system with end-to-end verifiability was used.\nIn 2013, Takoma Park became the first city in the U.S. to allow sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds to vote.\nConvicted felons on parole and probation were also given the right to vote in Takoma Park elections in 2013.\nIn 2017, the Takoma Park City Council changed the City Charter to schedule City elections in even numbered years (called \"Election Synchronization\") beginning in 2020. The Council elected in 2017 would serve a three-year term.\nIn 2020, Takoma Park held its first ever vote-by-mail election, with 6549 ballots counted, more than 2 1/2 times the number of votes in the 2015 and 2017 elections.\nFederal government.\nThe United States Postal Service operates the Takoma Park Post Office, as well as the Langley Park Post Office; the latter has a Hyattsville, Maryland postal address.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nPublic schools.\nThe city is served by the Montgomery County Public Schools.\nElementary schools that serve the city include:\nMost Takoma Park residents are zoned to Takoma Park ES and Piney Branch. Sligo Creek Elementary School has new boundaries that no longer include students living in Takoma Park. SCES has a French Immersion program open to all Montgomery County families via lottery. \nMiddle schools that serve the city include:\nAll of the city is served by Montgomery Blair High School. With the Downcounty Consortium, students have limited opportunity to enroll in one of four other schools, including Kennedy, Northwood, Einstein, and Wheaton.\nPrior to the mid-1990s sections of the Takoma Park census-designated place were zoned to Prince George's County Public Schools (PGCPS). These sections are now designated as being in the Chillum CDP index map. PG County Takoma Park CDP is shown on pages 7 and 12. From 1950 to 1964, during the era of legally-required racial segregation of schools, black students from the PG County section of Takoma Park attended Fairmont Heights High School, then near Fairmount Heights.\nPolice.\nTakoma Park is chartered with its own police force, public works department, housing department, library, and recreation department. It has also historically maintained its own Volunteer Fire Department and Municipal Library. Until 2007, the city operated a Tool Library as well, and continues to operate its own compost recycling program and silo for corn-burning stoves. Takoma Park is densely developed with narrow houses on deep lots, often featuring mid-block developments and a mix of apartments and homes which are no longer permitted under regional suburban zoning laws, under which many apartments were de-zoned in 1989.\nTransportation.\nRoads and highways.\nSeveral state highways serve Takoma Park. The largest of these is Maryland Route 650 (New Hampshire Avenue), which is the only six-lane thoroughfare running within city limits. New Hampshire Avenue continues into central Washington, D.C. and primarily serves through-traffic to the east of the city. Maryland Route 193 (University Boulevard) serves as the major suburban shopping strip, skirting the city on its northeast edge. Other state highways serving Takoma Park include Maryland Route 410, Maryland Route 320 and Maryland Route 195, all of which serve as local connectors to neighboring areas.\nPublic transportation.\nBeing part of Montgomery County, Takoma Park is served by both the Ride On bus system, and by the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, which provides bus and rail service to the Maryland and Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C.\nThe Takoma Metrorail station, also a Ride On and Metrobus hub, sits in the heart of the Old Takoma Main Street, in Washington, D.C., two blocks from the Maryland line.\nThe Takoma Langley Crossroads Transit Center is situated just outside the city border, at the intersection of University Boulevard and New Hampshire Avenue, also a location for a future Purple Line station.\nThe Sligo Creek Trail is used for recreation by bicyclists and pedestrians, and much of the roadway segment within the City of Takoma Park is closed to motor vehicles Fridays through Sundays. The Takoma Park segment of the Metropolitan Branch Trail, a rail trail that parallels the Red Line, is complete. Trail-building is planned to connect that segment with the completed portion that runs south to Washington Union Station and to planned segments running north to Silver Spring, Maryland with a connection to the Capital Crescent Trail.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50070", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50070", "title": "Franklin County", "text": "Franklin County may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "50071", "revid": "50219925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50071", "title": "Battle of Tewkesbury", "text": "1471 Yorkist victory in the Wars of the Roses\nThe Battle of Tewkesbury, which took place on Saturday 4 May 1471, was one of the most decisive battles of the Wars of the Roses in England. \nKing Edward IV and his forces loyal to the House of York completely defeated those of the rival House of Lancaster. The Lancastrian heir to the throne, Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales, and many prominent Lancastrian nobles were killed during the battle or executed. The Lancastrian king, Henry VI, who was a prisoner in the Tower of London, died shortly after the battle, perhaps murdered. Tewkesbury restored political stability to England until the death of Edward IV in 1483.\nBackground.\nThe term \"Wars of the Roses\" refers to the informal heraldic badges of the two rival houses of Lancaster and York, which had been contending for the English throne since the late 1450s. In 1461 the Yorkist claimant, Edward, Earl of March, was proclaimed King Edward IV and defeated the supporters of the weak, intermittently insane Lancastrian King Henry VI at the Battle of Towton. Lancastrian revolts in the far north of England were defeated in 1464, and the fugitive King Henry was captured and imprisoned the next year. His wife, Margaret of Anjou, and their 13-year-old son Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales were exiled and impoverished in France. Edward IV's hold on the throne appeared to be secure, at least temporarily.\nEdward owed his victory in large measure to the support of his cousin, the powerful 16th Earl of Warwick. They became estranged when Edward spurned the French diplomatic marriage that Warwick was seeking for him and instead married Elizabeth Woodville, widow of an obscure Lancastrian gentleman, in secret in 1464. \nWhen the marriage became public knowledge, Edward placed many of his new queen's family in powerful positions that Warwick had hoped to control. Edward, meanwhile, reversed Warwick's policy of friendship with France by marrying his sister Margaret to Charles the Bold, the Duke of Burgundy. The embittered Warwick secured the support of Edward IV's brother George Plantagenet, 1st Duke of Clarence, for a coup in exchange for Warwick's promise to crown Clarence king. Although Edward was imprisoned briefly, Clarence was unacceptable as monarch to most of the country. Edward was allowed to resume his rule, outwardly reconciled with Warwick and Clarence. Within a year, though, he accused them of fresh treachery and forced them to flee to France.\nReadeption of Henry VI.\nWith no hope of a reconciliation with King Edward, Warwick's best hope of regaining power in England lay in restoring Henry VI to the throne. Louis XI of France feared a hostile alliance of Burgundy under Charles the Bold and England under Edward. He was prepared to support Warwick with men and money, but to give legitimacy to any uprising by Warwick, the acquiescence of Margaret of Anjou was required. Warwick and Margaret were previously sworn enemies, but her attendants (in particular Sir John Fortescue, formerly Chief Justice during Henry VI's reign) and Louis eventually persuaded her to ally the House of Lancaster with Warwick. \nAt Angers Warwick begged her pardon on his knees for all past wrongs done to her, and was forgiven. Prince Edward was betrothed to Warwick's younger daughter Anne (the marriage was eventually solemnised at Amboise on 13 December 1470 but may not have been consummated, as Margaret was seeking a better match for Edward once he was king). Finally they swore loyalty to Henry VI on a fragment of the True Cross in Angers Cathedral. However, Margaret declined to let Prince Edward land in England or to land there herself until Warwick had established a firm government and made the country safe for them.\nWarwick landed in the West Country on 13 September 1470, accompanied by Clarence and some unswerving Lancastrian nobles, including the Earl of Oxford and Jasper Tudor, the Earl of Pembroke. As King Edward made his way south to face Warwick, he realised that Warwick's brother John, Marquess of Montagu, who had up until then remained loyal to Edward, had defected at the head of a large army in the north of England. Edward fled to King's Lynn, where he took ship for Flanders, part of Burgundy, accompanied only by his youngest brother Richard of Gloucester and a few faithful adherents.\nIn London Warwick released King Henry, led him in procession to Saint Paul's cathedral, and installed him in Westminster palace. Warwick's position nevertheless remained precarious. His alliance with Louis of France and his intention to declare war on Burgundy was contrary to the interests of the merchants, as it threatened English trade with Flanders and the Netherlands. Clarence had long been excluded from Warwick's calculations. In November 1470 Parliament declared that Prince Edward and his (putative) descendants were Henry's heirs to the throne; Clarence would become king only if the Lancastrian line of succession failed. Unknown to Warwick, Clarence secretly became reconciled with his brother, King Edward.\nEdward's landing and the death of Warwick.\nWith Warwick in power in England, it was Charles of Burgundy's turn to fear a hostile alliance of England and France. As an obvious counter to Warwick, he supplied King Edward with money (50,000 florins), ships, and several hundred men (including handgunners). Edward set sail from Flushing on 11 March 1471 with 36 ships and 1,200 men. He touched briefly on the English coast at Cromer but found that the Duke of Norfolk, who might have supported him, was away from the area and that Warwick controlled that part of the country. Instead, his ships made for Ravenspurn, near the mouth of the River Humber, where Henry Bolingbroke had landed in 1399 on his way to reclaim the Duchy of Lancaster and ultimately depose Richard II.\nEdward's landing was inauspicious at first; the ships were scattered by bad weather and his men landed in small detachments over a wide area on 14 March. The port of Kingston-upon-Hull refused to allow Edward to enter, so he made for York, claiming rather like Bolingbroke that he was seeking only the restoration of the Duchy of York. He then began to march south. Near Pontefract Castle he evaded the troops of Warwick's brother Montagu. By the time Edward reached the town of Warwick he had gathered enough supporters to proclaim himself king again. The Earl of Warwick sent urgent requests for Queen Margaret, who was gathering fresh forces in France, to join him in England. He himself was at Coventry, preparing to bar Edward's way to London, while Montagu hastened up behind the king's army.\nEdward, however, knew that Clarence was ready to turn his coat once again and betray Warwick, his father-in-law. He marched rapidly west and joined with Clarence's men, who were approaching from Gloucestershire. Clarence appealed to Warwick to surrender, but Warwick refused to even speak to him. Edward's army made rapidly for London, pursued by Warwick and Montagu. London was supposedly defended by the 4th Duke of Somerset, but he was absent and the city readily admitted Edward. The unfortunate and by now feeble Henry VI was sent back to the Tower of London. Edward then turned about to face Warwick's approaching army. On 14 April, they met at the Battle of Barnet. In a confused fight in thick fog, some of Warwick's army attacked each other by mistake, and at the cries of \"Treachery!\" his army disintegrated and was routed. Montagu died in the battle and Warwick was cut down trying to reach his horse to escape.\nThe Tewkesbury campaign.\nUrged on by Louis XI, Margaret finally sailed on 24 March. Storms forced her ships back to France several times, and she and Prince Edward finally landed at Weymouth in Dorsetshire on the same day the Battle of Barnet was fought. While Margaret sheltered at nearby Cerne Abbey, the Duke of Somerset brought news of the disaster at Barnet to her. She briefly wished to return to France, but Prince Edward persuaded her to gamble for victory. Somerset and the Earl of Devon had already raised an army for Lancaster in the West Country. Their best hope was to march northward and join forces with the Lancastrians in Wales, led by Jasper Tudor. Other Lancastrian forces could be relied upon to distract King Edward; in particular, a fleet under Warwick's relation, the Bastard of Fauconberg, was preparing to descend on Kent, where the Nevilles and Warwick, in particular, had always been popular.\nIn London King Edward had learned of Margaret's landing only two days after she arrived. Although he had given many of his supporters and troops leave after the victory at Barnet, he was nonetheless able to rapidly muster a substantial force at Windsor, just west of London. It was difficult at first to determine Margaret's intentions, as the Lancastrians had sent out several feints that suggested they might be making directly for London, but Edward's army set out for the West Country within a few days.\nOn 30 April Margaret's army had reached Bath, on its way towards Wales. She turned aside briefly to secure guns, reinforcements, and money from the city of Bristol. On the same day King Edward reached Cirencester. On hearing that Margaret was at Bristol, he turned south to meet her army. However, the Lancastrians made a feint towards Little Sodbury, about north-east of Bristol. Nearby was Sodbury Hill, an Iron Age hill fort that was an obvious strategic point for the Lancastrians to seize. When Yorkist scouts reached the hill there was a sharp fight in which they suffered heavy casualties. Believing that the Lancastrians were about to offer battle, Edward temporarily halted his army while the stragglers caught up and the remainder could rest after their rapid march from Windsor. However, the Lancastrians instead made a swift move north by night, passing within of Edward's army. By the morning of 2 May, they had gained the safety of Berkeley Castle and had a head start of over Edward.\nKing Edward realized that the Lancastrians were seeking to cross the River Severn into Wales. The nearest crossing point they could use was at the city of Gloucester. He sent urgent messages to the governor, Sir Richard Beauchamp, ordering him to bar the gates to Margaret and man the city's defences. When Margaret arrived on the morning of 3 May, Beauchamp refused her summons to let her army pass, and she realized that there was insufficient time to storm the city before Edward's army arrived. Instead, her army made another forced march of to Tewkesbury, attempting to reach the next bridge at Upton-upon-Severn, further on. Edward meanwhile had marched no less than , passing through Cheltenham (then little more than a village) in the late afternoon. The day was very hot, and both the Lancastrians and Edward's pursuing army were exhausted. The Lancastrians were forced to abandon some of their artillery, which was captured by Yorkist reinforcements following from Gloucester.\nAt Tewkesbury, the tired Lancastrians halted for the night. Most of their army were footmen and unable to continue further without rest, and even the mounted troops were weary. By contrast, King Edward's army was composed mainly of mounted men, who nevertheless dismounted to fight on foot as most English armies did during this period. Hearing from his \"prickers\" or mounted scouts of Margaret's position, Edward drove his army to make another march of from Cheltenham, finally halting from the Lancastrians. The Lancastrians knew they could retreat no further before Edward attacked their rear, and that they would be forced to give battle.\nBattle.\nLancastrian positions.\nAs day broke on 4 May, the Lancastrians took up a defensive position a mile south of the town of Tewkesbury. To their rear were the River Avon and the Severn. Tewkesbury Abbey was just behind the Lancastrian centre. A farmhouse then known as Gobes Hall marked the centre of the Lancastrian position; nearby was \"Margaret's camp\", earthworks of uncertain age. Queen Margaret is said to have spent the night at Gobes Hall, before hastily taking refuge on the day of battle in a religious house some distance from the battlefield. The main strength of the Lancastrians' position was provided by the ground in front, which was broken up by hedges, woods, embankments, and \"evil lanes\". This was especially true on their right.\nThe Lancastrian army numbered approximately 6,000, likely outnumbering the Yorkists by only a few hundred. As was customary at the time, it was organised into three \"battles\". The right battle was commanded by the Duke of Somerset. A stream, the Colnbrook, flowed through his position, making some of the ground difficult to traverse. The Lancastrian centre was commanded by Lord Wenlock. Unlike the other principal Lancastrian commanders, Wenlock had deserted the Lancastrian cause after the First Battle of Saint Albans, only to revert to the Lancastrians when he was deprived of the Lieutenancy of Calais. Prince Edward was present with the centre. At 17 Prince Edward was no stranger to battlefields, having been given by his mother the task of condemning to death Yorkist prisoners taken at the Second Battle of St Albans, but he lacked experience of actual command. The left battle was commanded by the Earl of Devon, another devoted Lancastrian. His battle, and part of the centre, occupied a low ridge known locally as the \"Gastons\". A small river, the Swilgate, protected Devon's left flank, before curving behind the Lancastrian position to join the Avon.\nEdward's moves.\nThe Yorkists numbered around 5,000\u20136,000 men. Like the Lancastrians, King Edward organised his army into three battles.\nEdward's vanguard was commanded by his youngest brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester. Although he was only 18 years old, Richard was already an experienced commander and had led a division at the Battle of Barnet. Edward himself commanded the main battle, in which Clarence was also stationed. Edward was 29 years old and at the height of his prowess as a soldier. His lifelong friend and supporter Lord Hastings commanded the rear. He also was an experienced commander and, like Richard, had accompanied Edward into exile in the Low Countries and had led a battle at Barnet.\nAlthough by tradition the vanguard occupied the right of the line of battle, several authors have conjectured from descriptions in near-contemporary accounts (such as the \"Historie of the arrivall of Edward IV\") that Richard of Gloucester's division actually took position to the left of Edward's battle or that the divisions of Edward's army advanced in line ahead, with Edward's division leading.\nEdward made one other important tactical disposition. To the left of his army was a thickly wooded park. Concerned that hidden Lancastrians might attack from this quarter, he ordered 200 mounted spearmen to occupy part of the woods and prevent the Lancastrians making use of them, or act on their own initiative if they were not themselves attacked. He then \"displayed his bannars: dyd blowe up the trompets: commytted his caws and qwarell to Almyghty God, to owr most blessyd lady his mother: Vyrgyn Mary, the glorious Seint George, and all the saynts: and advaunced, directly upon his enemyes.\"\nAction.\nAs they moved towards the Lancastrian position, King Edward's army found that the ground was so broken up by woods, ditches, and embankments that it was difficult to attack in any sort of order. However, the Yorkist archers and artillery showered the Lancastrians with arrows and shot. The Yorkists certainly had more guns than their enemies, and they were apparently better served.\nEither to escape the cannonade and volleys of archery or because he saw an opportunity to outflank King Edward's isolated battle, the Duke of Somerset led at least part of his men via some of the \"evil lanes\" to attack Edward's left flank. Although taken by surprise, Edward's men resisted stoutly, beating back Somerset's attack among the hedges and banks. At the vital moment, the 200 spearmen Edward had earlier posted in the woods far out on the left attacked Somerset from his own right flank and rear, as Gloucester's battle also joined in the fighting.\nSomerset's battle was routed, and his surviving troops tried to escape across the Severn. Most were cut down as they fled. The long meadow astride the Colnbrook leading down to the river is known to this day as \"Bloody Meadow\". Somerset galloped up to Wenlock, commanding the centre, and demanded to know why Wenlock had failed to support him. According to legend (recounted in \"Edward Hall's\" chronicle, written several years afterwards though from first-hand accounts), he did not wait for an answer but dashed out Wenlock's brains with a battleaxe before seeking sanctuary in the Abbey.\nAs its morale collapsed, the rest of the Lancastrian army tried to flee, but the Swilgate became a deadly barrier. Many who succeeded in crossing it converged on a mill south of the town of Tewkesbury and a weir in the town itself, where there were crossings over the Avon. Here, too, many drowned or were killed by their pursuers.\nAftermath of the battle.\nAmong the leading Lancastrians who died on the field were Somerset's younger brother John Beaufort, Marquess of Dorset, and the Earl of Devon. The Prince of Wales was slain on the field during the retreat by some of Clarence's men, despite pleading for help to Clarence, who had sworn allegiance to him in France barely a year before.\nMany of the other Lancastrian nobles and knights sought sanctuary in Tewkesbury Abbey. King Edward attended prayers in the Abbey shortly after the battle. He granted permission for the Prince of Wales and others slain in the battle to be buried within the Abbey or elsewhere in the town without being quartered as traitors as was customary. However, two days after the battle, Somerset and other leaders were dragged out of the Abbey and ordered by Gloucester and the Duke of Norfolk to be put to death after perfunctory trials. Among them were Hugh Courtenay, cousin of the Earls of Devon, and Sir John Langstrother, the prior of the military order of St. John. The Abbey was not officially a sanctuary. It had to be reconsecrated a month after the battle, following the violence done within its precincts.\nA few days later Queen Margaret sent word to Edward from her refuge that she was \"at his commandment\".\nFauconberg's repulse.\nEdward was unable to rest after the battle. Lancastrians under Jasper Tudor were still active in Wales, and there was an ineffective rising in the North. Edward went to Coventry in the Midlands to make dispositions against the northern and Welsh Lancastrians, and give his army three days' rest. The most dangerous Lancastrian force, however, was that commanded by the Bastard of Fauconberg. As anticipated, he had landed at Sandwich and rapidly recruited a force from among the pro-Neville Kentishmen. Together with exiled Lancastrians and freebooters from several countries, his army may have numbered 16,000 or even 17,000 in total.\nOn 14 May, he attacked London from the south. His men burned part of the suburb of Southwark, but were beaten back at London Bridge. The next day, they attacked Aldgate and Bishopsgate from the east. The garrison of the Tower of London, led by Earl Rivers, Queen Elizabeth's brother, who had been injured at Barnet, repulsed them. Citizens defending their property undoubtedly played a major role.\nHad Fauconberg succeeded in capturing the city, he might also have captured Edward's wife and their children and released King Henry from the Tower. However, on hearing that Edward's army was approaching, he retreated to Sandwich. Like Margaret, he appeared to be dispirited by the news of Tewkesbury and the Prince's death, and later rather tamely surrendered himself and his ships. He was executed five months later after attempting to escape from custody.\nEnd of the Lancastrian royal family.\nOn his way to suppress Fauconberg and the Kentish rebels, Edward passed through London in triumph on 21 May, with the captive Queen Margaret beside him in a chariot. King Henry VI died in the Tower of London that night, at the hands of or by the order of Richard of Gloucester according to several near contemporary accounts. However, the most contemporary account only states that Gloucester was there 'along with many others' and the murder was almost certainly on the orders of the new king, Edward IV. The deposed king's death was announced in public that he had died \"of pure displeasure and melancholy\", but few believed this.\nGloucester later married Anne Neville, the younger daughter of Warwick and the widow of Henry and Margaret's son Edward.\nWith the deaths of Somerset and his younger brother, the House of Beaufort, who were distant cousins of Henry VI and had a remote claim to succeed him, had been almost exterminated. Only the female line of Somerset's uncle, the 1st Duke of Somerset, remained, represented by Lady Margaret Beaufort and her son Henry Tudor (later King Henry VII). Henry escaped from Wales with Jasper Tudor, his paternal uncle, and remained in exile in Brittany for the remainder of Edward's reign. The year after the Battle of Tewkesbury, however, Lady Margaret married Lord Stanley, one of King Edward's supporters, who later turned against Edward's brother Richard of Gloucester when he became king as Richard III and was instrumental in putting Henry Tudor on the throne.\nRe-enactment.\nEvery year the battle is re-enacted on the second whole weekend in July at the Tewkesbury Medieval Festival. The event (founded in 1984) is one of the largest events of its kind in Europe, attracting enthusiasts from all over the world.\nMonument.\nThe Tewkesbury Battlefield Society erected a monument to the battle in the form of two sculptures high, of a victorious mounted knight and a defeated horse. Titled \"Arrivall\" after the contemporary account of the battle, the work was created by Phil Bews out of green oak wood felled in Gloucestershire, and was dedicated on the anniversary of the battle in 2014.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50072", "revid": "9155723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50072", "title": "Battle of Barnet", "text": "1471 engagement in the Wars of the Roses\nThe Battle of Barnet was a decisive engagement in the Wars of the Roses, a dynastic conflict of 15th-century England. The military action, along with the subsequent Battle of Tewkesbury, secured the throne for Edward IV. \nOn Sunday 14 April 1471, Easter Day, near Barnet, then a small Hertfordshire town north of London, Edward led the House of York in a fight against the House of Lancaster, which backed Henry VI for the throne. Leading the Lancastrian army was Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, who played a crucial role in the fate of each king. Historians regard the battle as one of the most important clashes in the Wars of the Roses, since it brought about a decisive turn in the fortunes of the two houses. Edward's victory was followed by 14 years of Yorkist rule over England.\nFormerly a key figure in the Yorkist cause, Warwick defected to the Lancastrians over disagreements about Edward's nepotism, secret marriage, and foreign policy. Leading a Lancastrian army, the earl defeated his former allies, forcing Edward to flee to Burgundy in October 1470. The Yorkist king persuaded his host, Charles the Bold, the Duke of Burgundy, to help him regain the English throne. Leading an army raised with Burgundian money, Edward launched his invasion of England, which culminated at the fields north of Barnet. Under cover of darkness, the Yorkists moved close to the Lancastrians and clashed in a thick fog at dawn. As both armies fought, the Earl of Oxford on the Lancastrian right routed the Yorkists opposite under Lord Hastings, chasing them back to Barnet. On their return to the battlefield, Oxford's men were erroneously shot at by the Lancastrian centre commanded by Lord Montagu. As cries of treason (always a possibility in that chaotic period) spread through their line, Lancastrian morale was disrupted and many abandoned the fight. While retreating, Warwick was killed by Yorkist soldiers.\nWarwick had been such an influential figure in 15th-century English politics that, on his death, no one matched him in terms of power and popularity. Deprived of Warwick's support, the Lancastrians suffered their final defeat at the Battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May, which marked the end of the reign of Henry VI and the restoration of the House of York. Three centuries after the Battle of Barnet, a stone obelisk was raised on the spot where Warwick purportedly died.\nBackground.\nThe Wars of the Roses were a series of conflicts between various English lords and nobles in support of two different royal families descended from Edward III. In 1461 the conflict reached a milestone when the House of York supplanted its rival, the House of Lancaster, as the ruling royal house in England. Edward IV, leader of the Yorkists, seized the throne from the Lancastrian king, Henry VI, who was captured in 1465 and imprisoned in the Tower of London. His wife, Margaret of Anjou, and their son, Edward of Westminster, fled to Scotland and organised resistance. Edward IV crushed the uprisings and pressured the Scottish government to force Margaret out; the House of Lancaster went into exile in France. As the Yorkists tightened their hold over England, Edward rewarded his supporters, including his chief adviser, Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick, elevating them to higher titles and awarding them land confiscated from their defeated foes. The Earl grew to disapprove of the King's rule, however, and their relationship later became strained.\nWarwick had planned for Edward to marry a French princess\u2014Bona of Savoy, sister-in-law to Louis XI of France\u2014to create an alliance between the two countries. The young king, however, favoured ties with Burgundy and, in 1464, further angered the Earl by secretly marrying Elizabeth Woodville; as an impoverished Lancastrian widow, she was regarded by the Yorkists as an unsuitable queen. Edward bestowed gifts of land and titles on her relations and arranged their marriages to rich and powerful families. Eligible bachelors were paired with the Woodville females, narrowing the marriage prospects for Warwick's daughters. Furthermore, the Earl was offended by two matches involving his kin. The first was the marriage of his aunt, Lady Katherine Neville, over 60\u00a0years old, to Elizabeth's 20-year-old brother, John Woodville, a pairing considered outside of normal wedlock by many people. The other was his nephew's fianc\u00e9e, the daughter of Henry Holland, 3rd Duke of Exeter, who was taken as a bride by the Queen's son, Thomas Grey, with Edward's approval. Exasperated by these acts, Warwick decided the Woodvilles were a malignant influence on his liege. He felt marginalized: his influence over the young king was failing, and he decided to take drastic action to force Edward's compliance. Warwick's alternative plan was to replace the King with his fellow conspirator, the Duke of Clarence, Edward's younger brother.\nInstigating several rebellions in the north, Warwick lured the King away from his main bastion of support in the south. Edward found himself outnumbered; while retreating, he learned that Warwick and Clarence had called for open support of the rebellion. After winning the Battle of Edgcote on 26 July 1469, the Earl found the Yorkist king deserted by his followers, and brought him to Warwick Castle for \"protection\". Lancastrian supporters took advantage of Edward's imprisonment to stage uprisings. Because most Yorkist-aligned warlords refused to rally to Warwick's call, the Earl was pressured to release the King. Back in power, Edward did not openly pursue Warwick's transgressions against him, but the Earl suspected that the King held a grudge. Warwick engineered another rebellion, this time to replace Edward with Clarence. The two conspirators, however, had to flee to France when Edward crushed the uprising\u2014the Battle of Losecoat Field\u2014on 12 March 1470. Through letters in the rebels' possession and confessions from the leaders, the King uncovered the Earl's betrayal. In a deal brokered by the French king, Louis XI, the Earl agreed to serve Margaret and the Lancastrian cause. Warwick invaded England at the head of a Lancastrian army and, in October 1470, forced Edward to seek refuge in Burgundy, then ruled by the King's brother-in-law Charles the Bold. The throne of England was temporarily restored to Henry VI; on 14 March 1471, Edward brought an army back across the English Channel, precipitating the Battle of Barnet a month later.\nCommanders.\nYorkist.\nEdward IV was normally at the forefront of his armies. Standing , he was an inspiring figure in combat, attacking foes while wearing a suit of gilded armour. Medieval texts describe the King as handsome, finely muscled and with a broad chest. He was personable and charismatic, easily winning people to his cause. Edward was a capable tactician and leader in battles. He frequently spotted and exploited defensive frailties in enemy lines, often with decisive results. By 1471 the young king was a highly respected field commander. He received some criticism, however; after winning the throne in 1461, he proved indecisive about putting down rebellions. Historian Charles Ross praises Edward's leadership and skill in close combat rather than his strategies and tactics. \nWith his good looks and capable leadership, Edward was popular among the common people, especially compared to Henry VI. His trade policies, which aimed to expand and protect markets for English commerce, pleased local merchants, who were also won over by the Yorkist king's personality. By 1469 Edward's groundswell of popular support had eroded. The euphoria of a change in government had ebbed and the people blamed Edward for failing to \"bring the realm of England in[to] great popularity and rest\" and allowing Yorkist nobles to go unpunished for abuses. When Edward invaded England in 1471, not many common people openly celebrated his return.\nEdward was joined at Barnet by his brothers, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and George, Duke of Clarence. Unlike his eldest brother, Gloucester was slender and seemingly delicate. He was 18 years old at the Battle of Barnet, his first major engagement. His military prowess, however, was well respected; many historians judge him a capable warrior and military leader. Clarence was not as well regarded as his brothers, especially in matters of loyalty. When Edward became king, Clarence became his heir; however, Edward's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville threatened to displace the Duke in the line of succession to the throne. Hence, Clarence participated in Warwick's schemes, marrying the Earl's daughter Isabel, believing he could gain his brother's throne. Clarence lost faith in the Earl when Warwick defected to the Lancastrians and married off his other daughter, Anne, to their prince in order to cement his new allegiance. When Edward launched his campaign to retake England, Clarence accepted his brother's offer of pardon and rejoined the Yorkists at Coventry on 2 April 1471. The last of the Yorkist commanders was William, Lord Hastings, a loyal subject since the start of the wars. Hastings had accompanied the young king in exile and supported his return. The courtier was rewarded for his faithfulness, gaining the lieutenancy of Calais in 1471 and becoming Edward's lord chamberlain and primary confidant.\nLancastrian.\nWarwick had fought for the House of York since the early stages of the Wars of the Roses and alongside his cousin, Edward IV, in many of the battles. His years of loyalty earned him the trust of the Yorkists, and his victories\u2014both political and military\u2014and popularity with the common people made him an important figure. He had powerful influence over the line of succession, earning him the nickname \"The Kingmaker\". Early historians described him as a military genius, but by the 20th century his tactical acumen was reconsidered; Philip Haigh suspects that the Earl largely owed some of his victories, such as the First Battle of St Albans, to being in the right place at the right time. Christopher Gravett believes the Earl was too defensive and lacked mental flexibility.\nJohn Neville, 1st Marquess of Montagu, was less ambitious than his brother Warwick, but a more capable warrior and tactician. In 1464 he commanded a Yorkist force that turned the tables on a Lancastrian ambush at the Battle of Hedgeley Moor and launched a surprise attack at the Battle of Hexham. These victories capped Neville's extensive service in the north, and Edward rewarded him with the Earldom of Northumberland, which bore substantial income. The gift was particularly gratifying for Neville; his family had experienced a deep feud with the former earls of Northumberland, the Percys, who supported the House of Lancaster. However, in March 1470, Edward, trying to win over the Percys' support, reinstated Henry Percy to the earldom. As recompense, Neville received the grander title of Marquess of Montagu; however, the lands accompanying this rank were much poorer than the estate he had lost. The new marquess saw it as an insult\u2014an insubstantial title that was inadequate recognition for his years of faithful service. Montagu did not immediately join Warwick's rebellion, however; he defected later in the year when his brother invaded England.\nNot much is known about the early history of John de Vere, 13th Earl of Oxford, another Lancastrian commander; the chronicles mention little about him until the Battle of Losecoat Field. His father, the previous earl and a loyal Lancastrian, was executed for a failed plot to assassinate Edward IV. The Yorkist king tried to secure the loyalty of Oxford by knighting him and pardoning his transgressions. This tactic failed; Oxford remained true to the Lancastrian crown and participated in Warwick's effort to dethrone Edward. Historians describe the young Oxford as a decent military leader, exemplified by his conduct in the Battle of Barnet.\nAlthough Henry Holland, 3rd Duke of Exeter, was of royal blood, he was commonly viewed as a criminal, prone to violence and stupidity. A proven enemy of the Nevilles, Exeter bore a grudge particularly against Warwick for displacing him from his hereditary role of Lord High Admiral in 1457. Nonetheless, when Warwick joined the Lancastrians, Exeter obeyed Margaret and served under the Earl during the invasion of England. Although he supported the Lancastrian cause, Exeter had family ties to the House of York; he was husband to Anne of York, Edward's sister.\nPrelude.\nOn 14 March 1471, Edward's army landed at Ravenspurn. Gathering more men as they went, the Yorkists moved inland towards York. Edward's march was unopposed at the beginning because he was moving through lands that belonged to the Percys, and the Earl of Northumberland was indebted to the Yorkist king for the return of his northern territory. Furthermore, Edward announced that he was returning only to claim his father's title of Duke of York and not to contest the English crown. The ruse was successful: Montagu, who was monitoring Edward's march, could not convince his men to move against the Yorkist king.\nOnce Edward's force had gathered sufficient strength, he dropped the ruse and headed south towards London. Fighting off Exeter's and Oxford's attacks, he besieged Warwick at Coventry, hoping to engage the earl in battle. Although Warwick's force had more men than Edward's army, the earl refused the challenge. He was waiting for the arrival of Clarence, who wanted to use their combined strength to overwhelm the Yorkists. When he learned of this, Edward sent Gloucester to entreat Clarence to return to the House of York, an offer that Clarence readily accepted. Reconciled, the royal brothers moved towards Coventry, and Clarence urged Warwick's surrender. Infuriated with his son-in-law's treachery, Warwick refused to speak to Clarence. Unable to fight the earl at this time, Edward turned again towards London.\nReinforced by Montagu, Oxford and Exeter a few days later, Warwick followed the Yorkists' trail. He hoped that London, under Somerset's control, would close its gates to Edward, allowing him to catch the Yorkist army in the open. The city, however, welcomed Edward warmly; Somerset had left the city and the London populace preferred the young Yorkist king to Henry VI. The old king greeted his usurper warmly and offered himself into custody, trusting \"[his] life to be in no danger in [Edward's] hands.\" Lancastrian scouts probed Barnet, which lay north of London, but were beaten off. On 13 April their main army took up positions on a ridge of high ground north of Barnet to prepare for battle the next day. Warwick arrayed his army in a line from east to west, on either side of the Great North Road running through Barnet. Oxford held the right flank and Exeter the left. Montagu commanded the centre, and Warwick readied himself to command from among the reserves. The earl displaced his entire line slightly to the west; a depression at the rear of his left flank could impede Exeter's group if they had to fall back.\nWarwick's army heavily outnumbered Edward's, although sources differ on exact numbers. Lancastrian strength ranges from 10,000 to 30,000 men, with 7,000\u201315,000 on the Yorkist side. Facing this disadvantage, Edward hurried to meet the Lancastrians with a surprise attack. He brought Henry VI along to prevent the Lancastrians from retaking their king. Edward reached Barnet in the evening, and without knowing the precise location of his foes, prepared the battle line. The Yorkist king deployed Hastings on the left and entrusted Gloucester to lead the right flank. Clarence would fight alongside Edward in the centre, although this was not due to faith in his ability\u2014it was easier for the Yorkists to keep an eye on their twice-defected prince there. A contingent of reserves was kept at the rear, ready to deploy at Edward's call. As night fell, Edward put his plan for surprise morning attack in motion. Under a strict order of silence, the Yorkist army crept closer to the Lancastrians. During the night, neither commander spotted the opposing army, an event that proved crucial in the battle the next day.\nDuring the night, Warwick ordered his cannons to continually bombard the estimated position of the Yorkists' encampment. The Yorkists, however, had sneaked in close, and the Lancastrian artillery overshot their enemies. The Yorkist cannon, meanwhile, kept quiet to avoid betraying their location. As the armies settled down to rest, Montagu approached his brother and advised him of the troops' low morale. He suggested that, as the highest-ranking commanders, the brothers should fight on foot throughout the battle instead of riding on horse. The soldiers believed that mounted commanders tended to abandon them when the situation deteriorated. By staying on foot, the Nevilles would show that they were prepared to fight to the death with the men, inspiring the troops to stand and fight harder. Warwick agreed and the horses were tethered to the rear, near Wrotham Wood.\nFighting in the mist.\nOn 14 April 1471, at around 4\u00a0o'clock in the morning, both armies woke. Edward had planned for an early attack, however, and quickly roused his men to engage the Lancastrians. Both sides fired their cannon and arrows before laying into each other with polearms. The morning fog was thick and the night movements of the two forces had displaced them laterally with each other. Neither group was facing the other; each was offset slightly to the right. This displacement meant that the right end of either army could outflank the other by wrapping around the opposing left end. The Lancastrians were the first to exploit this advantage; Oxford's group quickly overwhelmed Hastings'. Yorkist soldiers fled towards Barnet, chased by the Lancastrians. Some of Hastings' men even reached London, spreading tales of the fall of York and a Lancastrian victory. Oxford's group disintegrated as they split off to loot the fallen enemies and plunder Barnet. Yelling and chasing after his men, Oxford rallied 800 of them and led them back to the battle.\nDue to the fog, visibility was low and the two main forces failed to notice Oxford's victory over Hastings. Accordingly, the collapse of the Yorkist left wing had little (if any) effect on morale of either side. The fighting between Montagu's and Edward's groups was evenly matched and intense. The Lancastrian left wing, however, was suffering treatment similar to that Oxford had inflicted on its counterpart; Gloucester exploited the misaligned forces and beat Exeter back. Progress for Edward's brother was slow because his group was fighting up a slight slope. Nonetheless, the pressure he exerted on the Lancastrian left wing rotated the entire battle line. Warwick, seeing the shift, ordered most of his reserves to help ease the pressure on Exeter, and took the rest into fighting at the centre. Gradually, the battle line settled to an orientation that slanted north-east to south-west.\nOxford retraced his steps through the fog back to the fight. His group arrived, unexpectedly, at Montagu's rear. Obscured by the fog, Oxford's \"star with rays\" badge was mistaken by Montagu's men for Edward's \"sun in splendour\". They assumed their allies were Edward's reserves and unleashed a volley of arrows. Oxford and his men immediately cried treachery; as staunch Lancastrians, they were wary of Montagu's recent defection. They struck back and began withdrawing from the battle. Their shouts of treason were taken up and spread quickly throughout the Lancastrian line, breaking it apart as men fled in anger, panic and confusion. As the fog started to dissipate, Edward saw the Lancastrian centre in disarray and sent in his reserves, hastening its collapse. Cries of Exeter's demise from a Yorkist axe resounded across the battlefield from the Lancastrian left, and amidst the confusion, Montagu was struck in his back and killed by either a Yorkist or one of Oxford's men.\nWitnessing his brother's death, Warwick knew the battle was lost. He made for the horses in an attempt to retreat. Edward recognised his victory was at hand, and\u2014deciding that Warwick was more valuable alive than dead\u2014sent the order and dispatched his guards to bring back the earl alive. Several chroniclers have suggested that the king thought Warwick would again be a valuable ally if persuaded back to the Yorkist cause. Historian Michael Hicks, in contrast, suggests that Edward wanted to capture the earl for public execution rather than as a gesture of mercy. Regardless of the king's intent, Warwick died in the Lancastrian rout: when fleeing the field he was struck off his horse and killed. \nA miniature model reproduction of the Battle of Barnet can be found at the Battle's natural interpretive centre, The Barnet Museum.\nPost-battle.\nThe battle lasted from two to three hours, and was over by the time the fog lifted in the early morning. As usual in most battles of the time, the routed army suffered far more casualties; fleeing men were cut down from behind. Contemporary sources give various casualty figures; the \"Great Chronicle of London\" reports 1,500\u00a0dead, whereas \"Warkworth's Chronicle\" states 4,000. Edward Hall and Raphael Holinshed, both 16th-century chroniclers, say that at least 10,000\u00a0men died in the battle. The Yorkists suffered half as many casualties as the Lancastrians. Royle favours the recorded approximate figures of 500\u00a0Yorkists and 1,000\u00a0Lancastrians dead.\nThe bodies of the two Neville brothers were brought back to London. They did not suffer the customary fate accorded to traitors\u2014quartering and display at the city gates. Edward exhibited the brothers' naked corpses in St. Paul's Cathedral for three days to quell any rumours that they had survived, before allowing them to be laid to rest in the family vault at Bisham Abbey.\nAlthough he had defeated the Neville brothers, Edward had little time to rest; Margaret landed at Weymouth on the day of the battle. She feigned a march to London while augmenting her army with recruits from Wales and the Welsh Marches. The Lancastrian queen was disheartened by the news of Warwick's demise, but Somerset suggested that they were better off without the earl. Despite the defeat at Barnet, Lancastrians who fled from the battle looked to the queen to restore their house to the throne. Alerted by his spies to the Lancastrians' true route, Edward intercepted and defeated them at the Battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May. Gloucester, Clarence and Hastings again fought to defend the Yorkist crown.\nExeter had been stripped of his armour and left for dead on the battlefield at Barnet, but he was alive\u2014though gravely injured. His followers found him and took him to Westminster Abbey. On his recovery, he was imprisoned in the Tower of London for four years before submitting to Edward's rule. Exeter did not participate in the later battles of the Wars of the Roses. Edward sent him on a Yorkist expedition to France in 1475, and the duke was reported to have fallen overboard and drowned without any witnesses.\nAfter withdrawing from the battle, Oxford fled to France and participated in attacks on English ships, continuing his campaign against Yorkist rule. He was captured in 1473 after seizing St Michael's Mount, an island off the southwest coast of England. Twelve years later Oxford escaped from prison and joined Henry Tudor's fight against the Yorkists, commanding the Lancastrian army at the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485.\nLegacy.\nThe Battle of Barnet was an important engagement in the Wars of the Roses: it brought about the death of a prominent figure and secured the throne for another. Despite its importance to history, contemporary records about the battle are rare. The sole chronicle based on an eyewitness account\u2014\"The Arrivall of Edward IV\"\u2014was written by someone within Edward's council, which presents a biased account of the battle. Another first-hand observation was found in the Paston Letters, written by the Lancastrian Sir John Paston. Other records, such as \"The Warkworth Chronicle\", offer only bits and pieces about the battle. Therefore, deficits in historical understanding must be filled through field research and discoveries of mediaeval documents.\nHistorians theorise that had Warwick's force joined Margaret's before challenging Edward, the combined Lancastrian army would have overwhelmed the Yorkists. Instead, Warwick's defeat gave the Yorkists a victory so decisive that it, along with the Battle of Tewkesbury, secured the English throne for Edward IV. Historian Colin Richmond believes that Edward's return to power was assured at Barnet\u2014Tewkesbury was \"merely an epilogue\". Without having to contend with Warwick's popularity and political influence, the young Yorkist king could fully exert his will and rule the land unchallenged. Ballads composed during Edward's reign celebrated his victory as sanctioned by God: \"Man proposes, oftimes in veyn, But God disposes, the boke telleth pleyn\". Barnet was a disaster for the Nevilles; their lands given away and their offices reduced. The family never again reached the prominence in English politics that they had enjoyed before the battle.\nShakespearian dramatisation.\nThe battle is alluded to in William Shakespeare's \"Henry VI, Part 3\" (1595). The end of Act V, scene one depicts the events leading up to the battle; scenes two and three portray the conclusion, in which the characters discuss the combat and the fates of its participants. Shakespeare uses few details reported by contemporary chroniclers and ignores notable incidents, such as the confusion over Oxford's and Edward's badges. His play is based mostly on poetic and dramatic sources. In the play, Montagu is killed while trying to save his brother (Shakespeare's source material included Hall's 1548 \"The Union of the Two Noble and Illustrate Famelies of Lancastre and Yorke\"), and Warwick is dragged in by Edward IV and left to speak his dying words to Oxford and Somerset. Warwick's death dominates the scenes, reflecting Hall's vivid portrayal of the earl's passing as a valiant death. Furthermore, whereas several chronicles mention Edward's desire to capture Warwick, Shakespeare has the Yorkist king lustily demand Warwick's skin.\nShakespeare presents the Nevilles as brothers who are willing to die for each other, whereas the three sons of York\u2014Edward, Gloucester, and Clarence\u2014are slowly driven apart by their own goals and ideas. Professor of English John Cox suggests that Shakespeare did not share the impression given in post-battle ballads that Edward's triumph was divinely ordained. He argues that Shakespeare's placement of Clarence's last act of betrayal immediately before the battle suggests that Edward's rule stems from his military aggression, luck, and \"policy\". Shakespeare also explicitly excludes Edward from action sequences, a departure from Hall's depictions.\nBattlefield.\nEnglish Heritage, a government body in charge of conservation of historic sites, roughly locates the battlefield in an area 800 to 1600\u00a0metres (0.5 to 1.0 mile) north of the town of Barnet. Over the centuries, much of the terrain has changed, and records of the town's boundaries and geography are not detailed enough for English Heritage or historians to conclude the exact location of the battle. Geographical features corresponding to contemporary descriptions allow approximations of where the fighting took place.\nEnglish Heritage suggests that a 15th-century letter from a Hanseatic merchant, Gerhard von Wessel, helps to identify the battlefield via geological features. It mentions a \"broad green\" which corresponds to Hadley Green, and the marsh on the right flank of the Yorkist line is likely to be in the valley of the Monken Mead Brook. The letter also mentions St Albans road, which has remained largely the same, winding through the fields. Urbanisation over the 18th and 19th centuries, however, has populated much of the area with buildings. By the 20th century, the suburb of Monken Hadley covered part of the fields where the Battle of Barnet was fought. A hedge in the local golf course, as suggested by Lieutenant-Colonel Alfred H. Burne, is likely the row of shrubs behind which Oxford's men lined up and took cover.\nIn 1740 Sir Jeremy Sambroke erected an obelisk to commemorate the battle about south of the junction between the Great North Road and Kitts End Road. It was later moved just north of the junction on the grass between the two roads. Known as Hadley Highstone, it stands tall and marks its location with the inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Here was fought the Famous Battle Between Edward the 4th and the Earl of Warwick April the 14th ANNO 1471 in which the Earl was Defeated And Slain.\"\nThe battle is referred to in the coat of arms of the London Borough of Barnet which display a red and a silver rose in the top of the shield and two crossed swords in the crest.\nEvery year, the Barnet Medieval Festival is held at the place where the battle is thought to have occurred. It features a re-enactment of the battle and market stalls.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50073", "revid": "1723027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50073", "title": "Chemical warfare", "text": "Using poison gas or other toxins in war\nChemical warfare (CW) involves using the toxic properties of chemical substances as weapons. This type of warfare is distinct from nuclear warfare, biological warfare and radiological warfare, which together make up CBRN, the military acronym for chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (warfare or weapons), all of which are considered \"weapons of mass destruction\" (WMDs), a term that contrasts with conventional weapons.\nThe use of chemical weapons in international armed conflicts is prohibited under international humanitarian law by the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907. The 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention prohibits signatories from acquiring, stockpiling, developing, and using chemical weapons in all circumstances except for very limited purposes (research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nChemical warfare is different from the use of conventional weapons or nuclear weapons because the destructive effects of chemical weapons are not primarily due to any explosive force. The offensive use of living organisms (such as anthrax) is considered biological warfare rather than chemical warfare; however, the use of nonliving toxic products produced by living organisms (e.g. toxins such as botulinum toxin, ricin, and saxitoxin) \"is\" considered chemical warfare under the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Under this convention, any toxic chemical, regardless of its origin, is considered a chemical weapon unless it is used for purposes that are not prohibited (an important legal definition known as the General Purpose Criterion).\nAbout 70 different chemicals have been used or were stockpiled as chemical warfare agents during the 20th century. The entire class, known as Lethal Unitary Chemical Agents and Munitions, has been scheduled for elimination by the CWC.\nUnder the convention, chemicals that are toxic enough to be used as chemical weapons, or that may be used to manufacture such chemicals, are divided into three groups according to their purpose and treatment:\nChemical weapons are divided into three categories:\nHistory.\nSimple chemical weapons were used sporadically throughout antiquity and into the Industrial Age. It was not until the 19th century that the modern conception of chemical warfare emerged, as various scientists and nations proposed the use of asphyxiating or poisonous gasses.\nMultiple international treaties were passed banning chemical weapons based upon the alarm of nations and scientists. This however did not prevent the extensive use of chemical weapons in World War I. Chlorine gas, among other chemicals, was used by both the Allied and Central powers to try to break the stalemate of trench warfare. In most cases the gasses used did not kill, but instead incapacitated or caused permanent or temporary injuries. Historians have reached a wide range of estimates on gas casualties, ranging from 500k to 1.3 million casualties directly caused by chemical warfare agents during the course of the war, of which 2-4% died. A minimum of around 1300 civilians were injured due to the use of the weapons, and at least around 4000 were injured during weapon production. Gas casualties were a small fraction of the overall human impact of the war, but the horrifying effects of such weapons gave them a strong psychological impact.\nThe interwar years saw the occasional use of chemical weapons during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War by the Italians, while the Japanese made use of chloroacetophenone to suppress a native rebellion in Formosa in 1930, and later made use of mustard gas, lewisite, and irritant agents during the Second Sino-Japanese War. The Chinese, often lacking protective gear such as gas masks, were usually forced to retreat against CW attacks.\nWorld War II.\nAlthough significant effort went into the development and stockpiling of chemical weapons in World War II, they saw no battlefield use in the European Theatre. Nazi Germany dedicated much research to the development of nerve agents, but never used them even during the final defense of the fatherland. It has been suggested that Adolf Hitler's own experience with poison gas during WWI and fears that the Allies would retaliate with their own chemical weapons were the main reasons. According to military historian Ian V. Hogg, the Germans were reluctant to use nerve agents since they couldn't find any defense or antidote for them. They also feared that the ban on scientific journals about organophosphates in Britain meant that the Allies also discovered nerve agents. In reality, they were unaware of the G-series until an ammunition dump captured in April 1945 was examined, while the ban on scientific publications was meant to prevent Axis nations from learning about advances on the development of insecticides and herbicides to boost food production; nonetheless, the Allies made comprehensive plans for defensive and retaliatory use of chemical weapons, and stockpiled large quantities. \nThe Imperial Japanese Army, as part of the Axis, used chemical weapons in China and Burma until 1943. After President Roosevelt threatened the Japanese with retaliation in kind in 1942, they were forced to limit their usage in the Pacific Theatre. Chemical weapons were frequently used against both the Kuomintang and People's Liberation Army troops in China, while Unit 731 carried experiments with CW agents on prisoners of war in 1940 and 1943. By 1944, the Japanese gradually ceased production of chemical munitions in favor of conventional high-explosive and incendiary shells, while keeping a large enough stockpile for retaliatory use.\nHowever, Nazi Germany extensively used poison gas against civilians, particularly Jews, in the Holocaust. Vast quantities of Zyklon B and carbon monoxide gas were used in the systematic extermination of some three million victims. This remains the deadliest use of poison gas in history.\nPost-War.\nSmall amounts of chemical agents were employed by Egyptian forces during the North Yemen civil war between 1963 and 1967, resulting hundreds of casualties. In one of the largest chemical attacks, the United States dropped over 90,000 tons of chemical agents, mostly Rainbow Herbicides but tear gas as well during the Vietnam War.\nDuring the Iran\u2013Iraq War, some 100,000 Iranian troops were casualties of Iraqi chemical weapons. Iraq also used mustard gas and nerve agents against the Kurdish population killing more than 5,000 people and injuring many in the 1988 Halabja chemical attack.\nThe Cuban intervention in Angola saw limited use of organophosphates.\nOn 22 September 1991, during the battle of \u0160ibenik, Federal Yugoslav authorities accused Croatian forces of employing non-lethal chemical agents to storm the naval base in the city's harbour. \nTerrorist groups have also used chemical weapons, notably in Japan in the 1990s, illustrated by the 1994 Matsumoto incident and the 1995 Tokyo subway sarin attack.\n21st century.\nThe Ba'athist regime in Syria used sarin, chlorine, and mustard gas in numerous deadly chemical attacks against civilian populations during the Syrian civil war.\nDuring the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Russia has been reported to deploy CS gas through K-51 grenades dropped by unmanned drones. On 13 December 2024, the Ukrainian military stated that over 4,800 incidents involving chemical weapons against Ukrainian forces have been recorded since the war began, which resulted in over 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers having been hospitalized, and 3 deaths. The use of gas was often hidden by heavy Russian \"intense artillery, rocket, and bomb attacks\u201d, forcing Ukrainian soldiers out of their positions. They saw less use of chemical gas in cold weather, as it reduced the effectiveness of the K-51 gas grenades. A recent US aid package to Ukraine included \"nuclear, chemical and radiological protective equipment\".\nTechnology.\nAlthough crude chemical warfare has been employed in many parts of the world for thousands of years, \"modern\" chemical warfare began during World War I \u2013 see Chemical weapons in World War I.\nInitially, only well-known commercially available chemicals and their variants were used. These included chlorine and phosgene gas. The methods used to disperse these agents during battle were relatively unrefined and inefficient. Even so, casualties could be heavy, due to the mainly static troop positions which were characteristic features of trench warfare.\nGermany, the first side to employ chemical warfare on the battlefield, simply opened canisters of chlorine upwind of the opposing side and let the prevailing winds do the dissemination. Soon after, the French modified artillery munitions to contain phosgene \u2013 a much more effective method that became the principal means of delivery.\nSince the development of modern chemical warfare in World War I, nations have pursued research and development on chemical weapons that falls into four major categories: new and more deadly agents; more efficient methods of delivering agents to the target (dissemination); more reliable means of defense against chemical weapons; and more sensitive and accurate means of detecting chemical agents.\nChemical warfare agents.\nThe chemical used in warfare is called a \"chemical warfare agent\" (\"CWA\"). About 70 different chemicals have been used or stockpiled as chemical warfare agents during the 20th and 21st centuries. These agents may be in liquid, gas or solid form. Liquid agents that evaporate quickly are said to be \"volatile\" or have a \"high vapor pressure\". Many chemical agents are volatile organic compounds so they can be dispersed over a large region quickly.\nThe earliest target of chemical warfare agent research was not toxicity, but development of agents that can affect a target through the skin and clothing, rendering protective gas masks useless. In July 1917, the Germans employed sulfur mustard. Mustard agents easily penetrate leather and fabric to inflict painful burns on the skin.\nChemical warfare agents are divided into \"lethal\" and \"incapacitating\" categories. A substance is classified as incapacitating if less than 1/100 of the lethal dose causes incapacitation, e.g., through nausea or visual problems. The distinction between lethal and incapacitating substances is not fixed, but relies on a statistical average called the LD50.\nPersistency.\nChemical warfare agents can be classified according to their \"persistency\", a measure of the length of time that a chemical agent remains effective after dissemination. Chemical agents are classified as \"persistent\" or \"nonpersistent\".\nAgents classified as \"nonpersistent\" lose effectiveness after only a few minutes or hours or even only a few seconds. Purely gaseous agents such as chlorine are nonpersistent, as are highly volatile agents such as sarin. Tactically, nonpersistent agents are very useful against targets that are to be taken over and controlled very quickly.\nApart from the agent used, the delivery mode is very important. To achieve a nonpersistent deployment, the agent is dispersed into very small droplets comparable with the mist produced by an aerosol can. In this form not only the gaseous part of the agent (around 50%) but also the fine aerosol can be inhaled or absorbed through pores in the skin.\nModern doctrine requires very high concentrations almost instantly in order to be effective (one breath should contain a lethal dose of the agent). To achieve this, the primary weapons used would be rocket artillery or bombs and large ballistic missiles with cluster warheads. The contamination in the target area is only low or not existent and after four hours sarin or similar agents are not detectable anymore.\nBy contrast, \"persistent\" agents tend to remain in the environment for as long as several weeks, complicating decontamination. Defense against persistent agents requires shielding for extended periods of time. Nonvolatile liquid agents, such as blister agents and the oily VX nerve agent, do not easily evaporate into a gas, and therefore present primarily a contact hazard.\nThe droplet size used for persistent delivery goes up to 1\u00a0mm increasing the falling speed and therefore about 80% of the deployed agent reaches the ground, resulting in heavy contamination. Deployment of persistent agents is intended to constrain enemy operations by denying access to contaminated areas.\nPossible targets include enemy flank positions (averting possible counterattacks), artillery regiments, command posts or supply lines. Because it is not necessary to deliver large quantities of the agent in a short period of time, a wide variety of weapons systems can be used.\nA special form of persistent agents are thickened agents. These comprise a common agent mixed with thickeners to provide gelatinous, sticky agents. Primary targets for this kind of use include airfields, due to the increased persistency and difficulty of decontaminating affected areas.\nClasses.\nChemical weapons are agents that come in four categories: choking, blister, blood and nerve. The agents are organized into several categories according to the manner in which they affect the human body. The names and number of categories varies slightly from source to source, but in general, types of chemical warfare agents are as follows:\nThere are other chemicals used militarily that are not scheduled by the CWC, and thus are not controlled under the CWC treaties. These include:\nDesignations.\nMost chemical weapons are assigned a one- to three-letter \"NATO weapon designation\" in addition to, or in place of, a common name. Binary munitions, in which precursors for chemical warfare agents are automatically mixed in shell to produce the agent just prior to its use, are indicated by a \"-2\" following the agent's designation (for example, GB-2 and VX-2).\nSome examples are given below:\nDelivery.\nThe most important factor in the effectiveness of chemical weapons is the efficiency of its delivery, or dissemination, to a target. The most common techniques include munitions (such as bombs, projectiles, warheads) that allow dissemination at a distance and spray tanks which disseminate from low-flying aircraft. Developments in the techniques of filling and storage of munitions have also been important.\nAlthough there have been many advances in chemical weapon delivery since World War I, it is still difficult to achieve effective dispersion. The dissemination is highly dependent on atmospheric conditions because many chemical agents act in gaseous form. Thus, weather observations and forecasting are essential to optimize weapon delivery and reduce the risk of injuring friendly forces.\nDispersion.\nDispersion is placing the chemical agent upon or adjacent to a target immediately before dissemination, so that the material is most efficiently used. Dispersion is the simplest technique of delivering an agent to its target. The most common techniques are munitions, bombs, projectiles, spray tanks and warheads.\nWorld War I saw the earliest implementation of this technique. The actual first chemical ammunition was the French 26\u00a0mm cartouche suffocante rifle grenade, fired from a flare carbine. It contained of the tear-producer ethyl bromoacetate, and was used in autumn 1914 \u2013 with little effect on the Germans.\nThe German military contrarily tried to increase the effect of shrapnel shells by adding an irritant \u2013 dianisidine chlorosulfonate. Its use against the British at Neuve Chapelle in October 1914 went unnoticed by them. Hans Tappen, a chemist in the Heavy Artillery Department of the War Ministry, suggested to his brother, the Chief of the Operations Branch at German General Headquarters, the use of the tear-gases benzyl bromide or xylyl bromide.\nShells were tested successfully at the Wahn artillery range near Cologne on January 9, 1915, and an order was placed for howitzer shells, designated 'T-shells' after Tappen. A shortage of shells limited the first use against the Russians at the Battle of Bolim\u00f3w on January 31, 1915; the liquid failed to vaporize in the cold weather, and again the experiment went unnoticed by the Allies.\nThe first effective use were when the German forces at the Second Battle of Ypres simply opened cylinders of chlorine and allowed the wind to carry the gas across enemy lines. While simple, this technique had numerous disadvantages. Moving large numbers of heavy gas cylinders to the front-line positions from where the gas would be released was a lengthy and difficult logistical task.\nStockpiles of cylinders had to be stored at the front line, posing a great risk if hit by artillery shells. Gas delivery depended greatly on wind speed and direction. If the wind was fickle, as at the Battle of Loos, the gas could blow back, causing friendly casualties.\nGas clouds gave plenty of warning, allowing the enemy time to protect themselves, though many soldiers found the sight of a creeping gas cloud unnerving. This made the gas doubly effective, as, in addition to damaging the enemy physically, it also had a psychological effect on the intended victims.\nAnother disadvantage was that gas clouds had limited penetration, capable only of affecting the front-line trenches before dissipating. Although it produced limited results in World War I, this technique shows how simple chemical weapon dissemination \"can\" be.\nShortly after this \"open canister\" dissemination, French forces developed a technique for delivery of phosgene in a non-explosive artillery shell. This technique overcame many of the risks of dealing with gas in cylinders. First, gas shells were independent of the wind and increased the effective range of gas, making any target within reach of guns vulnerable. Second, gas shells could be delivered without warning, especially the clear, nearly odorless phosgene\u2014there are numerous accounts of gas shells, landing with a \"plop\" rather than exploding, being initially dismissed as dud high explosive or shrapnel shells, giving the gas time to work before the soldiers were alerted and took precautions.\nThe major drawback of artillery delivery was the difficulty of achieving a killing concentration. Each shell had a small gas payload and an area would have to be subjected to saturation bombardment to produce a cloud to match cylinder delivery. A British solution to the problem was the Livens Projector. This was effectively a large-bore mortar, dug into the ground that used the gas cylinders themselves as projectiles \u2013 firing a cylinder up to . This combined the gas volume of cylinders with the range of artillery.\nOver the years, there were some refinements in this technique. In the 1950s and early 1960s, chemical artillery rockets and cluster bombs contained a multitude of submunitions, so that a large number of small clouds of the chemical agent would form directly on the target.\nThermal dissemination.\nThermal dissemination is the use of explosives or pyrotechnics to deliver chemical agents. This technique, developed in the 1920s, was a major improvement over earlier dispersal techniques, in that it allowed significant quantities of an agent to be disseminated over a considerable distance. Thermal dissemination remains the principal method of disseminating chemical agents today.\nMost thermal dissemination devices consist of a bomb or projectile shell that contains a chemical agent and a central \"burster\" charge; when the burster detonates, the agent is expelled laterally.\nThermal dissemination devices, though common, are not particularly efficient. First, a percentage of the agent is lost by incineration in the initial blast and by being forced onto the ground. Second, the sizes of the particles vary greatly because explosive dissemination produces a mixture of liquid droplets of variable and difficult to control sizes.\nThe efficacy of thermal detonation is greatly limited by the flammability of some agents. For flammable aerosols, the cloud is sometimes totally or partially ignited by the disseminating explosion in a phenomenon called \"flashing\". Explosively disseminated VX will ignite roughly one third of the time. Despite a great deal of study, flashing is still not fully understood, and a solution to the problem would be a major technological advance.\nDespite the limitations of central bursters, most nations use this method in the early stages of chemical weapon development, in part because standard munitions can be adapted to carry the agents.\nAerodynamic dissemination.\nAerodynamic dissemination is the non-explosive delivery of a chemical agent from an aircraft, allowing aerodynamic stress to disseminate the agent. This technique is the most recent major development in chemical agent dissemination, originating in the mid-1960s.\nThis technique eliminates many of the limitations of thermal dissemination by eliminating the flashing effect and theoretically allowing precise control of particle size. In actuality, the altitude of dissemination, wind direction and velocity, and the direction and velocity of the aircraft greatly influence particle size. There are other drawbacks as well; ideal deployment requires precise knowledge of aerodynamics and fluid dynamics, and because the agent must usually be dispersed within the boundary layer (less than above the ground), it puts pilots at risk.\nSignificant research is still being applied toward this technique. For example, by modifying the properties of the liquid, its breakup when subjected to aerodynamic stress can be controlled and an idealized particle distribution achieved, even at supersonic speed. Additionally, advances in fluid dynamics, computer modeling, and weather forecasting allow an ideal direction, speed, and altitude to be calculated, such that warfare agent of a predetermined particle size can predictably and reliably hit a target.\nProtection against chemical warfare.\nIdeal protection begins with nonproliferation treaties such as the CWC, and detecting, very early, the \"signatures\" of someone building a chemical weapons capability. These include a wide range of intelligence disciplines, such as economic analysis of exports of dual-use chemicals and equipment, human intelligence (HUMINT) such as diplomatic, refugee, and agent reports; photography from satellites, aircraft and drones (IMINT); examination of captured equipment (TECHINT); communications intercepts (COMINT); and detection of chemical manufacturing and chemical agents themselves (MASINT).\nIf all the preventive measures fail and there is a clear and present danger, then there is a need for detection of chemical attacks,\ncollective protection, and decontamination. Since industrial accidents can cause dangerous chemical releases (e.g., the Bhopal disaster), these activities are things that civilian, as well as military, organizations must be prepared to carry out. In civilian situations in developed countries, these are duties of HAZMAT organizations, which most commonly are part of fire departments.\nDetection has been referred to above, as a technical MASINT discipline; specific military procedures, which are usually the model for civilian procedures, depend on the equipment, expertise, and personnel available. When chemical agents are detected, an alarm needs to sound, with specific warnings over emergency broadcasts and the like. There may be a warning to expect an attack.\nIf, for example, the captain of a US Navy ship believes there is a serious threat of chemical, biological, or radiological attack, the crew may be ordered to set Circle William, which means closing all openings to outside air, running breathing air through filters, and possibly starting a system that continually washes down the exterior surfaces. Civilian authorities dealing with an attack or a toxic chemical accident will invoke the Incident Command System, or local equivalent, to coordinate defensive measures.\nIndividual protection starts with a gas mask and, depending on the nature of the threat, through various levels of protective clothing up to a complete chemical-resistant suit with a self-contained air supply. The US military defines various levels of MOPP (mission-oriented protective posture) from mask to full chemical resistant suits; Hazmat suits are the civilian equivalent, but go farther to include a fully independent air supply, rather than the filters of a gas mask.\nCollective protection allows continued functioning of groups of people in buildings or shelters, the latter which may be fixed, mobile, or improvised. With ordinary buildings, this may be as basic as plastic sheeting and tape, although if the protection needs to be continued for any appreciable length of time, there will need to be an air supply, typically an enhanced gas mask.\nDecontamination.\nDecontamination varies with the particular chemical agent used. Some \"nonpersistent\" agents, including most pulmonary agents (chlorine, phosgene, and so on), blood gases, and nonpersistent nerve gases (e.g., GB), will dissipate from open areas, although powerful exhaust fans may be needed to clear out buildings where they have accumulated.\nIn some cases, it might be necessary to neutralize them chemically, as with ammonia as a neutralizer for hydrogen cyanide or chlorine. Riot control agents such as CS will dissipate in an open area, but things contaminated with CS powder need to be aired out, washed by people wearing protective gear, or safely discarded.\nMass decontamination is a less common requirement for people than equipment, since people may be immediately affected and treatment is the action required. It is a requirement when people have been contaminated with persistent agents. Treatment and decontamination may need to be simultaneous, with the medical personnel protecting themselves so they can function.\nThere may need to be immediate intervention to prevent death, such as injection of atropine for nerve agents. Decontamination is especially important for people contaminated with persistent agents; many of the fatalities after the explosion of a WWII US ammunition ship carrying sulfur mustard, in the harbor of Bari, Italy, after a German bombing on December 2, 1943, came when rescue workers, not knowing of the contamination, bundled cold, wet seamen in tight-fitting blankets.\nFor decontaminating equipment and buildings exposed to persistent agents, such as blister agents, VX or other agents made persistent by mixing with a thickener, special equipment and materials might be needed. Some type of neutralizing agent will be needed; e.g. in the form of a spraying device with neutralizing agents such as Chlorine, Fichlor, strong alkaline solutions or enzymes. In other cases, a specific chemical decontaminant will be required.\nSociopolitical climate.\nThere are many instances of the use of chemical weapons in battles documented in Greek and Roman historical texts; the earliest example was the deliberate poisoning of Kirrha's water supply with hellebore in the First Sacred War, Greece, about 590 BC.\nOne of the earliest reactions to the use of chemical agents was from Rome. Struggling to defend themselves from the Roman legions, Germanic tribes poisoned the wells of their enemies, with Roman jurists having been recorded as declaring \"armis bella non venenis geri\", meaning \"war is fought with weapons, not with poisons.\" Yet the Romans themselves resorted to poisoning wells of besieged cities in Anatolia in the 2nd century BC.\nBefore 1915 the use of poisonous chemicals in battle was typically the result of local initiative, and not the result of an active government chemical weapons program. There are many reports of the isolated use of chemical agents in individual battles or sieges, but there was no true tradition of their use outside of incendiaries and smoke. Despite this tendency, there have been several attempts to initiate large-scale implementation of poison gas in several wars, but with the notable exception of World War I, the responsible authorities generally rejected the proposals for ethical reasons or fears of retaliation.\nFor example, in 1854 Lyon Playfair (later 1st Baron Playfair, GCB, PC, FRS (1818\u20131898), a British chemist, proposed using a cacodyl cyanide-filled artillery shell against enemy ships during the Crimean War. The British Ordnance Department rejected the proposal as \"as bad a mode of warfare as poisoning the wells of the enemy.\"\nChemical weapon proliferation.\nDespite numerous efforts to reduce or eliminate them, some nations continue to research and/or stockpile chemical warfare agents.\nIn 1997, future US Vice President Dick Cheney opposed the signing ratification of a treaty banning the use of chemical weapons, a recently unearthed letter shows. In a letter dated April 8, 1997, then Halliburton-CEO Cheney told Sen. Jesse Helms, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, that it would be a mistake for America to join the convention. \"Those nations most likely to comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention are not likely to ever constitute a military threat to the United States. The governments we should be concerned about are likely to cheat on the CWC, even if they do participate,\" reads the letter, published by the Federation of American Scientists.\nThe CWC was ratified by the Senate that same month. In the following years, Albania, Libya, Russia, the United States, and India declared over 71,000 metric tons of chemical weapon stockpiles, and destroyed a third of them. Under the terms of the agreement, the United States and Russia agreed to eliminate the rest of their supplies of chemical weapons by 2012, but ended up taking far longer to do so as shown in the previous and following section of this article.\nChemical weapons destruction.\nIndia.\nIn June 1997, India declared that it had a stockpile of 1044 tons of sulphur mustard in its possession. India's declaration of its stockpile came after its entry into the Chemical Weapons Convention, that created the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and on January 14, 1993, India became one of the original signatories to the Chemical Weapons Convention. By 2005, from among six nations that had declared their possession of chemical weapons, India was the only country to meet its deadline for chemical weapons destruction and for inspection of its facilities by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. By 2006, India had destroyed more than 75 percent of its chemical weapons and material stockpile and was granted an extension to complete a 100 percent destruction of its stocks by April 2009. On May 14, 2009, India informed the United Nations that it has completely destroyed its stockpile of chemical weapons.\nIraq.\nThe Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, welcomed Iraq's decision to join the OPCW as a significant step to strengthening global and regional efforts to prevent the spread and use of chemical weapons. The OPCW announced \"The government of Iraq has deposited its instrument of accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention with the Secretary General of the United Nations and within 30 days, on 12 February 2009, will become the 186th State Party to the Convention\". Iraq has also declared stockpiles of chemical weapons, and because of their recent accession is the only State Party exempted from the destruction time-line.\nJapan.\nDuring the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945) Japan stored chemical weapons on the territory of mainland China. The weapon stock mostly containing sulfur mustard-lewisite mixture. The weapons are classified as abandoned chemical weapons under the Chemical Weapons Convention, and from September 2010 Japan has started their destruction in Nanjing using mobile destruction facilities in order to do so.\nRussia.\nRussia signed into the Chemical Weapons Convention on January 13, 1993, and ratified it on November 5, 1995. Declaring an arsenal of 39,967 tons of chemical weapons in 1997, by far the largest arsenal, consisting of blister agents: Lewisite, Sulfur mustard, Lewisite-mustard mix, and nerve agents: Sarin, Soman, and VX. Russia met its treaty obligations by destroying 1 percent of its chemical agents by the 2002 deadline set out by the Chemical Weapons Convention, but requested an extension on the deadlines of 2004 and 2007 due to technical, financial, and environmental challenges of chemical disposal. Since, Russia has received help from other countries such as Canada which donated C$100,000, plus a further C$100,000 already donated, to the Russian Chemical Weapons Destruction Program. This money will be used to complete work at Shchuch'ye and support the construction of a chemical weapons destruction facility at Kizner (Russia), where the destruction of nearly 5,700 tons of nerve agent, stored in approximately 2\u00a0million artillery shells and munitions, will be undertaken. Canadian funds are also being used for the operation of a Green Cross Public Outreach Office, to keep the civilian population informed on the progress made in chemical weapons destruction activities.\nAs of July 2011, Russia has destroyed 48 percent (18,241 tons) of its stockpile at destruction facilities located in Gorny (Saratov Oblast) and Kambarka (Udmurt Republic) \u2013 where operations have finished \u2013 and Schuch'ye (Kurgan Oblast), Maradykovsky (Kirov Oblast), Leonidovka (Penza Oblast) whilst installations are under construction in Pochep (Bryansk Oblast) and Kizner (Udmurt Republic). As August 2013, 76 percent (30,500 tons) were destroyed, and Russia leaves the Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) Program, which partially funded chemical weapons destruction.\nIn September 2017, OPCW announced that Russia had destroyed its entire chemical weapons stockpile.\nUnited States.\nOn November 25, 1969, President Richard Nixon unilaterally renounced the offensive use of biological and toxic weapons, but the U.S. continued to maintain an offensive chemical weapons program.\nFrom May 1964 to the early 1970s the U.S. participated in Operation CHASE, a United States Department of Defense program that aimed to dispose of chemical weapons by sinking ships laden with the weapons in the deep Atlantic. After the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972, Operation Chase was scrapped and safer disposal methods for chemical weapons were researched, with the U.S. destroying several thousand tons of sulfur mustard by incineration at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal, and nearly 4,200 tons of nerve agent by chemical neutralisation at Tooele Army Depot.\nThe U.S. began stockpile reductions in the 1980s with the removal of outdated munitions and destroying its entire stock of 3-Quinuclidinyl benzilate (BZ or Agent 15) at the beginning of 1988. In June 1990 the Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System began destruction of chemical agents stored on the Johnston Atoll in the Pacific, seven years before the Chemical Weapons Treaty came into effect. In 1986 President Ronald Reagan made an agreement with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to remove the U.S. stockpile of chemical weapons from Germany. In 1990, as part of Operation Steel Box, two ships were loaded with over 100,000 shells containing Sarin and VX were taken from the U.S. Army weapons storage depots such as Miesau and then-classified FSTS (Forward Storage / Transportation Sites) and transported from Bremerhaven, Germany to Johnston Atoll in the Pacific, a 46-day nonstop journey.\nIn the 1980s, Congress, at the urging of the Reagan administration, provided funding for the manufacture of binary chemical weapons (sarin artillery shells) from 1987 until 1990, but this was halted after the U.S. and the Soviet Union entered into a bilateral agreement in June 1990. In the 1990 agreement, the U.S. and Soviet Union agreed to begin destroying their chemical weapons stockpiles before 1993 and to reduce them to no more than 5,000 agent tons each by the end of 2002. The agreement also provided for exchanges of data and inspections of sites to verify destruction. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U.S.'s Nunn\u2013Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program helped eliminate some of the chemical, biological and nuclear stockpiles of the former Soviet Union.\nThe United Nations Conference on Disarmament in Geneva in 1980 led to the development of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), a multilateral treaty that prohibited the development, production, stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons, and required the elimination of existing stockpiles. The treaty expressly prohibited state parties from making reservations (unilateral caveats). During the Reagan administration and the George H. W. Bush administration, the U.S. participated in the negotiations toward the CWC. The CWC was concluded on September 3, 1992, and opened for signature on January 13, 1993. The U.S. became one of 87 original state parties to the CWC. President Bill Clinton submitted it to the U.S. Senate for ratification on November 23, 1993. Ratification was blocked in the Senate for years, largely as a result of opposition from Senator Jesse Helms, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. On April 24, 1997, the Senate gave its consent to ratification of the CWC by a 74\u201326 vote (satisfying the required two-thirds majority). The U.S. deposited its instrument of ratification at the United Nations on April 25, 1997, a few days before the CWC entered into force. The U.S. ratification allowed the U.S. to participate in the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the organization based in The Hague that oversees implementation of the CWC.\nUpon U.S. ratification of the CWC, the U.S. declared a total of 29,918 tons of chemical weapons, and committed to destroying all of the U.S.'s chemical weapons and bulk agent. The U.S. was one of eight states to declare a stockpile of chemical weapons and to commit to their safe elimination. The U.S. committed in the CWC to destroy its entire chemical arsenal within 10 years of the entry into force (\"i.e.\", by April 29, 2007), However, at a 2012 conference, the parties to the CWC parties agreed to extend the U.S. deadline to 2023. By 2012, stockpiles had been eliminated at seven of the U.S.'s nine chemical weapons depots and 89.75% of the 1997 stockpile was destroyed. The depots were the Aberdeen Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Anniston Chemical Disposal Facility, Johnston Atoll, Newport Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Pine Bluff Chemical Disposal Facility, Tooele Chemical Disposal Facility, Umatilla Chemical Disposal Facility, and Deseret Chemical Depot. The U.S. closed each site after the completion of stockpile destruction. In 2019, the U.S. began to eliminate its chemical-weapon stockpile at the last of the nine U.S. chemical weapons storage facilities: the Blue Grass Army Depot in Kentucky. By May 2021, the U.S. destroyed all of its Category 2 and Category 3 chemical weapons and 96.52% of its Category 1 chemical weapons. The U.S. is scheduled to complete the elimination of all its chemical weapons by the September 2023 deadline. In July 2023 OPCW confirmed the last chemical munition of the U.S., and that the last chemical weapon from the stockpiles declared by all States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was verified as destroyed.\nThe U.S. has maintained a \"calculated ambiguity\" policy that warns potential adversaries that a chemical or biological attack against the U.S. or its allies will prompt a \"overwhelming and devastating\" response. The policy deliberately leaves open the question of whether the U.S. would respond to a chemical attempt with nuclear retaliation. Commentators have noted that this policy gives policymakers more flexibility, at the possible cost of decreased strategic unpreparedness.\nAnti-agriculture.\nHerbicidal warfare.\nAlthough herbicidal warfare use chemical substances, its main purpose is to disrupt agricultural food production and/or to destroy plants which provide cover or concealment to the enemy.\nThe use of herbicides by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War has left tangible, long-term impacts upon the Vietnamese people and U.S. veterans of the war. The government of Vietnam says that around 24% of the forests of Southern Vietnam were defoliated and up to four million people in\u00a0Vietnam\u00a0were exposed to Agent Orange. They state that as many as three million people have developed illness because of Agent Orange while the\u00a0Red Cross of Vietnam\u00a0estimates that up to one million people were disabled or have health problems associated with Agent Orange. The United States government has described these figures as unreliable.\nDuring the war, the U.S. fought the North Vietnamese and their allies in Laos and Cambodia, dropping large quantities of Agent Orange in each of those countries. According on one estimate, the U.S. dropped of Agent Orange in Laos and in Cambodia. Because Laos and Cambodia were officially neutral during the Vietnam War, the U.S. attempted to keep secret its military involvement in these countries. The U.S. has stated that Agent Orange was not widely used and therefore hasn't offered assistance to affected Cambodians or Laotians, and limits benefits American veterans and CIA personnel who were stationed there.\nAnti-livestock.\nDuring the Mau Mau Uprising in 1952, the poisonous latex of the African milk bush was used to kill cattle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50076", "revid": "715696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50076", "title": "String instrument", "text": "Class of musical instruments with vibrating strings\nIn musical instrument classification, string instruments, or chordophones, are musical instruments that produce sound from vibrating strings when a performer strums, plucks, strikes or sounds the strings in varying manners.\nMusicians play some string instruments, like guitars, by plucking the strings with their fingers or a plectrum (pick), and others by hitting the strings with a light wooden hammer or by rubbing the strings with a bow, like violins. In some keyboard instruments, such as the harpsichord, the musician presses a key that plucks the string. Other musical instruments generate sound by striking the string.\nWith bowed instruments, the player pulls a rosined horsehair bow across the strings, causing them to vibrate. With a hurdy-gurdy, the musician cranks a wheel whose rosined edge touches the strings. \nBowed instruments include the string section instruments of the orchestra in Western classical music (violin, viola, cello and double bass) and a number of other instruments (e.g., viols and gambas used in early music from the Baroque music era and fiddles used in many types of folk music). All of the bowed string instruments can also be plucked with the fingers, a technique called \"pizzicato\". A wide variety of techniques are used to sound notes on the electric guitar, including plucking with the fingernails or a plectrum, strumming and even \"tapping\" on the fingerboard and using feedback from a loud, distorted guitar amplifier to produce a sustained sound.\nSome string instruments are mainly plucked, such as the harp and the electric bass. Other examples include the sitar, rebab, banjo, mandolin, ukulele, and bouzouki.\nIn the Hornbostel\u2013Sachs scheme of musical instrument classification, used in organology, string instruments are called chordophones. According to Sachs,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chordophones are instruments with strings. The strings may be struck with sticks, plucked with the bare fingers or a plectrum, bowed or (in the Aeolian harp, for instance) sounded by wind. The confusing plenitude of stringed instruments can be reduced to four fundamental type: zithers, lutes, lyres, and harps.\nIn most string instruments, the vibrations are transmitted to the body of the instrument, which often incorporates some sort of hollow or enclosed area. The body of the instrument also vibrates, along with the air inside it. The vibration of the body of the instrument and the enclosed hollow or chamber make the vibration of the string more audible to the performer and audience. The body of most string instruments is hollow, in order to have better sound projection. Some, however\u2014such as electric guitar and other instruments that rely on electronic amplification\u2014may have a solid wood body.\nClassification.\nIn musicology, string instruments are known as chordophones. It is one of the five main divisions of instruments in the Hornbostel\u2013Sachs scheme of musical instrument classification.\nHornbostel\u2013Sachs divides chordophones into two main groups: instruments without a resonator as an integral part of the instrument (which have the classification number 31, also known as 'simple'); and instruments with such a resonator (which have the classification number 32, also known as 'composite'). Most western instruments fall into the second group, but the piano and harpsichord fall into the first. Hornbostel and Sachs's criterion for determining which sub-group an instrument falls into is that if the resonator can be removed without destroying the instrument, then it is classified as 31. The idea that the piano's casing, which acts as a resonator, could be removed without destroying the instrument, may seem odd, but if the action and strings of the piano were taken out of its box, it could still be played. This is not true of the violin, because the string passes over a bridge located on the resonator box, so removing the resonator would mean the strings had no tension.\nCurt Sachs also broke chordophones into four basic subcategories, \"zithers, lutes, lyres and harps.\"\nEarliest string instruments.\nDating to around c.\u200913,000 BC, a cave painting in the Trois Fr\u00e8res cave in France depicts what some believe is a musical bow, a hunting bow used as a single-stringed musical instrument. From the musical bow, families of stringed instruments developed; since each string played a single note, adding strings added new notes, creating bow harps, harps and lyres. In turn, this led to being able to play dyads and chords. Another innovation occurred when the bow harp was straightened out and a bridge used to lift the strings off the stick-neck, creating the lute.\nThis picture of musical bow to harp bow is theory and has been contested. In 1965 Franz Jahnel wrote his criticism stating that the early ancestors of plucked instruments are not currently known. He felt that the harp bow was a long cry from the sophistication of the civilizations of western Asia in 4000 BC that took the primitive technology and created \"technically and artistically well-made harps, lyres, citharas, and lutes.\"\nArchaeological digs have identified some of the earliest stringed instruments in Ancient Mesopotamian sites, like the lyres of Ur, which include artifacts over three thousand years old. The development of lyre instruments required the technology to create a tuning mechanism to tighten and loosen the string tension. Lyres with wooden bodies and strings used for plucking or playing with a bow represent key instruments that point towards later harps and violin-type instruments; moreover, Indian instruments from 500 BC have been discovered with anything from 7 to 21 strings. In Vietnam, a 2,000 year old, singularly stringed instrument made of deer antler was also discovered.\nLutes.\nMusicologists have put forth examples of that 4th-century BC technology, looking at engraved images that have survived. The earliest image showing a lute-like instrument came from Mesopotamia prior to 3000 BC. A cylinder seal from c.\u20093100 BC or earlier (now in the possession of the British Museum) shows what is thought to be a woman playing a stick lute. From the surviving images, theorists have categorized the Mesopotamian lutes, showing that they developed into a long variety and a short. The line of long lutes may have developed into the tamburs and pandura. The line of short lutes was further developed to the east of Mesopotamia, in Bactria, Gandhara, and Northwest India, and shown in sculpture from the 2nd century BC through the 4th or 5th centuries AD.\nDuring the medieval era, instrument development varied in different regions of the world. Middle Eastern rebecs represented breakthroughs in terms of shape and strings, with a half a pear shape using three strings. Early versions of the violin and fiddle, by comparison, emerged in Europe through instruments such as the gittern, a four-stringed precursor to the guitar, and basic lutes. These instruments typically used catgut (animal intestine) and other materials, including silk, for their strings.\nRenaissance to modern.\nString instrument design was refined during the Renaissance and into the Baroque period (1600\u20131750) of musical history. Violins and guitars became more consistent in design and were roughly similar to acoustic guitars of the 2000s. The violins of the Renaissance featured intricate woodwork and stringing, while more elaborate bass instruments such as the bandora were produced alongside quill-plucked citterns, and Spanish body guitars.\nIn the 19th century, string instruments were made more widely available through mass production, with wood string instruments a key part of orchestras \u2013 cellos, violas, and upright basses, for example, were now standard instruments for chamber ensembles and smaller orchestras. At the same time, the 19th-century guitar became more typically associated with six-string models, rather than traditional five-string versions.\nMajor changes to string instruments in the 20th century primarily involved innovations in electronic instrument amplification and electronic music \u2013 electric violins were available by the 1920s and were an important part of emerging jazz music trends in the United States. The acoustic guitar was widely used in blues and jazz, but as an acoustic instrument, it was not loud enough to be a solo instrument, so these genres mostly used it as an accompaniment rhythm section instrument. In big bands of the 1920s, the acoustic guitar played backing chords, but it was not loud enough to play solos like the saxophone and trumpet. The development of guitar amplifiers, which contained a power amplifier and a loudspeaker in a wooden cabinet, let jazz guitarists play solos and be heard over a big band. The development of the electric guitar provided guitarists with an instrument that was built to connect to guitar amplifiers. Electric guitars have magnetic pickups, volume control knobs and an output jack.\nIn the 1960s, larger, more powerful guitar amplifiers were developed, called \"stacks\". These powerful amplifiers enabled guitarists to perform in rock bands that played in large venues such as stadiums and outdoor music festivals (e.g., Woodstock Music Festival). Along with the development of guitar amplifiers, a large range of electronic effects units, many in small stompbox pedals, were introduced in the 1960s and 1970s, such as fuzz pedals, flangers, and phasers, enabling performers to create unique new sounds during the psychedelic rock era. Breakthroughs in electric guitar and bass technologies and playing styles enabled major breakthroughs in pop and rock music in the 1960s and 1970s. The distinctive sound of the amplified electric guitar was the centerpiece of new genres of music such as blues rock and jazz-rock fusion. The sonic power of the loudly amplified, highly distorted electric guitar was the key element of the early heavy metal music, with the distorted guitar being used in lead guitar roles, and with power chords as a rhythm guitar.\nThe ongoing use of electronic amplification and effects units in string instruments, ranging from traditional instruments like the violin to the new electric guitar, added variety to contemporary classical music performances, and enabled experimentation in the dynamic and timbre (tone colour) range of orchestras, bands, and solo performances.\nTypes of instruments.\nConstruction.\nString instruments can be divided into three groups:\nIt is also possible to divide the instruments into categories focused on how the instrument is played.\nPlaying techniques.\nAll string instruments produce sound from one or more vibrating strings, transferred to the air by the body of the instrument (or by a pickup in electronically amplified instruments). They are usually categorised by the technique used to make the strings vibrate (or by the primary technique, in the case of instruments where more than one may apply). The three most common techniques are plucking, bowing, and striking. An important difference between bowing and plucking is that in the former the phenomenon is periodic so that the overtones are kept in a strictly harmonic relationship to the fundamental.\nPlucking.\nPlucking is a method of playing on instruments such as the veena, banjo, ukulele, guitar, harp, lute, mandolin, oud, and sitar, using either a finger, thumb, or quills (now plastic plectra) to pluck the strings.\nInstruments normally played by bowing (see below) may also be plucked, a technique referred to by the Italian term \"pizzicato\".\nBowing.\nBowing (Italian: \"arco\") is a method used in some string instruments, including the violin, viola, cello, and the double bass (of the violin family), and the old viol family. The bow consists of a stick with a \"ribbon\" of parallel horse tail hairs stretched between its ends. The hair is coated with rosin so it can grip the string; moving the hair across a string causes a stick-slip phenomenon, making the string vibrate, and prompting the instrument to emit sound. Darker grades of rosin grip well in cool, dry climates, but may be too sticky in warmer, more humid weather. Violin and viola players generally use harder, lighter-colored rosin than players of lower-pitched instruments, who tend to favor darker, softer rosin.\nThe ravanahatha is one of the oldest string instruments. Ancestors of the modern bowed string instruments are the rebab of the Islamic Empires, the Persian kamanche and the Byzantine lira. Other bowed instruments are the rebec, hardingfele, nyckelharpa, koky\u016b, erhu, igil, sarangi, morin khuur, and K'ni. The hurdy-gurdy is bowed by a wheel. Rarely, the guitar has been played with a bow (rather than plucked) for unique effects.\nStriking.\nThe third common method of sound production in stringed instruments is to strike the string. The piano and hammered dulcimer use this method of sound production. Even though the piano strikes the strings, the use of felt hammers means that the sound that is produced can nevertheless be mellow and rounded, in contrast to the sharp attack produced when a very hard hammer strikes the strings.\nViolin family string instrument players are occasionally instructed to strike the string with the stick of the bow, a technique called \"col legno\". This yields a percussive sound along with the pitch of the note. A well-known use of \"col legno\" for orchestral strings is Gustav Holst's \"Mars\" movement from \"The Planets\" suite.\nOther methods.\nThe aeolian harp employs a very unusual method of sound production: the strings are excited by the movement of the air.\nSome instruments that have strings have an attached keyboard that the player presses keys on to trigger a mechanism that sounds the strings, instead of directly manipulating the strings. These include the piano, the clavichord, and the harpsichord. With these keyboard instruments, strings are occasionally plucked or bowed by hand. Modern composers such as Henry Cowell wrote music that requires that the player reach inside the piano and pluck the strings directly, \"bow\" them with bow hair wrapped around the strings, or play them by rolling the bell of a brass instrument such as a trombone on the array of strings. However, these are relatively rarely used special techniques.\nOther keyed string instruments, small enough for a strolling musician to play, include the plucked autoharp, the bowed nyckelharpa, and the hurdy-gurdy, which is played by cranking a rosined wheel.\nSteel-stringed instruments (such as the guitar, bass, violin, etc.) can be played using a magnetic field. An E-Bow is a small hand-held battery-powered device that magnetically excites the strings of an electric string instrument to provide a sustained, singing tone reminiscent of a held bowed violin note.\nThird bridge is a plucking method where the player \"frets\" a string and strikes the side opposite the bridge. The technique is mainly used on electric instruments because these have a pickup that amplifies only the local string vibration. It is possible on acoustic instruments as well, but less effective. For instance, a player might press on the seventh fret on a guitar and pluck it at the head side to make a tone resonate at the opposing side. On electric instruments, this technique generates multitone sounds reminiscent of a clock or bell.\nElectric string instruments, such as the electric guitar, can also be played without touching the strings by using audio feedback. When an electric guitar is plugged into a loud, powerful guitar amplifier with a loudspeaker and a high level of distortion is intentionally used, the guitar produces sustained high-pitched sounds. By changing the proximity of the guitar to the speaker, the guitarist can produce sounds that cannot be produced with standard plucking and picking techniques. This technique was popularized by Jimi Hendrix and others in the 1960s. It was widely used in psychedelic rock and heavy metal music.\nChanging the pitch of a vibrating string.\nThere are three ways to change the pitch of a vibrating string. String instruments are tuned by varying a string's tension because adjusting length or mass per unit length is impractical. Instruments with a fingerboard are then played by adjusting the length of the vibrating portion of the strings. The following observations all apply to a string that is infinitely flexible (a theoretical assumption, because in practical applications, strings are not infinitely flexible) strung between two fixed supports. Real strings have finite curvature at the bridge and nut, and the bridge, because of its motion, is not exactly nodes of vibration. Hence the following statements about proportionality are approximations.\nLength.\nPitch can be adjusted by varying the length of the string. A longer string results in a lower pitch, while a shorter string results in a higher pitch. A concert harp has pedals that cause a hard object to make contact with a string to shorten its vibrating length during a performance. The frequency is inversely proportional to the length:\nformula_1\nA string twice as long produces a tone of half the frequency (one octave lower).\nTension.\nPitch can be adjusted by varying the tension of the string. A string with less tension (looser) results in a lower pitch, while a string with greater tension (tighter) results in a higher pitch. Pushing a pedal on a pedal steel guitar raises the pitch of certain strings by increasing tension on them (stretching) through a mechanical linkage; release of the pedal returns the pitch to the original. Knee levers on the instrument can lower a pitch by releasing (and restoring) tension in the same way. A homemade washtub bass made out of a length of rope, a broomstick and a washtub can produce different pitches by increasing the tension on the rope (producing a higher pitch) or reducing the tension (producing a lower pitch). The frequency is proportional to the square root of the tension:\nformula_2\nLinear density.\nThe pitch of a string can also be varied by changing the linear density (mass per unit length) of the string. In practical applications, such as with double bass strings or bass piano strings, extra weight is added to strings by winding them with metal. A string with a heavier metal winding produces a lower pitch than a string of equal length without a metal winding. This can be seen on a 2016-era set of gut strings for double bass. The higher-pitched G string is often made of synthetic material, or sometimes animal intestine, with no metal wrapping. To enable the low E string to produce a much lower pitch with a string of the same length, it is wrapped with many wrappings of thin metal wire. This adds to its mass without making it too stiff. The frequency is inversely proportional to the square root of the linear density:\nformula_3\nGiven two strings of equal length and tension, the string with higher mass per unit length produces the lower pitch.\nString length or scale length.\nThe length of the string from nut to bridge on bowed or plucked instruments ultimately determines the distance between different notes on the instrument. For example, a double bass with its low range needs a scale length of around , whilst a violin scale is only about . On the shorter scale of the violin, the left hand may easily reach a range of slightly more than two octaves without shifting position, while on the bass' longer scale, a single octave or a ninth is reachable in lower positions.\nContact points along the string.\nIn bowed instruments, the bow is normally placed perpendicularly to the string, at a point halfway between the end of the fingerboard and the bridge. However, different bow placements can be selected to change timbre. Application of the bow close to the bridge (known as \"sul ponticello\") produces an intense, sometimes harsh sound, which acoustically emphasizes the upper harmonics. Bowing above the fingerboard (\"sul tasto\") produces a purer tone with less overtone strength, emphasizing the fundamental, also known as \"flautando\", since it sounds less reedy and more flute-like.\nBowed instruments pose a challenge to instrument builders, as compared with instruments that are only plucked (e.g., guitar), because on bowed instruments, the musician must be able to play one string at a time if they wish. As such, a bowed instrument must have a curved bridge that makes the \"outer\" strings lower in height than the \"inner\" strings. With such a curved bridge, the player can select one string at a time to play. On guitars and lutes, the bridge can be flat, because the strings are played by plucking them with the fingers, fingernails or a pick; by moving the fingers or pick to different positions, the player can play different strings. On bowed instruments, the need to play strings individually with the bow also limits the number of strings to about six or seven; with more strings, it would be impossible to select individual strings to bow. (Bowed strings can also play two bowed notes on two different strings at the same time, a technique called a double stop.) Indeed, on the orchestral string section instruments, four strings are the norm, with the exception of five strings used on some double basses. In contrast, with stringed keyboard instruments, 88 courses are used on a piano, and even though these strings are arranged on a flat bridge, the mechanism can play any of the notes individually.\nSimilar timbral distinctions are also possible with plucked string instruments by selecting an appropriate plucking point, although the difference is perhaps more subtle.\nIn keyboard instruments, the contact point along the string (whether this be hammer, tangent, or plectrum) is a choice made by the instrument designer. Builders use a combination of experience and acoustic theory to establish the right set of contact points.\nIn harpsichords, often there are two sets of strings of equal length. These \"choirs\" usually differ in their plucking points. One choir has a \"normal\" plucking point, producing a canonical harpsichord sound; the other has a plucking point close to the bridge, producing a reedier \"nasal\" sound rich in upper harmonics.\nProduction of multiple notes.\nA single string at a certain tension and length only produces one note. To produce multiple notes, string instruments use one of two methods. One is to add enough strings to cover the required range of different notes (e.g., as with the piano, which has sets of 88 strings to enable the performer to play 88 different notes). The other is to provide a way to \"stop\" the strings along their length to shorten the part that vibrates, which is the method used in guitar and violin family instruments to produce different notes from the same string. The piano and harp represent the first method, where each note on the instrument has its own string or course of multiple strings tuned to the same note. (Many notes on a piano are strung with a \"choir\" of three strings tuned alike, to increase the volume.) A guitar represents the second method\u2014the player's fingers push the string against the fingerboard so that the string is pressed firmly against a metal fret. Pressing the string against a fret while plucking or strumming it shortens the vibrating part and thus produces a different note.\nSome zithers combine stoppable (melody) strings with a greater number of \"open\" harmony or chord strings. On instruments with stoppable strings, such as the violin or guitar, the player can shorten the vibrating length of the string, using their fingers directly (or more rarely through some mechanical device, as in the nyckelharpa and the hurdy-gurdy). Such instruments usually have a fingerboard attached to the neck of the instrument, that provides a hard flat surface the player can stop the strings against. On some string instruments, the fingerboard has frets, raised ridges perpendicular to the strings, that stop the string at precise intervals, in which case the fingerboard is also called a \"fretboard\".\nMoving frets during performance is usually impractical. The bridges of a koto, on the other hand, may be moved by the player occasionally in the course of a single piece of music. Many modern Western harps include levers, either directly moved by fingers (on Celtic harps) or controlled by foot pedals (on orchestral harps), to raise the pitch of individual strings by a fixed amount. The Middle Eastern zither, the qanun, is equipped with small levers called \"mandal\" that let each course of multiple strings be incrementally retuned \"on the fly\" while the instrument is being played. These levers raise or lower the pitch of the string course by a microtone, less than a half step.\nSympathetic strings.\nSome instruments are employed with sympathetic strings\u2014which are additional strings not meant to be plucked. These strings resonate with the played notes, creating additional tones. Sympathetic strings vibrate naturally when various intervals, such as the unisons or the octaves of the notes of the sympathetic strings are plucked, bowed or struck. This system is used on the sarangi, the grand piano, the hardanger fiddle and the rubab.\nSound production.\nAcoustic instruments.\nA vibrating string strung on a very thick log, as a hypothetical example, would make only a very quiet sound, so string instruments are usually constructed in such a way that the vibrating string is coupled to a hollow resonating chamber, a soundboard, or both. On the violin, for example, the four strings pass over a thin wooden bridge resting on a hollow box (the body of the violin). The normal force applied to the body from the strings is supported in part by a small cylinder of wood called the soundpost. The violin body also has two \"f-holes\" carved on the top. The strings' vibrations are distributed via the bridge and soundpost to all surfaces of the instrument, and are thus made louder by matching of the acoustic impedance. The correct technical explanation is that they allow a better match to the acoustic impedance of the air.\nIt is sometimes said that the sounding board or soundbox \"amplifies\" the sound of the strings. In reality, no power amplification occurs, because all of the energy to produce sound comes from the vibrating string. The mechanism is that the sounding board of the instrument provides a larger surface area to create sound waves than that of the string and therefore acts as a matching element between the acoustic impedance of the string and that of the surrounding air. A larger vibrating surface can sometimes produce better matching; especially at lower frequencies.\nAll lute-type instruments traditionally have a bridge, which holds the string at the proper action height from the fret/finger board at one end of the strings. On acoustic instruments, the bridge performs an equally important function of transmitting string energy into the \"sound box\" of the instrument, thereby increasing the sound volume. The specific design, and materials used in the construction of the bridge of an instrument, have a dramatic impact upon both the sound and responsiveness of the instrument.\nAchieving a tonal characteristic that is effective and pleasing to the player's and listener's ear is something of an art and craft, as well as a science, and the makers of string instruments often seek very high quality woods to this end, particularly spruce (chosen for its lightness, strength and flexibility) and maple (a very hard wood). Spruce is used for the sounding boards of instruments from the violin to the piano. Instruments such as the banjo use a drum, covered in natural or synthetic skin, as their soundboard.\nAcoustic instruments can also be made of artificial materials, such as carbon fiber and fiberglass (particularly the larger, lower-pitched instruments, such as cellos and basses).\nIn the early 20th century, the Stroh violin used a diaphragm-type resonator and a metal horn to project the string sound, much like early mechanical gramophones. Its use declined beginning about 1920, as electronic amplification through power amplifiers and loudspeakers was developed and came into use. String instrument players can electronically amplify their instruments by connecting them to a PA system or a guitar amplifier.\nElectronic amplification.\nMost string instruments can be fitted with piezoelectric or magnetic pickups to convert the string's vibrations into an electrical signal that is amplified and then converted back into sound by loudspeakers. Some players attach a pickup to their traditional string instrument to \"electrify\" it. Another option is to use a solid-bodied instrument, which reduces unwanted feedback howls or squeals.\nAmplified string instruments can be much louder than their acoustic counterparts, so musicians can play them in relatively loud rock, blues, and jazz ensembles. Amplified instruments can also have their amplified tone modified by using electronic effects such as distortion, reverb, or wah-wah.\nBass-register string instruments such as the double bass and the electric bass are amplified with bass instrument amplifiers that are designed to reproduce low-frequency sounds. To modify the tone of amplified bass instruments, a range of electronic bass effects are available, such as distortion and chorus.\nSymphonic strings.\nThe string instruments usually used in the orchestra, and often called the \"symphonic strings\" or string section are:\nWhen orchestral instrumentation specifies \"strings\", it often means this combination of string parts. Orchestral works rarely omit any of these string parts, but often include additional string instruments, especially the concert harp and piano. In the Baroque orchestra from the 1600s\u20131750 (or with modern groups playing early music) harpsichord is almost always used to play the basso continuo part (the written-out bass line and improvised chords), and often a theorbo or lute or a pipe organ. In some classical music, such as the string quartet, the double bass is not typically used; the cello plays the bass role in this literature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50079", "revid": "35016573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50079", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for History", "text": "American award for history books\nThe Pulitzer Prize for History, administered by Columbia University, is one of the seven American Pulitzer Prizes that are annually awarded for Letters, Drama, and Music. It has been presented since 1917 for a distinguished book about the history of the United States. Thus it is one of the original Pulitzers, for the program was inaugurated in 1917 with seven prizes, four of which were awarded that year. The Pulitzer Prize program has also recognized some historical work with its Biography prize, from 1917, and its General Nonfiction prize, from 1962.\nFinalists have been announced since 1980, ordinarily two others beside the winner.\nWinners.\nIn its first 97 years to 2013, the History Pulitzer was awarded 95 times. Two prizes were given in 1989; none in 1919, 1984, and 1994.\n1980s.\nEntries from this point on include the finalists listed after the winner for each year.\nRepeat winners.\nFive people have won the Pulitzer Prize for History twice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50080", "revid": "50571517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50080", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for Criticism", "text": "American journalism award\nThe Pulitzer Prize for Criticism has been presented since 1970 to a newspaper writer in the United States who has demonstrated 'distinguished criticism'. Recipients of the award are chosen by an independent board and officially administered by Columbia University. The Pulitzer Committee issues an official citation explaining the reasons for the award.\nWinners and citations.\nThe Criticism Pulitzer has been awarded to one person annually except in 1992 when it was not awarded\u201443 prizes in 44 years 1970\u20132013. Wesley Morris is the only person to have won the prize more than once, winning in 2012 and 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50082", "revid": "29345997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50082", "title": "Bitstream", "text": "Sequence of binary digits\nA bitstream (or bit stream), also known as binary sequence, is a sequence of bits.\nA bytestream is a sequence of bytes. Typically, each byte is an 8-bit quantity, and so the term octet stream is sometimes used interchangeably. An octet may be encoded as a sequence of 8 bits in multiple different ways (see bit numbering) so there is no unique and direct translation between bytestreams and bitstreams.\nBitstreams and bytestreams are used extensively in telecommunications and computing. For example, synchronous bitstreams are carried by SONET, and Transmission Control Protocol transports an asynchronous bytestream.\nRelationship to bytestreams.\nIn practice, bitstreams are not used directly to encode bytestreams; a communication channel may use a signalling method that does not directly translate to bits (for instance, by transmitting signals of multiple frequencies) and typically also encodes other information such as framing and error correction together with its data.\nExamples.\nThe term bitstream is frequently used to describe the configuration data to be loaded into a field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Although most FPGAs also support a byte-parallel loading method as well, this usage may have originated based on the common method of configuring the FPGA from a serial bit stream, typically from a serial PROM or flash memory chip. The detailed format of the bitstream for a particular FPGA is typically proprietary to the FPGA vendor.\nIn mathematics, several specific infinite sequences of bits have been studied for their mathematical properties; these include the Baum\u2013Sweet sequence, Ehrenfeucht\u2013Mycielski sequence, Fibonacci word, Kolakoski sequence, regular paperfolding sequence, Rudin\u2013Shapiro sequence, and Thue\u2013Morse sequence.\nOn most operating systems, including Unix-like and Windows, standard I/O libraries convert lower-level paged or buffered file access to a bytestream paradigm. In particular, in Unix-like operating systems, each process has three standard streams, which are examples of unidirectional bytestreams. The Unix pipe mechanism provides bytestream communications between different processes.\nCompression algorithms often code in bitstreams, as the 8 bits offered by a byte (the smallest addressable unit of memory) may be wasteful. Although typically implemented in low-level languages, some high-level languages such as Python and Java offer native interfaces for bitstream I/O.\nOne well-known example of a communication protocol which provides a byte-stream service to its clients is the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) of the Internet protocol suite, which provides a bidirectional bytestream.\nThe Internet media type for an arbitrary bytestream is application/octet-stream. Other media types are defined for bytestreams in well-known formats.\nFlow control.\nOften the contents of a bytestream are dynamically created, such as the data from the keyboard and other peripherals (/dev/tty), data from the pseudorandom number generator (/dev/urandom), etc.\nIn those cases, when the destination of a bytestream (the consumer) uses bytes faster than they can be generated, the system uses process synchronization to make the destination wait until the next byte is available.\nWhen bytes are generated faster than the destination can use them and the producer is a software algorithm, the system pauses it with the same process synchronization techniques. When the producer supports flow control, the system only sends the \"ready\" signal when the consumer is ready for the next byte. When the producer can not be paused\u2014a keyboard or some hardware that does not support flow control\u2014the system typically attempts to temporarily store the data until the consumer is ready for it, typically using a queue. Often the receiver can empty the buffer before it gets completely full. A producer that continues to produce data faster than it can be consumed, even after the buffer is full, leads to unwanted buffer overflow, packet loss, network congestion, and denial of service.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50089", "revid": "19469161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50089", "title": "Otto Neurath", "text": "Austrian economist, philosopher and sociologist (1882\u20131945)\nOtto Karl Wilhelm Neurath (; ; 10 December 1882 \u2013 22 December 1945) was an Austrian-born philosopher of science, sociologist, and political economist. He was also the inventor of the ISOTYPE method of pictorial statistics and an innovator in museum practice. Before he fled his native country in 1934, Neurath was one of the leading figures of the Vienna Circle.\nEarly life.\nNeurath was born in Vienna, the son of Wilhelm Neurath (1840\u20131901), a well-known Jewish political economist at the time. Otto's mother was a Protestant, and he would also become one. Helene Migerka was his cousin. He studied mathematics and physics at the University of Vienna (he formally enrolled for classes only for two semesters in 1902\u20133). In 1906, he gained his Ph.D. in the department of Political Science and Statistics at the University of Berlin with a thesis entitled \"Zur Anschauung der Antike \u00fcber Handel, Gewerbe und Landwirtschaft\" (\"On the Conceptions in Antiquity of Trade, Commerce and Agriculture\").\nHe married Anna Schapire in 1907, who died in 1911 while bearing their son, Paul, and then married a close friend, the mathematician and philosopher Olga Hahn. Perhaps because of his second wife's blindness and then because of the outbreak of war, Paul was sent to a children's home outside Vienna, where Neurath's mother lived, and returned to live with both of his parents when he was nine years old.\nCareer in Vienna.\nNeurath taught political economy at the New Vienna Commercial Academy in Vienna until war broke out. Subsequently, he directed the Department of War Economy in the War Ministry. In 1917, he completed his habilitation thesis \"Die Kriegswirtschaftslehre und ihre Bedeutung f\u00fcr die Zukunft\" (\"War Economics and Their Importance for the Future\") at Heidelberg University. In 1918, he became director of the Deutsches Kriegswirtschaftsmuseum (German Museum of War Economy, later the \"Deutsches Wirtschaftsmuseum\") in Leipzig. There he worked with Wolfgang Schumann, known from the D\u00fcrerbund for which Neurath had written many articles. During the political crisis which led to the armistice, Schumann urged him to work out a plan for socialization in Saxony. Along with Schumann and Hermann Kranold developed the \"Programm Kranold-Neurath-Schumann\". Neurath then joined the German Social Democratic Party in 1918\u201319 and ran an office for central economic planning in Munich. When the Bavarian Soviet Republic was defeated, Neurath was imprisoned but returned to Austria after intervention from the Austrian government. While in prison, he wrote \"Anti-Spengler\", a critical attack on Oswald Spengler's \"Decline of the West\".\nIn Red Vienna, he joined the Social Democrats and became secretary of the Austrian Association for Settlements and Small Gardens (Verband f\u00fcr Siedlungs-und Kleingartenwesen), a collection of self-help groups that set out to provide housing and garden plots to its members. In 1923, he founded a new museum for housing and city planning called Siedlungsmuseum. In 1925 he renamed it Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsmuseum in Wien (Museum of Society and Economy in Vienna) and founded an association for it, in which the Vienna city administration, the trade unions, the Chamber of Workers and the Bank of Workers became members. Then-mayor Karl Seitz acted as the first proponent of the association. Julius Tandler, city councillor for welfare and health, served on the first board of the museum together with other prominent social democratic politicians. The museum was provided with exhibition rooms in buildings of the city administration, the most prominent being the People's Hall at the Vienna City Hall.\nNeurath was a contributor to the Social Democrat magazine \"Der Kampf\".\nTo make the museum understandable for visitors from all around the polyglot Austro-Hungarian Empire, Neurath worked on graphic design and visual education, believing that \"Words divide, pictures unite,\" a coinage of his own that he displayed on the wall of his office there. In the late 1920s, graphic designer and communications theorist Rudolf Modley served as an assistant to Neurath, contributing to a new means of communication: a visual \"language.\" With the illustrator Gerd Arntz and with Marie Reidemeister (who he would marry in 1941), Neurath developed novel ways of representing quantitative information via easily interpretable icons. The forerunner of contemporary infographics, he initially called this the Vienna Method of Pictorial Statistics. As his ambitions for the project expanded beyond social and economic data related to Vienna, he renamed the project \"Isotype\", an acronymic nickname for the project's full title: International System of Typographic Picture Education. At international conventions of city planners, Neurath presented and promoted his communication tools. During the 1930s, he also began promoting Isotype as an International Picture Language, connecting it both with the adult education movement and with the Internationalist passion for new and artificial languages like Esperanto, although he stressed in talks and correspondence that Isotype was not intended to be a stand-alone language and was limited in what it could communicate.\nIn the 1920s, Neurath also became an ardent logical positivist, and was the main author of the Vienna Circle manifesto. He was the driving force behind the Unity of Science movement and the \"International Encyclopedia of Unified Science\".\nNeurath was a proponent of Esperanto, and attended the 1924 World Esperanto Congress in Vienna, where he met Rudolf Carnap for the first time. In 1927 he became Secretary of the Ernst Mach Society.\nExile.\nNetherlands.\nDuring the Austrian Civil War in 1934, Neurath had been working in Moscow. Anticipating problems, he had asked to get a coded message in case it would be dangerous for him to return to Austria. As Marie Reidemeister reported later, after receiving the telegram \"Carnap is waiting for you,\" Neurath chose to travel to The Hague, the Netherlands, instead of Vienna, to be able to continue his international work. He was joined by Arntz after affairs in Vienna had been sorted out as best they could. His wife also fled to the Netherlands, where she died in 1937.\nBritish Isles.\nAfter the Luftwaffe had bombed Rotterdam, he and Marie Reidemeister fled to Britain, crossing the Channel with other refugees in an open boat. He and Reidemeister married in 1941 after a period of being interned on the Isle of Man (Neurath was in Onchan Camp). In Britain, he and his wife set up the Isotype Institute in Oxford and he was asked to advise on, and design Isotype charts for, the intended redevelopment of the slums of Bilston, near Wolverhampton.\nNeurath died of a stroke, suddenly and unexpectedly, in December 1945. After his death, Marie Neurath continued the work of the Isotype Institute, publishing Neurath's writings posthumously, completing projects he had started and writing many children's books using the Isotype system, until her death in the 1980s.\nContributions.\nPhilosophy of science and language.\nNeurath's work on protocol statements tried to reconcile an empiricist concern for the grounding of knowledge in experience with the essential publicity of science. Neurath suggested that reports of experience should be understood to have a third-person and hence public and impersonal character, rather than as being first person subjective pronouncements. Bertrand Russell took issue with Neurath's account of protocol statements in his book \"An Inquiry Into Meaning and Truth\" (p.\u00a0139ff), on the grounds that it severed the connection to experience that is essential to an empiricist account of truth, facts and knowledge.\nOne of Neurath's later works, \"Physicalism\", completely transformed the nature of the logical positivist discussion of the program of unifying the sciences. Neurath delineates and explains his points of agreement with the general principles of the positivist program and its conceptual bases:\nHe then rejects the positivist treatment of language in general and, in particular, some of Wittgenstein's early fundamental ideas.\nFirst, Neurath rejects the isomorphism between language and reality as useless metaphysical speculation, which would call for explaining how words and sentences could represent things in the external world. Instead, Neurath proposed that language and reality coincide\u2014that reality consists simply of the totality of previously verified sentences in the language, and the \"truth\" of a sentence is about its relationship to the totality of already verified sentences. If a sentence fails to \"concord\" (or cohere) with the totality of already verified sentences, then either it should be considered false, or some of that totality's propositions must be modified somehow. He thus views truth as internal coherence of linguistic assertions, rather than anything to do with facts or other entities in the world. Moreover, the criterion of verification is to be applied to the system as a whole (see semantic holism) and not to single sentences. Such ideas profoundly shaped the \"holistic verificationism\" of Willard Van Orman Quine. Quine's book \"Word and Object\" (p.\u00a03f) made famous Neurath's analogy, which compares the holistic nature of language and consequently scientific verification with the construction of a boat which is already at sea (cf. Ship of Theseus):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are like sailors who on the open sea must reconstruct their ship but are never able to start afresh from the bottom. Where a beam is taken away a new one must at once be put there, and for this, the rest of the ship is used as support. In this way, by using the old beams and driftwood, the ship can be shaped entirely anew, but only by gradual reconstruction.\nKeith Stanovich discusses this metaphor in context of memes and memeplexes and refers to this metaphor as a \"Neurathian bootstrap\".\nNeurath also rejected the notion that science should be reconstructed in terms of sense data, because perceptual experiences are too subjective to constitute a valid foundation for the formal reconstruction of science. Thus, the phenomenological language that most positivists were still emphasizing was to be replaced by the language of mathematical physics. This would allow for the required objective formulations because it is based on spatio-temporal coordinates. Such a \"physicalistic\" approach to the sciences would facilitate the elimination of every residual element of metaphysics because it would permit them to be reduced to a system of assertions relative to physical facts.\nEconomics.\nIn economics, Neurath was notable for his advocacy of ideas like \"in-kind\" economic accounting in place of monetary accounting. In the 1920s, he also advocated \"Vollsozialisierung\", that is \"complete\" rather than merely partial \"socialization\". Thus, he advocated changes to the economic system that were more radical than those of the mainstream Social-Democratic parties of Germany and Austria. In the 1920s, Neurath debated these matters with leading Social Democratic theoreticians (such as Karl Kautsky, who insisted that money is necessary in a socialist economy. While serving as a government economist during the war, Neurath had observed that \"As a result of the war, in-kind calculus was applied more often and more systematically than before\u00a0... war was fought with ammunition and with the supply of food, not with money\" i.e. that goods were incommensurable. This convinced Neurath of the feasibility of economic planning in terms of amounts of goods and services, without use of money. In response to these ideas, Ludwig von Mises wrote his famous essay of 1920, \"Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth\".\nOtto Neurath believed it was 'war socialism' that would come into effect after capitalism. For Neurath, war economies showed advantages in speed of decision and execution, optimal distribution of means relative to (military) goals, and no-nonsense evaluation and utilization of inventiveness. Two disadvantages which he perceived as resulting from centralized decision-making were a reduction in productivity and a loss of the benefits of simple economic exchanges; but he thought that the reduction in productivity could be mitigated by means of \"scientific\" techniques based on analysis of work-flows as advocated by Frederick Winslow Taylor. Neurath believed that socioeconomic theory and scientific methods could be applied together in contemporary practice.\nNeurath's view on socioeconomic development was similar to the materialist conception of history first elaborated in classical Marxism, in which technology and the state of epistemology come into conflict with social organization. In particular, Neurath, influenced also by James George Frazer, associated the rise of scientific thinking and empiricism/positivism with the rise of socialism, both of which were coming into conflict with older modes of epistemology such as theology (which was allied with idealist philosophy), the latter of which served reactionary purposes. However, Neurath followed Frazer in claiming that primitive magic closely resembled modern technology, implying an instrumentalist interpretation of both. Neurath claimed that magic was unfalsifiable and therefore disenchantment could never be complete in a scientific age. Adherents of the scientific view of the world recognize no authority other than science and reject all forms of metaphysics. Under the socialist phase of history, Neurath predicted that the scientific worldview would become the dominant mode of thought.\nSelected publications.\nMost publications by and about Neurath are still available only in German. However, he also wrote in English, using Ogden's Basic English. His scientific papers are held at the Noord-Hollands Archief in Haarlem; the Otto and Marie Neurath Isotype Collection is held in the Department of Typography &amp; Graphic Communication at the University of Reading in England.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50091", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50091", "title": "408 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 408 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Iullus, Ahala and Cossus (or, less frequently, year 346 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 408 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50095", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50095", "title": "Fractional reserve banking system", "text": ""}
{"id": "50099", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50099", "title": "Kate Chopin", "text": "American author (1850\u20131904)\nKate Chopin (, ; born Katherine O'Flaherty; February 8, 1850 \u2013 August 22, 1904) was an American author of short stories and novels based in Louisiana. She is considered by scholars to have been a forerunner of American 20th-century feminist authors of Southern or Catholic background, such as Zelda Fitzgerald, and she is among the most frequently read and recognized writers of Louisiana Creole heritage. She is best known today for her 1899 novel \"The Awakening\".\nOf maternal French and paternal Irish descent, Chopin was born in St. Louis, Missouri. She married and moved with her husband to New Orleans. They later lived in the country in Cloutierville, Louisiana. From 1892 to 1895, Chopin wrote short stories for both children and adults that were published in national magazines, including \"The Atlantic Monthly\", \"Vogue\", \"The Century Magazine\", and \"The Youth's Companion\". Her stories aroused controversy because of her subjects and her approach; they were condemned as immoral by some critics.\nHer major works were two short story collections and two novels. The collections are \"Bayou Folk\" (1894) and \"A Night in Acadie\" (1897). Her important short stories included \"D\u00e9sir\u00e9e's Baby\" (1893), a tale of an interracial relationship in antebellum Louisiana, \"The Story of an Hour\" (1894), and \"The Storm\" (written 1898, first published 1969). (\"The Storm\" is a sequel to her \"At the 'Cadian Ball\" (1892), which appeared in \"Bayou Folk\", her first collection of short stories.) Chopin's two novels, \"At Fault\" (1890) and \"The Awakening\" (1899), are set in New Orleans and nearby Grand Isle. The characters in her stories are usually residents of Louisiana, and many are Creoles of various ethnic or racial backgrounds. Many of her works are set in Natchitoches in north-central Louisiana, a region where she lived.\nWithin a decade of her death, Chopin was widely recognized as one of the leading writers of her time. In 1915, Fred Lewis Pattee wrote \"some of [Chopin's] work is equal to the best that has been produced in France or even in America. [She displayed] what may be described as a native aptitude for narration amounting almost to genius.\" \nShe was not related to famous Polish composer Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, but she did have a son named Frederick Chopin, who was probably named after the composer.\nLife.\nChopin was born Katherine O'Flaherty in St. Louis, Missouri. Her father, Thomas O'Flaherty, was a successful businessman who had immigrated to the United States from Galway, Ireland. Her mother, Eliza Faris, was his second wife, and a well-connected member of the ethnic French community in St. Louis as the daughter of Ath\u00e9na\u00efse Charleville, a Louisiana Creole of French Canadian descent. Some of Chopin's ancestors were among the early European (French) inhabitants of Dauphin Island, Alabama.\nKate was the third of five children, but her sisters died in infancy and her half-brothers (from her father's first marriage) died in their early 20s. They were raised Catholic in the French and Irish traditions. She became an avid reader of fairy tales, poetry, religious allegories, and classic and contemporary novels. She graduated from Sacred Heart Convent in St. Louis in 1868.\nAt the age of five, she was sent to Sacred Heart Academy, where she learned how to handle her own money and make her own decisions. Upon her father's death, she was brought home to live with her grandmother and great-grandmother, comprising three generations of women who were widowed young and never remarried. For two years, she was tutored at home by her great-grandmother, Victoria (or Victoire) Charleville, who taught French, music, history, gossip, and the need to look on life without fear. After those two years, Kate went back to Sacred Heart Academy, which her best friend and neighbor, Kitty Garesche, also attended, and where her mentor, Mary O'Meara, taught. A gifted writer of both verse and prose, O'Meara guided her student to write regularly, to judge herself critically, and to conduct herself valiantly. Nine days after Kate and Kitty's first communions in May 1861, the American Civil War came to St. Louis. During the war, Kate's half-brother died of fever, and her great-grandmother died as well. After the war ended, Kitty and her family were banished from St. Louis for supporting the Confederacy.\nIn St. Louis, Missouri on June 8, 1870, she married Oscar Chopin and settled with him in his home town of New Orleans. The Chopins had six children between 1871 and 1879: in order of birth, Jean Baptiste, Oscar Charles, George Francis, Frederick, Felix Andrew, and L\u00e9lia (baptized Marie La\u00efza). In 1879, Oscar Chopin's cotton brokerage failed.\nThe family left the city and moved to Cloutierville in south Natchitoches Parish to manage several small plantations and a general store. They became active in the community, where Chopin found, in the local creole culture, much material for her future writing.\nWhen Oscar Chopin died in 1882, he left Kate $42,000 in debt (approximately $ in 2024). The scholar Emily Toth noted that \"for a while the widow Kate ran his [Oscar's] business and flirted outrageously with local men; (she even engaged in a relationship with a married farmer).\" Although Chopin worked to make her late husband's plantation and general store succeed, she sold her Louisiana business two years later.\nChopin's mother had implored her to move back to St. Louis, which she did, with her mother's financial support. Her children gradually settled into life in the bustling city, but Chopin's mother died the following year.\nChopin struggled with depression after the successive loss of her husband, her business, and her mother. Chopin's obstetrician and family friend Dr. Frederick Kolbenheyer suggested that she start writing, believing that it could be therapeutic for her. He believed that writing could be a focus for her energy as well as a source of income.\nBy the early 1890s, Chopin's short stories, articles, and translations appeared in periodicals, including the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\", and in various literary magazines. During a period of considerable publishing of folk tales, works in dialect, and other elements of Southern folk life, she was considered a regional writer who provided local color. Her literary qualities were largely overlooked.\nIn 1899, \"The Awakening\", her second novel, was published. While some newspaper critics reviewed the novel favorably, the critical reception was largely negative. The critics considered the behavior of the novel's characters, especially the women, as well as Chopin's general treatment of female sexuality, motherhood, and marital infidelity, to be in conflict with prevailing standards of moral conduct and therefore offensive.\nThis novel, her best-known work, is the story of a woman trapped within the confines of an oppressive society. Out of print for several decades, it was rediscovered in the 1970s, when there was a wave of new studies and appreciation of women's writings. The novel has been reprinted and now is widely available. It has been critically acclaimed for its writing quality and importance as an example of early feminist literature of the South.\nCritics suggest that such works as \"The Awakening\" were scandalous and therefore not socially embraced. Chopin was discouraged by the lack of acceptance, but she continued to write, primarily writing short stories. In 1900, she wrote \"The Gentleman from New Orleans\". That same year she was listed in the first edition of \"Marquis Who's Who\". However, she never earned a significant amount of money from her writing, instead living off of the investments she made locally in Louisiana and St. Louis of the inheritance from her mother's estate.\nWhile visiting the St. Louis World's Fair on August 20, 1904, Chopin suffered a brain hemorrhage. She died two days later, at the age of 54. She was interred in Calvary Cemetery in St. Louis.\nLiterary themes.\nKate Chopin lived in a variety of locations, based on different economies and societies. These were sources of insights and observations from which she analyzed and expressed her ideas about late 19th-century society in the Southern United States. She was brought up by women who were primarily ethnic French. Living in areas influenced by the Louisiana Creole and Cajun cultures after she joined her husband in Louisiana, she based many of her stories and sketches on her life in Louisiana. They expressed her unusual portrayals of women as individuals with separate wants and needs.\nChopin's writing style was influenced by her admiration of the contemporary French writer Guy de Maupassant, known for his short stories:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKate Chopin is an example of a revisionist myth-maker because she revises myth more realistically about marriage and female sexuality of her time. The biggest myth Chopin focused on was the \"Victorian notion of women's somewhat anemic sexuality\" and \"The Storm\" is the best example of Kate Chopin using that myth through a character set on fulfilling her complete sexual potential. For instance, in \"The Storm\", portraits of women were revised by Kate Chopin to obtain consummation in roles other than marriage to evince a passionate nature considered inappropriate by conventional, patriarchal standards of Victorian America.\nChopin went beyond Maupassant's technique and style to give her writing its own flavor. She had an ability to perceive life and creatively express it. She concentrated on women's lives and their continual struggles to create an identity of their own within the Southern society of the late nineteenth century. For instance, in \"The Story of an Hour\", Mrs. Mallard allows herself time to reflect after learning of her husband's death. Instead of dreading the lonely years ahead, she stumbles upon another realization:\nShe knew that she would weep again when she saw the kind, tender hands folded in death; the face that had never looked save with love upon her, fixed and gray and dead. But she saw beyond that bitter moment a long procession of years to come that would belong to her absolutely. And she opened and spread her arms out to them in welcome.\nNot many writers during the mid- to late 19th century were bold enough to address subjects that Chopin addressed. Elizabeth Fox-Genovese of Emory University wrote that \"Kate was neither a feminist nor a suffragist, she said so. She was nonetheless a woman who took women extremely seriously. She never doubted women's ability to be strong.\" Kate Chopin's sympathies lay with the individual in the context of his and her personal life and society.\nThrough her stories, Chopin wrote a kind of autobiography and described her societies; she had grown up in a time when her surroundings included the abolitionist movements before the American Civil War, and their influence on freedmen education and rights afterward, as well as the emergence of feminism. Her ideas and descriptions were not reporting, but her stories expressed the reality of her world.\nChopin took strong interest in her surroundings and wrote about many of her observations. Jane Le Marquand assesses Chopin's writings as a new feminist voice, while other intellectuals recognize it as the voice of an individual who happens to be a woman. Marquand writes, \"Chopin undermines patriarchy by endowing the Other, the woman, with an individual identity and a sense of self, a sense of self to which the letters she leaves behind give voice. The 'official' version of her life, that constructed by the men around her, is challenged and overthrown by the woman of the story.\"\nChopin appeared to express her belief in the strength of women. Marquand draws from theories about creative nonfiction in terms of her work. In order for a story to be autobiographical, or even biographical, Marquand writes, there has to be a nonfictional element, but more often than not the author exaggerates the truth to spark and hold interest for the readers. Kate Chopin might have been surprised to know her work has been characterized as feminist in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, just as she had been in her own time to have it described as immoral. Critics tend to regard writers as individuals with larger points of view addressed to factions in society.\nEarly works.\nKate Chopin began her writing career with her first story published in the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\". By the early 1890s, Chopin forged a successful writing career, contributing short stories and articles to local publications and literary journals. She also initially wrote a number of short stories such as \"A Point at Issue!\", \"A No-Account Creole\", \"Beyond the Bayou\", which were published in various magazines. In 1890, her first novel, \"At Fault\", about a young widow and the sexual constraints of women, was published privately. The protagonist demonstrates the initial theme of Kate Chopin's works when she began writing. In 1892, Chopin produced \"D\u00e9sir\u00e9e's Baby\", \"Ripe Figs\", and \"At the 'Cadian Ball\", which appeared in \"Two Tales\" that year, and eight of her other stories were published.\nThe short story \"D\u00e9sir\u00e9e's Baby\" focuses on Chopin's experience with interracial relationships and communities of the Creoles of color in Louisiana. She came of age when slavery was institutionalized in St. Louis and the South. In Louisiana, there had been communities established of free people of color, especially in New Orleans, where formal arrangements were made between white men and free women of color or enslaved women for pla\u00e7age, a kind of common-law marriage. There and in the country, she lived with a society based on the history of slavery and the continuation of plantation life to a great extent. Mixed-race people were numerous in New Orleans and the South. This story addresses the racism of 19th century America; persons who were visibly European-American could be threatened by the revelation of also having African ancestry. Chopin was not afraid to address such issues, which were often suppressed and intentionally ignored by others. Her character Armand tries to deny this reality, when he refuses to believe that he is of partial black descent, as it threatens his ideas about himself and his status in life. R.\u00a0R. Foy believed that Chopin's story reached the level of great fiction, in which the only true subject is \"human existence in its subtle, complex, true meaning, stripped of the view with which ethical and conventional standards have draped it\".\n\"Desiree's Baby\" was first published in an 1893 issue of \"Vogue\", alongside \"A Visit to Avoyelles\", another of Chopin's short stories, under the heading \"Character Studies: The Father of Desiree's Baby \u2013 The Lover of Mentine\". \"A Visit to Avoyelles\" typifies the local color writing that Chopin was known, and it is one of her stories that shows a couple in a completely fulfilled marriage. While Doudouce is hoping otherwise, he sees ample evidence that Mentine and Jules' marriage is a happy and fulfilling one, despite the poverty-stricken circumstances in which they live. In contrast, \"Desiree's Baby\", which is much more controversial due to the topic of interracial relationships, portrays a marriage in trouble. The other contrasts to \"A Visit to Avoyelles\" are clear, but some are more subtle than others. Unlike Mentine and Jules, Armand and Desiree are rich and own slaves and a plantation. Mentine and Jules' marriage has weathered many hard times, while Armand and Desiree's falls apart at the first sign of trouble. Kate Chopin was talented at showing various sides of marriages and local people and their lives, making her writing very broad and sweeping in topic, even as she had many common themes in her work.\nMartha Cutter argues that Kate Chopin demonstrates feminine resistance to patriarchal society through her short stories. Cutter claims that Chopin's resistance can be traced through the timeline of her work, with Chopin becoming more and more understanding of how women can fight back suppression as time progresses. To demonstrate this, Cutter claims that Chopin's earlier stories, such as \"At the 'Cadian Ball\", \"Wiser than a God\", and \"Mrs. Mobry's Reason\" present women who are outright resisting, and are therefore not taken seriously, erased, or called insane. However, in Chopin's later stories, the female characters take on a different voice of resistance, one that is more \"covert\" and works to undermine patriarchal discourse from within. Cutter exemplifies this idea through the presentation of Chopin's works written after 1894. Cutter claims that Chopin wanted to \"disrupt patriarchal discourse, without being censored by it\". And to do this, Chopin tried different strategies in her writings: silent women, overly resistant women, women with a \"voice covert\", and women who mimic patriarchal discourse.\nIn 1893, she wrote \"Madame C\u00e9lestin's Divorce\", and 13 of her stories were published. In 1894, \"The Story of an Hour\" and \"A\u00a0Respectable woman\" were published by \"Vogue\". \"Bayou Folk\", a collection of 23 of Chopin's stories, was a success for Chopin in 1894, published by Houghton Mifflin. It was the first of her works to gain national attention, and it was followed by \"A Night in Acadie\" (1897), another collection of short stories.\n\"The Awakening\".\nPublished in 1899, her novel \"The Awakening\" is considered ahead of its time, garnering more negative reviews than positive from contemporary sources. Chopin was discouraged by this criticism, and she turned to writing short stories almost exclusively. The female characters in \"The Awakening\" went beyond the standards of social norms of the time. The protagonist has sexual desires and questions the sanctity of motherhood. \nThe novel explores the theme of marital infidelity from the perspective of a married woman. The book was widely banned, and it fell out of print for several decades, then was republished in the 1970s. It now is considered a classic of feminist fiction. Chopin reacted to the negative events happening to her by commenting:\nI never dreamt of Mrs. Pontellier making such a mess of things and working out her own damnation as she did. If I had had the slightest intimation of such a thing I would have excluded her from the company. But when I found out what she was up to, the play was half over and it was then too late.\nAccording to Bender, Chopin was intrigued by Darwin's \"The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex\". Although she agreed with the theory of evolution, Chopin disagreed with Darwin's theory of sexual selection and the female's role, and she expressed her opposition in \"The Awakening\", in which, Bender argues, Chopin references \"The Descent of Man\". In his essay, Darwin suggests female inferiority and says that males had \"gained the power of selection\". Bender argues that in her writing, Chopin presented women characters that had selective power based on their own sexual desires, not the need for reproduction or love. Bender argues this idea through the examples of Edna Pontellier in \"The Awakening\", Mrs. Baroda in \"A\u00a0Respectable Woman\", and Mrs. Mallard in \"The Story of an Hour\".\nMartha Cutter's article \"The Search for a Feminine Voice in the Works of Kate Chopin\" analyzes the female characters in many of Chopin's stories. Cutter argues that Chopin's opinion of women as being \"the invisible and unheard sex\" is exemplified through the characterization of Edna in \"The Awakening\". Cutter argues that Chopin's writing was shocking due to its sexual identity and articulation of feminine desire. According to Cutter, Chopin's stories disrupt patriarchal norms. Today, \"The Awakening\" is said to be one of the five top favorite novels in literature courses all over America.\nReception and legacy.\nLegacy.\nKate Chopin has been credited by some as a pioneer of the early feminist movement despite not achieving any literary rewards for her works.\nCritical reception.\nKate Chopin wrote the majority of her short stories and novels from 1889 to 1904. Altogether, Chopin wrote about 100 short stories or novels during her time as a fiction writer; her short stories were published in a number of local newspapers including the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\". A large number of her short stories were published in national magazines,such as \"Youth's Companion\" and \"Harper's Young People\". \"Bayou Folk\" was well-reviewed, with Chopin's writing about how she had seen 100 press notices about it. Those stories were published in \"The New York Times\" and \"The Atlantic\". Readers particularly liked how she used local dialects to give her characters a more authentic and relatable feel. She also published two novels: \"At Fault\" and \"The Awakening\". Her novels were not well-received initially, compared to her short stories. Her 1899 novel \"The Awakening\" was considered to be immoral due to the overt themes of female sexuality, as well as the female protagonist's constantly rebuking gender roles and norms. There have been rumors that the novel originally was banned, which have been disproved. Local and national newspapers published mixed reviews of Chopin's novel with one calling it \"poison\" and \"unpleasant\", going on to say it was \"too strong a drink for moral babes\", while another newspaper published a review calling Choppn, \"A\u00a0St. Louis Woman Who Has Turned Fame Into Literature\". The majority of the early reviews for \"The Awakening\" were largely negative. Emily Toth, one of Chopin's most well known biographers, thought she had gone too far with this novel. She argued that the protagonist Edna's blatant sensuality was too much for the male gatekeepers. So much so that publication of her next novel was cancelled.\nThe poet Orrick Johns was at least one strong advocate of Chopin and \"The Awakening\", calling her \"an\u00a0influential modernist poet and progressive journalist originally from St. Louis who was popular in Greenwich Village literary circles\". in 1911 he wrote in Reedy's Mirror: \"To one who has read her as a boy and come back to her again with powers of appreciation more subtly developed, she breathes the magic of a whole chapter in his life.\" \"...[C]redible evidence exists that Johns shared his positive views of Chopin with his literary peers, a tight-knit group that included feminist writers Susan Glaspell and Edith Summers Kelley...\" Through Johns's personal friendship with Kelley and his fierce advocacy for \"The Awakening\", it has been argued that Kelley read and was influenced by \"The Awakening\", a book once thought of as a literary dead end in terms of influence on the next generation of feminist writers. Textual comparisons between specific texts in Kelly's \"https://\" and \"The Awakening\" point toward an argument for its wider influence.\nBy the 1950s, Kate Chopin was all but forgotten. Her books were all out of print, only her story \"D\u00e9sir\u00e9e's Baby\" was in print in numerous American short story anthologies. That started to change in 1962, when noted literary critic Edmund Wilson included her as one of 30 authors discussed in \"\". Unhappy that he had to read some of her works on microfilm at the Library of Congress, Wilson urged Per Seyersted, a Norwegian who had written an article on her and who was studying in America, to focus his studies on her. Seven years later, in 1969, Seyersted published \"The Complete Works of Kate Chopin\" and a full-length biography. These two books formed the scholarly support for a rediscovery of Chopin.\nIt took a brief commentary by novelist Linda Wolfe in the September 22, 1972, issue of \"The New York Times\" to kickstart the rediscovery of Chopin by the general public. In \"There's Someone You Should Know \u2013 Kate Chopin\", she described how she encouraged friends disappointed with contemporary fiction to discover Chopin and how \"The Awakening\" spoke to her today. The last step required to bring the novel to general awareness happened almost immediately. Before the year was out, a major mass-market paperback publisher, Avon Books, had the first mass-market paperback publication of the book heading to drug stores, supermarkets, and bookstores. A blurb from Wolfe's comments was featured prominently below the title and author's name at the top of the cover: \"'Speaks to me as pertinently as any fiction published this year or last. It is uncanny, nothing else . . . A masterpiece.' Linda Wolfe, \"The New York Times\"\". Within a few years, all of the major mass-market paperback publishers had editions of \"The Awakening\" in print, making it widely available for anyone to buy.\nPer Seyersted's rediscovery of Chopin caused her work to be seen as essential feminist and Southern literature from the 19th century. Seyersted wrote that she \"broke new ground in American Literature\". According to Emily Toth, author of a recent Chopin biography, Kate Chopin's work rose in popularity and recognition during the 1970s due to themes of women venturing outside of the constraints set upon them by society, which appealed to people participating in feminist activism and the sexual revolution. She also argues that the works appealed to women in the 1960s, \"a\u00a0time when American women yearned to know about our feisty foremothers\". Academics and scholars began to put Chopin in the same feminist categories as Louisa May Alcott, Susan Warner, and Emily Dickinson. Parallels between Alcott and Chopin have been drawn to point out how both authors wrote about women who departed from their traditional roles by dreaming of or striving for independence and individual freedoms, also described as a dramatization of a woman's struggle for selfhood. A reviewer for \"Choice Reviews\" stated that it was ultimately a struggle doomed to failure because the patriarchal conventions of her society restricted her freedom. Karen Simons felt that this failed struggle was perfectly captured by the ending of the novel, where Edna Pontellier realizes that she cannot truly be both the traditional mother and have a sense of herself as an individual at the same time.\nRepresentation in other media.\nLouisiana Public Broadcasting, under president Beth Courtney, produced \"Kate Chopin: A Reawakening\", a documentary on Chopin's life.\nIn the penultimate episode of the first season of HBO's \"Treme\", set in New Orleans, the teacher Creighton (played by John Goodman) assigns Chopin's \"The Awakening\" to his freshman class at Tulane University in New Orleans, and warns them:\n\"I want you to take your time with it,\" he cautions. \"Pay attention to the language itself. The ideas. Don't think in terms of a beginning and an end. Because unlike some plot-driven entertainments, there is no closure in real life. Not really.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50100", "revid": "32005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50100", "title": "Journalist", "text": "Person who collects, writes and distributes news and similar information\nA journalist is a person who gathers information in the form of text, audio or pictures, processes it into a newsworthy form and disseminates it to the public. This process is called journalism.\nRoles.\nJournalists can work in broadcast, print, advertising, or public relations personnel. Depending on the form of journalism, \"journalist\" may also describe various categories of people by the roles they play in the process. These include reporters, correspondents, citizen journalists, editors, editorial writers, columnists, and photojournalists.\nA reporter is a type of journalist who researches, writes and reports on information in order to present using sources. This may entail conducting interviews, information-gathering and/or writing articles. Reporters may split their time between working in a newsroom, from home or outside to witness events or interview people. Reporters may be assigned a specific beat (area of coverage).\nMatthew C. Nisbet, who has written on science communication, has defined a \"knowledge journalist\" as a public intellectual who, like Walter Lippmann, Fareed Zakaria, Naomi Klein, Michael Pollan, and Andrew Revkin, sees their role as researching complicated issues of fact or science which most laymen would not have the time or access to information to research themselves, then communicating an accurate and understandable version to the public as a teacher and policy advisor.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his best-known books, \"Public Opinion\" (1922) and \"The Phantom Public\" (1925), Lippmann argued that most people lacked the capacity, time and motivation to follow and analyze news of the many complex policy questions that troubled society. Nor did they often experience most social problems or directly access expert insights. These limitations were made worse by a news media that tended to oversimplify issues and to reinforce stereotypes, partisan viewpoints and prejudices. As a consequence, Lippmann believed that the public needed journalists like himself who could serve as expert analysts, guiding \"citizens to a deeper understanding of what was really important\".\nIn 2018, the United States Department of Labor's Occupational Outlook Handbook reported that employment for the category \"reporters, correspondents and broadcast news analysts\" will decline 9 percent between 2016 and 2026.\nModern overview.\nA worldwide sample of 27,500 journalists in 67 countries in 2012\u20132016 produced the following profile:\nIn 2019 the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism Digital News Report described the future for journalists in South Africa as \"grim\" because of low online revenue and plummeting advertising.\nIn 2020 Reporters Without Borders secretary general Christophe Deloire said journalists in developing countries were suffering political interference because the COVID-19 pandemic had given governments around the world the chance \"to take advantage of the fact that politics are on hold, the public is stunned and protests are out of the question, in order to impose measures that would be impossible in normal times\".\nIn 2023 the closure of local newspapers in the US accelerated to an average of 2.5 per week, leaving more than 200 US counties as \"news deserts\" and meaning that more than half of all U.S. counties had limited access to reliable local news and information, according to researchers at the Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications at Northwestern University.\nIn January 2024, The Los Angeles Times, Time magazine and National Geographic all conducted layoffs, and Cond\u00e9 Nast journalists went on strike over proposed job cuts. The Los Angeles Times laid off more than 20% of the newsroom.\nCNN, Sports Illustrated and NBC News shed employees in early 2024. The New York Times reported that Americans were suffering from \"news fatigue\" due to coverage of major news stories like the Hamas attack, Russian invasion of Ukraine and the presidential election. American consumers turned away from journalists at legacy organizations as social media became a common news source.\nFreedom.\nJournalists sometimes expose themselves to danger, particularly when reporting in areas of armed conflict or in states that do not respect the freedom of the press. Organizations such as the Committee to Protect Journalists and Reporters Without Borders publish reports on press freedom and advocate for journalistic freedom. As of December 2024, the committee to Protect Journalists reports that 2253 journalists have been killed worldwide since 1992, either by murder (71%), crossfire or combat (17%), or on dangerous assignments (11%). The \"Ten deadliest countries\" for journalists since 1992 have been Iraq (227 deaths), Philippines (157), Mexico (153), Israel (143), Pakistan (96), Colombia (95), India (89), Russia (84), Somalia (81), Brazil (60), and Algeria (60).\nThe committee to Protect Journalists also reports that as on 1 December 2010, 145 journalists were jailed worldwide for journalistic activities. Current numbers are even higher. The ten countries with the largest number of currently-imprisoned journalists are Turkey (95), China (34), Iran (34), Eritrea (17), Burma (13), Uzbekistan (6), Vietnam (5), Cuba (4), Ethiopia (4) and Sudan (3).\nApart from physical harm, journalists are harmed psychologically. This applies especially to war reporters, but their editorial offices at home often do not know how to deal appropriately with the reporters they expose to danger. Hence, a systematic and sustainable way of psychological support for traumatized journalists is strongly needed. Few and fragmented support programs exist so far.\nOn 8 August 2023, Iran's Journalists' Day, Tehran Journalists' Association head Akbar Montajabi noted over 100 journalists arrested amid protests, while HamMihan newspaper exposed repression against 76 media workers since September 2022 following Mahsa Amini's death-triggered mass protests, leading to legal consequences for journalists including Niloufar Hamedi and Elaheh.\nRelationship with sources.\nThe relationship between a professional journalist and a source can be rather complex, and a source can sometimes have an effect on an article written by the journalist. The article 'A Compromised Fourth Estate' uses Herbert Gans' metaphor to capture their relationship. He uses a dance metaphor, \"The Tango\", to illustrate the co-operative nature of their interactions inasmuch as \"It takes two to tango\". Herbert suggests that the source often leads, but journalists commonly object to this notion for two reasons:\nThe dance metaphor goes on to state:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A relationship with sources that is \"too cozy\" is potentially compromising of journalists' integrity and risks becoming collusive. Journalists have typically favored a more robust, conflict model, based on a crucial assumption that if the media are to function as watchdogs of powerful economic and political interests, journalists must establish their independence of sources or risk the fourth estate being driven by the fifth estate of public relations.\nSafety.\nJournalists can face violence and intimidation for exercising their fundamental right to freedom of expression. The range of threats they are confronted with include murder, kidnapping, hostage-taking, offline and online harassment, intimidation, enforced disappearances, arbitrary detention and torture. Women in journalism also face specific dangers and are especially vulnerable to sexual assault, whether in the form of a targeted sexual violation, often in reprisal for their work. Mob-related sexual violence aimed against journalists covering public events; or the sexual abuse of journalists in detention or captivity. Many of these crimes are not reported as a result of powerful cultural and professional stigmas.\nIncreasingly, journalists (particularly women) are abused and harassed online, via hate speech, cyber-bullying, cyber-stalking, doxing, trolling, public shaming, intimidation and threats.\nMost dangerous year.\nAccording to Reporters Without Borders' 2018 annual report, it was the worst year on record for deadly violence and abuse toward journalists; there was a 15 percent increase in such killings since 2017, with 80 killed, 348 imprisoned and 60 held hostage.\nYaser Murtaja was shot by an Israeli army sniper. Rub\u00e9n Pat was gunned down outside a beach bar in Mexico. Mexico was described by Reporters Without Borders as \"one of world's deadliest countries for the media\"; 90% of attacks on journalists in the country reportedly go unsolved. Bulgarian Victoria Marinova was beaten, raped and strangled. Saudi Arabian dissident Jamal Khashoggi was killed inside Saudi Arabia's consulate in Istanbul.\nCommemoration.\nFrom 2008 to 2019, Freedom Forum's now-defunct Newseum in Washington, D.C. featured a Journalists Memorial which honored several thousand journalists around the world who had died or were killed while reporting the news. After the Newseum closed in December 2019, supporters of freedom of the press persuaded the United States Congress in December 2020 to authorize the construction of a memorial to fallen journalists on public land with private funds. By May 2023, the Fallen Journalists Memorial Foundation had begun the design of the memorial.\nEducation.\nIn the US, nearly all journalists have attended university, but only about half majored in journalism. Journalists who work in television or for newspapers are more likely to have studied journalism in college than journalists working for the wire services, in radio, or for news magazines.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "50107", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50107", "title": "MOD", "text": ""}
{"id": "50111", "revid": "6518951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50111", "title": "Zebu", "text": "South Asian domestic cattle\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe zebu (; Bos indicus), also known as indicine cattle and humped cattle, is a species or subspecies of domestic cattle originating in South Asia. Zebu, like many Sanga cattle breeds, differ from taurine cattle in the fatty hump on their shoulders, their large dewlap, and their sometimes-drooping ears. They are well adapted to high temperatures and are raised throughout the tropics.\nThe zebu is used as a draught and riding animal, as dairy cattle and beef cattle, and as a source of byproducts such as hides and dung for fuel and manure. Some small breeds such as Nadudana (also known as the miniature zebu) are also kept as pets.\nIn some regions, zebu have significant religious meaning.\nTaxonomy.\nBoth scientific names \"Bos taurus\" and \"Bos indicus\" were introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, with the latter used for humped cattle in China.\nThe zebu was classified as a distinct species by Juliet Clutton-Brock in 1999, but was later classified as a subspecies of the domestic cattle, \"Bos taurus indicus\", by both Clutton-Brock and Colin Groves in 2004 and by Peter Grubb in 2005. In 2011, Groves and Grubb classified it as a distinct species again.\nThe American Society of Mammalogists considers it as belonging to the species \"Bos taurus\" in analogy to Sanga cattle (\"Bos taurus africanus\" Kerr,\u00a01792).\nThe extinct wild aurochs (\"Bos primigenius\") is thought to have diverged into two distinct genetic strains: the humped \"Bos indicus\" and the humpless \"Bos taurus\".\nOrigin.\nZebu cattle were found to derive from the Indian form of aurochs and one of the key centers of the Indian Subcontinent been domesticated between 7,000 and 6,000 YBP at Mehrgarh, present-day Pakistan, by people linked to or coming from Mesopotamia, including with South India and Gujarat from Western-India being the additional centers for domestication.\nIts wild ancestor, the Indian aurochs, became extinct during the Indus Valley Civilisation likely due to habitat loss, caused by expanding pastoralism and interbreeding with domestic zebu. Its latest remains ever found were dated to 3,800 YBP, making it the first of the three aurochs subspecies to die out.\nArchaeological evidence including depictions on pottery and rocks suggests that humped cattle likely imported from the Near East was present in Egypt around 4,000 YBP. Its first appearance in the Subsahara is dated to after 700 AD and it was introduced to the Horn of Africa around 1000.\nPhylogenetic analysis revealed that all the zebu Y chromosome haplotype groups are found in three different lineages: Y3A, the most predominant and cosmopolitan lineage; Y3B, only observed in West Africa; and Y3C, predominant in south and northeast India.\nCharacteristics.\nZebu, as well as many Sanga cattle, have humps on the shoulders, large dewlaps and droopy ears.\nCompared to taurine cattle, the zebu is well adapted to the hot tropical savanna climate and steppe environments. These adaptations result in higher tolerance for drought, heat and sunlight exposure.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nStudies on the natural weaning of zebu cattle have shown that cows wean their calves over a 2-week period, but after that, continue to show strong affiliatory behavior with their offspring and preferentially choose them for grooming and as grazing partners for at least 4\u20135 years.\nReproduction.\nZebu are generally mature enough to give birth when they are 29 months old. This is based on the development of their bodies to withstand the strain of carrying the calf and lactation. Early reproduction can place too much stress on the body and possibly shorten lifespans. The gestation period averages 285 days, but varies depending on the age and nutrition of the mother. The sex of the calf may also affect the carrying time, as male calves are carried for a longer period than females. Location, breed, body weight, and season affect the overall health of the animal and in return may also affect the gestation period.\nHealth and diseases.\nThe zebu is susceptible to nagana as it does not exhibit trypanotolerance.\nIt is said to be resilient to parasites.\nBreeds and hybrids.\nZebu are very common in much of Asia, including Pakistan, India, Nepal, Bangladesh and China. In Asia, taurine cattle are mainly found in the northern regions such as Japan, Korea, northern China and Mongolia. In China, taurine cattle are most common in northern breeds, zebu more common in southern breeds, with hybrids in between.\nGeneticists at the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) in Nairobi, Kenya and in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia discovered that cattle had been domesticated in Africa independently of domestication in the Near East. They concluded that the southern African cattle populations derive originally from East Africa rather than from a southbound migration of taurine cattle. The results are inconclusive as to whether domestication occurred first in Africa or the Near East.\nSanga cattle breeds is considered to have originated from hybridization of zebu with taurine cattle leading to the Afrikaner, Red Fulani, Ankole, Boran and many other breeds.\nSome 75 breeds of zebu are known, split about evenly between African and Indian breeds.\nOther breeds of zebu are quite local, like the Hariana from Haryana, Punjab or the Rath from Alwar district, Rajasthan.\nZebu were imported into Brazil in the early 20th century. Their importation marked a change in cattle ranching in Brazil as they were considered \"ecological\" since they could graze on natural grasses, and their meat was lean and without chemical residues.\nFrom the 1960s onwards, Nelore which is an off breed of Ongole Cattle became the primary cattle breed in Brazil because of its hardiness, heat-resistance, and because it thrives on poor-quality forage and breeds easily, with the calves rarely requiring human intervention to survive. More than 80% of beef cattle in Brazil (approximately 167,000,000 animals) are either purebred or hybrid Ongole Cattle.\nUses.\nZebu are used as draught and riding animals, beef cattle, dairy cattle, as well as for byproducts such as hides, dung for fuel and manure, and horn for knife handles and the like. Zebu, mostly miniature zebu, are kept as pets. In India, the number of draft cattle in 1998 was estimated at 65.7 million head.\nZebu cows commonly have low production of milk. They do not produce milk until maturation later in their lives and do not produce much. When zebus are crossed with taurine cattle, milk production generally increases.\nIn Madagascar, zebu outnumber people, and there are an \"astonishing\" 6,813 Malagasy proverbs, common sayings, and expressions referring to zebu in parlance on the island. Zebu are wrestled by young men in a competitive ritual of courtship called \"tolon'omby\".\nWithin the Indian state of Tamil Nadu, zebu are used for jallikattu.\nIn 1999, researchers at Texas A&amp;M University successfully cloned a zebu."}
{"id": "50116", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50116", "title": "Lille", "text": " \nLille (, ; ; ; ; ) is a city in the northern part of France, within French Flanders. Positioned along the De\u00fble river, near France's border with Belgium, it is the capital of the Hauts-de-France region, the prefecture of the Nord department, and the main city of the European Metropolis of Lille.\nThe city of Lille proper had a population of 236,234 in 2020 within its small municipal territory of , but together with its French suburbs and exurbs the Lille metropolitan area (French part only), which extends over , had a population of 1,515,061 that same year (January 2020 census), the fourth most populated in France after Paris, Lyon, and Marseille. The city of Lille and 94 suburban French municipalities have formed since 2015 the European Metropolis of Lille, an indirectly elected metropolitan authority now in charge of wider metropolitan issues, with a population of 1,182,250 at the January 2020 census.\nMore broadly, Lille belongs to a vast conurbation formed with the Belgian cities of Mouscron, Kortrijk, Tournai and Menin, which gave birth in January 2008 to the Eurometropolis Lille\u2013Kortrijk\u2013Tournai, the first European Grouping of Territorial Cooperation (EGTC), which has more than 2.1 million inhabitants.\nNicknamed in France the \"Capital of Flanders\", Lille and its surroundings belong to the historical region of Romance Flanders, a former territory of the county of Flanders that is not part of the linguistic area of West Flanders. A garrison town (as evidenced by its Citadel), Lille has had an eventful history from the Middle Ages to the French Revolution. Very often besieged during its history, it belonged successively to the Kingdom of France, the Burgundian State, the Holy Roman Empire of Germany and the Spanish Netherlands before being definitively attached to the France of Louis XIV following the War of Spanish Succession along with the entire territory making up the historic province of French Flanders. Lille was again under siege in 1792 during the Franco-Austrian War, and in 1914 and 1940. It was severely tested by the two world wars of the 20th century during which it was occupied and suffered destruction.\nA merchant city since its origins and a manufacturing city since the 16th century, the Industrial Revolution made it a great industrial capital, mainly around the textile and mechanical industries. Their decline, from the 1960s onwards, led to a long period of crisis and it was not until the 1990s that the conversion to the tertiary sector and the rehabilitation of the disaster-stricken districts gave the city a different face. Today, the historic center, Old Lille, is characterized by its 17th-century red brick town houses, its paved pedestrian streets and its central Grand'Place. The belfry of the (City Hall) is one of the 23 belfries in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Somme regions that were classified as UNESCO World Heritage Sites in July 2005, in recognition of their architecture and importance to the rise of municipal power in Europe.\nThe construction of the brand-new Euralille business district in 1988 (now the third largest in France) and the arrival of the TGV and then the Eurostar in 1994 put Lille at the heart of the major European capitals. The development of its international airport, annual events such as the Braderie de Lille in early September (attracting three million visitors), the development of a student and university center (with more than 110,000 students in colleges and schools of the University of Lille and the Catholic University of Lille, the third largest in France behind Paris and Lyon), its ranking as a European Capital of Culture in 2004 and the events of Lille 2004 (European Capital of Culture) and Lille 3000 are the main symbols of this revival. The European metropolis of Lille was awarded the \"World Design Capital 2020\".\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nArcheological digs seem to show the area as inhabited by as early as 2000 BC, most notably in the modern \"quartiers\" of Fives, Wazemmes and Vieux Lille. The original inhabitants of the region were the Gauls, such as the Menapians, the Morins, the Atrebates and the Nervians, who were followed by Germanic peoples: the Saxons, the Frisians and the Franks.\nThe legend of \"Lyd\u00e9ric and Phinaert\" puts the foundation of the city of Lille at 640. In the 8th century, the language of Old Low Franconian was spoken, as attested by toponymic research. Lille's Dutch name is \"Rijsel\", which comes from \"ter ijsel\" (at the island) from Middle Dutch \"ijssel\" (\"small island, islet\"), calque of Old French l'Isle (\"the Island\"), itself from Latin \"\u012ansula\", from \"\u012bnsula\" (\"island\").\nFrom 830 to around 910, the Vikings invaded Flanders. After the destruction caused by Normans' and the Magyars' invasion, the eastern part of the region was ruled by various local princes.\nThe first mention of the town dates from 1066: \"apud Insulam\" (Latin for \"at the island\"). It was then controlled by the County of Flanders, as were the regional cities (the Roman cities Boulogne, Arras, Cambrai as well as the Carolingian cities Valenciennes, Saint-Omer, Ghent and Bruges). The County of Flanders thus extended to the left bank of the Scheldt, one of the richest and most prosperous regions of Europe.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Carolingian duke \u00c9vrard lived in the city in the 9th century and participated in many of the day's political and military affairs. There was an important Battle of Lille in 1054. Raimbert of Lille (fl. c. 1100) was an early nominalist who taught at Lille.\nFrom the 12th century, the fame of the Lille cloth fair began to grow. In 1144 Saint-Sauveur parish was formed, which would give its name to the modern-day \"quartier Saint-Sauveur\".\nThe counts of Flanders, Boulogne, and Hainaut came together with England and East Frankia and tried to regain territory taken by Philip II of France following Henry II of England's death, a war that ended with the French victory at Bouvines in 1214. Infante Ferdinand, Count of Flanders was imprisoned and the county fell into dispute: it would be his wife, Jeanne, Countess of Flanders and Constantinople, who ruled the city. She was said to be well loved by the residents of Lille, who by that time numbered 10,000.\nIn 1225, the street performer and juggler Bertrand Cordel, doubtlessly encouraged by local lords, tried to pass himself off as Baldwin I of Constantinople (the father of Jeanne of Flanders), who had disappeared at the battle of Adrianople. He pushed the counties of Flanders and Hainaut towards sedition against Jeanne in order to recover his land. She called her cousin, Louis VIII (\"The Lion\"). He unmasked the imposter, whom Countess Jeanne quickly had hanged. In 1226 the king agreed to free Infante Ferdinand, Count of Flanders. Count Ferrand died in 1233, and his daughter Marie soon after. In 1235, Jeanne granted a city charter by which city governors would be chosen each All Saint's Day by four commissioners chosen by the ruler. On 6 February 1236, she founded the Countess's Hospital (Hospice Comtesse). It was in her honour that the hospital of the Regional Medical University of Lille was named \"Jeanne of Flanders Hospital\" in the 20th century.\nThe Countess died in 1244 in the Abbey of Marquette, leaving no heirs. The rule of Flanders and Hainaut thus fell to her sister, Margaret II, Countess of Flanders, then to Margaret's son, Guy of Dampierre. Lille fell under the rule of France from 1304 to 1369, after the Franco-Flemish War (1297\u20131305).\nThe county of Flanders fell to the Burgundian State next, after the 1369 marriage of Margaret III, Countess of Flanders, and Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. Lille thus became one of the three capitals of said Duchy, along with Brussels and Dijon. By 1445, Lille counted some 25,000 residents. Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, was even more powerful than the King of France, and made Lille an administrative and financial capital.\nOn 17 February 1454, one year after the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, Philip the Good organised a Pantagruelian banquet at his Lille palace, the still-celebrated \"Feast of the Pheasant\". There the Duke and his court undertook an oath to Christianity.\nIn 1477, at the death of the last duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold, Mary of Burgundy married Maximilian of Austria, who thus became Count of Flanders.\nEarly modern era.\nThe 16th and 17th centuries were marked by a boom in the regional textile industry, the Protestant revolts and outbreaks of the Black Death.\nLille came under the rule of the Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor in 1519. The Low Countries fell to his eldest son, Philip II of Spain, in 1555. The city remained under Spanish Habsburg rule until 1668. Reformed Christianity first appeared in the area in 1542, and by 1555, the authorities were taking steps to suppress that form of Protestantism. In 1566, the countryside around Lille was affected by the Beeldenstorm. In 1578, the , a group of Protestant rebels, stormed the castle of the Counts of Mouscron. They were removed four months later by a Catholic Wallon regiment, and they tried several times between 1581 and 1582 to take the city of Lille, all in vain. The Hurlus were notably held back by the legendary .\nAlso in 1581, at the call of Elizabeth I of the Kingdom of England, the north of the Seventeen Provinces, having gained a Protestant majority, successfully revolted and formed the Dutch Republic. The war brought or exacerbated periods of famine and plague (the last in 1667\u20131679).\nThe first printer to set up shop in Lille was Antoine Tack in 1594. The 17th century saw the building of new institutions: an Irish College in 1610, a Jesuit college in 1611, an Augustinian college in 1622, almshouses or hospitals such as the Maison des Vieux hommes in 1624 and the Bonne et Forte Maison des Pauvres in 1661, and of a Mont-de-pi\u00e9t\u00e9 in 1626.\nUnsuccessful French attacks on the city were launched in 1641 and 1645. In 1667, Louis XIV successfully laid siege to Lille, resulting in it becoming French in 1668 under the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, provoking discontent among the citizens of the prosperous city. A number of important public works undertaken between 1667 and 1670, such as when S\u00e9bastien Le Prestre, Marquis of Vauban build the Citadel of Lille, or the creation of the quartiers of Saint-Andr\u00e9 and la Madeleine, enabled the French king to gradually gain the confidence of his new subjects in Lille, some of whom continued to feel Flemish, but they had always spoken the Romance Picard language.\nIn 1708, during the War of the Spanish Succession, the Grand Alliance managed to capture Lille. For five years, from 1708 to 1713, the Dutch continued to occupy the city. Throughout the 18th century, Lille remained a profoundly Catholic city. It took little part in the French Revolution, but there were riots and the destruction of churches. In 1790, the city held its first municipal elections.\nPost-French Revolution.\nIn 1792, in the aftermath of the French Revolution, the Austrians, then in the United Provinces, laid siege to Lille. The \"Column of the Goddess\", erected in 1842 in the \"Grand-Place\" (officially named Place du G\u00e9n\u00e9ral-de-Gaulle), is a tribute to the city's resistance, led by Mayor Fran\u00e7ois Andr\u00e9-Bonte. Although Austrian artillery destroyed many houses and the main church of the city, the city did not surrender, and the Austrian Army left after eight days.\nThe city continued to grow and, by 1800, had some 53,000 residents, leading to Lille becoming the seat of the Nord \"d\u00e9partement\" in 1804. In 1846, a railway connecting Paris and Lille was built. In the early 19th century, Napoleon I's continental blockade against the United Kingdom led to Lille's textile industry developing even more fully. The city was known for its cotton while the nearby towns of Roubaix and Tourcoing worked wool. Leisure activities were thoroughly organised in 1858 for the 80,000 inhabitants. Cabarets or taverns for the working class numbered 1,300, or one for every three houses. At that time the city counted 63 drinking and singing clubs, 37 clubs for card players, 23 for bowling, 13 for skittles, and 18 for archery. The churches likewise have their social organizations. Each club had a long roster of officers, and a busy schedule of banquets festivals and competitions. In 1853, Alexandre Desrousseaux composed his lullaby \"P'tit quinquin\".\nIn 1858, Lille annexed the adjacent towns of Esquermes, Fives, Moulins-Lille and Wazemmes. Lille's population was 158,000 in 1872, growing to over 200,000 by 1891. In 1896 Lille became the first city in France to be led by a socialist, Gustave Delory.\nBy 1912, Lille's population stood at 217,000. The city profited from the Industrial Revolution, particularly via coal and the steam engine. The entire region grew wealthy thanks to its mines and textile industry.\nFirst World War.\nLille's occupation by the Germans began on 13 October 1914 after a ten-day siege and heavy shelling, which destroyed 882 apartment and office blocks and 1,500 houses, mostly around the railway station and in the centre. By the end of October, the city was being run by German authorities. Because Lille was only from the battlefield, German troops passed through the city regularly on their way to and from the front. As a result, occupied Lille became a place for the hospitalisation and the treatment of wounded soldiers as well as a place for soldiers' relaxation and entertainment. Many buildings, homes and businesses were requisitioned to those ends.\nLille was liberated by the Allies on 17 October 1918, when General William Birdwood and his troops were welcomed by joyous crowds. The general was made an honorary citizen of the city of Lille on 28 October.\nThe only audio recording known to have been made during World War I was recorded near Lille in October 1918. The two-minute recording captured the Royal Garrison Artillery conducting a gas shell bombardment.\nLille was also the hunting ground of the German World War I flying ace Max Immelmann, who was nicknamed \"the Eagle of Lille\".\n\"Ann\u00e9es Folles\", Great Depression and Popular Front.\nIn July 1921, at the Pasteur Institute in Lille, Albert Calmette and Camille Gu\u00e9rin discovered the first anti-tuberculosis vaccine, known as BCG (\"Bacille de Calmette et Gu\u00e9rin\"). The Op\u00e9ra de Lille, designed by Lille architect Louis M. Cordonnier, was dedicated in 1923.\nFrom 1931, Lille felt the repercussions of the Great Depression, and by 1935, a third of the city's population lived in poverty. In 1936, the city's mayor, Roger Salengro, became Minister of the Interior of the Popular Front but eventually killed himself after right-wing groups led a slanderous campaign against him.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Battle of France, Lille was besieged by German forces for several days. When Belgium was invaded, the citizens of Lille, still haunted by the events of World War I, began to flee the city in large numbers. Lille was part of the zone under control of the German commander in Brussels, and was never controlled by the Vichy government in France. Lille was instead controlled under the military administration in Northern France. The \"d\u00e9partements\" of Nord and Pas-de-Calais (with the exception of the coast, notably Dunkirk) were for the most part liberated from 1 to 5 September 1944, by British, Canadian and Polish troops. On 3 September, German troops began to leave Lille out of fear of the British, who were on their way from Brussels. The city was liberated by a British force consisting largely of tanks.\nRationing came to an end in 1947, and by 1948, normality had returned to Lille.\nPostwar.\nIn 1967, the Chamber of Commerce of Lille, Roubaix and Tourcoing were joined, and in 1969 the \"Communaut\u00e9 urbaine de Lille\" (Lille urban community) was created, linking 87 \"communes\" with Lille.\nThroughout the 1960s and the 1970s, the region was faced with some problems after the decline of the coal, mining and textile industries. From the early 1980s, the city began to turn itself more towards the service sector.\nPierre Mauroy served as Mayor of Lille for 28 years from 1973 to 2001. Mauroy was Prime Minister for part of the term of Francois Mitterrand.\nIn 1983, the VAL, the world's first automated rapid transit underground network, opened. In 1993, a high-speed TGV train line was opened connecting Paris with Lille in one hour. This, with the opening of the Channel Tunnel in 1994 and the arrival of the Eurostar train put Lille at the centre of a triangle connecting Paris, London and Brussels.\nWork on Euralille, an urban remodelling project, began in 1991. The Euralille Centre was opened in 1994, and the remodeled district is now full of parks and modern buildings containing offices, shops and apartments. In 1994 the \"Grand Palais\" was also opened for the general public, which is free for the public to enter on the first Sunday of every month.\n21st century.\nLille was chosen as a European Capital of Culture in 2004, along with the Italian city of Genoa.\nLille and Roubaix were affected by the 2005 riots, like all of France's other urban centres.\nIn 2007 and again in 2010, Lille was awarded the label \"Internet City\".\nThe Saint-Joseph Chapel of Saint-Paul College was demolished in February 2021.\nClimate.\nLille can be described as having a temperate oceanic climate; summers normally do not reach high average temperatures, but winters can fall below freezing temperatures, though with averages still above the freezing mark. Precipitation is plentiful year round.\nThe table below gives average temperatures and precipitation levels for the 1991\u20132020 reference period.\nEnvironment.\nLille is noted for its air pollution, with a 2018 study attributing 1,700 deaths per year in the agglomeration of Lille to pollution. In 2018, Lille held France's record pollution peaks.\nPopulation.\nThe population data in the table and graph to the left below refer to the commune of Lille proper in its borders since 2000, i.e. a municipal territory of . This includes the former communes annexed by the commune of Lille: Esquermes, Fives, Moulins-Lille, and Wazemmes in 1858, Hellemmes-Lille in 1977, and Lomme in 2000.\nThe Lille metropolitan area (table to the right below), which is much larger than the small commune of Lille proper, covers a territory of (French part of the metropolitan area only) and had a population of 1,515,061 in 2020 (Jan. census).\nEconomy.\nA former major mechanical, food industry and textile manufacturing centre as well as a retail and finance center, Lille is the largest city of a conurbation, built like a network of cities: Lille, Roubaix, Tourcoing and Villeneuve-d'Ascq. The conurbation forms the M\u00e9tropole Europ\u00e9enne de Lille which is France's fourth-largest urban conglomeration with a 2016 population of over 1.15 million.\nRevenues and taxes.\nFor centuries, Lille, a city of merchants, has displayed a wide range of incomes: great wealth and poverty have lived side by side, especially until the end of the 1800s. This contrast was noted by Victor Hugo in 1851 in his poem Les Ch\u00e2timents: \u00ab \"Caves de Lille ! on meurt sous vos plafonds de pierre !\" \u00bb (\"Cellars of Lille! We die under your stone ceilings!\")\nEmployment.\nEmployment in Lille has switched over half a century from a predominant industry to tertiary activities and services. Services account for 91% of employment in 2006.\nEmployment in Lille from 1968 to 2015\nEmployment per categories in 1968 and in 2017\nUnemployment in active population from 1968 to 2017\nEnterprises.\nAt the end of 2015, Lille hosts around industry or service establishments.\nEnterprises as per 31 December 2015\nMain sights.\nLille features an array of architectural styles with various amounts of Flemish influence, including the use of brown and red brick. In addition, many residential neighborhoods, especially in Greater Lille, consist of attached two- to three-storey houses aligned in a row, with narrow gardens in the back. These architectural attributes, many uncommon in France, help make Lille a transition in France to neighboring Belgium, as well as nearby Netherlands and England, where the presence of brick, as well as row houses or the terraced house is much more prominent.\nPoints of interest include\nLa Braderie.\nLille hosts an annual braderie on the first weekend in September. Its origins are thought to date back to the twelfth century and between two and three million visitors are drawn into the city. It is one of the largest gatherings of France and the largest flea market in Europe.\nMany of the roads in the inner city (including much of the old town) are closed and local shops, residents and traders set up stalls in the street. The food of choice during the braderie is Moules frites, or mussels with french fries.\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nThe M\u00e9tropole Europ\u00e9enne de Lille has a mixed mode public transport system, which is considered one of the most modern in the whole of France. It comprises buses, trams and a driverless light metro system, all of which are operated under the Transpole name. The Lille Metro is a VAL system (\"v\u00e9hicule automatique l\u00e9ger\" = light automated vehicle) that opened on 16 May 1983, becoming the first automatic light metro line in the world. The system has two lines, with a total length of and 60 stations. The tram system consists of two interurban tram lines, connecting central Lille to the nearby communities of Roubaix and Tourcoing, and has 45 stops. Sixty-eight urban bus routes cover the metropolis, 8 of which reach into Belgium.\nRailways.\nLille is an important junction in the European high-speed rail network. It lies on the Eurostar line to London (80-minute journey). The French TGV network also puts it only 1 hour from Paris and 38 minutes from Brussels and connects it to other major centres in France such as Marseille, Lyon and Toulouse. Lille has two railway stations next to each other: Lille-Europe station (\"Gare de Lille-Europe\"), which primarily serves high-speed trains and international services (Eurostar), and Lille-Flandres station (\"Gare de Lille-Flandres\"), which primarily serves lower-speed regional trains and regional Belgian trains.\nHighways.\nFive \"autoroutes\" pass by Lille, the densest confluence of highways in France after Paris:\nA sixth one\u2014the A24\u2014would have linked Amiens to Lille if built, but the project was rejected several times then abandoned.\nAir traffic.\nLille Lesquin International Airport is 15 minutes from the city centre by car (11\u00a0km). In terms of shipping, it ranks fourth, with almost 38,000 tonnes of freight which pass through each year. Its passenger traffic, around 1.2 million in 2010, is modest due to the proximity to Brussels, Charleroi, and Paris-CDG airports. The airport mostly connects other French and European cities (some with low-cost airlines).\nWaterways.\nLille is the third-largest French river port after Paris and Strasbourg. The river De\u00fble is connected to regional waterways with over of navigable waters. The De\u00fble connects to Northern Europe via the river Scarpe and the river Scheldt (towards Belgium and the Netherlands), and internationally via the Lys (to Dunkerque and Calais).\nShipping statistics\nEducation.\nWith a student population of over 110,000 students within its metropolitan area, Lille is one of the major French student cities.\nWith roots from 1562 to 1793 as University of Douai (then as Universit\u00e9 Imp\u00e9riale in 1808), the State University of Lille was established in Lille in 1854 with Louis Pasteur as the first dean of its Faculty of Sciences. A school of medicine and an engineering school were also established in Lille in 1854 and the University of Lille was united as the association of existing public Faculties in 1896. It was then split into three independent university campuses in 1970: Lille 1 University of Science and Technology, Lille 2 University of Law and Health and Lille 3 Charles de Gaulle University of Humanities, Social sciences, Literature and Arts.\nIn early 2018, the three universities merged to form the new University of Lille (student enrollment: 70,000). The new university is part of the Community of Universities and Institutions (COMUE) Lille Nord de France and the European Doctoral College Lille Nord de France.\nFurther institutions of higher education established or active in Lille include:\nLille is also site of the University and Polytechnic Federation of Lille (F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Universitaire et Polytechnique de Lille), a large private educational university that includes a medical school, business school, law school, etc.\nMedia and sports.\nLocal newspapers include \"Nord \u00e9clair\" and \"La Voix du Nord\".\nFrance's national public television network has a channel that focuses on the local area: France 3 Nord-Pas-de-Calais.\nThe city's most successful association football club, Lille OSC, currently plays in Ligue 1, the highest level of football in France. The club has won eight major national trophies and regularly features in the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League. In the 2010\u201311 season, Lille won the league and cup double. In 2020\u201321, they won the league and supercup.\nLille's Stade Pierre-Mauroy was the playground for the final stages of the FIBA EuroBasket 2015.\nThe same venue hosted handball and basketball events at the 2024 Summer Olympics. It was in Lille that the 100th World Esperanto Congress took place, in 2015.\nLille is home to Lille Lacrosse, former national champion and continuously one of France's best lacrosse teams. The team plays its home games at Halle de glisse.\nInternational relations.\nLille is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50117", "revid": "50368418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50117", "title": "Groningen (province)", "text": "Northeasternmost province of the Netherlands\nGroningen ( , ; ; ; ) is the northeasternmost province of the Netherlands. It borders on Friesland to the west, Drenthe to the south, the German state of Lower Saxony to the east, and the Wadden Sea to the north. As of January 2023, Groningen had a population of about 596,000, and a total area of .\nHistorically the area was at different times part of Frisia, the Frankish Empire, the Holy Roman Empire, and the Dutch Republic, the precursor state of the modern Netherlands. In the 14th century, the city of Groningen became a member of the Hanseatic League.\nThe provincial capital and the largest city in the province is the city of Groningen (231,299 inhabitants). Since 2016, Ren\u00e9 Paas has been the King's Commissioner in the province. A coalition of GroenLinks, the Labour Party, ChristianUnion, People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, Democrats 66, and Christian Democratic Appeal forms the executive branch. The province is divided into 10 municipalities.\nThe land is mainly used for agriculture. There are seaports in Delfzijl and Eemshaven. The Groningen gas field, one of the world's largest, was discovered in 1959. The province is home to the University of Groningen and Hanze University of Applied Sciences.\nHistory.\nGroningen was originally a part of Frisia. It became a part of the Frankish Empire around 785. Charlemagne assigned the Christianization of this new possession to Ludger.\nIn the 11th century, the city of Groningen was a village in Drenthe that belonged to the Bishopric of Utrecht, while most of the province was in the Prince-Bishopric of M\u00fcnster.\nDuring the Middle Ages, central control was remote, and the city of Groningen acted as a city-state, exerting a dominating influence on the surrounding Ommelanden. In the 14th century, Groningen became one of the towns within the Hanseatic League. In the years after, Groningen expanded its influence. At its peak almost all of the current province Friesland was under the influence and control of Groningen.\nShortly before 1498, Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor gave Groningen and Friesland to Albert III, Duke of Saxony, who could however not establish permanent control. In 1514/15 Groningen came to the Duchy of Guelders, and in 1536 as the Lordship of Groningen to the Habsburg Netherlands.\nIn 1594, Groningen was conquered from the Spanish by the Republic of the Seven United Provinces, precursor state of the Netherlands, to which it belonged henceforth.\nDuring World War II, the Netherlands were occupied by Nazi Germany. In April 1945, the 2nd Canadian Division fought in the Battle of Groningen, which resulted in the liberation of the city and in the death of 130, the capture of 5,212, and the fleeing of 2,000 German soldiers. In May 1945, another 3,000 German soldiers were captured in the Battle of Delfzijl by the 5th Canadian Division, after which all of the northern provinces were liberated.\nEast Groningen was the scene of a particularly fierce class struggle in the 19th and 20th centuries. Perhaps not coincidentally, Groningen boasts the only municipality (Beerta) where the Communist Party of the Netherlands has ever had a mayor (Hanneke Jagersma).\nGeography.\nGroningen is situated at in the northeast of the Netherlands. To the west is the province Friesland, to the south is the province Drenthe, to the east the German districts are Leer and Emsland in the state Lower Saxony, and to the north the North Sea, Ems, and Dollart. The northernmost point of the Netherlands is on Rottumerplaat at ; the easternmost point of the Netherlands is in Bad Nieuweschans at .\nGroningen is the 7th largest province of the Netherlands. It has a total area of , with of land and of water. About 80% of the land or is used for agriculture. The rest of the land is: 9% or of built-up or semi built-up area, 6% or of nature, 3% or of infrastructure, and 2% or of recreational area.\nThe land in Groningen is flat. A large area of the province is below sea level. The Hasseberg near Sellingen of above sea level is the highest point.\nThe Groningen gas field near Slochteren is the 8th largest natural gas field in the world. Since 1986, the exploitation of this gas field has caused earthquakes in the region with magnitudes up to 3.6.\nIn the Wadden Sea of Groningen, a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 2009, are the sandbank Simonszand and the natural reserve Rottum consisting of the three uninhabited islands Rottumeroog, Rottumerplaat, and Zuiderduintjes. The national park Lauwersmeer (IUCN category II) is located on the border between Groningen and Friesland.\nSubdivisions.\nThe province of Groningen is also called Stad en Ommelanden, meaning \"City and Surrounding Lands\", referring to the eponymous city of Groningen as well as the \"surrounding lands\" of Fivelingo, Hunsingo, Oldambt, Westerkwartier, and Westerwolde.\nThe province (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics or NUTS level 2) is divided into three COROP regions (NUTS level 3): East Groningen, Delfzijl and surroundings, and the rest of Groningen. The COROP regions are used for statistical purposes.\nThe province is also divided into ten municipalities, each with its own local government. Currently, Groningen is the most populated and most densely populated municipality, containing the largest city.\nClimate.\nThe province of Groningen has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Cfb).\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOn 1 January 2023, the province of Groningen had a population of 596,075 and a population density of , which make it the 9th most populous province and 8th most densely populated province of the Netherlands. The city of Groningen is the most populous city in the province and the 6th most populous city in the Netherlands.\nOn 1 January 2013, 92.2% of the total provincial population was born in the Netherlands; and of the 7.8% that was born abroad, the ten most common foreign countries of origin are the neighbour Germany (1.09%), the former colonies and dependencies Indonesia (0.60%), Netherlands Antilles and Aruba (0.55%), Suriname (0.54%), and other countries Turkey (0.41%), Soviet Union (0.36%), China (0.32%), Poland (0,26%), Yugoslavia (0.26%), and United Kingdom (0.18%).\nReligion.\nIn 2015, 18.7% of the population belonged to the Protestant Church in the Netherlands while 4.9% was Roman Catholic, 1.3% was Muslim and 6.7% belonged to other churches or faiths. Over half (68.4%) of the population identified as non-religious.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nThe city of Groningen is the economic center of the province. In the 14th century, the city became a member of the Hanseatic League. Currently some of the city's major employers are University Medical Center Groningen with 12,141 employees, University of Groningen with 5,591 employees, Municipality of Groningen with 3,063 employees, Education Implementation Service (DUO) with 2,000 employees, and Gasunie with 1,748 employees.\nThe other economically important area is the Ems delta with the sea ports of Delfzijl and Eemshaven. In 2015, a total of 11,589 cargo vessels arrived at the two Groningen Seaports combined, 7,111 sea vessels and 4,478 inland vessels. The ports had a cargo throughput of 11,309,000 tonnes. The chemical industry near Delfzijl is located at the Chemie Park in Farmsum, with factories of AkzoNobel, Lubrizol, and Teijin Aramid. Both GDF Suez and Vattenfall have a natural gas-fired power plant in Eemshaven, and Essent is building a coal-fired power plant there.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 25 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 3.2% of the Netherlands economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 37,300 \u20ac or 124% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nIn 1959, the Groningen gas field near Slochteren was discovered, and the NAM started to exploit the field in 1963. This caused Dutch disease and induced earthquakes.\nIn 2013, Groningen had a labor force of 268,000 people and unemployment rate of 9.6%, which is the second highest unemployment for a province in the Netherlands.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nGroningen is home to the Low Saxon dialect called \"Gronings\" (\"Gr\u00f6nnegs\" / \"Grunnegs\" in Gronings regional language), In the eastern part of Friesland variations of the Groninger 'language' is spoken. Gronings has local nuances, for example, the people in the eastern part speak Gronings with more German influence. Nowadays, many inhabitants of the province do not speak the dialect, especially in the city of Groningen where many outsiders have moved.\nCuisine.\nTraditional dishes and delicacies from Groningen are boerenkoolstamppot, droge worst, krentjebrij, oudewijvenkoek, poffert, and spekdik. Traditional alcoholic drinks are boerenjongens, boerenmeisjes, fladderak, and heet bier.\nMuseums.\nMuseumhuis Groningen is an umbrella organization for museums and other heritage organizations in the province of Groningen and has 58 members. The Groninger Museum is the most visited museum in the province with 209,195 visitors in 2015. The other museums and heritage organizations with more than 25 thousand visitors in 2015 are Fort Bourtange in Bourtange, Noordelijk Scheepvaartmuseum in Groningen, Ter Apel Monastery in Ter Apel, Fraeylemaborg in Slochteren, Nationaal Bus Museum in Hoogezand, and Museumspoorlijn STAR in Stadskanaal.\nSports.\nFC Groningen from the city of Groningen is the only football club from the province in the Eredivisie. Their home stadium Euroborg has a capacity of 22,550 seats. In the 2012\u20132013 competition, FC Groningen became 7th of the 18 teams. SC Veendam played in the Eerste Divisie, but filed for bankruptcy in 2013.\nThe city of Groningen is also the base of basketball club GasTerra Flames, volleyball club Lycurgus, and korfball club Nic.\nThe ice rink at the multi-sport center Kardinge in the city of Groningen is used for national speed skating championships, most recently the 2013 KNSB Dutch Sprint Championships.\nPolitics.\nA provincial government in the Netherlands consists of a Provincial Council, the directly elected legislative branch, and a Provincial Executive, the executive branch. The King's Commissioner, who is appointed by the national government, is chairman of both branches. The Provincial Council of Groningen consists of 43 members and the Provincial Executive consists of the King's Commissioner and six deputies. The government has its seat in the city of Groningen, which is the provincial capital.\nRen\u00e9 Paas, member of the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), has been the King's Commissioner since 18 April 2016. He succeeded Max van den Berg who was the King's Commissioner in Groningen from 2007 to 2016.\nIn the provincial elections of 2011, the Labour Party became the largest party with nearly 25% of the votes and 12 seats in the Provincial Council. The next three largest parties are the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) and the Socialist Party (SP) with 6 seats each, and the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) with 5 seats. In 2011, two months after the elections, the member of the Party for the North (PvhN) continued as an independent under the name Free Mandate. The next provincial elections are planned for 18 March 2015.\nFollowing the 2011 elections, the Provincial Executive was formed by a coalition of the Labour Party, the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, Democrats 66 (D66), and GreenLeft (GL). In 2013, GreenLeft left the coalition and was replaced by the ChristianUnion (CU). The Labour Party has three deputies, the other coalition parties have one deputy each.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nIn the province of Groningen, there are three national roads (), which are maintained by Rijkswaterstaat. The motorway A7 (E22) connects the city of Groningen with the provinces of Friesland and North Holland in the west and with Winschoten and Germany in the east. The motorway is interrupted for the ring road of the city of Groningen, where it is the expressway N7. The motorway A28 (E232) starts at the city of Groningen and runs south connecting it with the provinces of Drenthe, Overijssel, Gelderland, and Utrecht. The expressway N33 runs south from Eemshaven, via Appingedam and Veendam, to Drenthe. Other roads are overseen by the province (N roads), municipalities, or water boards.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport falls under the rules for government procurement in the European Union. Tenders for regional bus and railway services are selected by the province of Groningen. Qbuzz is contracted for bus services in the period 2009\u20132015 and Arriva for railway services in the period 2005\u20132020. Nederlandse Spoorwegen operates the railway services from Groningen railway station southward to Drenthe and beyond.\nThe railway network in the Netherlands is maintained by ProRail. There are six railways located partially or entirely in the province of Groningen. The railway station Groningen connects several of these railways.\nAirports.\nThe international airport that serves Groningen is Groningen Airport Eelde, which is located in Eelde in the province of Drenthe. The airport is co-owned by the provinces of Groningen and Drenthe and the municipalities of Groningen, Assen, and Tynaarlo. Its summer destinations are Antalya, Faro, Girona, Gran Canaria, Heraklion, Kos, Palma de Mallorca, and Tenerife. Its winter destinations are Innsbruck and Salzburg. Starting on 5 June 2014, there will also be flights to London. For other international destinations, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is the nearest airport. The general aviation airports in the province are Oostwold Airport in Oostwold and Stadskanaal Airfield in Stadskanaal.\nScience and education.\nThe University of Groningen in the city of Groningen was founded in 1614 and is the only research university (\"universiteit\") in the province. On 1 September 2013, it had 29,407 students and 5,238 full-time equivalent of staff members. The university has ten faculties: Arts, Behavioural and Social Sciences, Economics and Business, Law, Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Medical Sciences, Philosophy, Spatial Sciences, Theology and Religious Studies, and University College Groningen.\nThe Hanze University of Applied Sciences, the NHL University of Applied Sciences, and the Stenden University of Applied Sciences in the city of Groningen are the province's publicly funded universities of applied sciences (\"hogescholen\").\nMedia.\nThe \"Dagblad van het Noorden\" is a regional daily newspaper based in the city of Groningen and is owned by NDC Mediagroep. It was founded in 2002 by merging the \"Nieuwsblad van het Noorden\", the \"Groninger Dagblad\", and the \"Drentse Courant\". In 2015, the newspaper had a circulation of 96,515.\nRTV Noord is a regional public broadcaster of radio and television based in the city of Groningen, with Radio Noord and TV Noord. Their radio station has 121,000 daily listeners and a market share of 28% (2012) and their TV station has 171,000 daily viewers and a market share of 26.7% (2012).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50118", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50118", "title": "Groningen", "text": "City and municipality in the Netherlands\nGroningen ( , ; ; or ) is the capital city and main municipality of Groningen province in the Netherlands. Dubbed the \"capital of the north\", Groningen is the largest city as well as the economic and cultural centre of the northern part of the country; as of January 2025, it had 244,807 inhabitants, making it the sixth largest city/municipality in the Netherlands and the second largest outside the Randstad. The Groningen metropolitan area has a population of about half a million inhabitants.\nGroningen was established more than 980 years ago but never gained city rights. Due to its relatively isolated location from the then successive Dutch centres of power (Utrecht, The Hague, Brussels), Groningen was historically reliant on itself and nearby regions. As a Hanseatic city, it was part of the North German trade network, but later it mainly became a regional market centre. At the height of its power in the 15th century, Groningen could be considered an independent city-state and it remained autonomous until the late 18th century, when it was incorporated into the Napoleonic Batavian Republic.\nToday Groningen is a university city, home to some of the country's leading higher education institutes; University of Groningen (\"Rijksuniversiteit Groningen\"), which is the Netherlands's second oldest university, and Hanze University of Applied Sciences (\"Hanzehogeschool Groningen\"). Students comprise an estimated 25% of its total population, making it the country's demographically youngest city (although Urk is the youngest municipality overall).\nEtymology.\nThe origin and meaning of 'Groningen' and its older variant, 'Groeningen', are uncertain. A folk origin story relates the idea that, in 453 BC, exiles from Troy who were guided by a mythical figure called Gruno (or Grunius, Gryns or Grunus), along with a group of Phrygians from Germany, founded a settlement in what is now Groningen, and built a castle on the bank of the Hunze, which they called 'Grunoburg', and which was later destroyed by the Vikings.\nOne modern theory is that 'Groningen' meant 'among the people of Groni' ('Groningi' and 'Groninga' in the 11th century), derived from \"Gronesbeke\", which was the old name for a small lake near the Hunze (on the northern border of Zuidlaarderveen). As the name Grone (variant Groene) is an old Frisian personal name, the origin may very well be in a settlement originally founded by the family of Grone and their followers, which in Frisian would be called Groninga. Another theory is that the name was derived from the word \"groenighe\", meaning 'green fields'. \nIn Frisian, it is called \"Grins\". In Groningen province, it is called \"Groot Loug\". Regionally, it is often simply referred to as \"Stad\" (the \"city\"), and its inhabitants are referred to as \"Stadjers\" or \"Stadjeder\". The Dutch sometimes refer to it as \"the Metropolis of the North\", or \"Martinistad\" (after the \"Martinitoren\" tower).\nHistory.\nThe city was founded at the northernmost point of the \"Hondsrug\" area. While the oldest document referring to Groningen's existence dates from 1040, the area was occupied by Anglo-Saxons centuries prior. The oldest archaeological evidence of a settlement in the region stems from around 3950\u20133650 BC, and the first major settlement in Groningen trace back to the year 3 AD.\nIn the 13th century Groningen was an important trade centre and its inhabitants built a city wall to underline its authority. The city had a strong influence on its surrounding lands and the Gronings dialect became common. The city's most influential period was at the end of the 15th century, when the nearby province of Friesland was administered from Groningen. During these years the \"Martinitoren\" was built which is considered to be the city's most significant landmark.\nIn 1536, Groningen accepted Emperor Charles V, the King of Spain and the Habsburg ruler of the other Netherlands as its ruler, thus ending the region's autonomy. The city was captured in the Siege of Groningen (1594) by the Dutch and English forces led by Maurice of Nassau. After the siege, the city and the province joined the Dutch Republic.\nDuring the 17th century, Groningen served as a crucial hub for the Dutch West India Company (WIC). This powerful trading company was responsible for maritime trade, colonization, and the transportation of goods and people.\nThe WIC transported over 300,000 slaves from the African coast to the Dutch colonies between 1621 and 1792. Warships like the \"Groeningen\" sailed from Groningen's shipyards to Africa's west coast, carrying enslaved Africans to plantations in Brazil, Suriname, and the Antilles. These same ships returned to Europe laden with valuable commodities such as sugar, coffee, and tobacco.\nThe University of Groningen was founded in 1614 with initial course offerings in law, medicine, theology and philosophy. During this period the city expanded rapidly and a new city wall was built.\nThe Siege of Groningen (1672) led by the bishop of M\u00fcnster, Bernhard von Galen, during the Third Anglo-Dutch War failed and the city walls resisted; an event that is celebrated annually with music and fireworks on 28 August as \"\"Gronings Ontzet\" or \"Bommen Berend\"\" (\"Bombing Bernard\"). In the early 19th century when the kingdom of Holland under king Jer\u00f4me Bonaparte was founded, Groningen was integrated into the French system of administration, and then annexed in 1811 into the French Empire under emperor Napoleon I (until 1813). During the French administration of the area, Groningen was called \"Groningue\". \nDuring World War II, the main square and the Grote Markt were largely destroyed in the Battle of Groningen in April 1945. However, the church \"Martinitoren\", the \"Goudkantoor\", and the city hall were undamaged.\nGeography.\nThere is a town named after Groningen in Saramacca District, Suriname, a former Dutch colony. It was named after the hometown of Dutch governor-general of Suriname Jan Wichers, who established the town as a fort in 1790.\nCanals.\nNumerous canals () surround the city, locally called . The major canals that travel from the city are the Van Starkenborgh Canal, Eems Canal, and Winschoterdiep. Groningen's canals, no longer used for commercial goods transport, were once vital hubs in trade and transport. The rivers crossing close to the Binnenstad have been used for trade for at least a thousand years. The Dutch West India Company and foreign investors established their Groningen headquarters in Reitemakersrijge. Additional warehouses were strategically built along the canals at Noorderhaven to store colonial produce. These warehouses often held goods obtained from plantations in the Dutch colonies.\nClimate.\nGroningen has an oceanic temperate climate, like all of the Netherlands, although slightly colder in winter than other major cities in the Netherlands due to its northeasterly position. Weather is influenced by the North Sea to the north-west and its prevailing north-western winds and gales.\nSummers are somewhat warm and humid. Temperatures of or higher occur sporadically; the average daytime high is around . Very rainy periods are common, especially in spring and summer. Average annual precipitation is about . Annual sunshine hours vary, but are usually below 1600\u00a0hours, giving much cloud cover similar to most of the Netherlands. Climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is \"\". (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).\nWinters are cool; on average above freezing, although frosts are common during spells of easterly winds. Night-time temperatures of or lower are not uncommon during cold winter periods. The lowest temperature ever recorded is on 16 February 1956. Snow often falls, but rarely stays long due to warmer daytime temperatures, although white snowy days happen every winter.\nEconomy.\nHotel and catering industries constitute a significant part of the economy in Groningen. Focus on business services has increased over time and areas such as IT, life sciences, tourism, energy, and environment have developed.\nUntil 2008 there were two major beet sugar factories within the city. The Suiker Unie plant was constructed in the outskirts of Groningen, but became a part of the city due to expansion. The factory had 98 employees before it was closed in 2008 due to a reduction in demand. As of 2017, Vierverlaten sugar factory in Hoogkerk remains the only beet sugar production plant in the city. Other notable companies from Groningen include publishing company Noordhoff Uitgevers, tobacco company Niemeyer, cooperative health insurance company Menzis, distillery Hooghoudt, and natural gas companies GasUnie and GasTerra.\nDemographics.\nImmigration.\nAs of 2020, Groningen had a total population of 232,874 people.\nReligion.\nThe majority of people in Groningen, slightly more than 70%, are non-religious. With 25.1%, the largest religion in Groningen is Christianity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation growth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The municipality of Groningen has grown rapidly. In 1968 it expanded by mergers with Hoogkerk and Noorddijk, and in 2019 it merged with Haren and Ten Boer.\nAll historical data are for the original city limits, excluding Hoogkerk, Noorddijk, Haren and Ten Boer.\nIt has a land area of , and a total area, including water, of . Its population density is 1,367 residents per km2 (3,540 per square mile). On 1 January 2019, it was merged with the municipalities of Ten Boer and Haren. The Groningen-Assen metropolitan area has about half a million inhabitants.\nCulture.\nGroningen is nationally known as the \"Metropolis of the North\". The city is regarded as the main urban centre of the Northern part of the country, particularly in the fields of education, business, music and other arts. It is also known as \"Martinistad\", referring to the tower of the \"Martinitoren\", which is named after Groningen's patron saint Martin of Tours. The large student population also contributes to the very diverse cultural scene for a city of its size.\nSince 2016 Groningen has been host of the International Cycling Film Festival, an annual film festival for bicycle related films. It takes place in the art house cinema of the old Roman Catholic Hospital.\nThe first major international chess tournament after World War II was held in Groningen in 1946. The tournament, won by Mikhail Botvinnik of the USSR, was the first time the Soviet Union had sent a team to a foreign event. An international chess \"Schaakfestival Groningen tournament\" has been held in the city in most years since 1946.\nMuseums.\nGroningen is home to the Groninger Museum. Its new building designed by Alessandro Mendini in 1994 echoes the Italian post-modern concepts and is notable for its futuristic and colourful style. The city has a maritime museum, a university museum, a comics museum and a graphics museum. Groningen is also the home of Noorderlicht, an international photographic platform that runs a photo gallery and organizes an international photo festival. The Forum Groningen that opened in 2019 is a cultural center consisting of a museum, art cinema, library, bars, rooftop terrace and tourist information office.\nTheatre and music.\nGroningen has a city theatre called the Stadsschouwburg, located on the Turfsingel, a theatre and concert venue called Martini Plaza, and a cultural venue on the Trompsingel, called the Oosterpoort. Vera is located on the Oosterstraat, the Grand Theatre on the Grote Markt, and Simplon on the Boterdiep. Several caf\u00e9s feature live music, a few of which specialize in jazz music, including the \"Jazzcafe De Spieghel\" on the Peperstraat. Groningen is the host city for Eurosonic Noorderslag, an annual music showcase event for bands from across Europe.\nNightlife.\nGroningen's active nightlife depends largely on its student population, with the Grote Markt, Vismarkt, Poelestraat and Peperstraat crowded nightly, most bars not closing until five in the morning. From 2005 to 2007, Groningen was named \"best city centre\" of the Netherlands. Groningen has a red-light district, called \"Nieuwstad\".\nSports.\nFC Groningen, founded in 1971, is the local football club, and as of 2000 they play in the Eredivisie, the highest football league of the Netherlands. Winners of the KNVB Cup in the 2014\u201315 season, their best Eredivisie result was in the 1990\u201391 season when they finished third. Their current stadium which opened in January 2006 has 22,525 seats. It is called the Hitachi Capital Mobility Stadion; it was known as the \"Euroborg stadium\" before 2016, and \"Noordlease Stadion\" from 2016 to 2018.\nAmerican sports are fairly popular in Groningen; it has American football, baseball, and basketball clubs. Groningen's professional basketball club Donar play in the highest professional league, the Dutch Basketball League, and have won the national championship seven times. The Groningen Giants are the American football team of the city who play in the premier league of the AFBN and are nicknamed as the \"Kings of the North\".\nThe running event called 4 Miles of Groningen takes place in the city on the second Sunday of October every year with over 23,000 participants. The 2002 Giro d'Italia began in Groningen, including the prologue and the start of the first stage. The city hosted the start and finish of the fifth stage of the 2013 Energiewacht Tour.\nEducation.\nAs of 2020, around 25% of the 230,000 inhabitants in Groningen are students. The city has the highest density of students and the lowest mean age in the Netherlands.\nThere are also Middle Schools, such as H.N. Werkman College\nThe University of Groningen (in Dutch: \"Rijksuniversiteit Groningen\"), established in 1614 is the second oldest university in the Netherlands (after the University of Leiden). The university educated the country's first female student, Aletta Jacobs, the first Dutch national astronaut, Wubbo Ockels, the first president of the European Central Bank, Wim Duisenberg, and two Nobel laureates; Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (in Physics) and Ben Feringa (in Chemistry). The university has about 31,000 students 22% of whom are international.\nThe Hanze University of Applied Sciences (in Dutch: \"Hanzehogeschool Groningen\") was founded in 1986 and is more focused on the practical application of knowledge, offering bachelor and master courses in fields like Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Communication and Multimedia Design, and Renewable Energy. With around 8.1% international students, Hanze hosts more than 28,000 students and is one of the largest universities of applied sciences by enrollment in the Netherlands.\nPolitics.\nThe Groningen municipal council has 45 members which, after the 2022 local elections, was made up as follows:\nFrom 2022, the ruling municipal coalition consisted of GroenLinks, PvdA, Party for the Animals, the Socialist Party and ChristenUnie.\nInternational relations.\nGroningen is twinned with the following cities:\nGroningen also has a trilateral partnership with the nearby northern German cities of Bremen and Oldenburg.\nTransport.\nCycling and walking.\nGroningen is known as the \"World Cycling City\"; around 57% of its residents use a bicycle for regular commute within the city. In 2000, Groningen was chosen as the \"Fietsstad 2002\", the top cycle-city in the Netherlands for 2002. Similar to most Dutch cities, Groningen has developed to accommodate a large number of cyclists. An extensive network of bike paths were planned to make it more convenient to cycle to various destinations instead of taking a car.\nThe city has segregated cycle-paths, public transport, and a large pedestrianised zone in the city centre. Groningen's city centre was remodeled into a \"pedestrian priority zone\" to promote walking and biking. This was achieved by applying the principle of filtered permeability\u2014the network configuration favours active transportation and selectively \"filters out\" traveling in a car by reducing the number of streets that run through the centre. The streets that are discontinuous for cars connect to a network of pedestrian and bike paths which permeate the entire centre. In addition, these paths go through public squares and open spaces, increasing aesthetic appeal and encouraging participation. The logic of filtering a mode of transport is fully expressed in a comprehensive model for laying out neighbourhoods and districts\u2014the fused grid.\nPublic transport.\nTrains.\nGroningen railway station (in Dutch: \"Hoofdstation\") is the main railway station and has regular services to most of the major cities in the country. The city's remaining two railway stations are Europapark and Noord.\nGroningen has six railway routes:\nOn those six routes, ten lines stop at:\nBuses.\nGroningen has bus lines and Q-Link\u2014a network of buses similar to a tram/metro network.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDirect bus routes from Groningen to Bremen, Hamburg, Berlin, and Munich are also available.\nMotorways.\nThe A28 motorway connects Groningen to Utrecht (via Assen, Zwolle and Amersfoort). The A7 motorway connects it to Friesland and Zaandam (West), and Winschoten and Leer (East).\nAirport.\nGroningen Airport Eelde is an international airport located near Eelde, in Drenthe, with scheduled services to Guernsey, Gran Canaria, Antalya, Crete, Mallorca and Bodrum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50122", "revid": "30973818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50122", "title": "Yuri Andropov", "text": "Leader of the Soviet Union from 1982 to 1984\nYuri Vladimirovich Andropov (15\u00a0June\u00a0[O.S. 2 June]\u00a01914 \u2013 9 February 1984) was a Soviet politician who served as the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from late 1982 until his death in 1984. He previously served as the Chairman of the KGB from 1967 until 1982.\nEarlier in his career, Andropov served as the Soviet ambassador to Hungary from 1954 to 1957. During this period, he took part in the suppression of the 1956 Hungarian Uprising. Later under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev, he was appointed chairman of the KGB on 10 May 1967. As Brezhnev's health deteriorated from the mid-1970s onward, Andropov began to increasingly dictate Soviet policy alongside Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Defense Minister Dmitry Ustinov.\nUpon Brezhnev's death on 10 November 1982, Andropov succeeded him as General Secretary and, by extension, as the leader of the Soviet Union. Subsequently, he sought to implement reforms to eliminate corruption and economic inefficiency in the country by criminalizing truancy in the workplace and investigating longtime officials for violations of party discipline. Under Andropov's leadership, while the regime struggled to handle the growing crisis in the Soviet economy. His major long\u2011term impact was bringing to the fore a new generation of young reformers as energetic as himself, including Yegor Ligachyov, Nikolai Ryzhkov, and, most importantly, Mikhail Gorbachev. \nUpon suffering kidney failure in February 1983, Andropov's health began to deteriorate rapidly. He died aged 69 on 9 February 1984, having led the country for about 15 months.\nEarly life.\nThere has been much contention over Andropov's family background. According to the official biography, Andropov was born in Stanitsa Nagutskaya (modern-day Stavropol Krai, Russia) on 15 June 1914. His father, Vladimir Konstantinovich Andropov, was a railway worker of Don Cossack descent who died of typhus in 1919. His mother, Yevgenia Karlovna Fleckenstein (none of the official sources mention her name), was a school teacher who died in 1931. She was born in the Ryazan Governorate into a family of town dwellers and was abandoned on the doorstep of Jewish watchmaker and Finnish citizen Karl Franzevich Fleckenstein, who lived in Moscow. He and his wife, Eudoxia Mikhailovna Fleckenstein, adopted and raised her.\nAndropov's earliest documented name was Grigory Vladimirovich Andropov-Fyodorov which he changed to Yuri Andropov several years later. His original birth certificate disappeared, but it has been established that Andropov was born in Moscow, where his mother worked at a women's gymnasium from 1913 to 1917.\nOn various occasions, Andropov gave different death dates for his mother: 1927, 1929, 1930 and 1931. The story of her adoption was also likely a mystification. In 1937, Andropov was vetted when he applied for Communist Party membership, and it turned out that \"the sister of his native maternal grandmother\" (whom he called his aunt), who was living with him and who supported the legend of his Ryazan peasant origins, was in fact his nurse, who had been working for Fleckenstein long before Andropov was born.\nIt was also reported that Andropov's mother came from a line of merchants. Karl Fleckenstein was the rich proprietor of a jewellery business which was run by his wife after his death in 1915 when he was mistaken for a German during the infamous anti-German pogrom in Moscow and killed, although Andropov characterized the pogrom as anti-Jewish. The whole family could have been turned into lishentsy and stripped of basic rights had she not abandoned the store after another pogrom in 1917, invented a proletarian background, and left Moscow for the Stavropol Governorate along with Andropov's mother.\nAndropov gave different versions of his father's fate: in one, he divorced his mother soon after his birth; in another he died of illness. The \"father\" in question, Vladimir Andropov, was in fact his stepfather, who lived and worked in Nagutskaya and died of typhus in 1919. The Fyodorov surname belonged to his second stepfather, Viktor Fyodorov, a machinist's assistant turned schoolteacher. Andropov's biological father is unknown; he probably died in 1916, a date in Andropov's 1932 r\u00e9sum\u00e9. During the 1937 vetting, it was reported that his father served as an officer in the Imperial Russian Army. Andropov joined the Communist Party in 1939.\nEarly career in the Communist Party.\nAndropov was educated at the Rybinsk Water Transport Technical College and graduated in 1936. As a teenager he worked as a loader, a telegraph clerk, and a sailor for the Volga steamship line. At 16, then a member of the All-Union Leninist Young Communist League (YCL, or Komsomol), Andropov was a worker in the town of Mozdok in the North Ossetian ASSR.\nAndropov became full-time secretary of the YCL of the Rybinsk Water Transport Technical School and was soon promoted to organizer of the YCL Central Committee at the Volodarsky Shipyards in Rybinsk. In 1938, he was elected First Secretary of the Yaroslavl Regional Committee of the YCL and was First Secretary of the Central Committee of Komsomol in the Soviet Karelo-Finnish Republic from 1940 to 1944.\nAccording to his official biography, during World War II Andropov took part in partisan guerrilla activities in Finland although modern researchers have found no trace of his supposed squad. From 1944 onward, he left Komsomol for Communist Party work. Between 1946 and 1951, he studied at the university of Petrozavodsk. In 1947, he was elected Second Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Karelo-Finnish SSR.\nIn 1951, Andropov was transferred to the CPSU Central Committee. He was appointed an inspector and then the head of a subdepartment of the committee.\nSuppression of the Hungarian Uprising.\nIn July 1954, Andropov was appointed Ambassador to Hungary. He held this position during the 1956 Hungarian Revolution. Andropov played a key role in crushing the uprising. He convinced Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev that military intervention was necessary. Andropov is known as \"The Butcher of Budapest\" for his ruthless suppression of the uprising. Hungarian leaders were arrested and Imre Nagy and others executed.\nAfter these events, Andropov suffered from a \"Hungarian complex\", according to historian Christopher Andrew: \"He had watched in horror from the windows of his embassy as officers of the hated Hungarian security service [the \"\u00c1llamv\u00e9delmi Hat\u00f3s\u00e1g\" (AVH)] were strung up from lampposts. Andropov remained haunted for the rest of his life by the speed with which an apparently all-powerful Communist one-party state had begun to topple. When other Communist regimes later seemed at risk \u2013 in Prague in 1968, in Kabul in 1979, in Warsaw in 1981, he was convinced that, as in Budapest in 1956, only armed force could ensure their survival\".\nChairmanship of the KGB and Politburo career.\nIn 1957, Andropov returned to Moscow from Budapest in order to head the Department for Liaison with Communist and Workers' Parties in Socialist Countries, a position he held until 1967. In 1961, he was elected full member of the CPSU Central Committee and was promoted to the Secretariat of the CPSU Central Committee in 1962. In 1967, he was relieved of his work in the Central Committee apparatus and appointed head of the KGB on Mikhail Suslov's recommendation and promoted to candidate member of the Politburo. In 1970, out of concern that the burial place of Joseph and Magda Goebbels and their children would become a shrine to neo-Nazis, Andropov authorized an operation to destroy the remains that were buried in Magdeburg in 1946. The remains were thoroughly burned and crushed, and the ashes thrown into the Biederitz River, a tributary of the nearby Elbe. No proof exists that the Russians ever found Adolf Hitler's body, but it is presumed that Hitler and Eva Braun were among the remains as 10 or 11 bodies were exhumed. Andropov gained additional powers in 1973 when he was promoted to full member of the Politburo.\nCrushing the Prague Spring.\nDuring the Prague Spring in 1968, Andropov was the main advocate of taking \"extreme measures\" against Czechoslovakia. According to classified information released by Vasili Mitrokhin, the \"KGB whipped up the fear that Czechoslovakia could fall victim to NATO aggression or to a coup\". At this time, agent Oleg Kalugin reported from Washington that he had gained access to \"absolutely reliable documents proving that neither the CIA nor any other agency was manipulating the Czechoslovak reform movement\". His message was destroyed because it contradicted the conspiracy theory Andropov had fabricated. Andropov ordered a number of active measures, collectively known as operation PROGRESS, against Czechoslovak reformers during the Normalization period.\nSuppression of dissidents.\n Throughout his career, Andropov aimed to achieve \"the destruction of dissent in all its forms\" and insisted that \"the struggle for human rights was a part of a wide-ranging imperialist plot to undermine the foundation of the Soviet state\". To this end, he launched a campaign to eliminate all opposition in the USSR through a mixture of mass arrests, involuntary commitments to psychiatric hospitals, and pressure on rights activists to emigrate. These measures were meticulously documented throughout his time as KGB chairman by the underground Chronicle of Current Events, a samizdat publication that was itself finally forced out of existence after its 30 June 1982 issue.\nOn 3 July 1967, Andropov proposed to establish the KGB's Fifth Directorate to deal with the political opposition (ideological coun\u00adter\u00adin\u00adtel\u00adli\u00adgence). At the end of July, the directorate was established and entered in its files cases of all Soviet dissidents, including Andrei Sakharov and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. In 1968, as KGB chairman, Andropov issued the order \"On the tasks of State security agencies in combating the ideological sabotage by the adversary\", calling for struggle against dissidents and their imperialist masters.\nAfter the assassination attempt against Brezhnev in January 1969, Andropov led the interrogation of the captured gunman, Viktor Ivanovich Ilyin. Ilyin was pronounced insane and sent to Kazan Psychiatric Hospital. On 29 April 1969, Andropov submitted to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union an elaborate plan to create a network of psychiatric hospitals to defend the \"Soviet Government and socialist order\" from dissidents. In January 1970, Andropov submitted an account to his fellow Politburo members of the widespread threat of the mentally ill to the regime's stability and security. His proposal to use psychiatry for struggle against dissidents was implemented. As head of the KGB, Andropov was in charge of the widespread deployment of psychiatric repression. According to Yuri Felshtinsky and Boris Gulko, Andropov and the head of the Fifth Directorate, Filipp Bobkov, originated the idea to use psychiatry for punitive purposes.\nThe repression of dissidents was a big part of Andropov's agenda and targeted such prominent figures as Andrei Sakharov and Roy Medvedev. Some believe that Andropov was behind the deaths of Fyodor Kulakov and Pyotr Masherov, the two youngest members of the Soviet leadership. A declassified document revealed that as KGB director, Andropov gave the order to prevent unauthorized gatherings mourning John Lennon.\nBeginning in January 1972, Andropov led the implementation of the Soviet d\u00e9tente strategy.\nIn 1977, Andropov convinced Brezhnev that the Ipatiev House, where Tsar Nicholas II and his family were murdered by Bolshevik revolutionaries during the Russian Civil War, had become a site of pilgrimage for covert monarchists. With the Politburo's approval, the house, deemed to be not of \"sufficient historical significance\", was demolished in September 1977, less than a year before the murders' 60th anniversary.\nAccording to Yaakov Kedmi, Andropov was particularly keen to persecute any sign of Zionism in order to distance himself from his Jewish heritage. He was personally responsible for orchestrating the arrest and persecution of Soviet Jewish activist Natan Sharansky.\nRole in the invasion of Afghanistan.\nIn March 1979, Andropov and the Politburo initially opposed military intervention in Afghanistan. Among their concerns were that the international community would blame the USSR for its \"aggression\" and that the upcoming SALT II negotiation meeting with U.S. President Jimmy Carter would be derailed. Andropov changed his mind after the assassination of Nur Muhammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin's seizure of power. He became convinced that the CIA had recruited Amin to create a pro-Western expansionist \"New Great Ottoman Empire\" that would attempt to dominate Soviet Central Asia. Andropov's bottom line, \"under no circumstances can we lose Afghanistan\", led him and the Politburo to invade Afghanistan on 24 December 1979. The invasion led to the extended Soviet\u2013Afghan War (1979\u20131989) and a boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympic Games in Moscow by 66 countries, something of concern to Andropov since spring 1979. Some have proposed that the Soviet\u2013Afghan War also played an important role in the Soviet Union's dissolution.\nRole in the non-invasion of Poland.\nOn 10 December 1981, in the face of Poland's Solidarity movement, Andropov, Soviet Second Secretary Mikhail Suslov, and Polish First Secretary Wojciech Jaruzelski persuaded Brezhnev that it would be counterproductive for the Soviet Union to invade Poland by repeating the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia to suppress the Prague Spring. This effectively marked the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine. The pacification of Poland was thus left to Jaruzelski, Kiszczak and their Polish forces.\nPromotion of Gorbachev.\nFrom 1980 to 1982, while still chair of the KGB, Andropov opposed plans to occupy Poland after the emergence of the Solidarity movement and promoted reform-minded party cadres, including Mikhail Gorbachev. Andropov was the longest-serving KGB chairman and did not resign as head of the KGB until May 1982, when he was again promoted to the Secretariat to succeed Mikhail Suslov as secretary responsible for ideological affairs.\nLeader of the Soviet Union (1982\u20131984).\nTwo days after Brezhnev's death, on 12 November 1982, Andropov was elected general secretary of the CPSU, the first former head of the KGB to become general secretary. His appointment was received in the West with apprehension in view of his roles in the KGB and in Hungary. At the time his personal background was a mystery in the West, with major newspapers printing detailed profiles of him that were inconsistent and in several cases fabricated.\nAndropov divided responsibilities in the Politburo with his chief deputy, Konstantin Chernenko. Andropov took control of organizing the work of the Politburo, supervising national defense, supervising the main issues of domestic and foreign policy and foreign trade, and making leadership assignments in the top ranks of the party and the government. Chernenko handled espionage, KGB, the Interior Ministry, party organs, ideology, organizational matters, propaganda, culture, science, and higher education. He was also given charge of the Central Committee. It was far too much for Chernenko to handle, and other Politburo members were not given major assignments.\nDomestic policy.\nEconomy.\nAt home, Andropov attempted to improve the USSR's economy by increasing its workforce's efficiency. He cracked down on Soviet laborers' lack of discipline by decreeing the arrest of absentee employees and penalties for tardiness. For the first time, the facts about economic stagnation and obstacles to scientific progress were made available to the public and open to criticism. Furthermore, Andropov gave select industries greater autonomy from state regulations and enabled factory managers to retain control over more of their profits. Such policies resulted in a 4% rise in industrial output and increased investment in new technologies such as robotics.\nDespite such reforms, Andropov refused to consider any changes that sought to dispense with the Planned economy introduced under Joseph Stalin. In his memoirs, Gorbachev wrote that when Andropov was the leader, Gorbachev and Gosplan chairman Nikolai Ryzhkov asked him for access to real budget figures. \"You are asking too much\", Andropov responded. \"The budget is off limits to you.\"\nAnti-corruption campaign.\nIn contrast to Brezhnev's policy of avoiding conflicts and dismissals, Andropov began to fight violations of party, state and labor discipline, which led to significant personnel changes during an anti-corruption campaign against many of Brezhnev's cronies. During his 15 months in office, Andropov dismissed 18 ministers and 37 first secretaries of obkoms, kraikoms and Central Committees of Communist Parties of Soviet Republics, and criminal cases against high-level party and state officials were started. Biographers including Solovyov and Klepikova and Zhores Medvedev have discussed the complex possibilities underlying the motivations of anti-corruption campaigning in the Soviet Union during the 1970s and early 1980s: it is true that Andropov fought corruption for moral, ethical, ascetic, and ideological reasons, but it was also an effective way for party members from the police and security organizations to defeat competitors for power at the party's senior levels. Thus Andropov himself, as well as such prot\u00e9g\u00e9s as Eduard Shevardnadze, could advance their power by the same efforts that also promised to be better for the country in terms of justice, economic performance, and even defense readiness (which depended on economic performance). Part of the complexity is that in the Brezhnev era, corruption was pervasive and implicitly tolerated (though officially denied), and many members of the police and security organizations participated in it to various degrees, but only those organizations had access to the power to measure it and monitor its details. In such an environment, anti-corruption campaigning is a way for police and security people to appear to be cleaning up villains' malfeasance and coincidentally increasing their own power, when in fact one set of antiheroes may be defeating another set in a morally gray power struggle.\nForeign policy.\nAndropov faced a series of foreign policy crises: the hopeless situation of the Soviet army in Afghanistan, threatened revolt in Poland, growing animosity with China, the polarization threat of war in the Middle East, and civil strife in Ethiopia and South Africa. The most critical threat was the \"Second Cold War\" U.S. President Ronald Reagan launched, and the specific attack of rolling back what he called the \"Evil Empire\". Reagan used American economic power and Soviet economic weakness to escalate massive spending on the Cold War, emphasizing technology that Moscow lacked. The main response was to raise the Soviet military budget to 70% of the total budget and supply billions of dollars of military aid to Syria, Iraq, Libya, South Yemen, the Palestine Liberation Organization, Cuba, and North Korea. That included tanks and armored troop carriers, hundreds of fighter planes, anti-aircraft systems, artillery systems, and other high\u2011tech equipment of which the USSR was its allies' main supplier. Andropov's main goal was to avoid an open war.\nIn foreign policy, the conflict in Afghanistan continued even though Andropov, who now felt the invasion was a mistake, half-heartedly explored options for a negotiated withdrawal. Andropov's rule was also marked by deterioration of relations with the United States. During a much-publicized \"walk in the woods\" with Soviet dignitary Yuli Kvitsinsky, American diplomat Paul Nitze suggested a compromise for reducing nuclear missiles in Europe on both sides that the Politburo ignored. Kvitsinsky later wrote that, despite his efforts, the Soviet leadership was not interested in compromise, instead calculating that peace movements in the West would force the Americans to capitulate. On 8 March 1983, Reagan called the Soviet Union an \"evil empire\". On 23 March, he announced the Strategic Defense Initiative. Reagan claimed this research program into ballistic missile defense was \"consistent with our obligations under the ABM Treaty\". Andropov dismissed this claim, saying, \"It is time they [Washington] stopped ... search[ing] for the best ways of unleashing nuclear war. ... Engaging in this is not just irresponsible. It is insane\".\nIn August 1983, Andropov made an announcement that the USSR would stop all work on space-based weapons. One of his most notable acts as leader of the Soviet Union was in response to a letter from a 10-year-old American child, Samantha Smith, inviting her to the Soviet Union. She came, but he was too ill to meet with her, thus revealing his grave condition to the world. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union suspended talks with the U.S. on intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe in November 1983, and by the end of the year the Soviets had broken off all arms control negotiations.\nMassive bad publicity worldwide came when Soviet fighters shot down a civilian jet liner, Korean Air Flight KAL-007, which carried 269 passengers and crew. It had strayed over the Soviet Union on 1 September 1983 on its scheduled route from Anchorage, Alaska, to Seoul, South Korea. Andropov kept secret that the Soviet Union held in its possession the black box from KAL 007 that proved the pilot had made a typographical error when entering data in the automatic pilot. The Soviet air defence system was unprepared to deal with a civilian airliner, and the shooting down was a matter of following orders without question. Instead of admitting an accident, Soviet media proclaimed a brave decision to meet a Western provocation.\nDeath and funeral.\nIn February 1983, Andropov suffered total kidney failure. In August 1983, he entered Moscow's Central Clinical Hospital, where he would spend the rest of his life.\nIn late January 1984, Andropov's health deteriorated rapidly. Due to growing toxicity in his blood, he had periods of falling into unconsciousness. He died on 9 February 1984 at 16:50, aged 69. Few of the top Soviet leaders learned of his death on that day. According to the Soviet post-mortem medical report, Andropov suffered from several medical conditions: interstitial nephritis, nephrosclerosis, residual hypertension and diabetes, worsened by chronic kidney deficiency.\nA four-day period of mourning across the USSR was announced. Syria declared seven days of mourning; Cuba declared four days of mourning; India, Iraq, Afghanistan, Ghana, Benin, and Brazil declared three days of mourning; Bulgaria, North Korea People's Republic of the Congo, and Zimbabwe declared two days of mourning; Czechoslovakia Yugoslavia, Sri Lanka and Costa Rica declared one day of mourning. Andropov had a state funeral in Red Square, in a service attended by numerous foreign leaders, such as U.S. Vice President George H. W. Bush, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Italian President Sandro Pertini, East German First Secretary Erich Honecker, Polish First Secretary Wojciech Jaruzelski, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, Cuban President Fidel Castro, and Irish President Patrick Hillery. Eulogists were Chernenko, Ustinov, Gromyko, Georgi Markov (head of the Union of Soviet Writers), and Ivan Senkin (First Secretary of the Karelian Regional Committee of the CPSU). Andropov was buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis, in one of the 12 tombs between the Lenin Mausoleum and the Kremlin wall.\nAndropov was succeeded by Konstantin Chernenko, even though Andropov had wanted a younger Politburo member, Mikhail Gorbachev to succeed him. Andropov went as far as to add a paragraph to his report at a Central Committee plenum that did not meet until his death. However, he was ignored. In most respects, Chernenko seemed to mirror Andropov's tenure. Chernenko was already terminally ill when he ascended to the USSR's top spot, and served even less time in office (13 months). Similarly to Andropov, Chernenko spent much of his time hospitalized, and also died in office, in March 1985. Chernenko was succeeded by Gorbachev, who implemented perestroika and glasnost policies to reform the Soviet Union politically and economically. On 26 December 1991, the USSR was dissolved.\nPersonal life.\nAndropov lived at 26 Kutuzovsky Prospekt, the same building in which Suslov and Brezhnev lived.\nTatyana and Andropov had two children, Igor and Irina. Igor joined the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs and served as ambassador to Greece.\nLegacy.\nAndropov's legacy remains the subject of much debate in Russia and elsewhere among scholars and in the popular media. He remains the focus of television documentaries and popular nonfiction, particularly at important anniversaries. As the head of the KGB for fifteen years, Andropov was ruthless against dissent, and author David Remnick, who covered the Soviet Union for \"The Washington Post\" in the 1980s, called him \"profoundly corrupt, a beast\". Alexander Yakovlev, later an advisor to Gorbachev and the ideologist of perestroika, said: \"In a way I always thought Andropov was the most dangerous of all of them, simply because he was smarter than the rest.\" But Andropov himself recalled Yakovlev back to high office in Moscow in 1983 after a ten-year exile as ambassador to Canada after attacking Russian chauvinism. Yakovlev was also a close colleague of Andropov associate KGB General Yevgeny Primakov, later Prime Minister of Russia. Andropov began to follow a trend of replacing elderly officials with considerably younger ones.\nAccording to his former subordinate Securitate general Ion Mihai Pacepa:\nIn the West, if Andropov is remembered at all, it is for his brutal suppression of political dissidence at home and for his role in planning the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia. By contrast, the leaders of the former Warsaw Pact intelligence community, when I was one of them, looked up to Andropov as the man who substituted the KGB for the Communist party in governing the Soviet Union, and who was the godfather of Russia's new era of deception operations aimed at improving the badly damaged image of Soviet rulers in the West.\nDespite Andropov's hard-line stance in Hungary and the numerous banishments and intrigues for which he was responsible as head of the KGB, many commentators regard him as a reformer, especially in comparison with the stagnation and corruption of Brezhnev's later years. A \"throwback to a tradition of Leninist asceticism\", Andropov was appalled by the corruption of Brezhnev's regime, and ordered investigations and arrests of the most flagrant abusers. The investigations were so frightening that several members of Brezhnev's circle \"shot, gassed or otherwise did away with themselves.\" He was generally regarded as inclined to more gradual and constructive reform than was Gorbachev; most of the speculation centers on whether Andropov would have reformed the USSR in a manner that did not result in its eventual dissolution.\nThe Western media generally favored Andropov, but the short time he spent as leader, much of it in ill health, leaves debaters few concrete indications as to the nature of an extended rule. The 2002 Tom Clancy novel \"Red Rabbit\" focuses heavily on Andropov during his tenure of KGB chief, when his health was slightly better. It mirrors his secrecy in that British and American intelligence know little about him, not even able to confirm he was married. The novel also depicts Andropov as a fan of Marlboros and starka vodka, almost never available to ordinary Soviet citizens.\nAttitudes toward Andropov.\nLeadership persona and strategy.\nVarious people who knew Andropov well, including Vladimir Medvedev, , Vladimir Kryuchkov and Roy Medvedev, remembered him for his politeness, calmness, unselfishness, patience, intelligence and exceptionally sharp memory. According to Chuchyalin, while working at the Kremlin, Andropov would read about 600 pages a day and remember everything he read. Andropov read English literature and could communicate in Finnish, English and German.\nHistorian Moshe Lewin characterizes Andropov during his brief tenure as Soviet leader as \"a politician interested in intellectual issues, but who was also a realist\" and states that \"Andropov was free of the habitual arrogance of Soviet leaders, who considered their empire invulnerable\". This led him to seek dialogue with social democrats in Western countries instead of only building relationships with fellow Marxist-Leninists. Within the party elites, he actively encouraged disagreements and debates, while also preserving the image of ideological unity towards the outside. Despite his KGB connections and his repressive tendencies, Andropov mused over ways to encourage \"forms of political as well as economic pluralism\". Vladislav Zubok even states that \"The idea of renovating the Soviet Union originated not with Mikhail Gorbachev, but with his mentor Yuri Andropov\", who was in favor of \"controlled, conservative reforms\".\nAttitudes among dissidents.\nAccording to Russian historian Nikita Petrov, \"He was a typical Soviet jailer who violated human rights. Andropov headed the organisation which persecuted the most remarkable people of our country.\" According to Petrov, it was a shame for the USSR that a persecutor of intelligentsia and of freedom of thought became leader of the country.\nRoy Medvedev stated that the year that Andropov spent in power was memorable for increasing repression against dissidents. During most of his KGB career, Andropov crushed dissident movements, isolated people in psychiatric hospitals, imprisoned them, and deported them. According to political scientist Georgy Arbatov, Andropov is responsible for many injustices in the 1970s and early 1980s: deportations, political arrests, persecuting dissidents, the abuse of psychiatry, and notorious cases such as the persecution of academician Andrei Sakharov. According to Dmitri Volkogonov and Harold Shukman, Andropov approved the numerous trials of human rights activists such as Andrei Amalrik, Vladimir Bukovsky, Viacheslav Chornovil, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, Alexander Ginzburg, Natalya Gorbanevskaya, Petro Grigorenko, and Anatoly Sharansky.\nAccording to Natalya Gorbanevskaya, after Andropov came to power the dissident movement went into decline, not on its own but because it was strangled. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, repression was most severe; many people were arrested a second time and sentenced to longer terms. The camp regime was not strict but specific, and when Andropov became General Secretary, he introduced an Article under which violations of camp regime resulted in a punishment cell and an additional term up to three years. For two or three remarks a person could be sent to another camp with non-political criminals. In those years, there were many deaths in camps from disease and lack of medical care.\nAttitudes among Russian leaders.\nIn a message read at the opening of a new exhibition dedicated to Andropov, Vladimir Putin called him \"a man of talent with great abilities\". Putin has praised Andropov's \"honesty and uprightness\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50123", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50123", "title": "Autocracy", "text": "Form of government\nAutocracy is a form of government in which absolute power is held by one person, known as an autocrat. It includes both absolute monarchies and dictatorships, while it is contrasted with democracy and other forms of free government. The autocrat has total control over the exercise of civil liberties within the autocracy, choosing under what circumstances they may be exercised, if at all. Governments may also blend elements of autocracy and democracy, forming a mixed type of regime sometimes referred to as anocracy, hybrid regime, or electoral autocracy. The concept of autocracy has been recognized in political philosophy since ancient history.\nAutocrats maintain power through political repression of any opposition and co-optation of other influential or powerful members of society. The general public is controlled through indoctrination and propaganda, and an autocracy may attempt to legitimize itself in the eyes of the public through appeals to political ideology, religion, birthright, or foreign hostility. Some autocracies establish legislatures, unfair elections, or show trials to further exercise control while presenting the appearance of democracy. The only limits to autocratic rule are practical considerations in preserving the regime. Autocrats must retain control over the nation's elites and institutions for their will to be exercised, but they must also prevent any other individual or group from gaining significant power or influence. Internal challenges are the most significant threats faced by autocrats, as they may lead to coups d'\u00e9tat.\nAutocracy was among the earliest forms of government, and existed throughout the ancient world in various societies. Monarchy was the predominant form of autocracy for most of history. Dictatorship became more common in the 19th century, beginning with the \"caudillos\" in Latin America and the empires of Napoleon and Napoleon III in Europe. Totalitarian dictatorships developed in the 20th century with the advent of fascist and communist states.\nEtymology and use.\n\"Autocracy\" comes from the Ancient Greek (Greek: ; \"self\") and (Greek: ; \"power, might\"). This became the Hellenistic/Byzantine Greek word (Greek: \u03b1\u1f50\u03c4\u03bf\u03ba\u03c1\u03ac\u03c4\u03c9\u03c1) and the Latin , both of which were titles for the Roman emperor. This was adopted in Old Russian as and then modern Russian as . In the 18th century, the title for the Russian emperor was translated to and then in French, while it was translated to and then , \"Selbstherrscher\" or \"Alleinherrscher\" in German. These terms were eventually used to refer to autocratic rulers in general. The term has since developed a negative connotation.\nPolitical structure.\nMany attempts have been made to define the political structure of autocracy. It traditionally entails a single unrestrained ruler, known as an autocrat, though unrestrained non-democratic rule by a group may also be defined as autocratic. Autocracy is distinguished from other forms of government by the power of the autocrat to unilaterally repress the civil liberties of the people and to choose what liberties they may exercise. Modern autocracy is often defined as any non-democratic government. As with all forms of government, autocracy has no clearly defined boundaries, and it may intersect with other forms of government. Though autocracy usually encompasses an entire country, it can sometimes take place at subnational or local levels, even in countries with a more democratic government, if the national government has limited control over a specific area or its political conflicts.\nAutocracies impose few to no limits on the power of the autocrat, and any formal institutions that exist create only limited accountability. To maintain power, an autocrat must have the support of elites that hold influence in the country and assist the autocrat in carrying out their will. The amount of direct control that an autocrat wields in practice may vary. As an autocratic government solidifies its rule, it develops stronger institutions to carry out the autocrat's will. These institutions are necessary for maintaining control and extracting value from the state, but they can also serve as checks on the autocrat. Autocrats must also balance the affiliation that regional elites have over their jurisdiction; too little can prevent effective rule, while too much may cause the elite to favor the region's interests over the autocrat's. Some autocracies incorporate an elected legislature that has a limited ability to check the power of the autocrat, though these are not usually formed through free and fair elections. These legislatures may also be prone to corruption and can be influenced by the autocrat in exchange for preferential treatment. Other institutions, such as an independent judiciary or an active civil society, may also limit the autocrat's power.\nSome autocracies emphasize a ruling family rather than a single autocrat. This has been the case of most monarchies. Such arrangements allow for royal intermarriage, which can join autocracies together through dynastic unions. Personalist dictatorships may also give significance to the ruling family through a cult of personality, such as the Kim family of North Korea and the Taliban of Afghanistan.\nOrigin and development.\nFormation.\nThe earliest autocracies, such as chiefdoms, formed where there was previously no centralized government. The initial development of an autocracy is attributed to its efficiency over anarchy, as it provides security and negates internal divisions. Mancur Olson introduced the term \"stationary bandits\" to describe the method of control associated with autocracy, as opposed to the \"roaming bandits\" that dominate anarchic society. Under this definition, autocrats as stationary bandits see long-term investment in the society that they exploit through taxation and other seizure of resources, as opposed to the bandits in stateless societies that have no incentive to improve society. This creates a Pareto efficiency in which both the autocrat and the subjects benefit over the alternative.\nDouglass North, John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast describe autocracies as natural states that arise from this need to monopolize violence. In contrast to Olson, these scholars understand the early state not as a single ruler, but as an organization formed by many actors. They describe the process of autocratic state formation as a bargaining process among individuals with access to violence. For them, these individuals form a dominant coalition that grants each other privileges such as the access to resources. As violence reduces the economic rents, members of the dominant coalition have incentives to cooperate and to avoid fighting. A limited access to privileges is necessary to avoid competition among the members of the dominant coalition, who then will credibly commit to cooperate and will form the state.\nThere is great variance in the types of states that become autocratic. Neither a state's size, its military strength, its economic success, nor its cultural attributes significantly affect whether it is likely to be autocratic. Autocracy is more likely to form in heterogeneous populations, as there is greater inequality and less social cohesion. Autocracies formed under these conditions are often more volatile for the same reasons.\nStability and succession.\nAutocracies face challenges to their authority from several fronts, including the citizenry, political opposition, and internal disloyalty from elites. As autocrats must share their power with the state's elites to see their will carried out, these elites are the greatest threat to the autocrat. Most autocratic governments are overthrown by a coup, and historically most have been succeeded by another autocratic government, though a trend toward democracy developed in 20th century Europe. These new governments are commonly a different type of autocracy or a weaker variant of the same type.\nWhile popular support for revolution is often necessary to overthrow an autocratic government, most revolts are accompanied by internal support from elites who believe that it is no longer in their interest to support the autocrat. Overthrow of an autocratic government purely through popular revolt is virtually nonexistent throughout history, but popular support for democracy is a significant indicator of challenges to autocratic rule. Modernization and increased wealth are often associated with stronger support for democracy, though failing to provide these things also reduces support for the autocratic regime. Popular revolt is most likely to occur during periods of reform. Government reform can provide an impetus for stronger opposition, especially when it does not meet expectations, and it can weaken the centralization of power through poor implementation. When revolt appears likely, an autocrat may grant civil rights, redistribute wealth, or abdicate from power entirely to avoid the threat of violence.\nSome autocracies use hereditary succession in which a set of rules determines who will be the next autocrat. Otherwise, a successor may be handpicked, either by the autocrat or by another governmental body. Pre-determined successors are incentivized to overthrow and replace the autocrat, creating a dilemma for autocrats wishing to choose a successor. The threat of overthrow is greater for appointed successors over hereditary successors, as hereditary successors are often younger and less influential. Other autocracies have no appointed successor, and a power struggle will take place upon the death or removal of the autocrat. These methods of succession are a common distinction between monarchical rule and dictatorial rule; monarchies use an established system of succession such as hereditary succession, while dictatorships do not. Autocratic rule is most unstable during succession from one autocrat to another. Orders of succession allow for more peaceful transition of power, but it prevents meaningful vetting of successors for competence or fortitude. When rule passes between autocrats, the incoming autocrat often inherits an established bureaucracy. This bureaucracy facilitates the transfer of power, as the new ruler gains immediate control over the nation without having to conquer its people or win their popular support.\nLegitimacy.\nAutocrats may claim that they have legitimacy under a legal framework, or they may exert influence purely through force. Opinion on whether an autocratic government is legitimate can vary, even among its own population. An autocracy's approach to legitimacy can be affected by recognition from other nations. Widely accepted autocratic governments are more able to convince their own populations of their legitimacy. Less widely accepted autocracies may rally internal support by attributing their lack of recognition to malevolent foreign efforts, such as American imperialism or Zionism.\nHistorically, the most common claim of legitimacy is birthright in an autocracy that uses hereditary succession. Theocratic governments appeal to religion to justify their rule, arguing that religious leaders must also be political leaders. Other autocrats may use similar claims of divine authority to justify their rule, often in absolute monarchy. This includes the Mandate of Heaven in ancient China and the divine right of kings in 17th century England and France. When an autocratic government has a state ideology, this may be used to justify the autocrat's rule. This is most common in communist or ethnonationalist governments. Autocracies with unfair elections will cite election results to prove that the autocrat has a mandate to rule. Some autocracies will use practical considerations to legitimise their rule, arguing that they are necessary to provide basic needs to the population.\nTypes.\nAutocracy encompasses most non-democratic forms of government, including dictatorships, monarchies, and dominant-party regimes. Monarchies were common in medieval Europe, but in the modern era dictatorship is the most common form of government globally.\nAutocratic governments are classified as totalitarian when they engage in direct control of citizens' lives, or as authoritarian when they do not. Totalitarian governments do not allow political or cultural pluralism. Instead, citizens are expected to devote themselves to a single ideological vision and demonstrate their support of the state ideology through political engagement. Totalitarian governments are revolutionary, seeking radically to reform society, and they often engage in terror against groups that do not comply with the state's vision. Totalitarianism is associated with communist states and Nazi Germany. Authoritarian governments maintain control of a nation purely through repression and controlled opposition rather than mandated adherence to a state ideology. These include most traditional monarchies, military dictatorships, theocracies, and dominant party states.\nAn absolute autocracy may be referred to as despotism, in which the autocrat rules purely through personal control without any meaningful institutions. These were most common in pre-industrial societies, when large bureaucracies had not yet become standard in government. Sultanism is a type of personalist dictatorship in which a ruling family directly integrates itself into the state through a cult of personality, where it maintains control purely through rewards for allies and force against enemies. In these regimes, there is no guiding ideology or legal system, and the state serves only to bring about the leader's own personal enrichment. Other descriptors, such as tyranny and absolutism, may also be associated with variations of autocracy.\nThough autocracies often restrict civil and political rights, some may allow limited exercise of some rights. These autocracies grant moderate representation to political opponents and allow exercise of some civil rights, though less than those associated with democracy. These are contrasted with closed autocracies, which do not permit the exercise of these rights. Several forms of semi-autocratic government have been defined in which governments blend elements of democracy and autocracy. These include limited autocracy, semi-autocracy, liberal autocracy, semi-liberal autocracy, anocracy, electoral autocracy, partly-free regimes, and multi-party autocracies. These governments may begin as democratic governments and then become autocratic as the elected leader seizes control over the nation's institutions and electoral process. Conversely, autocratic governments may transition to democracy through a period of semi-autocratic rule.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAutocracy has been the primary form of government for most of human history. One of the earliest forms of government was the chiefdom that developed in tribal societies, which date back to the Neolithic. Chiefdoms are regional collections of villages ruled over by tribal chief. They are an emergent form of governance, originating from societies that previously lacked a centralized authority. Historical chiefs often held only tenuous power over the chiefdom, but they trended towards autocracy as heterarchical governance was replaced with hierarchical governance.\nEarly states were formed by warlords ruling over conquered territory. The first states were the city-states of Mesopotamia, which first developed around the 35th century BCE. These early states were ruled by kings who were both political and religious leaders. These were followed by the first empire, the Akkadian Empire, when they were conquered by Sargon of Akkad in the 24th century BCE. The blending of autocratic rule with religious significance continued under the Akkadian Empire, as the king Naram-Sin of Akkad was the first of several kings to be recognized as a god over the following centuries. Ancient Egypt also existed as an autocratic government for most of its early history, first developing states at the end of the fourth millennium BCE.\nChina has been subject to autocratic rule almost without interruption since its ancient feudal society was replaced by the Qin dynasty in 221\u00a0BCE, and even its feudal government had stronger elements of autocracy than other instances of feudalism. The early Chinese philosophy of Confucianism emphasized the importance of benevolent autocratic rule to maintain order, and this philosophy heavily influenced future Chinese thought.\nCity-states in Ancient Greece and the Etruscan civilization were often ruled by tyrants, though myth and historical revisionism later re-imagined these tyrants as kings with hereditary succession. The Roman Republic introduced the concept of the Roman dictator who would be temporarily invested with unchecked power to restore stability during periods of crisis. This temporary dictatorship was eventually subverted by Julius Caesar when he became dictator for life in 44\u00a0BCE, ending the Roman Republic and ushering the creation of the autocratic Roman Empire.\nSeveral early military autocracies formed in East Asia during the post-classical era. These include the rule of the Goguryeo kingdom by Y\u014fn Kaesomun in 642, the Goryeo military regime beginning in 1170, and the shogunate in Japan between the 12th and 19th centuries.\nParliamentary monarchies became common in the 13th century as monarchs sought larger advising bodies that were representative of the kingdom. European nations moved away from feudalism and towards centralized monarchy as the primary form of government in the 14th century.\nModern era.\nAbsolutism became more common in European monarchies at the onset of the 16th century as the continent struggled with weak leadership and religious conflict. Legislatures during this period were often tailored to enforce the king's will but not challenge it. This was sometimes justified through the divine right of kings, particularly in the kingdoms of England and France.\nThe French Revolution marked a significant shift in the perception of dictatorship as a form of tyrannical rule, as revolutionaries justified their actions as a means of combatting tyranny. In Europe, the original forms of dictatorship were Bonapartism, a form of monarchism that rejected feudalism, and Caesarism, imperial rule reminiscent of Julius Caesar. These were primarily used to define the First and Second French Empires. European monarchies moved away from autocracy in the 19th century as legislatures increased in power. In 19th century Latin America, regional rulers known as \"caudillos\" seized power in several nations as early examples of dictators.\nThe 19th and 20th centuries brought about the decline of traditional monarchies in favor of modern states, many of which developed as autocracies. The upheaval caused by World War I resulted in a broad shift of governance across Europe, and many nations moved away from traditional monarchies. Most European monarchs were stripped of their powers to become constitutional monarchs, or they were displaced entirely in favor of republics. Totalitarianism first developed as a form of autocracy during the interwar period. It seized power in many of these republics, particularly during the Great Depression. This saw the establishment of fascist, communist, and military dictatorships throughout Europe.\nThe communist state first developed as a new form of autocracy following the Russian Revolution. This type of autocratic government enforced totalitarian control over its citizens through a mass party said to represent the citizens. While other forms of European dictatorship were dissolved after World War II, communism was strengthened and became the basis of several dictatorships in Eastern Europe. Communist states became the primary model for autocratic government in the late-20th century, and many non-communist autocratic regimes replicated the communist style of government.\nThe decline in autocracy across Western Europe affected autocratic government elsewhere in the world through colonization. Societies without a state were readily colonized by European nations and subsequently adopted democracy and parliamentary government after it became common in Europe. Regions with historically strong autocratic states were able to resist European colonization or otherwise went unchanged, allowing autocracy to be preserved.\nThe strength of autocracy in global politics was significantly reduced at the end of the Cold War with the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, but it saw a resurgence over the following decades through regional powers such as China, Iran, Russia, and Saudi Arabia. The fall of totalitarian regimes led to authoritarianism becoming the predominant form of autocracy in the 21st century.\nPolitical activity.\nPolitical repression is the primary method by which autocrats preserve the regime and prevent the loss of power. This repression may take place implicitly by coercing and intimidating potential opposition, or it may involve direct violence. Autocratic governments also engage in co-optation, in which influential figures are provided benefits by the regime in exchange for their support. Coercing these elites is usually more efficient for the autocrat than intimidating them through violence. Political parties are a common method of co-optation and coercion, as they provide a mechanism to control members of the government, initiate new members, and discourage a military coup. Autocratic governments controlled through a political party last longer on average than other autocratic governments.\nControl over the public is maintained through indoctrination and propaganda. Autocratic governments enjoy similar levels of public support to democratic governments, and a state's status as autocratic is not a significant indicator in whether it is supported by its citizens. Autocrats often appeal to the people by supporting a specific political, ethnic, or religious movement.\nThe different forms of autocratic government create significant variance in their foreign policy. Overall, autocratic governments are more likely to go to war than democratic governments, as citizens are not part of the selectorate to which autocrats are accountable. Totalitarian autocracies have historically engaged in militarism and expansionism after consolidating power, particularly fascist governments. This allows the autocracy to spread its state ideology, and the existence of foreign adversaries allows the autocrat to rally internal support.\nAutocratic regimes in the 21st century have departed from the historical precedent of direct rule in favor of institutions that resemble those of democratic governments. This may include controlled liberties for citizens such as the formation of opposition parties to participate in unfair elections. Elections provide several benefits to autocratic regimes, allowing for a venue to restrain or appease the opposition and creating a method to transfer power without violent conflict. Many autocrats also institute show trials to carry out political repression rather than carrying out direct purges. This may be done to more publicly discourage future dissidents. Prior to this trend, autocratic elections rarely invited public participation. They were instead used by elites to choose a leader amongst themselves, such as in an electoral monarchy. The creation of a constitution is another common measure used by autocrats to stay in power; as they are able to draft the constitution unilaterally, it can be tailored to suit their rule.\nStudy and evaluation.\nAutocratic government has been central to political theory since the development of Ancient Greek political philosophy. Despite its historical prominence, autocracy has not been widely recognized as its own political theory in the way that democracy has. Autocratic government is generally considered to be less desirable than democratic government. Reasons for this include its proclivity for corruption and violence as well as its lack of efficiency and its weakness in promoting liberty and transparency.\nHistorically, data on the operation of autocratic government has been limited, preventing detailed study. Study of postcolonial autocracy in Africa has been particularly limited, as these governments were less likely to keep detailed records of their activities relative to other governments at the time, and they frequently destroyed the records that did exist. Study of citizen support for autocratic government relative to democratic government has also been infrequent, and most studies conducted in this area have been limited to East Asia. Collection of information on autocratic regimes has improved in the 21st century, allowing for more detailed analysis.\nAutocratic government has been found to have effects on a country's politics, including its government's structure and bureaucracy, long after it democratizes. Comparisons between regions have found disparities in citizen attitudes, policy preferences, and political engagement depending on whether it had been subject to autocracy, even in different regions within the same country. Citizens of postcommunist nations are more likely to distrust government and free markets, directly hindering the long-term economic prosperity of these nations. Xenophobia is generally more common in post-autocratic nations, and voters in these nations are more likely to vote for far-right or far-left political parties.\nMany democracy indices have been developed to measure how democratic or authoritarian countries are, such as the Polity data series, the Freedom in the World report, and the Varieties of Democracy indices. These indices measure various attributes of a government's actions and its citizens' rights to sort democracies and autocracies. These attributes might include enfranchisement, freedom of expression, freedom of information, separation of powers, or free and fair elections, among others. Both the choice in attributes and the method of measuring them are subjective, and they are defined individually be each index. Despite this, different democracy indices generally produce similar results. Most discrepancies come from the measurement governments that blend democratic and autocratic traits. Different democracy indices refer to such types of government using a range of different names, for example, hybrid regimes, anocracies, partly-free regimes or electoral autocracies, and use different definitions and indicators to distinguish them from full autocracies and democracies.\nThe concepts of tyranny and despotism as distinct modes of government were abandoned in the 19th century in favor of more specific typologies. Modern typology of autocratic regimes originates from the work of Juan Linz in the mid-20th century, when his division of democracy, authoritarianism, and totalitarianism became accepted. The first general theory of autocracy that defined it independently of other systems was created by Gordon Tullock in 1974 through applied public choice theory. At the end of the Cold War, Francis Fukuyama's theory of the end of history became popular among political scientists. This theory proposed that autocratic government was approaching a permanent decline to be replaced by liberal democracy. This theory was largely abandoned after the increase in autocratic government over the following decades. In the 2010s, the concept of \"autocracy promotion\" became influential in the study of autocracy, proposing that some governments have sought to establish autocratic rule in foreign nations, though subsequent studies have found little evidence to support that such efforts are as widespread or successful as originally thought.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50124", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50124", "title": "Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov", "text": ""}
{"id": "50125", "revid": "51032048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50125", "title": "Cornett", "text": "Early wind instrument with a cup mouthpiece\nThe cornett (, ) is a lip-reed wind instrument that dates from the Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque periods, popular from 1500 to 1650. Although smaller and larger sizes were made in both straight and curved forms, surviving cornetts are mostly curved, built in the treble size from in length, usually described as in G. The note sounded with all finger-holes covered is A3, which can be lowered a further whole tone to G by slackening the embouchure. The name \"cornett\" comes from the Italian \"cornetto\", meaning \"small horn\".\nIt was used in performances by professional musicians for both state and liturgical music, especially accompanying choral music. It also featured in popular music in \"alta capella\" or loud wind ensembles. British organologist Anthony Baines wrote that the cornett \"was praised in the very terms that were to be bestowed upon the oboe [...]: it could be sounded as loud as a trumpet and as soft as a recorder, and its tone approached that of the human voice more nearly than that of any other instrument.\" It was popular in Germany, where trumpet-playing was restricted to professional trumpet guild members. As well, the mute cornett variant was a quiet instrument, playing \"gentle, soft and sweet.\"\nThe cornett is not to be confused with the modern cornet, a valved brass instrument with a separate origin and development. The English spelling \"cornet\", which had applied to the cornett since about 1400, was in around 1836 transferred to the \"cornet \u00e0 pistons\", the predecessor of the modern cornet. Subsequently, \"cornett\" became the modern English spelling of the older instrument.\nConstruction.\nPipes as short as the cornett are able to play only four or five notes of the harmonic series when sounded with all finger-holes closed; these harmonics are used as part of the standard fingering within the cornett's designated range. Other short trumpets, including King Tut's Trumpet, are capable of playing only two notes without a modern mouthpiece.\nThe instrument has features of both the trumpet and a woodwind instrument. Like the trumpet, the cornett has a small cup-shaped mouthpiece, where the instrument is sounded with the player's lips. Like many woodwind instruments, it has fingered tone holes (and rarely, keys) to determine the pitch by shortening the vibrating air column, although pitch can also be adjusted by varying the tension of the player's embochure.\nThe cornett has six finger holes and, like the recorder, a single thumb hole on the opposite side. Together these allow the instrument to play a diatonic scale. A small number of cornetts were built with seven holes, and French instruments often lacked a thumbhole. By using \"cross fingering\" and by varying the embouchure tension, the instrument can play a chromatic scale. A player in 1738 who mastered the cross-fingering and lip tension was documented to have reached 27 notes and half notes. In comparison, Praetorius gave cornetts credit for achieving 15 notes, before players used techniques to expand the range.\nThe cornett has a conical bore, narrow at the mouthpiece and widening towards the bell. The ordinary curved treble cornett is made by splitting a length of wood, usually walnut, boxwood or other tonewoods like plum, cherry or pear. The bore is carved out and the two halves then glued back together, and the outside planed to an octagonal cross section. The whole is then further bound tightly in thin black leather or parchment. A small number of surviving instruments were made from one straight piece, bored on a lathe, and then bent into a curve with steam. The finger holes and thumb hole are then bored in the instrument, and are slightly undercut.\nThe socket for the mouthpiece at the narrow end is sometimes reinforced with a brass collar, and sometimes ornamental silver or brass ferrules are added to reinforce each end of the instrument, especially in Austrian- or German-made cornetts. The separate cup mouthpiece is usually made of horn, ivory, or bone, with a thin rim and thread-wrapped shank, which is used to tune the instrument. Because it usually lacks a (seventh) little finger hole, its lowest note is A3 below middle C, though G3 is readily obtained by adjusting the embouchure.\nMute cornetts were usually made of boxwood. The top of the instrument is narrow; the bore is about wide at the top of the instrument, with a cone-shaped mouthpiece carved into the top across and deep.\nCornett family.\nCornetts were built in two styles, curved and straight.\nMost cornetts are shaped with gradual curve, greater than 90\u00b0, a single curve like a comma, or an S-curve. The instrument has a conical bore, and the outside shaped to have an octagonal cross-section. Curved cornets were traditionally black, the wood covered in thin black leather.\nThe cornett was, like many Renaissance and Baroque instruments, made in a family of sizes. Four extant sizes are the soprano (\"cornettino\"), the treble or curved cornett, the alto, the tenor or \"lizard\" and the rare bass cornett, which was supplanted by the serpent in the 17th century.\n&lt;score lang=\"lilypond\"&gt;\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major \\cadenzaOn\n e'4 \\finger \\markup \\text \" sopr. \"\n a4 \\finger \\markup \\text \" treble \"\n g4 \\finger \\markup \\text \" alto \"\n \\clef bass\n d4 \\finger \\markup \\text \" tenor \"\n g,4 \\finger \\markup \\text \" bass \"\n &lt;/score&gt; The lowest note of each type of cornett\nDescant.\nThe \"cornettino\" is the descant, or sometimes \"soprano\" member of the cornett family. In \"Syntagma Musicum\", it was presented as being about long and had a range from E4 to E6 in the 16th and 17th centuries. In the 18th century that changed to D4 to D6.\nTreble.\nThe 1911 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica defined this instrument using its French name (lit.\u2009'top'), and gave its fingered range as A3 to A5, the lowest being one note higher than that of the alto. To play notes below A3, players can slacken their embouchure.\nSibyl Marcuse did not name the normal cornett, but gave the treble's range. David Jarratt-Knock counted surviving instruments in museums to arrive at the treble cornett being the most commonly found cornett.\nAlto.\nFrom the 1619 the scaled drawings in \"Syntagma Musicum\", the instrument was about long.\nIt was built to start playing a tone lower than the treble and has a fingered range from G3 to G5. With good technique the lowest note is F3.\nThe 1911 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica called this the or alto cornet. Baines said that the use of this variant for an alto part was \"widely speculated.\"\nTenor.\nThe tenor cornett (Italian: \"cornone\", French: \"basse de cornet\u00e0 bouquin\", German: \"Basszink\") was the tenor instrument in the cornett family. About long from the \"Syntagma Musicum\" drawing, it was \"proportionally wider\" (bottom compared to top) than the treble and alto were, and that changed the tenor's sound quality to be more bugle-like.\nAlthough the French and German names imply it was bass instrument, it is placed as a tenor instrument by organologists Sibyl Marcuse and Anthony Baines, who both point out that two examples of a \"real bass\" instrument exist.\nThe cornone was pitched about a fifth below the alto cornett, with a playing range of C3 to D5.\nEven though tenor and bass instruments were created for the family, these came later in the instrument's development, perhaps as long as 50 years after the instrument became mainstream. The instrument was paired with other instruments to play the lower ranges, especially trombones.\nBass.\nThere are very few surviving examples of instruments larger than the tenor cornett. One is called \"hautecontre de cornet \u00e0 bouquin\". The other should be called \"contrebass de cornet \u00e0 bouquin\" according to Marcuse and Baines, and there are only two examples of it, one in the Paris Conservatoire museum and the other in Hamburg.\nThese were tuned \"a pitch or so below the type instrument\" or an octave below the cornettino. The Paris instrument is described as having \"an octagonal exterior and 4 extension keys.\" The Hamburg example has 2 extension keys.\nStraight cornett.\nThe common treble cornett was also made as a straight cornett (German: \"gerader Zink\", \"gelber Zink\", Italian: \"cornetto diritto\" or \"cornetto bianco\") and usually light-colored, as the yellow boxwood was not covered in leather.\nIt has conical bore and body that does not curve. The specific instrument differs from the mute cornett by having a removable mouthpiece. Surviving instruments in museums are mainly treble with a range of A3 to A5. A few survive as tenor instruments, range C3 to D5.\nMute cornett.\nA mute cornett (French: \"cornet muet\", German: \"stiller Zink\", Italian: \"cornetto muto\") is a straight cornett with a narrower bore and integrated mouthpiece carved into the end of the instrument's body. The instrument tapers in thickness, until at the top it is about wide. The instruments were mainly treble cornetts, tuned to the same range as the curved treble cornett, G3 to A5. The others found in museums are soprano cornetts, also tuned like curved instruments to E4 to E6.\nThis instrument's name tells something of its tonal nature. Its \"gentle, soft and sweet\" sound is different than the other cornetts because of its mouthpiece, and can be used in a consort of viols or recorders.\nThe mouthpiece is similar to that in a French horn; instead of being a cup like the other cornetts, it is a cone, about deep. Inside it transitions from cone to instrumental bore smoothly, without \"sharpness.\"\nOn the outside, there isn't an obvious lip carved.\nPraetorius drew a tenor mute cornett, with a seventh hole covered and labeled that a lower note could be reached by covering the base. In that range, the six holes with thumb hole could have delivered A3 to F5. The extra plate would make it G3 to F5, with the base covered F3 to F5.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nAurignacian pipes, fashioned with four finger holes 26,000\u201340,000 years ago from the slender bones of bird wings or mammoth ivory, have long been considered flutes. Recovered from Vogelherdh\u00f6hle and other caves in the Swabian Jura in Germany, they are among the oldest musical instruments yet discovered. British music archaeologist Graeme Lawson found that a replica of a complete specimen played as a flute has an indistinct whispery sound, but produces the first five notes of the diatonic series in a clear, strident tone when played as an end-blown lip reed instrument. He contends that this method of playing is supported by microscopic wear patterns, the absence of a fipple or blowhole, and the well-rounded end aperture.\nIn modern history, the cornett has been considered by musical historians to be a development of the medieval horn, such as a cow's horn. Francis Galpin believed the horns preceding the cornett to be goat horns.\nPlain horns in the shape of animal horns have been found in medieval European art as far back as the Utrecht Psalter in the 9th century. However, horns with fingerholes also began appearing in manuscript miniatures in the 10th century. By the 12th century, these were being carved with a six sided or 8 sided exterior. In the 11th century, some of the fingerhole horns began to be made longer and thinner, beginning to take on the appearance of the cornett.\nThe French \"coradoiz\", rendered now as \"cor \u00e0 doigts\", meant \"fingerhole horn\", was seen in the 13th to 15th centuries.\nThe earliest cowhorn instruments were played with one hand covering four or fewer fingerholes and the other stopping the bell to create additional tones, much like on a French horn. In Northern Europe, these horns, referred to in Scandinavian languages as bukkehorns, were made from natural animal horns.\nThe name \"cornet\" was printed in English in the \"Morte d'Arthure\", completed by Sir Thomas Mallory about 1470.\nThe cornett in its current form was developed by about 1500, as an improvement over earlier designs of fingerhole horns.\nThat was the path that led to the curved cornetts; another way led to the straight cornetts. In central Europe, cornetts were made from wood turned on a lathe; the fusion of these two instrument-building traditions as the cornett advanced in melodic capability explains the coexistence of the straight and curved cornetts, with the form of the latter most likely being a skeuomorphic trait derived from animal horns.\nEnds and beginnings.\nThe cornett was at the height of its popularity between 1550 and 1650. The instrument had declined by the 18th century. When the instrument was needed in the 19th century, it had gone extinct. Efforts to re-create it were not immediately successful and other instruments have been used in an attempt to replace it in classical music. These include the soprano saxophone, trumpet and oboe. Since the 19th century, the instrument is being made again and materials used for the body have widened to include resins. Recorded music of the instrument can be found.\nProminent cornettists today include Roland Wilson (ensemble Musica Fiata), Jean Tub\u00e9ry (La Fenice), Arno Paduch (Johann Rosenm\u00fcller Ensemble), and Bruce Dickey (Concerto Palatino).\nMusic for the cornett.\nVirtuoso performance.\nThe cornett, among other aerophones, were commonly used for virtuosic musical performances, equivalent to performances by a lead singer or violinist. A relatively large amount of solo music for the cornett (and/or violin) survives.\nGiovanni Bassano was a virtuoso early player of the cornett, and Giovanni Gabrieli wrote much of his polychoral, with Bassano playing it. Heinrich Sch\u00fctz also used the instrument extensively, especially in his earlier work; he had studied in Venice with Gabrieli and was likely acquainted with Bassano's playing.\nThe use of the instrument had declined by 1700, although the instrument was still common in Europe until the late 18th century. Johann Sebastian Bach, Georg Philipp Telemann and their German contemporaries used both the cornett and cornettino in cantatas to play in unison with the soprano voices of the choir. Occasionally, these composers allocated a solo part to the cornetto (see Bach's cantata \"O Jesu Christ, meins Lebens Licht, BWV 118\"). Alessandro Scarlatti used the cornetto or pairs of cornetts in a number of his operas. Johann Joseph Fux used a pair of mute cornetts in a Requiem.\nIt was scored for by Gluck, in his opera \"Orfeo ed Euridice\" (he suggested the soprano trombone as an alternative) and features in the TV theme music \"Testament\" by Nigel Hess, released in 1983.\nThe cornett was chosen to play \"colla parte\" (in which instrumentalists play the same notes as the vocal part) in works by Bach. These include Christ lag in Todes Banden, BWV 4 (paired with trombones) and Gottlob! nun geht das Jahr zu Ende, BWV 28 (paired with trombones).\nPopular performance.\nMusic books allowed non-professional musicians to learn instruments and play together. Such books included music theory, how to read sheet music, and instructions for how to reach notes on instruments. Professional musicians performed in public spaces and as part of official pomp before the country's residents. Images of heaven reflected a musicality that showed heavenly orchestras performing before God, and instruments were brought into churches.\nPublic performances where the cornett might be played included the alta capella and the Collegium Musicum.\nLiturgical performance.\nLike the serpent, another fingerhole horn that was paired with it, the cornett was used to reinforce the human voice, accompanying choral music. The cornett was deemed to be similar to the voice of a boy soprano, a part found in English liturgical music which the cornett accompanied. Not only English, for Mersenne speaks of the cornett being \"heard with the choir voices in the cathedrals or chapels.\"\nHistorically, two cornetts were frequently used in consort with three sackbuts, often to double a church choir, into the 18th century. This was particularly popular in Venetian churches such as the Basilica San Marco, where extensive instrumental accompaniment was encouraged, particularly in use with antiphonal choirs.\nPlaying the cornett.\nThe cornett's pitches are controlled using a combination of the player's lips and fingerholes. The lips change pitch through different tensions. The fingerholes alter the length of the sound column.\nCornetts are made with a mouthpiece, similar to that on brass instruments, but very small. Unlike the brass mouthpieces, players don't press the instrument to the center of their mouths, as on a trumpet. Rather the technique to produce sound is to hold the instrument to the side of the mouth, where the player's lips are thinner. Players stretch their lips to tighten them, with help from cheek muscles.\nThe technique is not unique to cornets, but has also been used for the traditional animal-horn horns, such as the shofur and Slovak shepherd's horn, as well as for folk horns such as the Russian rozhok.\nGirolamo dalla Casa wrote about how the coronet should sound when played, and in doing so revealed other ways it could sound as well. He felt that the instrument was meant to imitate the human voice, saying, \"The cornetto is the most excellent of the wind instruments since it imitates the human voice better than the other instruments.\" He warned that improperly played, it would sound \"horn-like or muted.\"\nTo play it properly, he said that player's must focus on the tone (with lips not spread apart and loose, or too tight and shrill). He felt tonguing was important to the sound, with energy but not too aggressive. Finally he felt that divisions or diminutions should be used, but sparingly and well. He said that cornettists should focus on making their playing sound like the human voice.\nLearning to play.\nBooks with cornett instruction included \"Grund-richtiger Unterricht der Musicalischen Kunst\" (\"Fundamentally correct instruction in the musical arts\") by Daniel Speer, 1697 and \"Museum Musicum Theoretico-Practicum\" (\"Museum of theoretical-practical music\") by Joseph Friedrich Bernhard Caspar Majer, 1732. Books written for other instruments were also applicable to the cornett. Among these were Ganassi \ndal Fontego (\"Opera intitulata Fontegara\", 1535) and Bismantova (\"Compendio musicale\", 1677). These books covered the recorder, but the instructions on \"tonguing\" with \"force and speed\" has application to the cornett, which was pictured on the \"Fontegara\" title page illustration.\nBesides tonguing, books taught students to improvise. Students learning cornet music were encouraged to play in the \"diminuative\", looking at sheet music and adapting it by creating runs of fast notes to replace long slow notes in written works.\nThe book (\"Il Vero Modo Di Diminuir\", 1584) by cornett virtoso Girolamo Dalla Casa focused on tone, tonguing and divisions to make the cornett sound like the human voice.\nThe cornett and historically informed performance.\nAs a result of the recent historically informed performance movement the cornett has been rediscovered, and modern works for the instrument have been written.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nExtant cornetts at The Metropolitan Museum of Art"}
{"id": "50128", "revid": "48259045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50128", "title": "Schizophernia", "text": ""}
{"id": "50133", "revid": "51019997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50133", "title": "Eleanor Bron", "text": "English actress (born 1938)\nEleanor Bron (born 14 March 1938) is an English stage, film and television actress, and an author. Her film roles include Ahme in the Beatles musical \"Help!\" (1965), the Doctor in \"Alfie\" (1966), Margaret Spencer in \"Bedazzled\" (1967) and Hermione Roddice in \"Women in Love\" (1969). She has appeared in television series such as \"Yes Minister\", \"Doctor Who\" and \"Absolutely Fabulous\".\n1980 Starred in \"My Dear Palestrina\" by Bernard Mc Clafferty alongside Ronan Downey and Liam Neeson.\nEarly life.\nBron was born on 14 March 1938 in Stanmore, Middlesex, into a Jewish family. Before her birth, her father Sydney had legally changed his name from Bronstein to Bron, in an effort to enhance his newly founded commercial enterprise, Bron's Orchestral Service. Her elder brother was the record producer Gerry Bron.\nShe attended the North London Collegiate School and then Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read Modern Languages. She later characterised her time at Newnham as \"three years of unparalleled pampering and privilege\".\nCareer.\nEarly work.\nBron began her career in the Cambridge Footlights revue of 1959, titled \"The Last Laugh\", in which Peter Cook also appeared. The addition of a female performer to the Footlights was a departure; until that time it had been all-male, with female characters portrayed in drag.\nFilm appearances.\nBron's film appearances include the role of Ahme in the Beatles' film \"Help!\" (1965); her name inspired Paul McCartney when he composed \"Eleanor Rigby\". Other roles included the doctor who grounds Michael Caine's character in \"Alfie\" (1966), the unattainable Margaret Spencer in Peter Cook and Dudley Moore's film \"Bedazzled\" (1967), Hermione Roddice in Ken Russell's \"Women in Love\" (1969), and Sisters McFee and MacArthur in \"The National Health\" (1973).\nShe also appeared in the films \"Two for the Road\" (1967) alongside Albert Finney and Audrey Hepburn, and \"A Touch of Love\" (1969) with Sandy Dennis and Ian McKellen. She later appeared in film adaptations of \"Black Beauty\" (1994), and \"A Little Princess\" (1995).\nTelevision work.\nBron's earliest work for television included appearances on David Frost's \"Not So Much a Programme, More a Way of Life\", \"My Father Knew Lloyd George\" and \"BBC-3\", where she performed in sketches with John Fortune; they had already worked together at Peter Cook's Establishment Club. Later, her work included such programmes as \"Where Was Spring?\" (1969, also alongside Fortune), \"World in Ferment\" (1969), and \"After That, This\" (1975).\nShe collaborated with novelist and playwright Michael Frayn on the BBC programmes \"Beyond a Joke\" (1972) and \"Making Faces\" (1975).\nFrom the mid-1970s, Bron made occasional appearances with the Monty Python team, such as \"The Secret Policeman's Ball\" series of concerts in support of Amnesty International. She adapted the Jilly Cooper novel Emily for television in 1976. She appeared in \"Equal Opportunities\", a 1982 episode of the BBC series \"Yes Minister\", playing a senior civil servant in Jim Hacker's Department. Hacker plans to promote her\u2014ostensibly to strike a blow for women's rights\u2014only to be sorely disappointed.\nIn 1979 Bron appeared as Maggie Hartley, a stage actress accused of murder, in an episode of the popular British legal series \"Rumpole of the Bailey\", entitled \"Rumpole and the Show Folk\", which starred Leo McKern in the title role. She and Leo McKern had appeared together in \"Help!\". She appeared as Mary in \"The Day Christ Died\" (1980), and played Mrs Barrymore in the 1983 TV movie \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" which starred Ian Richardson as Sherlock Holmes. That year also saw her appearance in an episode of \"Tales of the Unexpected\" (Series 6, The Tribute).\nBron appeared twice in the original series of \"Doctor Who\". She had a brief comedic scene in the serial \"City of Death\" (1979) alongside John Cleese, which was at the suggestion of its co-writer Douglas Adams. The pair are art critics in Denise Rene's art gallery in Paris who are admiring the TARDIS (which they think to be a piece of art), when the Doctor (Tom Baker), Romana (Lalla Ward), and Duggan (Tom Chadbon) rush into it and it dematerialises. Bron's character, believing this to be part of the work, states that it is \"Exquisite, absolutely exquisite!\" She also had the main guest billing as the villain Kara in the Colin Baker era serial \"Revelation of the Daleks\" (1985). Bron later appeared in the \"Doctor Who\" audio drama \"Loups-Garoux\" (2001) starring Peter Davison, in which she played the wealthy heiress Ileana de Santos.\nBron played an art critic again in 1990, appearing in the BBC sketch comedy show \"French and Saunders\" in a parody of an Andy Warhol documentary. Later she made frequent appearances in Jennifer Saunders' television series \"Absolutely Fabulous\". Bron played, via flashback, the recurring character of Patsy's mother, a woman who \"scattered bastard babies across Europe like a garden sprinkler\". After giving birth, she would always say \"Now take it away! And bring me another lover.\" In 1992, she played Maria Lazlos in an episode of the first series of \"Heartbeat\". She had a supporting role in the 1994 BBC ghost story \"The Blue Boy\", and also appeared in the BBC's biographical TV movie \"Saint-Ex\" in 1996. She also narrated an episode on \"Wild Discovery\".\nStage appearances.\nIn 1973 Bron appeared in the West End musical \"The Card\". Throughout the 1980s she appeared in Amnesty International's \"The Secret Policeman's Ball\" live benefit shows, working alongside Peter Cook and Rowan Atkinson, starting with the stage show that preceded those, \"A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)\" in 1976. In 2005 she appeared at the Liverpool Empire Theatre in the musical play \"Twopence to Cross the Mersey\". She appeared in the role of an abbess in Howard Brenton's play \"In Extremis\", staged at Shakespeare's Globe in 2007. She also appeared in the dramatised version of Pedro Almod\u00f3var's film \"All About My Mother\", which opened at the Old Vic theatre in the late summer of 2007.\nBron also gave the premiere performance of \"The Yellow Cake Revue\" (1980), a series of pieces for voice and piano written by Peter Maxwell Davies in protest against uranium mining in the Orkney Islands. Bron has written and performed new verses for Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns' \"The Carnival of the Animals\". She has also performed and recorded the female reciter part in William Walton's Fa\u00e7ade (entertainment) with the Nash Ensemble.\nSince 1985.\nIn 1985 Bron was selected, for her authoritative tone, to become \"the voice of BT\" and can still be heard on various British telephone error messages such as \"The number you have dialled has not been recognised, please check and try again\".\nIn 1998, Bron appeared as Frau Luther in episode 2 \"Stuckart\" of the BBC Radio 4 adaptation of \"Fatherland\", a novel by Robert Harris. \nIn 2001 and 2002, she appeared in the BBC radio comedy sketch show \"The Right Time\", along with Graeme Garden, Paula Wilcox, Clive Swift, and Neil Innes. Another notable radio appearance was in \"The Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes\" in the 2002 episode \"The Madness of Colonel Warburton\". In 2001 she played the great-grandmother in the seven-part ITV series \"Gypsy Girl\", based on books by Elizabeth Arnold.\nIn 2006, she narrated the BBC Radio 4 adaptation of the Craig Brown book \"1966 and All That\". Her other voice work includes a recorded tour of Sir John Soane's Museum in London, England.\nIn April 2010, Bron, along with Ian McKellen and Brian Cox, appeared in a series of TV advertisements to support Age UK, the charity recently formed from the merger of Age Concern and Help the Aged. All three actors gave their time free of charge.\nIn June 2010, she guest-starred in \"Foyle's War\" in the episode \"The Russian House\". She appeared in the long-running British TV series \"Midsomer Murders\" as Lady Isobel DeQuetteville in the episode \"The Dark Rider\", first aired on ITV1 on 1 February 2012. In 2019 she appeared as Maxine in \"The Miniature Murders.\"\nOn 25 December 2013, Bron appeared on BBC One in \"The Tractate Middoth\", an adaptation of the M.R. James ghost story \"The Tractate Middoth\". On 25 July 2014, she joined the cast of radio soap \"The Archers\", playing the part of Carol Tregorran.\nIn November\u2013December 2019, Bron read Salley Vickers's \"Grandmothers\" in 10 parts on BBC Radio 4.\nPersonal life.\nBron was the partner of the architect Cedric Price for many years until his death in 2003; they had no children. An interview with Bron in 2015 revealed that she had voted for Jeremy Corbyn in the Labour leadership election. Bron is a pescetarian.\nWriter.\nShe is the author of several books, including \"Life and Other Punctures\", a 1978 account of bicycling in France and Holland on a Moulton bicycle; and \"Cedric Price Retriever\", an inventory of the contents of the bookshelves of her late partner, architect Cedric Price.\nCultural influences.\nShe is mentioned in the Yo La Tengo song \"Tom Courtenay\": \"...dreaming 'bout Eleanor Bron, in my room with the curtains drawn...\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50137", "revid": "5839510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50137", "title": "Third Council of Constantinople", "text": "680s council of the Christian churches\nThe Third Council of Constantinople, counted as the Sixth Ecumenical Council by the Eastern Orthodox and Catholic Churches, and by certain other Western Churches, met in 680\u2013681 and condemned monoenergism and monothelitism as heretical and defined Jesus Christ as having two energies and two wills (divine and human).\nBackground.\nThe council settled a set of theological controversies that went back to the sixth century but had intensified under the emperors Heraclius (r.\u2009610\u00a0\u2013\u00a0641) and Constans II (r.\u2009641\u00a0\u2013\u00a0668). Heraclius had set out to recover much of the part of his empire lost to the Persians and had attempted to bridge the controversy with monophysitism, which was particularly strong in Syria and Egypt, by proposing a moderate theological position that had as good support in the tradition as any other. The result was first monoenergism, i.e., that Christ, though existing in two natures (divine and human), had one energy; the second was monothelitism, i.e., that Christ had one will (that is, that there was no opposition in Christ between his human and divine volition). This doctrine was accepted in most of the Byzantine world. Still, it was opposed in Jerusalem and Rome and started a controversy that persisted even after the loss of the reconquered provinces and the death of Heraclius. When Heraclius' grandson Constans II took the throne, he saw the controversy as threatening the stability of the Empire and attempted to silence discussion by outlawing speaking either in favor or against the doctrine. Pope Martin I and the monk Maximus, the foremost opponents of monothelitism (which they interpreted as denying a human faculty of will to Christ), held a synod in Rome in 649 that condemned monoenergism and monothelitism. At Constantinople in around 653, some accused the Pope of supporting revolution; this was regarded as high treason, and Martin was accordingly arrested, tried, condemned and sent into exile, where he soon died. Martin and Maximus's position was supported by others at the Council of Constantinople.\nPreparations.\nAfter Constans' son and successor Constantine IV had overcome the Muslim siege of Constantinople in 678, he immediately set his sights on restoring communion with Rome: he wrote to Pope Donus suggesting a conference on the matter. When the letter reached Rome, Donus had died. Still, his successor, Pope Agatho, agreed to the Emperor's suggestion and ordered councils held throughout the West so that legates could present the tradition of the Western Church. There was a synod in Milan under Archbishop Mausuetus; another synod was held in 680 at Hatfield, over which Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury presided. Pope Agatho then convened a synod at Rome at Easter 680, with representatives from the regional synods.\nThen he sent a delegation to meet the Easterners at Constantinople. The delegates set out bearing two letters, one from Pope Agatho to the Emperor and the other from the bishops of the Rome synod to those gathered in Constantinople.\nIn the meantime, Constantine summoned Patriarch George I of Constantinople and all bishops of his jurisdiction of Constantinople to a council. He also summoned Patriarch Macarius of Antioch, a Byzantine appointee permanently resident in Constantinople because of the Muslim occupation of his see.\nProceedings.\nOn 7 November 680, a mere 37 bishops and several presbyters convened in a domed hall called the Trullus in the imperial palace. The patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch participated in person. In contrast, the patriarchates of Alexandria and Jerusalem were represented by Byzantine appointees (because of the Saracen Muslim conquest, there was, at this date, no patriarch in either of these sees). The Pope and a council he had held in Rome were represented (as was customary at eastern ecumenical councils) by a few priests and bishops. In its opening session, the council assumed the authority of an ecumenical council. The emperor attended and presided over the first eleven sessions, participated in the discussions, and returned for the closing session on 16 September 681, attended by 151 bishops.\nDuring the council, a letter by Pope Agatho was read, which asserted the traditional belief of the Church that Christ was of two wills, divine and human. Most of the bishops present accepted the letter, proclaiming that Peter spoke through Agatho, though this council also proclaimed another historical pope as anathema. Macarius of Antioch defended monothelitism but was condemned and deposed, along with his partisans. The council, in keeping with Agatho's letter, defined that Jesus Christ possessed two energies and two wills but that the human will was 'in subjection to his divine and all-powerful will'. The council carefully avoided any mention of Maximus the Confessor, who was still regarded with suspicion. It condemned both monoenergism and monothelitism as heretical and included those who had supported this heresy, including Pope Honorius I and four previous patriarchs of Constantinople. When the council had concluded, the decrees were sent to Rome where they were accepted by Agatho's successor, Pope Leo II. In his letter of confirmation of the council, Leo accuses, \"Honorius who did not attempt to sanctify this Apostolic Church with the teaching of Apostolic tradition, but by profane treachery permitted its purity to be polluted\".\nDuring the council's proceedings, a Monothelite priest named Polychronius claimed he could raise the dead, thereby proving his faith supreme. He had a corpse brought forth, but after whispering prayers into its ears, he could not revive the body. Despite his defeat, he continued to confess Monothelitism and was anathematised by the council.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50139", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50139", "title": "Girolamo Savonarola", "text": "De facto ruler of Florence from 1494 to 1498; Dominican friar and reformer\nGirolamo Savonarola, OP (, ; ; 21 September 1452 \u2013 23 May 1498), also referred to as Jerome Savonarola, was an ascetic Dominican friar from Ferrara and a preacher active in Renaissance Florence. He became known for his prophecies of civic glory, his advocacy of the destruction of secular art and culture, and his calls for Christian renewal. He denounced clerical corruption, despotic rule, and the exploitation of the poor.\nIn September 1494, when King Charles VIII of France invaded Italy and threatened Florence, Savonarola's prophecies seemed on the verge of fulfillment. While the friar intervened with the French king, the Florentines expelled the ruling Medicis and at Savonarola's urging established a \"well received\" republic, effectively under Savonarola's control. Declaring that Florence would be the New Jerusalem, the world centre of Christianity and \"richer, more powerful, more glorious than ever\", he instituted an extreme moralistic campaign, enlisting the active help of Florentine youth.\nIn 1495, when Florence refused to join Pope Alexander VI's Holy League against the French, the Vatican summoned Savonarola to Rome. He disobeyed, and further defied the pope by preaching under a ban, highlighting his campaign for reform with processions, bonfires of the vanities, and pious theatricals. In retaliation, Pope Alexander excommunicated Savonarola in May 1497 and threatened to place Florence under an interdict. A trial by fire proposed by a rival Florentine preacher in April 1498 to test Savonarola's divine mandate turned into a fiasco, and popular opinion turned against him. Savonarola and two of his supporting friars were imprisoned. On 23 May 1498, Church and civil authorities condemned, hanged, and burned the bodies of the three friars in the main square of Florence.\nSavonarola's devotees, the , kept his cause of republican freedom and religious reform alive well into the following century. Pope Julius II (in office: 1503\u20131513) allegedly considered his canonization. The Medici\u2014restored to power in Florence in 1512 with the help of the papacy\u2014eventually weakened the movement. Some early Protestants, including Martin Luther himself, have regarded Savonarola as a vital precursor to the Protestant Reformation.\nEarly years.\nSavonarola was born on 21 September 1452 in Ferrara to Niccol\u00f2 di Michele and Elena. His father, Niccol\u00f2, was born in Ferrara to a family originally from Padua; his mother, Elena, claimed a lineage from the Bonacossi family of Mantua. She and Niccol\u00f2 had seven children, of whom Girolamo was third. His grandfather, Michele Savonarola, a noted and successful physician and polymath, oversaw Girolamo's education. The family amassed a great deal of wealth from Michele's medical practice. After his grandfather's death in 1468 Savonarola may have attended the public school run by Battista Guarino, son of Guarino da Verona, where he would have received his introduction to the classics as well as to the poetry and writings of Petrarch, father of Renaissance humanism. Earning an arts degree at the University of Ferrara, he prepared to enter medical school, following in his grandfather's footsteps. At some point, however, he abandoned his career intentions.\nIn his early poems he expresses his preoccupation with the state of the Church and of the world. He began to write poetry of an apocalyptic bent, notably \"On the Ruin of the World\" (1472) and \"On the Ruin of the Church\" (1475), in which he singled out the papal court at Rome for special obloquy. About the same time he seems to have been thinking about a life in religion. As he later told his biographer, a sermon he heard by a preacher in Faenza persuaded him to abandon the world. Most of his biographers reject or ignore the account of his younger brother and follower, Maurelio (later fra Mauro), that in his youth Girolamo had been spurned by a neighbour, Laudomia Strozzi, to whom he had proposed marriage. True or not, in a letter he wrote to his father when he left home to join the Dominican Order he hints at being troubled by desires of the flesh. There is also a story that on the eve of his departure he dreamed that he was cleansed of such thoughts by a shower of icy water, which prepared him for the ascetic life. In the unfinished treatise he left behind, later called \"De contemptu Mundi\" or \"On Contempt for the World\", he calls upon readers to fly from this world of adultery, sodomy, murder, and envy.\nSavonarola studied Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. He also studied the scriptures and memorised parts. On 25 April 1475, Savonarola went to Bologna, where he knocked on the door of the Friary of San Domenico, of the Order of Friars Preacher, and asked to be admitted. As he told his father in his farewell letter, he wanted to become a knight of Christ.\nFriar.\nIn the convent, Savonarola took the vow of obedience proper to his order, and after a year was ordained to the priesthood. He studied Scripture, logic, Aristotelian philosophy and Thomistic theology in the Dominican studium, practised preaching to his fellow friars, and engaged in disputations. He then matriculated in the theological faculty to prepare for an advanced degree. Even as he continued to write devotional works and to deepen his spiritual life, he was openly critical of what he perceived as the decline in convent austerity. In 1478 his studies were interrupted when he was sent to the Dominican priory of Santa Maria degli Angeli in Ferrara as assistant master of novices. The assignment might have been a normal, temporary break from the academic routine, but in Savonarola's case, it was a turning point. One explanation is that he had alienated certain of his superiors, particularly fra Vincenzo Bandelli, or Bandello, a professor at the studium and future master general of the Dominicans, who resented the young friar's opposition to modifying the Order's rules against the ownership of property.\nIn 1482, instead of returning to Bologna to resume his studies, Savonarola was assigned as lector, or teacher, in the Convent of San Marco in Florence. In San Marco, fra Girolamo (Savonarola) taught logic to the novices, wrote instructional manuals on ethics, logic, philosophy and government, composed devotional works, and prepared his sermons for local congregations. As he recorded in his notes, his preaching was not altogether successful. Florentines were put off by his foreign-sounding Ferrarese speech, his strident voice and (especially to those who valued humanist rhetoric) his inelegant style.\nWhile waiting for a friend in the Convent of San Giorgio, he was studying Scripture when he suddenly conceived \"about seven reasons\" why the Church was about to be scourged and renewed. He broached these apocalyptic themes in San Gimignano, where he went as Lenten preacher in 1485 and again in 1486. A year later, when he left San Marco for a new assignment, he had said nothing of his \"San Giorgio revelations\" in Florence.\nPreacher.\nFor the next several years, Savonarola lived as an itinerant preacher with a message of repentance and reform in the cities and convents of north Italy. As his letters to his mother and his writings show, his confidence and sense of mission grew along with his widening reputation. In 1490, he was reassigned to San Marco. It seems that this was due to the initiative of the humanist philosopher-prince, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, who had heard Savonarola in a formal disputation in Reggio Emilia and been impressed with his learning and piety. Pico was in trouble with the Church for some of his unorthodox philosophical ideas (the famous \"900 theses\") and was living under the protection of Lorenzo the Magnificent, the Medici \"de facto\" ruler of Florence. To have Savonarola beside him as a spiritual counsellor, he persuaded Lorenzo that the friar would bring prestige to the convent of San Marco and its Medici patrons. After some delay, apparently due to the interference of his former professor fra Vincenzo Bandelli, now Vicar General of the Order, Lorenzo succeeded in bringing Savonarola back to Florence, where he arrived in May or June of that year.\nProphet.\nSavonarola preached on the First Epistle of John and on the Book of Revelation, drawing such large crowds that he eventually moved to the cathedral. Without mentioning names, he made pointed allusions to tyrants who usurped the freedom of the people, and he excoriated their allies, the rich and powerful who neglected and exploited the poor. Complaining of the evil lives of a corrupt clergy, he now called for repentance and renewal before the arrival of a divine scourge. Scoffers dismissed him as an over-excited zealot and \"preacher of the desperate\" and sneered at his growing band of followers as \"Piagnoni\"\u2014\"Weepers\" or \"Wailers\", an epithet they adopted. In 1492 Savonarola warned of \"the Sword of the Lord over the earth quickly and soon\" and envisioned terrible tribulations to Rome. Around 1493 (these sermons have not survived) he began to prophesy that a New Cyrus was coming over the mountains to begin the renewal of the Church.\nIn September 1494 King Charles VIII of France crossed the Alps with a formidable army, throwing Italy into political chaos. Many viewed the arrival of King Charles as proof of Savonarola's gift of prophecy. Charles advanced on Florence, sacking Tuscan strongholds and threatening to punish the city for refusing to support his expedition. As the populace took to the streets to expel Piero the Unfortunate, Lorenzo de' Medici's son and successor, Savonarola led a delegation to the camp of the French king in mid-November 1494. He pressed Charles to spare Florence and enjoined him to take up his divinely appointed role as the reformer of the Church. After a short, tense occupation of the city, and another intervention by fra Girolamo (as well as the promise of a huge subsidy), the French resumed their journey southward on 28 November 1494. Savonarola now declared that by answering his call to penitence, the Florentines had begun to build a new Ark of Noah which had saved them from the waters of the divine flood. Even more sensational was the message in his sermon of 10 December:\nI announce this good news to the city, that Florence will be more glorious, richer, more powerful than she has ever been; First, glorious in the sight of God as well as of men: and you, O Florence will be the reformation of all Italy, and from here the renewal will begin and spread everywhere, because this is the navel of Italy. Your counsels will reform all by the light and grace that God will give you. Second, O Florence, you will have innumerable riches, and God will multiply all things for you. Third, you will spread your empire, and thus you will have power temporal and spiritual.\nThis astounding guarantee may have been an allusion to the traditional patriotic myth of Florence as the new Rome, which Savonarola would have encountered in his readings in Florentine history. In any case, it encompassed both temporal power and spiritual leadership.\nReformer.\nWith Savonarola's advice and support (as a non-citizen and cleric he was ineligible to hold office), a Savonarolan political \"party\", dubbed \"the Frateschi\", took shape and steered the friar's program through the councils. The oligarchs most compromised by their service to the Medici were barred from office. A new constitution enfranchised the artisan class, opened minor civic offices to selection by lot, and granted every citizen in good standing the right to a vote in a new parliament, the Consiglio Maggiore, or Great Council. At Savonarola's urging, the Frateschi government, after months of debate, passed a \"Law of Appeal\" to limit the longtime practice of using exile and capital punishment as factional weapons. Savonarola declared a new era of \"universal peace\". On 13 January 1495 he preached his great Renovation Sermon to a huge audience in the cathedral, recalling that he had begun prophesying in Florence four years earlier, although the divine light had come to him \"more than fifteen, maybe twenty years ago\". He now claimed that he had predicted the deaths of Lorenzo de' Medici and of Pope Innocent VIII in 1492 and the coming of the sword to Italy\u2014the invasion of King Charles of France. As he had foreseen, God had chosen Florence, \"the navel of Italy\", as his favourite and he repeated: if the city continued to do penance and began the work of renewal it would have riches, glory and power.\nIf the Florentines had any doubt that the promise of worldly power and glory had heavenly sanction, Savonarola emphasised this in a sermon of 1 April 1495, in which he described his mystical journey to the Virgin Mary in heaven. At the celestial throne Savonarola presents the Holy Mother a crown made by the Florentine people and presses her to reveal their future. Mary warns that the way will be hard both for the city and for him, but she assures him that God will fulfil his promises: Florence will be \"more glorious, more powerful and richer than ever, extending its wings farther than anyone can imagine\". She and her heavenly minions will protect the city against its enemies and support its alliance with the French. In the New Jerusalem that is Florence peace and unity will reign. Based on such visions, Savonarola promoted theocracy, and declared Christ the king of Florence. He saw sacred art as a tool to promote this worldview, and he was therefore only opposed to secular art, which he saw as worthless and potentially damaging.\nBuoyed by liberation and prophetic promise, the Florentines embraced Savonarola's campaign to rid the city of \"vice\". At his repeated insistence, new laws were passed against sodomy (which included male and female same-sex relations), adultery, public drunkenness, and other moral transgressions, while his lieutenant Fra Silvestro Maruffi organised boys and young men to patrol the streets to curb immodest dress and behaviour. For a time, Pope Alexander VI (1492\u20131503) tolerated friar Girolamo's strictures against the Church, but he was moved to anger when Florence declined to join his new Holy League against the French invader, and blamed it on Savonarola's pernicious influence. An exchange of letters between the pope and the friar ended in an impasse which Savonarola tried to break by sending the pope \"a little book\" recounting his prophetic career and describing some of his more dramatic visions. This was the Compendium of Revelations, a self-dramatisation which was one of the farthest-reaching and most popular of his writings.\nThe pope was not mollified. He summoned the friar to appear before him in Rome, and when Savonarola refused, pleading ill health and confessing that he was afraid of being attacked on the journey, Alexander banned him from further preaching. For some months Savonarola obeyed, but when he saw his influence slipping he defied the pope and resumed his sermons, which became more violent in tone. He not only attacked secret enemies at home whom he rightly suspected of being in league with the papal Curia, he condemned the conventional, or \"tepid\", Christians who were slow to respond to his calls. He dramatised his moral campaign with special Masses for the youth, processions, bonfires of the vanities and religious theatre in San Marco. He and his close friend, the humanist poet Girolamo Benivieni, composed lauds and other devotional songs for the Carnival processions of 1496, 1497 and 1498, replacing the bawdy Carnival songs of the era of Lorenzo de' Medici. These continued to be copied and performed after his death, along with songs composed by Piagnoni in his memory. A number of them have survived.\nProto-Protestant.\nThe writings of Savonarola spread widely to Germany and Switzerland, and due to Savonarola's life and death, many people started to see the papacy as corrupted and sought a new reform of the church. Many people saw him as a martyr, including Martin Luther, who was influenced by Savonarola's writings. Savonarola's beliefs on the doctrine of justification have been said to be similar in some respects to Martin Luther's teachings, stating that humans are not justified by themselves. Savonarola may have influenced John Calvin, but this is a matter of historical debate.\nSavonarola never abandoned the teachings of the Catholic Church; for example, Savonarola held to a belief in seven sacraments and that the Church of Rome is \"the mother of all other churches and the pope its head\". However, his protests against papal corruption and his reliance on the Bible as the main guide link Savonarola with the later reformation, in the views of some. Savonarola, while revering the office of the papacy, nevertheless criticised the pope Alexander VI and his papal court. Savonarola even prophesied that Rome will come under judgement from God.the Pope may command me to do something that contravenes the law of Christian love or the Gospel. But, if he did so command, I would say to him, thou art no shepherd. Not the Roman Church, but thou errest\nWho are the fat kine of Bashan on the mountains of Samaria? I say they are the courtesans of Italy and Rome. Or, are there none? A thousand are too few for Rome, 10,000, 12,000, 14,000 are too few for Rome. Prepare thyself, O Rome, for great will be thy punishmentsCatholic sources, however, criticize the inclusion of Savonarola as a Protestant forerunner, because much of his theology still aligned with Catholic theology. For example, he is credited with writing or popularizing the second half of the modern Hail Mary () in his \"Esposizione sopra l\u2019Ave Maria\", (1495). Despite inspiring some Protestant reformers, Savonarola also influenced some leaders of the Counter-Reformation.\nExcommunication and death.\nOn 12 May 1497, Borgia Pope Alexander VI excommunicated Savonarola, and also threatened the Florentines with an interdict if they persisted in harbouring him. After describing the contemporary Church leadership as a pockmarked whore sitting on Solomon's throne, Savonarola was excommunicated for heresy and sedition. On 18 March 1498, after much debate and steady pressure from a worried government, Savonarola withdrew from public preaching. Under the stress of excommunication, he composed his spiritual masterpiece, the \"Triumph of the Cross\", a celebration of the victory of the Cross over sin and death and an exploration of what it means to be a Christian. This he summed up in the theological virtue of \"caritas\", or love. In loving their neighbours, Christians return the love which they have received from their Creator and Savior. Savonarola hinted at performing miracles to prove his divine mission, but when a rival Franciscan preacher proposed to test that mission by walking through fire, he lost control of public discourse. Without consulting him, his confidant Fra Domenico da Pescia offered himself as his surrogate and Savonarola felt he could not afford to refuse. The first trial by fire in Florence in over four hundred years was set for 7 April.\nA crowd filled the central square, eager to see if God would intervene, and if so, on which side. The nervous contestants and their delegations delayed the start of the contest for hours. A sudden rain drenched the spectators and government officials cancelled the proceedings. The crowd disbanded angrily; the burden of proof had been on Savonarola, and he was blamed for the fiasco. A mob assaulted the convent of San Marco. Fra Girolamo, Fra Domenico, and Fra Silvestro Maruffi were arrested and imprisoned. Under torture Savonarola confessed to having invented his prophecies and visions, then recanted, then confessed again. In his prison cell in the tower of the government palace he composed meditations on Psalms 51 (\"Infelix ego\") and 31 (\"Tristitia obsedit me\"). On the morning of 23 May 1498, the three friars were led out into the main square where, before a tribunal of high clerics and government officials, they were condemned as heretics and schismatics, and sentenced to die forthwith. Stripped of their Dominican garments in ritual degradation, they mounted the scaffold in their thin white shirts. Each on separate gallows, they were hanged, while fires were ignited below them to consume their bodies. To prevent devotees from searching for relics, their ashes were carted away and scattered in the Arno.\nAftermath and legacy.\nResisting censorship and exile, the friars of San Marco fostered a cult of \"the three martyrs\" and venerated Savonarola as a saint. They encouraged women in local convents and surrounding towns to find mystical inspiration in his example, and, by preserving many of his sermons and writings, they helped keep his political as well as his religious ideas alive.\nThe return of the Medici in 1512 ended the Savonarola-inspired republic and intensified pressure against the movement, although both were briefly revived in 1527 when the Medici were once again forced out. In 1530, Medici Pope Clement VII (Giulio de' Medici), with the help of soldiers of the Holy Roman Emperor, restored Medici rule, and Florence became a hereditary dukedom. Savonarola's contemporary Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli discusses the friar in Chapter VI of his book \"The Prince\", writing:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus had been unarmed they could not have enforced their constitutions for long\u2014as happened in our time to Fra Girolamo Savonarola, who was ruined with his new order of things immediately the multitude believed in him no longer, and he had no means of keeping steadfast those who believed or of making the unbelievers to believe.\nSavonarolan religious ideas found a reception elsewhere. In Germany and Switzerland the early Protestant reformers, most notably Martin Luther himself, read some of the friar's writings and praised him as a martyr and forerunner whose ideas on faith and grace anticipated Luther's own doctrine of justification by faith alone. In France many of his works were translated and published and Savonarola came to be regarded as a precursor of evangelical, or Huguenot reform. In Wittenberg, the hometown of Martin Luther, a statue of Girolamo Savonarola was erected to honour him.\nCarafa Pope Paul IV in 1558 declared that Savonarola was not a heretic. Savonarola had remained a believer in the dogmas of the Catholic church and even in his last major work had defended the institution of the papacy. Within the Dominican Order Savonarola was seen as a devotional figure (\"the evolving image of a Counter-Reformation saintly prelate\"), and in this benevolent guise his memory lived on. Philip Neri, founder of the Oratorians, a Florentine who had been educated by the San Marco Dominicans, also defended Savonarola's memory.\n18th century Spanish defense.\nIn the early 18th century, Savonarola\u2019s reputation was defended in Spain by the Dominican friar Manuel Joseph de Medrano, \"Predicador\" General and \"Choronista\" of the Dominican Order. Medrano authored the \"Vida de la admirable Virgen Santa In\u00e9s de Monte Policiano\", which included a theological defense of Savonarola's sanctity and prophetic mission. His writings were praised and analyzed in \"Tertulia hist\u00f3rica y apolog\u00e9tica\" (Zaragoza, c. 1730) by the jurist Doctor Jayme Ardanaz y Centellas. In this work, Medrano's scholarship, moderation, and courteous style were highlighted, and his arguments against the criticisms of Savonarola by the renowned Benedictine scholar Benito Jer\u00f3nimo Feij\u00f3o were carefully examined in a scholarly dialogue. This Spanish Dominican contribution reflects the continued cross-European reassessment of Savonarola\u2019s moral and prophetic role well before the modern period.\n19th century to present.\nIn the mid-nineteenth century, the \"New Piagnoni\" found inspiration in the friar's writings and sermons for the Italian national awakening known as the Risorgimento. By emphasising his political activism over his puritanism and cultural conservatism they restored Savonarola's voice for radical political change. The venerable pre-Reformation icon ceded to the fiery Renaissance reformer. This somewhat anachronistic image, fortified by much new scholarship, informed the major new biography by Pasquale Villari, who regarded Savonarola's preaching against Medici despotism as the model for the Italian struggle for liberty and national unification. In Germany, the Catholic theologian and church historian Joseph Schnitzer edited and published contemporary sources which illuminated Savonarola's career. In 1924 he crowned his vast research with a comprehensive study of Savonarola's life and times in which he presented the friar as the last best hope of the Catholic Church before the catastrophe of the Protestant Reformation. In the Italian People's Party founded by Don Luigi Sturzo in 1919, Savonarola was revered as a champion of social justice, and after 1945 he was held up as a model of reformed Catholicism by leaders of the Christian Democratic Party. From this milieu, in 1952 came the third of the major Savonarola biographies, the \"Vita di Girolamo Savonarola\" by Roberto Ridolfi. For the next half century Ridolfi was the guardian of the friar's saintly memory as well as the dean of Savonarola research which he helped grow into a scholarly industry. Today, most of Savonarola's treatises and sermons and many of the contemporary sources (chronicles, diaries, government documents, and literary works) are available in critical editions.\nThe present-day Church has considered his beatification. In 2020, a devotional society (The Savonarola Society) dedicated to promoting his cause for canonisation was founded; in 2024 this group began The Opera Savonarolae (The Savonarola Project) in collaboration with Studio Fratesco, attempting to translate all of Savonarola's works into English as well as many previously untranslated secondary sources. The first publication in this project was a reprint of Fr. J L O'Neil's 1898 biography \"Jerome Savonarola: A Sketch\". In December 2024, the group received a personal greeting from Pope Francis.\nThe Polish National Catholic Church, a church not in communion with Rome and a branch of the Union of Utrecht, named its seminary after Savonarola.\nWorks.\nAlmost thirty volumes of Savonarola's sermons and writings have so far been published in the \"Edizione nazionale delle Opere di Girolamo Savonarola\" (Rome, Angelo Belardetti, 1953 to the present). For editions of the 15th and 16th centuries see \"Catalogo delle edizioni di Girolamo Savonarola (secc. xv\u2013xvi)\" ed. P. Scapecchi (Florence, 1998, ).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50145", "revid": "33625371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50145", "title": "Economic surplus", "text": "Concept in economics\nIn mainstream economics, economic surplus, also known as total welfare or total social welfare or Marshallian surplus (after Alfred Marshall), is either of two related quantities: \nThe sum of consumer and producer surplus is sometimes known as social surplus or total surplus; a decrease in that total from inefficiencies is called deadweight loss.\nOverview.\nIn the mid-19th century, engineer Jules Dupuit first propounded the concept of economic surplus, but it was the economist Alfred Marshall who gave the concept its fame in the field of economics.\nOn a standard supply and demand diagram, consumer surplus is the area (triangular if the supply and demand curves are linear) above the equilibrium price of the good and below the demand curve. This reflects the fact that consumers would have been willing to buy a single unit of the good at a price higher than the equilibrium price, a second unit at a price below that but still above the equilibrium price, etc., yet they in fact pay just the equilibrium price for each unit they buy.\nLikewise, in the supply-demand diagram, producer surplus is the area below the equilibrium price but above the supply curve. This reflects the fact that producers would have been willing to supply the first unit at a price lower than the equilibrium price, the second unit at a price above that but still below the equilibrium price, etc., yet they in fact receive the equilibrium price for all the units they sell.\nHistory.\nEarly writers of economic issues used surplus as a means to draw conclusions about the relationship between production and necessities. In the agricultural sector surplus was an important concept because this sector has the responsibility to feed everyone plus itself. Food is notable because people only need a specific amount of food and can only consume a limited amount. This means that excess food production must overflow to other people, and will not be rationally hoarded. The non-agricultural sector is therefore limited by the agricultural sector equaling the output of food subtracting the amount consumed by the agricultural sector. \nWilliam Petty used a broad definition of necessities, leading him to focus on employment issues surrounding surplus. Petty explains a hypothetical example in which there is a territory of 1000 men and 100 of those men are capable of producing enough food for all 1000 men. The question becomes, what will the rest of the men do if only 100 are needed to provide necessities? He thereby suggests a variety of employments with some remaining unemployed. \nDavid Hume approached the agricultural surplus concept from another direction. Hume recognized that agriculture may feed more than those who cultivate it, but questioned why farmers would work to produce more than they need. Forceful production, which may occur under a feudal system, would be unlikely to generate a notable surplus in his opinion. Yet, if they could purchase luxuries and other goods beyond their necessities, they would become incentivized to produce and sell a surplus. Hume did not see this concept as abstract theory, he stated it as a fact when discussing how England developed after the introduction of foreign luxuries in his History of England.\nAdam Smith's thoughts on surplus drew on Hume. Smith noted that the desire for luxuries is infinite compared to the finite capacity of hunger. Smith saw the development in Europe as originating from landlords placing more importance on luxury spending rather than political power.\nConsumer surplus.\nConsumer surplus is the difference between the maximum price a consumer is willing to pay and the actual price they do pay. If a consumer is willing to pay more for a unit of a good than the current asking price, they are getting more benefit from the purchased product than they would if the price was their maximum willingness to pay. They are receiving the same benefit, the obtainment of the good, at a lesser cost. An example of a good with generally high consumer surplus is drinking water. People would pay very high prices for drinking water, as they need it to survive. The difference in the price that they would pay, if they had to, and the amount that they pay now is their consumer surplus. The utility of the first few liters of drinking water is very high (as it prevents death), so the first few liters would likely have more consumer surplus than subsequent quantities.\nThe maximum amount a consumer would be willing to pay for a given quantity of a good is the sum of the maximum price they would pay for the first unit, the (lower) maximum price they would be willing to pay for the second unit, etc. Typically these prices are decreasing; they are given by the individual demand curve, which must be generated by a rational consumer who maximizes utility subject to a budget constraint. Because the demand curve is downward sloping, there is diminishing marginal utility. Diminishing marginal utility means a person receives less additional utility from an additional unit. However, the price of a product is constant for every unit at the equilibrium price. The extra money someone would be willing to pay for the number units of a product less than the equilibrium quantity and at a higher price than the equilibrium price for each of these quantities is the benefit they receive from purchasing these quantities. For a given price the consumer buys the amount for which the consumer surplus is highest. The consumer's surplus is highest at the largest number of units for which, even for the last unit, the maximum willingness to pay is not below the market price.\nConsumer surplus can be used as a measurement of social welfare, shown by Robert Willig. For a single price change, consumer surplus can provide an approximation of changes in welfare. With multiple price and/or income changes, however, consumer surplus cannot be used to approximate economic welfare because it is not single-valued anymore. More modern methods are developed later to estimate the welfare effect of price changes using consumer surplus.\nThe aggregate consumers' surplus is the sum of the consumer's surplus for all individual consumers. This aggregation can be represented graphically, as shown in the above graph of the market demand and supply curves. The aggregate consumers' surplus can also be said to be the maxim of satisfaction a consumer derives from particular goods and services.\nCalculation from supply and demand.\nThe consumer surplus (individual or aggregated) is the area under the (individual or aggregated) demand curve and above a horizontal line at the actual price (in the aggregated case, the equilibrium price). If the demand curve is a straight line, the consumer surplus is the area of a triangle:\nformula_1\nwhere \"P\"mkt is the equilibrium price (where supply equals demand), \"Q\"mkt is the total quantity purchased at the equilibrium price, and \"P\"max is the price at which the quantity purchased would fall to 0 (that is, where the demand curve intercepts the price axis). For more general demand and supply functions, these areas are not triangles but can still be found using integral calculus. Consumer surplus is thus the definite integral of the demand function with respect to price, from the market price to the maximum reservation price (i.e., the price-intercept of the demand function):\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 This shows that if we see a rise in the equilibrium price and a fall in the equilibrium quantity, then consumer surplus falls.\nCalculation of a change in consumer surplus.\nThe change in consumer surplus is used to measure the changes in prices and income. The demand function used to represent an individual's demand for a certain product is essential in determining the effects of a price change. An individual's demand function is a function of the individual's income, the demographic characteristics of the individual, and the vector of commodity prices. When the price of a product changes, the change in consumer surplus is measured as the negative value of the integral from the original actual price (\"P\"0) and the new actual price (\"P\"1) of the demand for product by the individual. If the change in consumer surplus is positive, the price change is said to have increased the individuals welfare. If the price change in consumer surplus is negative, the price change is said to have decreased the individual's welfare.\nDistribution of benefits when price falls.\nWhen supply of a good expands, the price falls (assuming the demand curve is downward sloping) and consumer surplus increases. This benefits two groups of people: consumers who were already willing to buy at the initial price benefit from a price reduction, and they may buy more and receive even more consumer surplus; and additional consumers who were unwilling to buy at the initial price will buy at the new price and also receive some consumer surplus.\nConsider an example of linear supply and demand curves. For an initial supply curve \"S\"0, consumer surplus is the triangle above the line formed by price \"P\"0 to the demand line (bounded on the left by the price axis and on the top by the demand line). If supply expands from \"S\"0 to \"S\"1, the consumers' surplus expands to the triangle above P1 and below the demand line (still bounded by the price axis). The change in consumer's surplus is difference in area between the two triangles, and that is the consumer welfare associated with expansion of supply.\nSome people were willing to pay the higher price \"P\"0. When the price is reduced, their benefit is the area in the rectangle formed on the top by \"P\"0, on the bottom by \"P\"1, on the left by the price axis and on the right by line extending vertically upwards from \"Q\"0.\nThe second set of beneficiaries are consumers who buy more, and new consumers, those who will pay the new lower price (\"P\"1) but not the higher price (\"P\"0). Their additional consumption makes up the difference between \"Q\"1 and \"Q\"0. Their consumer surplus is the triangle bounded on the left by the line extending vertically upwards from \"Q\"0, on the right and top by the demand line, and on the bottom by the line extending horizontally to the right from \"P\"1.\nRule of one-half.\nThe rule of one-half estimates the change in consumer surplus for small changes in supply with a constant demand curve. Note that in the special case where the consumer demand curve is linear, consumer surplus is the area of the triangle bounded by the vertical line \"Q\"\u00a0=\u00a00, the horizontal line formula_4 and the linear demand curve. Hence, the change in consumer surplus is the area of the trapezoid with i) height equal to the change in price and ii) mid-segment length equal to the average of the ex-post and ex-ante equilibrium quantities. Following the figure above,\nformula_5\nwhere:\nProducer surplus.\nProducer surplus is the additional benefit that the owners of production factors and product providers bring to producers due to the differences between production, the supply price of the product, and the current market price. The difference between the amount actually obtained in a market transaction and the minimum amount it is willing to accept with the production factors or the products provided.\nCalculation of producer surplus.\nProducer surplus is usually expressed by the area below the market price line and above the supply curve. In Figure 1, the shaded areas below the price line and above the supply curve between production zero and maximum output \"Q\"1 indicate producer surplus. Among them, OP1EQ1 below the price line. This indicates that the total revenue is the minimum total payment actually accepted by the manufacturer. The area OPMEQ1 below the S curve is the minimum total revenue that the manufacturer is willing to accept. In Figure 1, the area enclosed by the market price line, the manufacturer's supply line, and the coordinate axis is the producer surplus. Because the rectangle OP1EQ1 is the total revenue actually obtained by the manufacturer, that is, \"A\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"B\", and the trapezoid OPMEQ. The minimum total profit that the manufacturer is willing to accept, that is, \"B\", so \"A\" is the producer surplus.\nObviously, the manufacturer produces and sells a certain quantity of \"Q\"1 goods at the market price \"P\"1. The manufacturer has reduced the quantity of goods for \"Q\"1, which means that the manufacturer has increased the production factors or production costs equivalent to the amount of AVC\u00b7\"Q\"1. However, at the same time, the manufacturer actually obtains a total income equivalent to the total market price \"P\"1\u00b7\"Q\"1. Since AVC is always smaller than \"P\"1, from the production and sales of goods in \"Q\"1, manufacturers not only get sales revenue equivalent to variable costs, but also get additional revenue. This part of the excess income reflects the increase in the benefits obtained by the manufacturers through market exchange. Therefore, in economics, producer surplus is usually used to measure producer welfare and is an important part of social welfare.\nProducer surplus is usually used to measure the economic welfare obtained by the manufacturer in the market supply. When the supply price is constant, the producer welfare depends on the market price. If the manufacturer can sell the product at the highest price, the welfare is the greatest. As part of social welfare, the size of the producer surplus depends on many factors. Generally speaking, when other factors remain constant, an increase in market price will increase producer surplus, and a decrease in supply price or marginal cost will also increase producer surplus. If there is a surplus of goods, that is, people can only sell part of the goods at market prices, and producer surplus will decrease.\nObviously, the sum of the producer surplus of all manufacturers in the market constitutes the producer surplus of the entire market. Graphically, it should be expressed as the area enclosed by the market supply curve, the market price line and the coordinate axis.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "50147", "revid": "13787145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50147", "title": "Animal physiology", "text": ""}
{"id": "50148", "revid": "35351935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50148", "title": "Prosecutor's fallacy", "text": ""}
{"id": "50149", "revid": "46193485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50149", "title": "Longitude rewards", "text": "1714 British prize for ship's chronometers\nThe longitude rewards were the system of inducement prizes offered by the British government for a simple and practical method for the precise determination of a ship's longitude at sea. The prizes, established through an act of Parliament, the Longitude Act 1714 (13 Ann. c. 14), in 1714, were administered by the Board of Longitude.\nThis was by no means the first reward to be offered to solve this problem. Philip II of Spain offered one in 1567, Philip III in 1598 offered 6,000 ducats and a pension, whilst the States General of the Netherlands offered 10,000 florins shortly after. In 1675 Robert Hooke wanted to apply for a \u00a31,000 reward in England for his invention of a spring-regulated watch. However, these large sums were never won, though several people were awarded smaller amounts for significant achievements.\nBackground.\nThe measurement of longitude was a problem that came into sharp focus as people began making transoceanic voyages.\nDetermining latitude was relatively easy in that it could be found from the altitude of the sun at noon with the aid of a table giving the sun's declination for the day. For longitude, early ocean navigators had to rely on dead reckoning, based on calculations of the vessel's heading and speed for a given time (much of which was based on intuition on the part of the master and/or navigator). This was inaccurate on long voyages out of sight of land, and these voyages sometimes ended in tragedy. An accurate determination of longitude was also necessary to determine the proper \"magnetic declination\", that is, the difference between indicated magnetic north and true north, which can differ by up to 10\u00a0degrees in the important trade latitudes of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Finding an adequate solution to determining longitude at sea was therefore of paramount importance.\nThe Longitude Act 1714 (13 Ann. c. 14) only addressed the determination of longitude at sea. Determining longitude reasonably accurately on land was possible, from the 17th century onwards, using the Galilean moons of Jupiter as an astronomical 'clock'. The moons were easily observable on land, but numerous attempts to reliably observe them from the deck of a ship resulted in failure.\nThe need for better navigational accuracy for increasingly longer oceanic voyages had been an issue explored by many European nations for centuries before the passing of the Longitude Act 1714 in England. Portugal, Spain, and the Netherlands offered financial incentives for solutions to the problem of longitude as early as 1598.\nAddressing the problem of longitude fell, primarily, into three categories: terrestrial, celestial, and mechanical. This included detailed atlases, lunar charts, and timekeeping mechanisms at sea. It is postulated by scholars that the economic gains and political power to be had in oceanic exploration, and not scientific and technological curiosity, is what resulted in the swift passing of the Longitude Act 1714 (13 Ann. c. 14) and the largest and most famous reward, the Longitude Prize being offered.\nEstablishing the prizes.\nIn the early 1700s, a series of maritime disasters occurred, including the wrecking of a squadron of naval vessels on the Isles of Scilly in 1707. Around the same time, mathematician Thomas Axe decreed in his will that a \u00a31,000 prize be awarded for promising research into finding \"true longitude\" and that annual sums be paid to scholars involved in making corrected world maps.\nIn 1713, when the longitude proposal of William Whiston and Humphrey Ditton was presented at the opening of the session of Parliament, a general understanding of the longitude problem prompted the formation of a parliamentary committee and the swift passing of the Longitude Act on July 8, 1714. Within this act are detailed three prizes based on levels of accuracy, which are the same accuracy requirements used for the Axe prize, set by Whiston and Ditton in their petition, and recommended by Sir Isaac Newton and Edmund Halley to the parliamentary committee.\nIn addition, rewards were on offer for those who could produce a method that worked within 80 geographical miles of the coast (where ships would be in most danger), and for those with promising ideas who needed financial help to bring them to trial.\nProposed methods would be tested by sailing through the ocean, from Britain to any port in West Indies (about six weeks) without losing its longitude beyond the limits listed above. Also, the contender would be required to demonstrate the accuracy of their method by determining the longitude of a specific land-based feature whose longitude was already accurately known. The parliamentary committee also established the Board of Longitude. This panel of adjudicators would review proposed solutions and were also given authority to grant up to \u00a32,000 in advances for promising projects that did not entirely fulfill the terms of the prize levels, but that were still found worthy of encouragement. The exact terms of the requirements for the prizes would later be contended by several recipients, including John Harrison. Ultimately, the \u00a320,000 reward was not awarded to anyone in a lump sum, although John Harrison did receive a series of payments totaling \u00a323,065. The Board of Longitude remained in existence for more than 100 years. When it was officially disbanded in 1828, an excess of \u00a3100,000 had been disbursed.\nNotable recipients.\nThe Longitude Act offered a very large incentive for solutions to the longitude problem. Some later recipients of rewards, such as Euler and Mayer, made clear publicly that the money was not the incentive, but instead the important improvements to navigation and cartography. Other recipients, such as Kendall and Harrison had to appeal to the Board of Longitude and other governmental officials for adequate compensation for their work. Still others submitted radical and impractical theories, some of which can be seen in a collection at Harvard\u2019s Houghton Library. Schemes and ideas for improvements to instruments and astronomy, both practical and impractical, can be seen among the digitised archives of the Board of Longitude.\nThough the Board of Longitude did not award \u00a320,000 at one time, they did offer sums to various individuals in recognition of their work for improvements in instrumentation or in published atlases and star charts.\nList of awardees by amount.\nA full list of prizes made by the Commissioners and Board of Longitude was drawn up by Derek Howse, in an Appendix to his article on the finances of the Board of Longitude.\nOther submissions.\nOnly two women are known to have submitted proposals to the Longitude Commissioners, Elizabeth Johnson and Jane Squire. Incoming submissions can be found among the correspondence of the digitised papers of the Board of Longitude.\nJohn Harrison's contested reward.\nThe winner of the most reward money under the Longitude Act is John Harrison for sea timekeepers, including his H4 sea watch. Harrison was 21 years old when the Longitude Act was passed. He spent the next 45 years perfecting the design of his timekeepers. He first received a reward from the Commissioners of Longitude in 1737 and did not receive his final payment until he was 80.\nHarrison was first awarded \u00a3250 in 1737, in order to improve on his promising H1 sea clock, leading to the construction of H2. \u00a32,000 was rewarded over the span of 1741\u20131755 for continued construction and completion of H2 and H3. From 1760 to 1765, Harrison received \u00a32,865 for various expenses related to the construction, ocean trials, and eventual award for the performance of his sea watch H4. Despite the performance of the H4 exceeding the accuracy requirement of the highest reward possible in the original Longitude Act, Harrison was rewarded \u00a37,500 (that is, \u00a310,000 minus payments he had received in 1762 and 1764) once he had revealed the method of making his device, and was told that he must show that his single machine could be replicated before the final \u00a310,000 could be paid.\nHarrison made one rather than the requested two further copies of H4, and he and his family members eventually appealed to King George III after petitions for further rewards were not answered by the Board of Longitude. A reward of \u00a38,750 was granted by Parliament in 1773 for a total payment of \u00a323,065 spanning thirty-six years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50151", "revid": "50903081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50151", "title": "Leonid Brezhnev", "text": "Leader of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982\nLeonid Ilyich Brezhnev (19 December 1906\u00a0\u2013 10 November 1982) was a Soviet politician who served as General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1964 until his death in 1982. He also held office as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (head of state) from 1960 to 1964 and later from 1977 to 1982. His tenure as General Secretary and leader of the Soviet Union was second only to Joseph Stalin's in duration.\nLeonid Brezhnev was born to a working-class family in Kamenskoye (now Kamianske, Ukraine) within the Yekaterinoslav Governorate of the Russian Empire. After the October Revolution created the Soviet Union, Brezhnev joined the ruling Communist party's youth league in 1923 before becoming an official party member in 1929. When Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, he joined the Red Army as a commissar and rose rapidly through the ranks to become a major general during World War II. \nAfter the war ended, Brezhnev was promoted to the party's Central Committee in 1952 and became a full member of the Politburo by 1957. In 1964, he took part in the removal of Nikita Khrushchev as leader of the Soviet Union and replaced him as First Secretary of the CPSU. When Khrushchev was ousted, Brezhnev formed a triumvirate alongside Premier Alexei Kosygin and CC Secretary Nikolai Podgorny that initially led the country in Khrushchev's place. By the end of the 1960s, he had successfully consolidated power to become the dominant figure within the Soviet leadership.\nBrezhnev's governance improved the Soviet Union's international standing while stabilizing the position of its ruling party at home. Whereas Khrushchev regularly enacted policies without consulting the Politburo, Brezhnev was careful to minimize dissent among the party elite by reaching decisions through consensus thereby restoring the semblance of collective leadership. Additionally, while pushing for d\u00e9tente between the two Cold War superpowers, he achieved nuclear parity with the United States and strengthened Moscow's dominion over Central and Eastern Europe. Furthermore, the massive arms buildup and widespread military interventionism under Brezhnev's leadership substantially expanded Soviet influence abroad, particularly in the Middle East and Africa. By the mid-1970s, numerous observers argued the Soviet Union had surpassed the United States to become the world's strongest military power.\nConversely, Brezhnev's leadership also witnessed a significant increase in repression and censorship throughout the Soviet Union compared with the relatively liberal years of the Khrushchev Thaw. Ultimately, Brezhnev's hostility towards political and economic reform ushered in an era of socioeconomic decline referred to as the Era of Stagnation. In addition to pervasive corruption and declining economic growth, this period was also characterized by the shrinking availability of consumer goods and a growing technological gap between the Soviet Union and the United States.\nAfter 1975, Brezhnev's health rapidly deteriorated and he increasingly withdrew himself from governing the country despite remaining its highest authority. He eventually died on 10 November 1982 and was succeeded as general secretary and head of state by Yuri Andropov. Upon coming to power in 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev denounced Brezhnev's government for its inefficiency and inflexibility before launching a campaign to liberalize the Soviet Union, culminating in its outright collapse by the early 1990s. Notwithstanding the backlash to his regime's policies in the mid-1980s, Brezhnev's rule has received consistently high approval ratings in public polls conducted in post-Soviet Russia.\nEarly life and early career.\n1906\u20131939: Origins.\nLeonid Ilyich Brezhnev was born on 19 December 1906 in Kamenskoye (now Kamianske, Ukraine) within the Yekaterinoslav Governorate of the Russian Empire to metalworker Ilya Yakovlevich Brezhnev (1874\u20131934) and his wife, Natalia Denisovna Mazalova (1886\u20131975). His father lived in Brezhnevo (Kursky District, Kursk Oblast, Russia) before moving to Kamenskoye. The parents of Brezhnev's mother came from Yenakiieve. Brezhnev's ethnicity was given as Ukrainian in some documents, including his passport, and Russian in others. A statement confirming that he regarded himself as a Russian can be found in his work \"Memories\", where he wrote: \"And so, according to nationality, I am Russian, I am a proletarian, a hereditary metallurgist.\"\nBrezhnev's niece wrote that in 1913, Brezhnev enrolled in a parish school. Two years later, he was admitted to a grammar school. In order to pass the entrance exams, students were required to demonstrate proficiency in reading, writing, and arithmetic, pass a dictation, and recite a poem. Brezhnev left Kamenskoe for Kursk due to the famine of 1921\u20131923 and got employment as a porter at a cooking fat factory. \nIn 1923, Brezhnev joined the Komsomol, the Bolshevik youth organization. He was seventeen at that time, which was relatively old for the organization. This led his biographer Paul J. Murphy to surmise that he did it for careerist reasons. In the same year, Brezhnev enrolled at a college and four years later got a degree in land management. He started to work a year before graduation, first as a trainee in the Byelorussian SSR and, after receiving the diploma, in the Kursk Governorate and later in the Ural Oblast. During his work there, Brezhnev applied for Communist Party membership in 1929, spending two years as a candidate before becoming a full Party member two years later. Brezhnev reached a position of the head of land registry of Sverdlovsk in 1930, but relinquished it just half a year later to move to Moscow to enroll at the Institute of Agricultural Machinery. Historian Susanne Schattenberg speculates that he did so to avoid the excesses of collectivization that the Soviet Union was undergoing at that time. \nBrezhnev did not stay in Moscow for long and left only two months later due to a housing shortage. Initially, he worked as a fitter at a plant in Zaporozhye. A year later, he enrolled in an evening program at the Arsenichev Institute of Metallurgy to study thermal engineering, while simultaneously working at the Dnieper Metallurgical Combine, which was one of the focal points of Soviet industrialization. While still a student, Brezhnev was appointed as the director of the Workers\u2019 Faculty in 1933. He graduated from the institute in 1935, but worked as an engineer for less than half a year before being drafted into the Red Army. During his one-year service, Brezhnev received military training in Chita and became a political commissar of a tank division.\nDuring Stalin's Great Purge, Brezhnev was one of many apparatchiks who exploited the resulting openings in the government and the party to advance rapidly in the regime's ranks. In 1936, he was appointed director of the Dniprodzerzhynsk Technical College and a year later he became deputy chairman of the Kamenskoye city soviet. In May 1938, he obtained a position in Dnepropetrovsk and met Nikita Khrushchev, who had just taken control of the Ukrainian Communist Party. This relationship would be decisive for Brezhnev's future career. In 1939, he was appointed propaganda secretary of the Dnipropetrovsk party committee. During this time, Brezhnev took the first steps toward building a network of supporters which came to be known as the \"Dnipropetrovsk Mafia\" that would greatly aid his rise to power.\n1941\u20131945: World War II.\nWhen Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union, Brezhnev was tasked with overseeing mobilization plans and the evacuation of Soviet factories. In July, he requested to be drafted into the military and was assigned to the Southern Front. During the retreat of Soviet forces, he returned to Dnepropetrovsk and remained in the city up to 25 August, the day it fell. In Autumn, Brezhnev was made deputy of political administration for the Southern Front, with the rank of Brigade-Commissar (equivalent to Colonel). During this period, Brezhnev developed his contacts with Khrushchev further, directly serving under his leadership from July to October 1941.\nWhen the Germans occupied Ukraine in 1942, Brezhnev was sent to the Caucasus as deputy head of political administration of the North Caucasus Front. In April 1943 he became head of the Political Department of the 18th Army. Later that year, the 18th Army became part of the 1st Ukrainian Front, as the Red Army regained the initiative and advanced westward through Ukraine. In 1944, Brezhnev was promoted to the rank of major general as Soviets successfully pushed German forces out of Transcarpathia. At the end of the war in Europe, Brezhnev was chief political commissar of the 4th Ukrainian Front, which entered Prague in May 1945, after the German surrender.\nRise to power.\nPromotion to the Central Committee.\nAt the end of the war, Brezhnev was the head of the political administration of the Carpathian Military District and oversaw the Sovietization of newly incorporated territories. He left the position in June 1946, and a few months later was appointed the first secretary of the Zaporizhzhia regional party committee, where his deputy was Andrei Kirilenko, one of the most important members of the Dnipropetrovsk Mafia. After working on reconstruction projects in Ukraine, he returned to Dnipropetrovsk in November 1947 as regional first party secretary. In 1950 Brezhnev became a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union's highest legislative body. In July that year he was sent to the Moldavian SSR and appointed Party First Secretary of the Communist Party of Moldova, where he was responsible for completing the introduction of collective agriculture. Konstantin Chernenko, a loyal addition to the \"mafia\", was working in Moldova as head of the agitprop department, and one of the officials Brezhnev brought with him from Dnipropetrovsk was the future USSR Minister of the Interior, Nikolai Shchelokov.\nIn 1952, Brezhnev met with Stalin who subsequently promoted him to the Communist Party's Central Committee as a candidate member of the Presidium (formerly the Politburo) and made him a member of the Secretariat. Following Stalin's death in March 1953, Brezhnev was demoted to first deputy head of the political directorate of the Army and Navy. He remained close to the main events, as he participated in the arrest of Lavrentiy Beria in June. In August, he was promoted to lieutenant general.\nAdvancement under Khrushchev.\nBrezhnev's patron Khrushchev succeeded Stalin as General Secretary, while Khrushchev's rival Georgy Malenkov succeeded Stalin as Chairman of the Council of Ministers. In February 1954, Brezhnev was appointed second secretary of the Communist Party of the Kazakh SSR, where he worked under Panteleimon Ponomarenko who was Malenkov's protege. Following Khrushchev's victory over Malenkov, Ponomarenko was removed in May 1955 and Brezhnev was promoted to First Secretary in August. In Kazakhstan, Brezhnev oversaw the construction of the Baikonur Cosmodrome and conducted the Virgin Lands campaign. He was recalled to Moscow in 1956, before it became clear that the campaign would turn out to be disappointing. \nIn Moscow, Brezhnev became a candidate member of the Politburo and was appointed secretary of Defense Industry. In this position, he oversaw the development of the Soviet missile and nuclear arms programs. In June 1957, he backed Khrushchev in his struggle with Malenkov's Stalinist old guard in the Party leadership, the so-called \"Anti-Party Group\". Following the Stalinists' defeat, Brezhnev became a full member of the Politburo. In May 1960, he was promoted to the post of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, making him the nominal head of state, although the real power resided with Khrushchev as First Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party and Premier.\nReplacement of Khrushchev as First Secretary.\nKhrushchev's position as Party leader was secure until about 1962, but as he aged, he grew more erratic and his performance undermined the confidence of his fellow leaders. The Soviet Union's mounting economic problems also increased the pressure on Khrushchev's leadership. Brezhnev remained outwardly loyal to Khrushchev, but became involved in a 1963 plot to remove him from power, possibly playing a leading role. Also in 1963, Brezhnev succeeded Frol Kozlov, another Khrushchev prot\u00e9g\u00e9, as Secretary of the Central Committee, thereby positioning himself as Khrushchev's likely successor. Khrushchev made him Second Secretary, or deputy party leader, in 1964.\nAfter returning from Scandinavia and Czechoslovakia in October 1964, Khrushchev, unaware of the plot, went on holiday to the Pitsunda resort on the Black Sea. Anastas Mikoyan visited Khrushchev, hinting that he should not be too complacent about his present situation. Vladimir Semichastny, head of the KGB, was a crucial part of the conspiracy, as it was his duty to inform Khrushchev if anyone was plotting against his leadership. Nikolay Ignatov, whom Khrushchev had sacked, discreetly requested the opinion of several Central Committee members. After some false starts, fellow conspirator Mikhail Suslov phoned Khrushchev on 12 October and requested that he return to Moscow to discuss the state of Soviet agriculture. Finally, Khrushchev understood what was happening, and said to Mikoyan, \"If it's me who is the question, I will not make a fight of it.\" Mikoyan wanted to remove Khrushchev from the office of First Secretary but retain him as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, but the rest of the Presidium, headed by Brezhnev, wanted to remove him from active politics altogether.\nBrezhnev and Suslov appealed to the Central Committee, blaming Khrushchev for economic failures, and accusing him of voluntarism and immodest behavior. Influenced by Brezhnev's allies, Politburo members voted on 14 October to remove Khrushchev from office. Some members of the Central Committee wanted him to undergo punishment of some kind, but Brezhnev, who had already been assured the office of the General Secretary, saw little reason to punish Khrushchev further. Brezhnev was appointed First Secretary on the same day, but at the time was believed to be a transitional leader, who would only \"keep the shop\" until another leader was appointed. Alexei Kosygin was appointed head of government, and Mikoyan was retained as head of state. Brezhnev and his companions supported the general party line taken after Stalin's death but felt that Khrushchev's reforms had removed much of the Soviet Union's stability. When Khrushchev left the public spotlight, there was no popular commotion, as most Soviet citizens, including the intelligentsia, anticipated a period of stabilization, steady development of Soviet society and continuing economic growth in the years ahead.\nPolitical scientist George W. Breslauer has compared Khrushchev and Brezhnev as leaders. He argues they took different routes to build legitimate authority, depending on their personalities and the state of public opinion. Khrushchev worked to decentralize the government system and empower local leadership, which had been wholly subservient; Brezhnev sought to centralize authority, going so far as to weaken the roles of the other members of the Central Committee and the Politburo.\nLeader of the Soviet Union (1964-1982).\nConsolidation of power.\nUpon replacing Khrushchev as the party's First Secretary, Brezhnev became the \"de jure\" supreme authority of the Soviet Union. However, he was initially forced to govern as part of an unofficial Triumvirate (also known by its Russian name \"Troika\") alongside the country's Premier, Alexei Kosygin, and Nikolai Podgorny, a Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee and later Chairman of the Presidium. Due to Khrushchev's disregard for the rest of the Politburo upon combining his leadership of the party with that of the Soviet government, a plenum of the Central Committee in October 1964 forbade any single individual from holding both the offices of General Secretary and Premier.\nDuring his consolidation of power, Brezhnev first had to contend with the ambitions of Alexander Shelepin, the former chairman of the KGB and current head of the Party-State Control Committee. In early 1965, Shelepin began calling for the restoration of \"obedience and order\" within the Soviet Union as part of his own bid to seize power. Towards this end, he exploited his control over both state and party organs to leverage support within the regime. Recognizing Shelepin as an imminent threat to his position, Brezhnev mobilized the Soviet collective leadership to remove him from the Party-State Control Committee before having the body dissolved altogether on 6 December 1965.\nAdditionally, by the end of 1965, Brezhnev had Podgorny removed from the Secretariat, thereby significantly curtailing the latter's ability to build support within the party apparatus. In the ensuing years, Podgorny's network of supporters was steadily eroded as the prot\u00e9g\u00e9s he cultivated in his rise to power were removed from the Central Committee. By 1977, Brezhnev was secure enough in his position to replace Podgorny as head of state and remove him from the Politburo altogether.\nAfter sidelining Shelepin and Podgorny as threats to his leadership in 1965, Brezhnev directed his attentions to his remaining political rival, Alexei Kosygin. In the 1960s, U.S. National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger initially perceived Kosygin to be the dominant leader of Soviet foreign policy in the Politburo. Within the same timeframe, Kosygin was also in charge of economic administration in his role as Chairman of the Council of Ministers. However, his position was weakened following his enactment of several economic reforms in 1965 that collectively came to be known within the Party as the \"Kosygin reforms\". Due largely to coinciding with the Prague Spring (whose sharp departure from the Soviet model led to its armed suppression in 1968), the reforms provoked a backlash among the party's old guard who proceeded to flock to Brezhnev and strengthened his position within the Soviet leadership. In 1969, Brezhnev further expanded his authority following a clash with Second Secretary Mikhail Suslov and other party officials who thereafter became firm supporters of his leadership over the Party.\nBrezhnev was adept at politics within the Soviet Union. Unlike Khrushchev, he did not make decisions without consulting with his colleagues and hearing their opinions. By the early 1970s, Brezhnev had successfully consolidated his position as first among equals within the Politburo. While Kosygin continued to hold office as Premier until shortly before his death in 1980, Brezhnev's dominance over the Soviet leadership remained secure from the mid-1970s up until his eventual death in 1982.\nDomestic policies.\nIdeological development.\nIdeologically, Brezhnev's rule was associated with the doctrine of Developed Socialism. This concept initially appeared in the Eastern Bloc countries during the 1960s, was rhetorically adopted by Brezhnev in 1971, took the central position at the Party Congress in 1976, and was inscribed in the Constitution the following year.\nBrezhnev has defined it as the Soviet-style socialism, which he believed had been successfully constructed in the Soviet Union. It emphasized the advanced technological developments with the use of nuclear power in production, computer planning, as well as a highly mechanized agriculture. Under developed socialism all social strata within the Soviet Union were closer to each other than ever before due to the highly developed productive force in the country. \nOne of the main reasons behind the doctrine was an attempt to secure Soviet leadership among the Socialist bloc by presenting the USSR as a country that had reached a more advanced level of socialist development which other countries were yet to achieve. Domestically, Developed Socialism was a response to the inability to reach communism by 1980, as had been promised by Khrushchev. It entrenched Party rule and promoted conservativism and caution by focusing on gradual change.\nRepression.\nBrezhnev's stabilization policy included ending the liberalizing reforms of Khrushchev, and clamping down on cultural freedom. This policy gradually led to an increasingly authoritarian and conservative attitude.\nBy the mid-1970s, there were an estimated 10,000 political and religious prisoners across the Soviet Union, living in grievous conditions and suffering from malnutrition. Many of these prisoners were considered by the Soviet state to be mentally unfit and were hospitalized in mental asylums across the Soviet Union. Under Brezhnev's rule, the KGB infiltrated most, if not all, anti-government organisations, which ensured that there was little to no opposition against him or his power base. However, Brezhnev refrained from the all-out violence seen under Stalin's rule. The trial of the writers Yuli Daniel and Andrei Sinyavsky in 1966, the first such public trials since Stalin's reign, marked the reversion to a repressive cultural policy. Under Yuri Andropov the state security service (in the form of the KGB) regained some of the powers it had enjoyed under Stalin, although there was no return to the purges of the 1930s and 1940s, and Stalin's legacy remained largely discredited among the Soviet intelligentsia.\nEconomics.\nEconomic growth until 1973.\nBetween 1960 and 1970, Soviet agriculture output increased by 3% annually. Industry also improved: during the Eighth Five-Year Plan (1966\u20131970), the output of factories and mines increased by 138% compared to 1960. While the Politburo became aggressively anti-reformist, Kosygin was able to convince both Brezhnev and the politburo to leave the reformist communist leader J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r of the Hungarian People's Republic alone because of an economic reform entitled New Economic Mechanism (NEM), which granted limited permission for the establishment of retail markets. In the Polish People's Republic, another approach was taken in 1970 under the leadership of Edward Gierek; he believed that the government needed Western loans to facilitate the rapid growth of heavy industry. The Soviet leadership gave its approval for this, as the Soviet Union could not afford to maintain its massive subsidy for the Eastern Bloc in the form of cheap oil and gas exports. The Soviet Union did not accept all kinds of reforms, an example being the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 in response to Alexander Dub\u010dek's reforms. Under Brezhnev, the Politburo abandoned Khrushchev's decentralization experiments. By 1966, two years after taking power, Brezhnev abolished the Regional Economic Councils, which were organized to manage the regional economies of the Soviet Union.\nThe Ninth Five-Year Plan delivered a change: for the first time industrial consumer products out-produced industrial capital goods. Consumer goods such as watches, furniture and radios were produced in abundance. The plan still left the bulk of the state's investment in industrial capital-goods production. This outcome was not seen as a positive sign for the future of the Soviet state by the majority of top party functionaries within the government; by 1975 consumer goods were expanding 9% slower than industrial capital-goods. The policy continued despite Brezhnev's commitment to make a rapid shift of investment to satisfy Soviet consumers and lead to an even higher standard of living. This did not happen.\nBy the early 1970s, the Soviet Union had the world's second largest industrial capacity, and produced more steel, oil, pig-iron, cement and tractors than any other country. Before 1973, the Soviet economy was expanding at a faster rate than that of the American economy (albeit by a very small margin). The USSR also kept a steady pace with the economies of Western Europe. Between 1964 and 1973, the Soviet economy stood at roughly half the output per head of Western Europe and a little more than one third that of the U.S. In 1973, the process of catching up with the rest of the West came to an end as the Soviet Union fell further and further behind in computer technology, which proved decisive for the Western economies. By 1973 the Era of Stagnation was apparent.\nEconomic stagnation until 1982.\nThe Era of Stagnation, a term coined by Mikhail Gorbachev, was attributed to a compilation of factors, including the ongoing \"arms race\"; the Soviet Union's decision to participate in international trade (thus abandoning the idea of economic isolation) while ignoring changes occurring in Western societies; increased authoritarianism in Soviet society; the invasion of Afghanistan; the bureaucracy's transformation into an undynamic gerontocracy; lack of economic reform; pervasive political corruption, and other structural problems within the country. Domestically, social stagnation was stimulated by the growing demands of unskilled workers, labor shortages and a decline in productivity and labor discipline. While Brezhnev, albeit \"sporadically\", through Alexei Kosygin, attempted to reform the economy in the late 1960s and 1970s, he failed to produce any positive results. One of these reforms was the economic reform of 1965, initiated by Kosygin, though its origins are often traced back to the Khrushchev Era. The reform was ultimately cancelled by the Central Committee, though the Committee admitted that economic problems did exist. After becoming leader of the Soviet Union, Gorbachev would characterize the economy under Brezhnev's rule as \"the lowest stage of socialism\".\nBased on its surveillance, the CIA reported that the Soviet economy peaked in the 1970s upon reaching 57% of American GNP. However, beginning around 1975, economic growth began to decline at least in part due to the regime's sustained prioritization of heavy industry and military spending over consumer goods. Additionally, Soviet agriculture was unable to feed the urban population, let alone provide for a rising standard of living which the government promised as the fruits of \"mature socialism\" and on which industrial productivity depended. Ultimately, the GNP growth rate slowed to 1% to 2% per year. As GNP growth rates decreased in the 1970s from the level held in the 1950s and 1960s, they likewise began to lag behind that of Western Europe and the United States. Eventually, the stagnation reached a point that the United States began growing an average of 1% per year above the growth rate of the Soviet Union.\nThe stagnation of the Soviet economy was fueled even further by the Soviet Union's ever-widening technological gap with the West. Due to the cumbersome procedures of the centralized planning system, Soviet industries were incapable of the innovation needed to meet public demand. This was especially notable in the field of computers. In response to the lack of uniform standards for peripherals and digital capacity in the Soviet computer industry, Brezhnev's regime ordered an end to all independent computer development and required all future models to be based on the IBM/360. However, following the adoption of the IBM/360 system, the Soviet Union was never able to build enough platforms, let alone improve on its design. As its technology continued to fall behind the West, the Soviet Union increasingly resorted to pirating Western designs.\nThe last significant reform undertaken by the Kosygin government, and some believe in the pre-\"perestroika\" era, was a joint decision of the Central Committee and the Council of Ministers named \"Improving planning and reinforcing the effects of the economic mechanism on raising the effectiveness in production and improving the quality of work\", more commonly known as the 1979 reform. The reform, in contrast to the 1965 reform, sought to increase the central government's economic involvement by enhancing the duties and responsibilities of the ministries. With Kosygin's death in 1980, and due to his successor Nikolai Tikhonov's conservative approach to economics, very little of the reform was actually carried out.\nThe Eleventh Five-Year Plan of the Soviet Union delivered a disappointing result: a change in growth from 5 to 4%. During the earlier Tenth Five-Year Plan, there had been target of 6.1% growth, but this was not met. Brezhnev was able to defer economic collapse by trading with Western Europe and the Arab World. The Soviet Union still outproduced the United States in the heavy industry sector during the Brezhnev era. Another dramatic result of Brezhnev's rule was that certain Eastern Bloc countries became more economically advanced than the Soviet Union.\nAgricultural policy.\nBrezhnev's agricultural policy reinforced traditional ways of organizing collective farms and enforced output quotas centrally. Although there was a record-high state investment in farming during the 1970s, the evaluation of agricultural output continued to focus on the grain harvest. Despite some improvement, there were still problems such as insufficient domestic production of fodder crops and a declining sugar beet harvest. Brezhnev attempted to address these issues by increasing state investment and allowing privately owned plots to be larger. However, these actions were not effective in solving fundamental problems like a shortage of skilled workers, a ruined rural culture, and inappropriate farm machinery for small collective farms. A significant reform was necessary, but it was not supported due to ideological and political considerations.\nBrezhnev's agricultural policy reinforced the conventional methods for organizing the collective farms. Output quotas continued to be imposed centrally. Khrushchev's policy of amalgamating farms was continued by Brezhnev, because he shared Khrushchev's belief that bigger kolkhozes would increase productivity. Brezhnev pushed for an increase in state investments in farming, which amounted to an all-time high in the 1970s of 27% of all state investment\u00a0\u2013 this figure did not include investments in farm equipment. In 1981 alone, 33\u00a0billion U.S. dollars (by contemporary exchange rate) was invested into agriculture.\nAgricultural output in 1980 was 21% higher than the average production rate between 1966 and 1970. Cereal crop output increased by 18%. These improved results were not encouraging. In the Soviet Union the criterion for assessing agricultural output was the grain harvest. The import of cereal, which began under Khrushchev, had in fact become a normal phenomenon by Soviet standards. When Brezhnev had difficulties sealing commercial trade agreements with the United States, he went elsewhere, such as to Argentina. Trade was necessary because the Soviet Union's domestic production of fodder crops was severely deficient. Another sector that was hitting the wall was the sugar beet harvest, which had declined by 2% in the 1970s. Brezhnev's way of resolving these issues was to increase state investment. Politburo member Gennady Voronov advocated for the division of each farm's workforce into what he called \"links\". These \"links\" would be entrusted with specific functions, such as to run a farm's dairy unit. His argument was that the larger the work force, the less responsible they felt. This program had been proposed to Joseph Stalin by Andrey Andreyev in the 1940s and had been opposed by Khrushchev before and after Stalin's death. Voronov was also unsuccessful; Brezhnev turned him down, and in 1973 he was removed from the Politburo.\nExperimentation with \"links\" was not disallowed on a local basis, with Mikhail Gorbachev, the then First Secretary of the Stavropol Regional Committee, experimented with links in his region. In the meantime, the Soviet government's involvement in agriculture was, according to Robert Service, otherwise \"unimaginative\" and \"incompetent\". Facing mounting problems with agriculture, the Politburo issued a resolution titled, \"On the Further Development of Specialisation and Concentration of Agricultural Production on the Basis of Inter-Farm Co-operation and Agro-Industrial Integration\". The resolution ordered kolkhozes close to each other to collaborate in their efforts to increase production. In the meantime, the state's subsidies to the food-and-agriculture sector did not prevent bankrupt farms from operating and rises in the price of produce were offset by rises in the cost of oil and other resources. By 1977, oil cost 84% more than it did in the late 1960s. The cost of other resources had also climbed by the late 1970s.\nBrezhnev's answer to these problems was to issue two decrees, one in 1977 and one in 1981, which called for an increase in the maximum size of privately owned plots within the Soviet Union to half a hectare. These measures removed important obstacles for the expansion of agricultural output but did not solve the problem. Under Brezhnev, private plots yielded 30% of the national agricultural production when they cultivated only 4% of the land. This was seen by some as proof that de-collectivization was necessary to prevent Soviet agriculture from collapsing, but leading Soviet politicians shrank from supporting such drastic measures due to ideological and political interests. The underlying problems were the growing shortage of skilled workers, a wrecked rural culture, the payment of workers in proportion to the quantity rather than the quality of their work, and too large farm machinery for the small collective farms and the roadless countryside. In the face of this, Brezhnev's only options were schemes such as large land reclamation and irrigation projects, or of course, radical reform.\nSociety.\nOver the eighteen years that Brezhnev ruled the Soviet Union, average income per head increased by half; three-quarters of this growth came in the 1960s and early 1970s. During the second half of Brezhnev's premiership, the average income per head grew by one-quarter. In the first half of the Brezhnev period, income per head increased by 3.5% per annum; slightly less growth than what it had been the previous years. This can be explained by the end of the post-war recovery. Consumption per head rose by an estimated 70% under Brezhnev, but with three-quarters of this growth happening before 1973 and only one-quarter in the second half of his rule. Most of the increase in consumer production in the early Brezhnev era can be attributed to the Kosygin reform.\nWhen the USSR's economic growth stalled in the 1970s, the standard of living and housing quality improved significantly. The Soviet leadership under Brezhnev tried to improve the living standard in the Soviet Union by extending social benefits. This led to an increase, though a minor one, in public support. The standard of living in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) was behind that of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic (GSSR) and the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic (ESSR) under Brezhnev; this led many Russians to believe that the policies of the Soviet Government were hurting the Russian population. The state usually moved workers from one job to another, which ultimately became an ineradicable feature in the Soviet industry. Government industries such as factories, mines and offices were staffed by undisciplined personnel who put a great effort into not doing their jobs; this ultimately led, according to Robert Service, to a \"work-shy workforce\". The Soviet Government had no effective counter-measure; it was extremely difficult to replace ineffective workers because of the country's lack of unemployment.\nWhile some areas improved during the Brezhnev era, the situation for ordinary Russian remained bad. Alcoholism, suicide, mental illness and divorce were on the rise. The living space remained rather small by First World standards, with the average Soviet person living on 13.4 square metres. Thousands of Moscow inhabitants became homeless, many of them living in shacks, doorways and parked trams. Nutrition ceased to improve in the late 1970s, while rationing of staple food products returned to Sverdlovsk.\nThe state provided recreation facilities and annual holidays for hard-working citizens. Soviet trade unions rewarded hard-working members and their families with beach vacations in Crimea and Georgia.\nSocial rigidification became a common feature of Soviet society. During the Stalin era in the 1930s and 1940s, a common labourer could expect promotion to a white-collar job if he studied and obeyed Soviet authorities. In Brezhnev's Soviet Union, this was not the case. Holders of attractive positions clung to them as long as possible; mere incompetence was not seen as a good reason to dismiss anyone. As a result of Brezhnev's rule, communism was brought to the greatest disrepute since 1917.\nForeign and defense policies.\nInvasion of Czechoslovakia.\nThe first crisis for Brezhnev's regime came in 1968, with the attempt by the Communist leadership in Czechoslovakia, under Alexander Dub\u010dek, to liberalize the Communist system (Prague Spring). In July, Brezhnev publicly denounced the Czechoslovak leadership as \"revisionist\" and \"anti-Soviet\". Despite his hardline public statements, Brezhnev was not the one pushing hardest for the use of military force in Czechoslovakia when the issue was before the Politburo. Archival evidence suggests that Brezhnev initially sought a temporary compromise with the reform-friendly Czechoslovak government when their dispute came to a head. However, in the end, Brezhnev concluded that he would risk growing turmoil domestically and within the Eastern bloc if he abstained or voted against Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia.\nAs pressure mounted on him within the Soviet leadership to \"re-install a revolutionary government\" within Prague, Brezhnev ordered the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, and Dub\u010dek's removal in August. Following the Soviet intervention, he met with Czechoslovak reformer Bohumil \u0160imon (politik KS\u010c), then a member of the Politburo of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, and said, \"If I had not voted for Soviet armed assistance to Czechoslovakia you would not be sitting here today, but quite possibly I wouldn't either.\" The invasion led to a drop in the belief in the Communist system among Czechoslovaks and prompted a rise of Eurocommunism, which was critical of the Soviet Union.\nVietnam War.\nUnder Khrushchev, the Soviet Union initially supported North Vietnam out of \"fraternal solidarity\". However, as the war escalated, Khrushchev urged the North Vietnamese leadership to give up the quest of liberating South Vietnam. He continued by rejecting an offer of assistance made by the North Vietnamese government, and instead told them to enter negotiations in the United Nations Security Council. After Khrushchev's ousting, Brezhnev resumed aiding the communist resistance in Vietnam. In February 1965, Premier Kosygin visited Hanoi with a dozen Soviet air force generals and economic experts. Over the course of the war, Brezhnev's regime would ultimately ship $450\u00a0million worth of arms annually to North Vietnam.\nLyndon B. Johnson privately suggested to Brezhnev that he would guarantee an end to South Vietnamese hostility if Brezhnev would guarantee a North Vietnamese one. Brezhnev was interested in this offer initially but rejected the offer upon being told by Andrei Gromyko that the North Vietnamese were not interested in a diplomatic solution to the war. The Johnson administration responded to this rejection by expanding the American presence in Vietnam, but later invited the USSR to negotiate a treaty concerning arms control. The USSR did not respond, initially because of the power struggle between Brezhnev and Kosygin over which figure had the right to represent Soviet interests abroad, and later because of the escalation of the \"dirty war\" in Vietnam.\nIn early 1967, Johnson offered to make a deal with Ho Chi Minh, and said he was prepared to end U.S. bombing raids in North Vietnam if Ho ended his infiltration of South Vietnam. The U.S. bombing raids halted for a few days and Kosygin publicly announced his support for this offer. The North Vietnamese government failed to respond, and because of this, the U.S. continued its raids in North Vietnam. After this event, Brezhnev concluded that seeking diplomatic solutions to the ongoing war in Vietnam was hopeless. Later in 1968, Johnson invited Kosygin to the United States to discuss ongoing problems in Vietnam and the arms race. The summit was marked by a friendly atmosphere, but there were no concrete breakthroughs by either side.\nIn the aftermath of the Sino\u2013Soviet border conflict, the Chinese continued to aid the North Vietnamese regime. However, with the death of Ho Chi Minh in 1969, China's strongest link to North Vietnam was gone. In the meantime, Richard Nixon had been elected President of the United States. While having been known for his anti-communist rhetoric, Nixon said in 1971 that the U.S. \"\"must\" have relations with Communist China\". His plan was for a slow withdrawal of U.S. troops from South Vietnam, while still retaining the government of South Vietnam. The only way he thought this was possible was by improving relations with both Communist China and the USSR. He later made a visit to Moscow to negotiate a treaty on arms control and the Vietnam War, but on Vietnam nothing could be agreed. Ultimately, years of Soviet military aid to North Vietnam finally bore fruit when collapsing morale among U.S. forces compelled their complete withdrawal from South Vietnam by 1973, thereby making way for the country's unification under communist rule two years later.\nSino\u2013Soviet relations.\nSoviet foreign relations with the People's Republic of China quickly deteriorated after Nikita Khrushchev's attempts to reach a \"rapprochement\" with more liberal Eastern European states such as Yugoslavia and with the west. When Brezhnev consolidated his power base in the 1960s, China was descending into crisis because of Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution, which led to the decimation of the Chinese Communist Party and other ruling offices. Brezhnev, a pragmatic politician who promoted the idea of \"stabilization\", could not comprehend why Mao would start such a \"self-destructive\" drive to finish the socialist revolution. \nHowever, Brezhnev had problems of his own in the form of Czechoslovakia, whose sharp deviation from the Soviet model prompted him and the rest of the Warsaw Pact to invade their Eastern Bloc ally. In the aftermath of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, involving the overthrow of the reformist government there, the Soviet leadership proclaimed the Brezhnev Doctrine: any threat to \"socialist rule\" in any state of the Soviet Bloc in Central and Eastern Europe was a threat to all of them, and would justify the intervention of fellow communist states to forcibly remove the threat. The references to \"socialism\" meant control by the communist parties that were loyal to the Kremlin. \nThis new policy increased tension not only with the Eastern Bloc, but also the Asian communist states. By 1969, relations with other communist countries had deteriorated to a level where Brezhnev was not even able to gather five of the fourteen ruling communist parties to attend an international conference in Moscow. In the aftermath of the failed conference, the Soviets concluded, \"there was no leading center of the international communist movement.\" Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev repudiated the Brezhnev Doctrine in the late 1980s, as the Kremlin accepted the peaceful overthrow of Soviet rule in all its satellite countries in Eastern Europe.\nLater in 1969, the deterioration in bilateral relations culminated in the Sino\u2013Soviet border conflict. The Sino\u2013Soviet split had chagrined Premier Alexei Kosygin a great deal, and for a while he refused to accept its irrevocability; he briefly visited Beijing in 1969 in an effort to ease the tension between the USSR and China. By the early 1980s, both the Chinese and the Soviets were issuing statements calling for a normalization of relations between the two states. The conditions given to the Soviets by the Chinese were the reduction of Soviet military presence on the Sino\u2013Soviet border, the withdrawal of Soviet troops in Afghanistan and the Mongolian People's Republic; furthermore, China also wanted the Soviets to end their support for the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia. Brezhnev responded in his March 1982 speech in Tashkent where he called for the normalization of relations. Full Sino\u2013Soviet normalization of relations would take years, until the last Soviet ruler, Mikhail Gorbachev, came to power.\nSoviet\u2013U.S. relations.\nDuring his eighteen years as Leader of the USSR, Brezhnev's signature foreign policy innovation was the promotion of d\u00e9tente. While sharing some similarities with approaches pursued during the Khrushchev Thaw, Brezhnev's policy significantly differed from Khrushchev's precedent in two ways. The first was that it was more comprehensive and wide-ranging in its aims, and included signing agreements on arms control, crisis prevention, East\u2013West trade, European security and human rights. The second part of the policy was based on the importance of equalizing the military strength of the United States and the Soviet Union. Defense spending under Brezhnev between 1965 and 1970 increased by 40%, and annual increases continued thereafter. In the year of Brezhnev's death in 1982, 12% of GNP was spent on the military. This build up led numerous observers \u2013 including Western ones \u2013 to argue that by the mid-1970s the USSR had surpassed the United States as the world's strongest military power.\nAt the 1972 Moscow Summit, Brezhnev and U.S. president Richard Nixon signed the SALT I Treaty. The first part of the agreement set limits on each side's development of nuclear missiles. The second part of the agreement, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, banned both countries from designing systems to intercept incoming missiles so neither the U.S. or the Soviet Union would be emboldened to strike the other without fear of nuclear retaliation.\nIn 1979, Henry Kissinger acknowledged that his policy of d\u00e9tente was faltering by the mid-1970s. The d\u00e9tente had rested on the assumption that a \"linkage\" of some type could be found between the two countries, with the U.S. hoping that the signing of SALT I and an increase in Soviet\u2013U.S. trade would stop the aggressive growth of communism in the third world. This did not happen, as evidenced by Brezhnev's continued military support for the communist guerillas fighting against the U.S. during the Vietnam War.\nAfter Gerald Ford lost the presidential election to Jimmy Carter, American foreign policies became more overtly aggressive in vocabulary towards the Soviet Union and the communist world. Attempts were also made to stop funding for repressive anti-communist governments and organizations the United States supported. While at first standing for a decrease in all defense initiatives, the later years of Carter's presidency would increase spending on the U.S. military. When Brezhnev authorized the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, Carter, following the advice of his National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski, denounced the intervention, describing it as the \"most serious danger to peace since 1945\". The U.S. stopped all grain exports to the Soviet Union and boycotted the 1980 Summer Olympics held in Moscow. The Soviet Union responded by boycotting the 1984 Summer Olympics held in Los Angeles.\nDuring Brezhnev's rule, the Soviet Union reached the peak of its political and strategic power in relation to the United States. As a result of the limits agreed to by both superpowers in the first SALT Treaty, the Soviet Union obtained parity in nuclear weapons with the United States for the first time in the Cold War. Additionally, as a result of negotiations during the Helsinki Accords, Brezhnev succeeded in securing the legitimization of Soviet hegemony over Central and Eastern Europe.\nIntervention in Afghanistan.\nAfter the communist revolution in Afghanistan in 1978, authoritarian actions forced upon the populace by the Communist regime led to the Afghan civil war, with the mujahideen leading the popular backlash against the regime. To stabilize the situation, Afghanistan's leader Nur Muhammad Taraki visited Moscow and asked for a military intervention in March 1979. Brezhnev was against it and was ready only to send an additional 500 civilian and military specialists, doubling the current number. Taraki visited Moscow again in September, where Brezhnev cautioned him that his confrontation with another Afghanistan leader, Hafizullah Amin, could damage the revolutionary cause and urged for a reconciliation. Shortly after that, Taraki was assassinated on Amin's order. This, together with the Soviet desire to assert its influence in Central Asia, were the factors that led the Soviet Union to intervene.\nThe decision to invade Afghanistan was taken unanimously in December 1979 by the Politburo leadership, an unsubstantiated KGB report that Amin was a CIA agent was used as a justification. German historian Susanne Schattenberg writes that Brezhnev was no longer in charge of foreign policy due to his deteriorating health condition, allowing other members of the Politburo to lead him. The operation was expected to be swift and generate little opposition from the USA. The initial invasion was successful, and in February 1980, the Soviets started to consider withdrawal, with Brezhnev agreeing that it would take a year or two. Ultimately, the war dragged on far longer, lasting nearly a decade and involving hundreds of thousands of troops.\nBrezhnev Doctrine.\nIn the aftermath of the Prague Spring's suppression, Brezhnev announced that the Soviet Union had the right to interfere in the internal affairs of its satellites to \"safeguard socialism\". This became known as the Brezhnev Doctrine, although it was really a restatement of existing Soviet policy, as enacted by Khrushchev in Hungary in 1956. Brezhnev reiterated the doctrine in a speech at the Fifth Congress of the Polish United Workers' Party on 13 November 1968:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When forces that are hostile to socialism try to turn the development of some socialist country towards capitalism, it becomes not only a problem of the country concerned, but a common problem and concern of all socialist countries.\u2014\u200a\nLater in 1980, a political crisis emerged in Poland with the emergence of the Solidarity movement. By the end of October, Solidarity had 3 million members, and by December, had 9\u00a0million. In a public opinion poll organised by the Polish government, 89% of the respondents supported Solidarity. With the Polish leadership split on what to do, the majority did not want to impose martial law, as suggested by Wojciech Jaruzelski. The Soviet Union and other states of the Eastern Bloc were unsure how to handle the situation, but Erich Honecker of East Germany pressed for military action. In a formal letter to Brezhnev, Honecker proposed a joint military measure to control the escalating problems in Poland. A CIA report suggested the Soviet military were mobilizing for an invasion.\nIn 1980\u201381 representatives from the Eastern Bloc nations met at the Kremlin to discuss the Polish situation. Brezhnev eventually concluded on 10 December 1981 that it would be better to leave the domestic matters of Poland alone, reassuring the Polish delegates that the USSR would intervene only if asked to. This effectively marked the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine. Notwithstanding the absence of a Soviet military intervention, Wojciech Jaruzelski ultimately gave in to Moscow's demands by imposing a state of war, the Polish version of martial law, on 13 December 1981.\nCult of personality.\nThe last years of Brezhnev's rule were marked by a growing personality cult. His love of medals (he received over 100) was well known, so in December 1966, on his 60th birthday, he was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev received the award, which came with the Order of Lenin and the Gold Star, three more times in celebration of his birthdays. On his 70th birthday he was awarded the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union's highest military honour. After being awarded the rank, he attended an 18th Army Veterans meeting, dressed in a long coat and saying \"Attention, the Marshal is coming!\" He also conferred upon himself the rare Order of Victory in 1978, which was posthumously revoked in 1989 for not meeting the criteria for citation. A promotion to the rank of Generalissimo of the Soviet Union, planned for Brezhnev's seventy-fifth birthday, was quietly shelved due to his ongoing health problems.\nBrezhnev's eagerness for undeserved glory was shown by his memoirs recalling his military service during World War II, which treated the minor battles near Novorossiysk as a decisive military theatre. Despite his book's apparent weaknesses, it was awarded the Lenin Prize for Literature and was hailed by the Soviet press. The book was followed by two other books, one on the Virgin Lands campaign.\nHealth problems.\nBrezhnev's personality cult was growing at a time when his health was in rapid decline. His physical condition was deteriorating; he had been a heavy smoker until the 1970s, had become addicted to sleeping pills and tranquilizers. Over the years Brezhnev had become overweight. From 1973 until his death, his central nervous system underwent chronic deterioration and he had several minor strokes as well as insomnia. In 1975 he suffered his first heart attack. When receiving the Order of Lenin, Brezhnev walked shakily and fumbled his words. According to one American intelligence expert, United States officials knew for several years that Brezhnev had suffered from severe arteriosclerosis and believed he had suffered from other unspecified ailments as well. In 1977, American intelligence officials publicly suggested that Brezhnev had also been suffering from gout, leukemia and emphysema from decades of heavy smoking, as well as chronic bronchitis. He was reported to have been fitted with a pacemaker to control his heart rhythm abnormalities. On occasion, he was known to have suffered from memory loss, speaking problems and had difficulties with coordination. According to \"The Washington Post\", \"All of this is also reported to be taking its toll on Brezhnev's mood. He is said to be depressed, despondent over his own failing health and discouraged by the death of many of his long-time colleagues. To help, he has turned to regular counseling and hypnosis by an Assyrian woman, a sort of modern-day Rasputin.\"\nUpon suffering a stroke in 1975, Brezhnev's ability to lead the Soviet Union was significantly compromised. As his ability to define Soviet foreign policy weakened, he increasingly deferred to the opinions of a hardline brain trust comprising KGB Chairman Yuri Andropov, longtime foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, and Defense Minister Andrei Grechko (who was succeeded by Dmitriy Ustinov in 1976).\nThe Ministry of Health kept doctors by Brezhnev's side at all times, and he was brought back from near death on several occasions. The most notable instance was in 1976, when Brezhnev suffered a near-fatal stroke that left him clinically dead and could've killed him sooner before the doctors resuscitated him. At this time, most senior officers of the CPSU wanted to keep Brezhnev alive. Even though an increasing number of officials were frustrated with his policies, no one in the regime wanted to risk a new period of domestic turmoil which might be caused by his death. Western commentators started guessing who Brezhnev's heir apparent was. The most notable candidates were Andrei Kirilenko and Mikhail Suslov, who were both older than Brezhnev, and Fyodor Kulakov, who was younger; Kulakov died of natural causes in 1978.\nLast years and death.\nBrezhnev's health worsened in the winter of 1981\u201382. While the Politburo was pondering the question of who would succeed, all signs indicated that the ailing leader was dying. The choice of the successor would have been influenced by Suslov, but he died at the age of 79 in January 1982. Andropov took Suslov's seat in the Central Committee Secretariat; by May, it became obvious that Andropov would make a bid for the office of the General Secretary. With the help of fellow KGB associates, he started circulating rumors that political corruption had become worse during Brezhnev's tenure as leader, in an attempt to create an environment hostile to Brezhnev in the Politburo. Andropov's actions showed that he was not afraid of Brezhnev's wrath.\nIn March 1982 Brezhnev received a concussion and fractured his right clavicle while touring a factory in Tashkent, after a metal balustrade collapsed under the weight of a number of factory workers, falling on top of Brezhnev and his security detail. This incident was reported in Western media as Brezhnev having suffered a stroke. After a month-long recovery, Brezhnev worked intermittently through November. On 7 November 1982, he was present standing on the Lenin's Mausoleum's balcony during the annual military parade and demonstration of workers commemorating the 65th anniversary of the October Revolution. The event marked Brezhnev's final public appearance before dying three days later after suffering a heart attack. He was honored with a state funeral after a three-day period of nationwide mourning. He is buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis in Red Square, in one of the twelve individual tombs located between the Lenin's Mausoleum and the Moscow Kremlin Wall. A number of countries including Cuba, Nicaragua, Mozambique, Afghanistan, India and others had declared national mourning over his death.\nNational and international statesmen from around the globe attended his funeral. His wife and family were also present. Brezhnev was dressed for burial in his Marshal's uniform along with his medals.\nLegacy.\nBrezhnev presided over the Soviet Union for longer than any other person except Joseph Stalin. He is remembered for donning the mantle of a peacemaker and a common-sense statesman. He is often criticised for the prolonged Era of Stagnation, in which fundamental economic problems were ignored and the Soviet political system was allowed to decline. During Mikhail Gorbachev's tenure as leader there was a sharp increase in criticism of Brezhnev's leadership, including claims that he followed \"a fierce neo-Stalinist line\" while consistently failing to modernize the country and change with the times. The intervention in Afghanistan, which was one of the major decisions of his career, also significantly undermined both the international standing and the internal strength of the Soviet Union.\nBrezhnev fared better when compared to his successors and predecessors in Russia. In a 1999 poll, he ranked as the best Russian leader of the 20th century. In an opinion poll by VTsIOM in 2007 the majority of Russians chose to live during the Brezhnev era rather than any other period of 20th century Soviet history. In a Levada Center poll conducted in 2013, Brezhnev beat Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin (respectively) as Russia's favorite leader in the 20th century with 56% approval. In another poll in 2013, Brezhnev was voted the best Russian leader of the 20th century. In a 2018 Rating Sociological Group poll, 47% of Ukrainian respondents had a positive opinion of Brezhnev.\nIn the West, the stagnation hypothesis is generally accepted with regards to the rule of Brezhnev.\nPersonality traits.\nRussian historian Roy Medvedev emphasizes the bureaucratic mentality and personality strengths that enabled Brezhnev to gain power. He was loyal to his friends, vain in desiring ceremonial power, and refused to control corruption inside the party. Especially in foreign affairs, Brezhnev increasingly took all major decisions into his own hands, without telling his colleagues in the Politburo. He deliberately presented a different persona to different people, culminating in the systematic glorification of his own career.\nBrezhnev's vanity made him the target of many political jokes. Nikolai Podgorny warned him of this, but Brezhnev replied, \"If they are poking fun at me, it means they like me.\"\nIn keeping with traditional socialist greetings, Brezhnev kissed many politicians on the lips during his career. One of these occasions, with Erich Honecker, was the subject of \"My God, Help Me to Survive This Deadly Love\", a mural painted on the Berlin Wall after its opening and dismantlement.\nBrezhnev's main passion was driving foreign cars given to him by leaders of state from across the world. He usually drove these between his dacha and the Kremlin with, according to historian Robert Service, flagrant disregard for public safety. When visiting the United States for a summit with Richard Nixon in 1973, he expressed a wish to drive around Washington in a Lincoln Continental that Nixon had just given him; upon being told that the Secret Service would not allow him to do this, he said \"I will take the flag off the car, put on dark glasses, so they can't see my eyebrows and drive like any American would\" to which Henry Kissinger replied \"I have driven with you and I don't think you drive like an American!\" He was also an avid fan of sports, and supported CSKA Moscow in ice hockey and Spartak Moscow in football. Kissinger claimed Brezhnev had on one occasion postponed a meeting on nuclear weapons because he did not want to miss a soccer match.\nPersonal life.\nBrezhnev was married to Viktoria Denisova (1908\u20131995). He had a daughter, Galina, and a son, Yuri. His niece Lyubov Brezhneva published a memoir in 1995 which claimed that Brezhnev worked systematically to bring privileges to his family in terms of appointments, apartments, private luxury stores, private medical facilities and immunity from prosecution.\nHonours.\nBrezhnev received several accolades and honours from his home country and foreign countries. Among his foreign honours are the Bangladesh Liberation War Honour and the Hero of the Mongolian People's Republic.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50155", "revid": "918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50155", "title": "Italian Red Brigade", "text": ""}
{"id": "50156", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50156", "title": "Battle of Stoke", "text": ""}
{"id": "50157", "revid": "3132940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50157", "title": "Battle of Stoke Field", "text": "Last battle of the Wars of the Roses\nThe Battle of Stoke Field, which took place at East Stoke, Nottinghamshire, on 16 June 1487, may be considered the last battle of the Wars of the Roses, since it was the last major engagement between contenders for the throne whose claims derived from descent from the houses of Lancaster and York. The Battle of Bosworth Field, two years previously, had established Henry VII on the throne, ending the last period of Yorkist rule and initiating that of the Tudors. The Battle of Stoke Field was the decisive engagement in an attempt by leading Ricardian Yorkists to unseat the King in favour of the pretender Lambert Simnel.\nThough it is often portrayed as almost a footnote to the major battles between York and Lancaster, it may have been slightly larger than Bosworth, with much heavier casualties, possibly because of the terrain which forced the two sides into close, attritional combat. In the end, though, Henry's victory was crushing. Almost all the leading Yorkists were killed in the battle.\nPretender.\nHenry VII of England held the throne for the new royal line (the House of Tudor), and had tried to gain the acceptance of the Yorkist faction by his marriage to their senior heiress, Elizabeth of York, but his hold on power was not entirely secure. The chief male-line claimant of the York dynasty was the queen's first cousin, Edward, Earl of Warwick, the son of George, Duke of Clarence. This boy was kept confined in the Tower of London.\nAn impostor claiming to be Edward (usually identified as Edward, Earl of Warwick, but may have initially begun by claiming to be one of the princes in the tower), whose name was Lambert Simnel, came to the attention of John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln, through the agency of a priest called Richard Symonds. Lincoln, although apparently reconciled with the Tudor king, had a claim on the throne; the last Plantagenet, Richard III of England, had named Lincoln, his nephew, as the royal heir. Although he probably had no doubt about Simnel's true identity, Lincoln saw an opportunity for revenge and reparation.\nLincoln fled the English court on 19 March 1487 and went to the court of Mechelen (Malines) and his aunt, Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy. Margaret provided financial and military support in the form of 2,000 German and Swiss mercenaries, under the commander Martin Schwartz. Lincoln was joined by a number of rebel English Lords at Mechelen, in particular Richard III's loyal supporter, Lord Lovell, Sir Richard Harleston, the former governor of Jersey and Thomas David, a captain of the English garrison at Calais. The Yorkists decided to sail to Ireland, where the Yorkist cause was popular, to gather more supporters.\nYorkist rebellion.\nThe Yorkist fleet set sail and arrived in Dublin on 4 May 1487. With the help of Gerald FitzGerald, 8th Earl of Kildare, and his brother Thomas FitzGerald of Laccagh, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, Lincoln recruited 4,500 Irish mercenaries, mostly kerns, lightly armoured but highly mobile infantry. With the support of the Irish nobility and clergy, Lincoln had the pretender Simnel crowned \"King Edward VI\" in Dublin on 24 May 1487. Although a parliament was called for the new \"king\", Lincoln had no intention of remaining in Dublin and instead packed up the army and Simnel and set sail for north Lancashire.\nOn landing on 4 June 1487, Lincoln was joined by a number of the local gentry led by Sir Thomas Broughton. In a series of forced marches, the Yorkist army, now numbering some 8,000 men, covered over 200 miles in five days. On the night of 10 June, the Yorkists were camped at Bramham moor, and the pro-Tudor forces under Clifford were camped near Tadcaster. Lovell led 2,000 Yorkists on a night attack against Clifford's 400 men. The result was an overwhelming Yorkist victory. Lincoln then outmanoeuvred King Henry's northern army, under the command of the Earl of Northumberland, by ordering a force under John, Lord Scrope, to mount a diversionary attack on Bootham Bar, York, on 12 June. Lord Scrope then withdrew northwards, taking Northumberland's army with him.\nLincoln and the main army continued southwards. Outside Doncaster, Lincoln encountered Lancastrian cavalry under Edward Woodville, Lord Scales. There followed three days of skirmishing through Sherwood Forest. Lincoln forced Scales back to Nottingham, where Scales' cavalry stayed to wait for the main royal army. However, the fighting had slowed down the Yorkist advance sufficiently to allow King Henry to receive substantial reinforcements under the command of Lord Strange by the time he joined Scales at Nottingham on 14 June. Rhys ap Thomas, Henry's leading supporter in Wales, also arrived with reinforcements. Henry's army now outnumbered the Yorkists. In addition, it was \"far better armed and equipped\" than the Yorkist army. His two principal military commanders, Jasper Tudor and John de Vere, 13th Earl of Oxford, were also more experienced than the Yorkist leaders.\nBattle.\nOn 15 June, King Henry began moving northeast toward Newark after receiving news that Lincoln had crossed the River Trent. Around nine in the morning of 16 June, King Henry's forward troops, commanded by the Earl of Oxford, encountered the Yorkist army assembled in a single block, on a brow of Rampire Hill surrounded on three sides by the River Trent at the village of East Stoke. Their right flank was anchored on a high spot known as Burham Furlong.\nHenry's army was divided into three battles, of which Oxford led the vanguard, he may have had as many as 6,000 infantry under his command, flanked by two wings of mounted troops under Baron Scales and Sir John Savage (both veterans of Bosworth). As at Bosworth, the King left the direction of the fighting itself to Oxford. Before the fight began some unusual lights in the sky were interpreted as ill-portents by Lancastrian soldiers, leading to some desertions, but Oxford and other nobles were able to restore morale, and soon the army was in \"good array and in a fair battle\".\nThe Yorkists, arrayed in a single concentrated formation, were assaulted by arrows. Suffering from the missiles, they chose to surrender the high ground by immediately going on to the attack in the hope of breaking the Lancastrian line and rolling up the enemy army. Though outnumbered overall, the Yorkists had the advantage of a \"core of well-trained foreign mercenaries\", and their concentrated force outnumbered Oxford's vanguard, which was the only part of the Lancastrian army engaged.\nThe vanguard was badly shaken, but Oxford was able to rally his force. The battle was bitterly contested for over three hours, but eventually sheer attrition told against the Yorkists after they failed to break the Lancastrian position early on. Henry chose not to commit his other \"battles\", leaving the struggle to the vanguard, which was probably repeatedly reinforced as Lancastrian contingents came up, directed by Jasper Tudor. Though the German mercenaries were equipped with the latest handguns, the presence of large numbers of traditional archers in the Lancastrian army proved decisive. The skilled longbowmen were able to shoot volley after volley into the Yorkist position. The lack of body armour on the Irish troops in particular meant that they were cut down in increasing numbers by repeated showers of arrows.\nUnable to retreat (with the river on three sides), the German and Swiss mercenaries fought it out. According to Jean Molinet, by the end of the battle, they were \"filled with arrows like hedgehogs\". The broken Yorkists fled towards the Trent down a ravine (known locally even today as the Red Gutter) in which many were cornered and killed. Most of the Yorkist commanders\u2014Lincoln, Fitzgerald, and Schwartz\u2014fell fighting. Only Lord Lovell and Broughton may have escaped. Lovell disappeared after the battle and was never seen again. He may have gone to Scotland, as there is evidence of a safe conduct pass being granted him there, but his later fate is unknown. In the 18th century a body was found inside a secret room at his house, Minster Lovell Hall in Minster Lovell, Oxfordshire, leading to conjecture that it was his.\nAftermath.\nSimnel was captured, but was pardoned by Henry in a gesture of clemency which did his reputation no harm. Henry realised that Simnel was merely a puppet for the leading Yorkists. He was given a job in the royal kitchen as a spit-turner, and later promoted to falconer. The Irish nobles who had supported Simnel were also pardoned, as Henry believed he needed their support to govern Ireland effectively. However, Henry later persuaded the Pope to excommunicate the Irish clergy who had supported the rebellion. Two other Yorkist conspirators were also captured: Richard Symonds and John Payne, Bishop of Meath. Symonds was the man who had introduced Lincoln to Simnel; Payne had preached the sermon at Simnel's coronation. Neither was executed: Symonds was imprisoned, and Payne was pardoned and eventually restored to royal favour.\nTo mark his victory, Henry raised his standard on Burham Furlong. The spot is marked by a large stone memorial with the legend \"Here stood the Burrand Bush planted on the spot where Henry VII placed his standard after the Battle of Stoke 16 June 1487\". Henry knighted many of his supporters in the aftermath of the battle. A handwritten list of the new knights by John Writhe survives inserted into a copy of the book \"Game and Play of Chess\". Thirteen new bannerets were created and fifty-two men were knighted. The following year in 1488 the two main cavalry commanders of Henry's army, Baron Scales and Sir John Savage, were both made Knights of the Garter.\nHenry had hoped to capture Lincoln alive in order to learn from him the true extent of support for the Yorkists. Instead, Henry launched a series of enquiries, the outcome of which was \"relatively few executions and very many fines\", consistent with Henry's policy of controlling the aristocracy by weakening it financially. After the battle, he progressed north through Pontefract, York, Durham, and Newcastle to show himself in those areas that had been strongholds of Richard III's supporters. Later in Henry's reign, in the 1490s, another pretender to the throne emerged, in the person of Perkin Warbeck; this time the matter was resolved without having to fight a battle, in the Second Cornish uprising of 1497.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50165", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50165", "title": "Louis de Broglie", "text": "French theoretical physicist (1892\u20131987)\nLouis Victor Pierre Raymond, 7th Duc de Broglie (; 15 August 1892 \u2013 19 March 1987) was a French theoretical physicist and aristocrat known for his contributions to quantum theory. In his 1924 Ph.D. thesis, he postulated the wave nature of electrons and suggested that all matter has wave properties. This concept is known as the de Broglie hypothesis, an example of wave\u2013particle duality, and forms a central part of the theory of quantum mechanics. In 1929, de Broglie won the Nobel Prize in Physics after the wave-like behaviour of matter was experimentally confirmed in 1927.\nThe wave-like behaviour of particles theorized by de Broglie was used by Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger in his formulation of wave mechanics.\nDe Broglie presented an alternative interpretation of these mechanics called the pilot-wave concept at the 1927 Solvay Conferences, but then abandoned it. In 1952, David Bohm developed a new form of the concept which became known as the de Broglie\u2013Bohm theory. De Broglie revisited the idea in 1956, creating another version that incorporated ideas from Bohm and Jean-Pierre Vigier.\nLouis de Broglie was the sixteenth member elected to occupy seat 1 of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise in 1944, and served as Perpetual Secretary of the French Academy of Sciences. De Broglie became the first high-level scientist to call for establishment of a multi-national laboratory, a proposal that led to the establishment of the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). Among his publications were \"The Revolution in Physics\" and \"Matter and Light\". He was honorary president of the French Association of Science Writers and received the inaugural Kalinga Prize from UNESCO for his efforts to popularize science.\nBiography.\nFamily and education.\nLouis Victor Pierre Raymond was born on 15 August 1892 in Dieppe, France, into the aristocratic House of Broglie, whose representatives for several centuries occupied important military and political posts in France. His father, Louis-Alphonse-Victor, 5th duc de Broglie, was married to Pauline d'Armaille, the granddaughter of the Napoleonic General Philippe Paul, comte de S\u00e9gur, and his wife, the biographer Marie C\u00e9lestine Am\u00e9lie d'Armaill\u00e9. They had five children; in addition to Louis, these were: Albertina (1872\u20131946), subsequently the Marquise de Lupp\u00e9; Maurice (1875\u20131960), subsequently a famous experimental physicist; Philip (1881\u20131890), who died two years before the birth of Louis, and Pauline, Comtesse de Pange (1888\u20131972), subsequently a famous writer. Per the \"New York Times\", \"a great-grandfather fought on George Washington's side in the American Revolutionary War as the chief lieutenant of the Marquis de Lafayette.\"\nAs the youngest child in the family, Louis grew up in relative loneliness, read a lot, and was fond of history, especially political. From early childhood, he had a good memory and could accurately read an excerpt from a theatrical production or give a complete list of ministers of the Third Republic of France. For this, he was predicted to become a great statesman in the future.\nDe Broglie had intended a career in humanities, and received his first degree (\"licence \u00e8s lettres\") in history. Afterwards he turned his attention toward mathematics and physics and received a degree (\"licence \u00e8s sciences\") in physics. With the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, he offered his services to the army in the development of radio communications.\nMilitary service.\nAfter graduation, de Broglie joined the engineering forces to undergo compulsory service. It began at Fort Mont Val\u00e9rien, but soon, on the initiative of his brother, he was seconded to the Wireless Communications Service and worked on the Eiffel Tower, where the radio transmitter was located. Louis de Broglie remained in military service throughout the First World War, dealing with purely technical issues. In particular, together with L\u00e9on Brillouin and brother Maurice, he participated in establishing wireless communications with submarines. Louis de Broglie was demobilized in August 1919 with the rank of adjudant. Later, the scientist regretted that he had to spend about six years away from the fundamental problems of science that interested him.\nScientific and pedagogical career.\nHis 1924 thesis \"Recherches sur la th\u00e9orie des quanta\" (Research on the Theory of the Quanta) introduced his theory of electron waves. This included the wave\u2013particle duality theory of matter, based on the work of Max Planck and Albert Einstein on light. This research culminated in the de Broglie hypothesis stating that \"any moving particle or object had an associated wave\". De Broglie thus created a new field in physics, the \"m\u00e9canique ondulatoire\", or wave mechanics, uniting the physics of energy (wave) and matter (particle). He won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1929 \"for his discovery of the wave nature of electrons\".\nIn his later career, de Broglie worked to develop a causal explanation of wave mechanics, in opposition to the wholly probabilistic models which dominate quantum mechanical theory; it was refined by David Bohm in the 1950s. The theory has since been known as the De Broglie\u2013Bohm theory.\nIn addition to strictly scientific work, de Broglie thought and wrote about the philosophy of science, including the value of modern scientific discoveries. In 1930 he founded the book series Actualit\u00e9s scientifiques et industrielles published by \u00c9ditions Hermann.\nDe Broglie became a member of the Acad\u00e9mie des sciences in 1933, and was the academy's perpetual secretary from 1942. He was asked to join \"Le Conseil de l'Union Catholique des Scientifiques Francais\", but declined because he was non-religious.\nIn 1941, he was made a member of the National Council of Vichy France. On 12 October 1944, he was elected to the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise, replacing mathematician \u00c9mile Picard. Because of the deaths and imprisonments of Acad\u00e9mie members during the occupation and other effects of the war, the Acad\u00e9mie was unable to meet the quorum of twenty members for his election; due to the exceptional circumstances, however, his unanimous election by the seventeen members present was accepted. In an event unique in the history of the Acad\u00e9mie, he was received as a member by his own brother Maurice, who had been elected in 1934. UNESCO awarded him the first Kalinga Prize in 1952 for his work in popularizing scientific knowledge, and he was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society on 23 April 1953.\nLouis became the 7th duc de Broglie in 1960 upon the death without heir of his elder brother, Maurice, 6th duc de Broglie, also a physicist.\nIn 1961, de Broglie received the title of Knight of the Grand Cross in the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. De Broglie was awarded a post as counselor to the French High Commission of Atomic Energy in 1945 for his efforts to bring industry and science closer together. He established a center for applied mechanics at the Henri Poincar\u00e9 Institute, where research into optics, cybernetics, and atomic energy were carried out. He inspired the formation of the International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science and was an early member.\nDe Broglie never married. When he died on 19 March 1987 in Louveciennes at the age of 94, he was succeeded as duke by a distant cousin, Victor-Fran\u00e7ois, 8th duc de Broglie. His funeral was held 23 March 1987 at the Church of Saint-Pierre-de-Neuilly.\nResearch.\nPhysics of X-ray and photoelectric effect.\nThe first works of Louis de Broglie (early 1920s) were performed in the laboratory of his older brother Maurice and dealt with the features of the photoelectric effect and the properties of x-rays. These publications examined the absorption of X-rays and described this phenomenon using the Bohr theory, applied quantum principles to the interpretation of photoelectron spectra, and gave a systematic classification of X-ray spectra. The studies of X-ray spectra were important for elucidating the structure of the internal electron shells of atoms (optical spectra are determined by the outer shells). Thus, the results of experiments conducted together with Alexandre Dauvillier, revealed the shortcomings of the existing schemes for the distribution of electrons in atoms; these difficulties were eliminated by Edmund Stoner. Another result was the elucidation of the insufficiency of the Sommerfeld formula for determining the position of lines in X-ray spectra; this discrepancy was eliminated after the discovery of the electron spin. In 1925 and 1926, Leningrad physicist Orest Khvolson nominated the de Broglie brothers for the Nobel Prize for their work in the field of X-rays.\nMatter and wave\u2013particle duality.\nStudying the nature of X-ray radiation and discussing its properties with his brother Maurice, who considered these rays to be some kind of combination of waves and particles, contributed to Louis de Broglie's awareness of the need to build a theory linking particle and wave representations. In addition, he was familiar with the works (1919\u20131922) of Marcel Brillouin, which proposed a hydrodynamic model of an atom and attempted to relate it to the results of Bohr's theory. The starting point in the work of Louis de Broglie was the idea of Einstein about the quanta of light. In his first article on this subject, published in 1922, the French scientist considered blackbody radiation as a gas of light quanta and, using classical statistical mechanics, derived the Wien radiation law in the framework of such a representation. In his next publication, he tried to reconcile the concept of light quanta with the phenomena of interference and diffraction and came to the conclusion that it was necessary to associate a certain periodicity with quanta. In this case, light quanta were interpreted by him as relativistic particles of very small mass.\nIt remained to extend the wave considerations to any massive particles, and in the summer of 1923 a decisive breakthrough occurred. De Broglie outlined his ideas in a short note \"Waves and quanta\" (, presented at a meeting of the Paris Academy of Sciences on September 10, 1923), which marked the beginning of the creation of wave mechanics. In this paper and his subsequent PhD thesis, the scientist suggested that a moving particle with energy \"E\" and velocity v is characterized by some internal periodic process with a frequency formula_1 (later known as Compton frequency), where formula_2 is the Planck constant. To reconcile these considerations, based on the quantum principle, with the ideas of special relativity, de Broglie associated wave he called a \"phase wave\" with a moving body, which propagates with the phase velocity formula_3. Such a wave, which later received the name matter wave, or de Broglie wave, in the process of body movement remains in phase with the internal periodic process. Having then examined the motion of an electron in a closed orbit, the scientist showed that the requirement for phase matching directly leads to the quantum Bohr-Sommerfeld condition, that is, to quantize the angular momentum. In the next two notes (reported at the meetings on September 24 and October 8, respectively), de Broglie came to the conclusion that the particle velocity is equal to the group velocity of phase waves, and the particle moves along the normal to surfaces of equal phase. In the general case, the trajectory of a particle can be determined using Fermat's principle (for waves) or the principle of least action (for particles), which indicates a connection between geometric optics and classical mechanics. The \"de Broglie wavelength\" \"\u03bb\" is the Planck constant \"h\" divided by momentum \"p\":\nformula_4\nThis theory set the basis of wave mechanics. It was supported by Albert Einstein, confirmed by the electron diffraction experiments of George Paget Thomson in the United Kingdom and Clinton Davisson and Lester Germer in the United States, and generalized by the work of Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger.\nOriginally, de Broglie thought that real wave (i.e., having a direct physical interpretation) was associated with particles. However, when the wave aspect of matter was formalized by a wavefunction defined by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, it came out as a pure mathematical entity having a probabilistic interpretation, without the support of physical elements. This wavefunction gives wave behavior to matter but it is only observed through individual quantum samples. However, in 1956 de Broglie again attempted a theory of a direct and physical interpretation of matter-waves, following the work of David Bohm and suggestions of Jean-Pierre Vigier.\nConjecture of an internal clock of the electron.\nIn his 1924 thesis, de Broglie conjectured that the electron has an internal clock that constitutes part of the mechanism by which a pilot wave guides a particle. Subsequently, David Hestenes has proposed a link to the zitterbewegung that was suggested by Schr\u00f6dinger.\nWhile attempts at verifying the internal clock hypothesis and measuring clock frequency are so far not conclusive, recent experimental data is at least compatible with de Broglie's conjecture.\nNon-nullity and variability of mass.\nAccording to de Broglie, the neutrino and the photon have rest masses that are non-zero, though very low. That a photon is not quite massless is imposed by the coherence of his theory. Incidentally, this rejection of the hypothesis of a massless photon enabled him to doubt the hypothesis of the expansion of the universe.\nIn addition, he believed that the true mass of particles is not constant, but variable, and that each particle can be represented as a thermodynamic machine equivalent to a cyclic integral of action.\nGeneralization of the principle of least action.\nIn the second part of his 1924 thesis, de Broglie used the equivalence of the mechanical principle of least action with Fermat's optical principle: \"Fermat's principle applied to phase waves is identical to Maupertuis' principle applied to the moving body; the possible dynamic trajectories of the moving body are identical to the possible rays of the wave.\" This latter equivalence had been pointed out by William Rowan Hamilton a century earlier, and published by him around 1830, for the case of light.\nDuality of the laws of nature.\nFar from claiming to make \"the contradiction disappear\" which Max Born thought could be achieved with a statistical approach, de Broglie extended wave\u2013particle duality to all particles (and to crystals which revealed the effects of diffraction) and extended the principle of duality to the laws of nature.\nHis last work made a single system of laws from the two large systems of thermodynamics and of mechanics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Boltzmann and his continuators developed their statistical interpretation of Thermodynamics, one could have considered Thermodynamics to be a complicated branch of Dynamics. But, with my actual ideas, it's Dynamics that appear to be a simplified branch of Thermodynamics. I think that, of all the ideas that I've introduced in quantum theory in these past years, it's that idea that is, by far, the most important and the most profound.\nThat idea seems to match the continuous\u2013discontinuous duality, since its dynamics could be the limit of its thermodynamics when transitions to continuous limits are postulated. It is also close to that of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who posited the necessity of \"architectonic principles\" to complete the system of mechanical laws.\nHowever, according to him, there is less duality, in the sense of opposition, than synthesis (one is the limit of the other) and the effort of synthesis is constant according to him, like in his first formula, in which the first member pertains to mechanics and the second to optics:\n formula_5\nNeutrino theory of light.\nThis theory, which dates from 1934, introduces the idea that the photon is equivalent to the fusion of two Dirac neutrinos. In 1938, the concept was challenged as not rotationally invariant and work on the concept was largely discontinued.\nHidden thermodynamics.\nDe Broglie's final idea was the hidden thermodynamics of isolated particles. It is an attempt to bring together the three furthest principles of physics: the principles of Fermat, Maupertuis, and Carnot.\nIn this work, action becomes a sort of opposite to entropy, through an equation that relates the only two universal dimensions of the form:\n formula_6\nAs a consequence of its great impact, this theory brings back the uncertainty principle to distances around extrema of action, distances corresponding to \"reductions in entropy\".\nAwards.\nJean-Claude Lehmann, director of the physics department at France's National Center for Scientific Research, said, \"The death of Louis de Broglie marks the disappearance of one of the most brilliant pioneers in contemporary physics\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50167", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50167", "title": "Soviet union", "text": ""}
{"id": "50183", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50183", "title": "Hans Christian Anderson", "text": ""}
