{"id": "44430", "revid": "34448393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44430", "title": "Glacis", "text": "Protective slope built into a fortification\nA glacis (, ) in military engineering is an artificial slope as part of a medieval castle or in early modern fortresses. They may be constructed of earth as a temporary structure or of stone in more permanent structure. More generally, a glacis is any slope, natural or artificial, which fulfils the above requirements. The etymology of this French word suggests a slope made dangerous with ice, hence the relationship with \"glacier\".\nA \"glacis plate\" is the sloped front-most section of the hull of a tank or other armoured fighting vehicle.\nAncient fortifications.\nA glacis could also appear in ancient fortresses, such as the one the ancient Egyptians built at Semna in Nubia. Here it was used by them to prevent enemy siege engines from weakening defensive walls.\nHillforts in Britain started to incorporate glacis around 350 BC. Those at Maiden Castle, Dorset were high.\nMedieval fortifications.\nGlacises, also called taluses, were incorporated into medieval fortifications to strengthen the walls against undermining, to hamper escalades and so that missiles dropped from the battlements would ricochet off the glacis into attacking forces.\nTowards the end of the medieval period some castles were modified to make them defensible against cannons. Glacis of earthen slopes faced with stones were placed in front of the curtain walls and bastions (towers) to absorb the impact of cannon shots, or to deflect them. Towers were lowered to the same height as the curtain walls and converted into gun platforms.\nEarly modern European fortifications.\nEarly modern European fortresses were constructed to keep any potential assailant under the fire of the defenders until the last possible moment. On natural, level ground, troops attacking any high work have a degree of shelter from its fire when close up to it; the glacis consists of a slope with a low grade inclined towards the top of the wall. This gave defenders a direct line of sight into the assaulting force, allowing them to efficiently sweep the field with fire from the parapet. Additionally, but secondarily, the bank of earth would shield the walls from being hit directly by cannon fire.\nThough defenders on high ground already have a direct line of sight, a glacis allows the field of fire to be swept more efficiently, by minimizing changes to the angle of their guns while firing. The glacis prevents attacking cannon from having a clear shot at the walls of a fortress, as usually these cannot be seen until the glacis is crossed and the ditch, bounded on either side by the smooth, masoned scarp and counterscarp, is reached.\nArmored vehicles.\nThe term \"glacis plate\" describes the sloped front-most section of the hull of a tank or other armored fighting vehicle, often composed of upper and lower halves. In a head-on-head armored engagement, the glacis plate is the largest and most obvious target available to an enemy gunner.\nSloped armour has two advantages: many projectiles will deflect rather than penetrate. Those that penetrate will have to travel on a longer diagonal route through any given thickness of armor, than if it were perpendicular to their trajectory.\nAnti-tank mines that employ a tilt-rod fuze are also designed to detonate directly underneath the glacis plate. As a result, it is generally the thickest, most robust armored section of a tank, followed by the turret face and gun mantlet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44431", "revid": "29750937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44431", "title": "Biafra", "text": "Partially recognised state in West Africa (1967\u20131970)\nBiafra ( ; from ), officially the Republic of Biafra, was a partially recognised state in West Africa that declared independence from Nigeria and existed from 1967 to 1970. Its territory consisted of the former Eastern Region of Nigeria, predominantly inhabited by the Igbo ethnic group. Biafra was established on 30 May 1967 by Igbo military officer and Eastern Region governor Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu under his presidency, following a series of ethnic tensions and military coups after Nigerian independence in 1960 that culminated in the 1966 anti-Igbo pogrom.\nThe Nigerian military attempted to reclaim the territory of Biafra, resulting in the beginning of the Nigerian Civil War. Biafra was officially recognized as a sovereign and independent country by Gabon, Haiti, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Tanzania, and Zambia while receiving \"de facto\" recognition and covert military support from France, Portugal, Israel, South Africa, and Rhodesia. After nearly three years of war, during which around two million Biafran civilians died, president Ojukwu fled into exile in the Ivory Coast as the Nigerian military approached the capital of Biafra. Philip Effiong became the second president of Biafra, overseeing the surrender of Biafran forces to Nigeria.\nIgbo nationalism became a strong political and social force after the civil war. It has grown more militant since the 1990s, calling for the independence of the Biafran people and the establishment of their state. Various Biafran secessionist groups have emerged, such as the Indigenous People of Biafra, the Movement for the Actualization of the Sovereign State of Biafra, and the Biafra Zionist Front.\nHistory.\nEarly modern maps of Africa from the 15th to the 19th\u00a0centuries, drawn from accounts written by explorers and travellers, show references to Biafar, Biafara, Biafra, and Biafares. According to the maps, the European travellers used the word \"Biafara\" to describe the region of today's West Cameroon, including an area around today's Equatorial Guinea. Between 1731 and 1754, German bookseller and publisher Johann Heinrich Zedler published his encyclopedia Grosses vollst\u00e4ndiges Universal-Lexicon, in which he mentioned the exact geographical location of the capital of Biafara, namely alongside the river Rio dos Camaroes in today's Cameroon, at a latitude of 6 degrees 10 minutes. The words \"Biafara\" and \"Biafares\" also appear on maps from the 18th century in the area around Senegal and Gambia.\nIn his personal writings from his travels, the Rev. Charles W. Thomas defined the locations of islands in the Bight of Biafra as \"between the parallels of longitude 5\u00b0 and 9\u00b0\u00a0East and latitude 4\u00b0\u00a0North and 2\u00b0\u00a0South.\"\nUnder independent Nigeria.\nIn 1960, Nigeria became independent from the United Kingdom. As with many other new African states, the country's borders did not reflect earlier ethnic, cultural, religious, or political boundaries. Consequently, the northern region of the country has a Muslim majority, primarily encompassing the territory of the indigenous Sokoto Caliphate. The southern population is predominantly Christian, mainly encompassing the territory of the indigenous Yoruba and Igbo states in the west and east, respectively. Following independence, Nigeria was demarcated primarily along ethnic lines: a Hausa and Fulani majority in the north, a Yoruba majority in the West, and an Igbo majority in the East.\nEthnic tension had simmered in Nigeria during discussions of independence, but in the mid-twentieth century, ethnic and religious riots began to occur. In 1945, an ethnic riot flared up in Jos, in which Hausa-Fulani people targeted Igbo people and left many dead and wounded. Police and army units from Kaduna had to be brought in to restore order. A newspaper article describes the event:\nAt Jos in 1945, a sudden and savage attack by Northerners took the Easterners completely by surprise, and before the situation could be brought under control, the bodies of Eastern women, men, and children littered the streets and their property worth thousands of pounds reduced to shambles\nThree thousand Igbo people were murdered in the Jos riots. In 1953, a similar riot occurred in Kano. A decade later, in 1964 and during the Western political crisis, the Western Region was divided as Ladoke Akintola clashed with Obafemi Awolowo. Widespread reports of fraud tarnished the election's legitimacy. Westerners especially resented the political domination of the Northern People's Congress, many of whose candidates ran unopposed in the election. Violence spread throughout the country, and some began to flee the North and West, some to Dahomey. The apparent domination of the political system by the North and the chaos breaking out across the country motivated elements within the military to consider decisive action. The federal government, dominated by Northern Nigeria, allowed the crisis to unfold with the intention of declaring a state of emergency and placing the Western Region under martial law. This administration of the Nigerian federal government was widely perceived to be corrupt. In January 1966, the situation reached a breaking point. A military coup occurred during which a mixed but predominantly Igbo group of army officers assassinated 30 political leaders, including Nigeria's Prime Minister, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, and the Northern premier, Sir Ahmadu Bello. The four most senior officers of Northern origin were also killed. Nnamdi Azikiwe, the President of Igbo extraction, and the favoured Western Region politician Obafemi Awolowo were not killed. The commander of the army, General Aguiyi Ironsi, seized power to maintain order.\nIn July 1966, northern officers and army units staged a countercoup, killing General Aguiyi Ironsi and several southern officers. The predominantly Muslim officers named a general from a small ethnic group (the Angas) in central Nigeria, General Yakubu \"Jack\" Gowon, as the head of the Federal Military Government (FMG). The two coups deepened Nigeria's ethnic tensions. In September 1966, approximately 30,000 Igbo civilians were killed and hundreds of thousands more maimed, had their properties confiscated, and fled the north, and some Northerners were expelled in backlashes in eastern cities.\nIn January 1967, military leaders Yakubu \"Jack\" Gowon and Chukwuemeka Ojukwu, as well as senior police officials from each region met in Aburi, Ghana, and agreed on a less centralised union of regions. The Northerners were at odds with this agreement, known as the Aburi Accords; Obafemi Awolowo, the leader of the Western Region, warned that if the Eastern Region seceded, the Western Region would also, which persuaded the Northerners.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNow, therefore, I, Lieutenant-Colonel Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu, Military Governor of Eastern Nigeria, by virtue of the authority, and pursuant to the principles, recited above, do hereby solemnly proclaim that the territory and region known as and called Eastern Nigeria together with her continental shelf and territorial waters shall henceforth be an independent sovereign state of the name and title of \"The Republic of Biafra\".\nChukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu\nAfter returning to Nigeria, the federal government reneged on the agreement and unilaterally declared the creation of several new states including some that gerrymandered the Igbos in Biafra.\nNigerian civil war.\nOn 26 May, Ojukwu decreed secession from Nigeria after consultations with community leaders from across the Eastern Region. Four days later, Ojukwu unilaterally declared the independence of the Republic of Biafra, citing the Igbos killed in the post-coup violence as reasons for the declaration of independence. It is believed this was one of the major factors that sparked the war. The large amount of oil in the region also created conflict, as oil was already becoming a major component of the Nigerian economy. Biafra was ill-equipped for war, with fewer army personnel and less equipment than the Nigerian military, but had advantages over the Nigerian state as they were fighting in their homeland and had the support of most Biafrans.\nThe FMG attacked Biafra on 6 July 1967. Nigeria's initial efforts were unsuccessful; the Biafrans successfully launched their own offensive and expansion efforts, occupying areas in the mid-Western Region in August 1967. This led to the creation of the Republic of Benin, a short lived puppet-state. However, with the support of the British, American, and Soviet governments, Nigeria turned the tide of the war. By October\u00a01967, the FMG had regained the land after intense fighting. In September\u00a01968, the federal army planned what Gowon described as the \"final offensive\". Initially, the final offensive was neutralised by Biafran troops. In the latter stages, a Southern FMG offensive managed to break through the fierce resistance.\nDue to the proliferation of television and international news organizations, the war found a global audience. 1968 saw the images of malnourished and starving Biafran children reach the mass media of Western countries, leading many non-governmental organisations to become involved to provide humanitarian aid, leading to the Biafran airlift.\nAfter two-and-a-half years of war, during which almost two million Biafran civilians (three-quarters of them small children) died from starvation caused by the total blockade of the region by the Nigerian government, Biafran forces under Nigeria's motto of \"No-victor, No-vanquished\" surrendered to the Nigerian Federal Military Government (FMG). The surrender was facilitated by the Biafran Vice President and Chief of General Staff, Major General Philip Effiong, who assumed leadership of the Republic of Biafra after the first President, Colonel Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu, fled to the Ivory Coast. After the surrender of Biafrans, some Igbos who had fled the conflict returned to their properties but were unable to claim them back from new occupants. This became law in the Abandoned Properties Act (28\u00a0September 1979). It was purported that at the start of the civil war, Igbos withdrew their funds from Nigerian banks and converted it to the Biafran currency. After the war, bank accounts owned by Biafrans were seized and a Nigerian panel resolved to give every Igbo person an account with only 20\u00a0pounds. Federal projects in Biafra were also greatly reduced compared to other parts of Nigeria. In an Intersociety study it was found that Nigerian security forces also extorted approximately $100\u00a0million per year from illegal roadblocks and other methods from Igboland \u2013 a cultural sub-region of Biafra in what is now southern Nigeria, causing the Igbo citizenry to trust the Nigerian security forces even less than before.\nGeography.\nThe Republic of Biafra comprised over of land, with terrestrial borders shared with Nigeria to the north and west, and with Cameroon to the east. Its coast is on the Gulf of Guinea of the South Atlantic Ocean in the south.\nThe country's northeast bordered the Benue Hills and mountains that lead to Cameroon. Three major rivers flow from Biafra into the Gulf of Guinea: the Imo River, the Cross River and the Niger River.\nThe territory of the Republic of Biafra is covered nowadays by the reorganised Nigerian states of Akwa Ibom, Rivers, Cross River, Bayelsa, Ebonyi, Enugu, Anambra, Imo, Abia, Delta and southern Kogi and Benue states.\nLanguages.\nThe languages of Biafra were Igbo, Anaang, Efik, Ibibio, Ogoni, and Ijaw. English was used as the national language.\nPolitics.\nThe Republic of Biafra, a short-lived state that existed from 1967 to 1970, was characterized by a unitary republic structure administered under emergency measures. It comprised an executive branch led by the Biafran president and the Biafran Cabinet, along with a judicial branch that included the Ministry of Justice, the Biafran Supreme Court, and other subordinate courts, reflecting its attempts to establish a functioning governmental system during the period of secession.\nInternational recognition.\nBiafra was formally recognised by Gabon, Haiti, Ivory Coast, Tanzania, and Zambia. Other nations, that did not officially recognise Biafra, but granted \"de facto\" recognition in the form of diplomatic support or military aid, included France, Spain, Portugal, Norway, Israel, Rhodesia, South Africa, and Vatican City. Biafra received aid from non-state actors, including Joint Church Aid, foreign mercenaries, Holy Ghost Fathers of Ireland, Caritas Internationalis, and Catholic Relief Services of the United States. Doctors Without Borders also originated in response to the suffering.\nAlthough the government of the United States under the presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson maintained an officially neutral stance during the war, there was strong public support for Biafra in the United States. The American Committee to Keep Biafra Alive was founded by American activists to spread pro-Biafran propaganda. U.S. president Richard Nixon was sympathetic to Biafra. Before he won the 1968 election, he accused Nigeria of committing genocide against Biafrans and called for the United States to intervene in the war to support Biafra. However, he was ultimately unsuccessful in his efforts to aid Biafra due to the demands of the Vietnam War.\nEconomy.\nAn early institution created by the Biafran government was the Bank of Biafra, accomplished under \"Decree No.\u00a03 of 1967\". The bank carried out all central banking functions including the administration of foreign exchange and the management of the public debt of the Republic. The bank was administered by a governor and four directors; the first governor, who signed on bank notes, was Sylvester Ugoh. A second decree, \"Decree No.\u00a04 of 1967\", modified the Banking Act of the Federal Republic of Nigeria for the Republic of Biafra.\nMany supporters of Biafra continue to advocate for the region's independence, citing cultural identity, historical grievances, and the desire for self-determination. Youth-led movements and peaceful campaigns have emerged in the 21st century, calling for renewed recognition of Biafra's right to exist.\nThe bank was first located in Enugu, but due to the ongoing war, it was relocated several times. Biafra attempted to finance the war through foreign exchange. After Nigeria announced its currency would no longer be legal tender (to make way for a new currency), this effort increased. After the announcement, tons of Nigerian bank notes were transported in an effort to acquire foreign exchange. The currency of Biafra had been the Nigerian pound until the Bank of Biafra started printing out its own notes, the Biafran pound. The new currency went public on 28\u00a0January 1968, and the Nigerian pound was not accepted as an exchange unit. The first issue of the bank notes included only 5\u00a0shillings notes and 1\u00a0pound notes. The Bank of Nigeria exchanged only 30\u00a0pounds for an individual and 300\u00a0pounds for enterprises in the second half of 1968.\nIn 1969, new notes were introduced: \u00a310, \u00a35, \u00a31, 10/- and 5/-.\nIt is estimated that a total of \u00a3115\u2013140\u00a0million Biafran pounds were in circulation by the end of the conflict, with a population of about 14\u00a0million, approximately \u00a310\u00a0per person.\nMilitary.\nAt the beginning of the war Biafra had 3,000\u00a0soldiers, but at the end of the war, the soldiers totalled 30,000. There was no official support for the Biafran Army by any other nation throughout the war, although arms were clandestinely acquired. Because of the lack of official support, the Biafrans manufactured many of their weapons locally. Europeans served in the Biafran cause; German-born Rolf Steiner was a lieutenant colonel assigned to the 4th\u00a0Commando Brigade and Welshman Taffy Williams served as a Major until the very end of the conflict. A special guerrilla unit, the Biafran Organization of Freedom Fighters, was established, designed to emulate the insurrectionist guerrilla forces of the Viet Cong in the American \u2013 Vietnamese War, targeting Nigerian Federal Army supply lines and forcing them to shift forces to internal security efforts.\nThe Biafrans managed to set up a small yet effective air force. The BAF commander was Polish World War II ace Jan Zumbach. Early inventory included four World War II American bombers: two B-25 Mitchells, two B-26 Invaders (Douglas A-26) (one piloted by Zumbach), a converted Douglas DC-3 and one British de Havilland Dove. In 1968 the Swedish pilot Carl Gustaf von Rosen suggested the MiniCOIN project to General Ojukwu. By early 1969, Biafra had assembled five MFI-9Bs in neighbouring Gabon, calling them the \"Biafra Babies\". They were painted in green camouflage and armed with two Matra Type\u00a0122 rocket pods, each being able to carry six 68\u00a0mm SNEB anti-armour rockets under each wing and had Swedish WW2 reflex sights from old FFVS J 22s. The six aeroplanes were flown by three Swedish pilots and three Biafran pilots. In September\u00a01969, Biafra acquired four ex-French North American T-6 Texans (T-6G), which were flown to Biafra the following month, with another aircraft lost on the ferry flight. These aircraft flew missions until January\u00a01970 and were flown by Portuguese ex-military pilots.\nBiafra also had a small improvised navy, but it never gained the success that their air force did. It was headquartered in Kidney Island, Port Harcourt, and commanded by Winifred Anuku. The Biafran Navy was made up of captured craft, converted tugs, and armour-reinforced civilian vessels armed with machine guns or captured 6-pounder guns. It mainly operated in the Niger River delta and along the Niger River.\nLegacy.\nThe international humanitarian organisation M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res originated in response to the suffering in Biafra. During the crisis, French medical volunteers, in addition to Biafran health workers and hospitals, were subjected to attacks by the Nigerian army and witnessed civilians being murdered and starved by the blockading forces. French doctor Bernard Kouchner also witnessed these events, particularly the huge number of starving children, and, when he returned to France, he publicly criticised the Nigerian government and the Red Cross for their seemingly complicit behaviour. With the help of other French doctors, Kouchner put Biafra in the media spotlight and called for an international response to the situation. These doctors, led by Kouchner, concluded that a new aid organisation was needed that would ignore political/religious boundaries and prioritise the welfare of victims.\nIn their study \"Smallpox and its Eradication\", Fenner and colleagues describe how vaccine supply shortages during the Biafra smallpox campaign led to the development of the focal vaccination technique, later adopted worldwide by the World Health Organization of the United Nations, which led to the early and cost-effective interruption of smallpox transmission in West Africa and elsewhere.\nIn 2010, researchers from Karolinska Institutet in Sweden and University of Nigeria at Nsukka showed that Igbos born in Biafra during the years of the famine were of higher risk of suffering from obesity, hypertension and impaired glucose metabolism compared to controls born a short period after the famine had ended in the early 1970s. The findings are in line with the developmental origin of health and disease hypothesis suggesting that malnutrition in early life is a predisposing factor for cardiovascular diseases and diabetes later in life.\nA 2017 paper found that Biafran \"women exposed to the war in their growing years exhibit reduced adult stature, increased likelihood of being overweight, earlier age at first birth, and lower educational attainment. Exposure to a primary education program mitigates the impacts of war exposure on education. War-exposed men marry later and have fewer children. War exposure of mothers (but not fathers) has adverse impacts on child growth, survival, and education. Impacts vary with the age of exposure. For mother and child health, the largest impacts stem from adolescent exposure.\"\nPost-war events and Biafran nationalism.\nThe Movement for the Actualization of the Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB) emerged in 1999 as a nonviolent Biafran nationalist group, associated with Igbo nationalism. The group enacted a \"re-launch\" of Biafra in Aba, the commercial centre of Abia State and a major commercial centre in Igboland. MASSOB says it is a peaceful group and advertises a 25-stage plan to achieve its goal peacefully. It has two arms of government, the Biafra Government in Exile and the Biafra Shadow Government. MASSOB accuses Nigeria of marginalising Biafran people. Since August\u00a01999, protests have erupted in cities across Nigeria's south-east. Though peaceful, the protesters have been routinely attacked by the Nigerian police and army, with large numbers of people reportedly killed. Many others have been injured and/or arrested.\nOn 29\u00a0May 2000, the Lagos \"Guardian\" newspaper reported that the former president Olusegun Obasanjo commuted to retirement the dismissal of all military persons, soldiers and officers, who fought for the breakaway Republic of Biafra during Nigeria's 1967\u20131970 civil war. In a national broadcast, he said the decision was based on the belief that \"justice must at all times be tempered with mercy\".\nIn July 2006, the Center for World Indigenous Studies reported that government-sanctioned killings were taking place in the southeastern city of Onitsha, because of a shoot-to-kill policy directed toward Biafrans, particularly members of the MASSOB.\nThe Nigerian federal government accuses MASSOB of violence; MASSOB's leader, Ralph Uwazuruike, was arrested in 2005 and was detained on treason charges. He has since been released and has been rearrested and released more than five times. In 2009, MASSOB leader Chief Uwazuruike launched an unrecognised \"Biafran International Passport\" and also launched a \"Biafra Plate Number\" in 2016 in response to persistent demand by some Biafran sympathizers in the diaspora and at home. On 16\u00a0June 2012, a Supreme Council of Elders of the Indigenous People of Biafra, another pro-Biafra organisation, was formed. The body is made up of some prominent persons in the Biafra region. They sued the Federal Republic of Nigeria for the right to self-determination. Debe Odumegwu Ojukwu, the eldest son of ex-President / General Ojukwu and a Lagos state-based lawyer was the lead counsel that championed the case.\nMASSOB leader Chief Ralph Uwazuruike established Radio Biafra in the United Kingdom in 2009, with Nnamdi Kanu as his radio director; later Kanu was said to have been dismissed from MASSOB because of accusations of supporting violence. The Nigerian Government, through its broadcasting regulators, the Broadcasting Organisation of Nigerian and Nigerian Communications Commission, has sought to clamp down on Radio Biafra with limited success. On 17\u00a0November 2015, the Abia state police command seized an Indigenous People of Biafra radio transmitter in Umuahia. On 23\u00a0December 2015, Kanu was detained and charged with charges that amounted to treason against the Nigerian state. He was released on bail on 24\u00a0April 2017 after spending more than 19\u00a0months without trial of his treason charges. Self-determination is not a crime in Nigerian law.\nAccording to the South-East Based Coalition of Human Rights Organisations, security forces under the directive of the federal government have killed 80\u00a0members of the Indigenous People of Biafra and their supporters between 30\u00a0August 2015 and 9\u00a0February 2016 in a renewed clampdown on the campaign. A report by Amnesty International between August\u00a02015 and August\u00a02016, at least 150 pro-Biafran activists overall were killed by Nigerian security forces, with 60 people shot in a period of two days in connection with events marking Biafran Remembrance Day. The Nigerian military killed at least 17\u00a0unarmed Biafrans in the city of Onitsha prior to a march on 30\u00a0May 2016 commemorating the 49th anniversary of Biafra's 1967 declaration of independence.\nAnother group is the Biafra Nations League, formerly known as Biafra Nations Youth League, which has its operational base in the Bakassi Peninsula. The group is led by Princewill Chimezie Richard, alias Prince Obuka, and Ebuta Akor Takon (not to be confused wth the group's former deputy, Ebuta Ogar Takon). The group also has a Chief of Staff and operational commander who are both natives of the Bakassi. BNL have recorded a series of security clampdowns, especially in the Bakassi where soldiers of 'Operations Delta Safe' apprehended the National Leader, Princewill, in the Ikang-Cameroon border area on 9\u00a0November 2016. During an attempt to mobilise a protest in support of Kanu's release, he was again re-arrested by the Nigeria Police Force in the same area on 16\u00a0January 2018 along with 20 of their supporters. Many media outlets reported that BNL is linked to the Southern Cameroons separatists; although the group confirms this, they denied involvement in violent activities in Cameroon. The Deputy Leader, Ebuta Akor Takon is an Ejagham native, a tribe in Nigeria and also in significant number in Cameroon. BNL, which operates more in the Gulf of Guinea, has links with Dokubo Asari, a former militant leader. About 100\u00a0members of the group were reportedly arrested in Bayelsa during a meeting with Dokubo on 18\u00a0August 2019.\nThe Incorporated Trustees of Bilie Human Rights Initiative, representing the Indigenous People of Biafra, have filed a lawsuit against the Federal Government of Nigeria and the Attorney General of the Federation, seeking the actualisation of the sovereign state of Biafra by legal means. The Federal High Court, Abuja has fixed 25\u00a0February 2019 for hearing the suit.\nOn 31 July 2020, the Movement for the Actualization of the Sovereign State of Biafra/Biafra Independence Movement (BIM-MASSOB) joined the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO).\nIndigenous People of Biafra (IPOB).\nThe Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB) is a separatist group in Nigeria that aims to restore the defunct Republic of Biafra, a country which seceded from Nigeria in 1967 prior to the Nigerian Civil War and was subsequently dissolved following its defeat in 1970. Since 2021, IPOB and other Biafran separatist groups have been fighting a low-level guerilla conflict in southeastern Nigeria against the Nigerian government. The group was founded in 2012 by Nnamdi Kanu who has been the leader and Uche Mefor, who served as the deputy leader.\nKanu is known as a British political activist known for his advocacy of the contemporary Biafran independence movement. It was declared a terrorist organization by the Nigerian government in 2017 under the Nigerian Terrorism Act but the declaration was nullified by a High Court sitting in Enugu in 2023. As of May 2022, the United Kingdom started denying asylum to members of IPOB who allegedly engaged in human rights abuses, though the UK government clarified that IPOB had not been designated as a terrorist organisation.\nIPOB has criticized the Nigerian federal government for poor investment, political alienation, inequitable resource distribution, ethnic marginalization, and heavy military presence, extrajudicial killings in the South-Eastern, South-Central and parts of North-Central regions of the country. The organization rose to prominence in the mid-2010s and is now the largest Biafran independence organization by membership. In recent years, it has gained significant media attention for becoming a frequent target of political crackdowns by the Nigerian government. It also has numerous sites and communication channels serving as the only trusted social apparatus educating and inculcating first-hand information and news to its members.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44432", "revid": "983723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44432", "title": "Republic of Biafra", "text": ""}
{"id": "44433", "revid": "24956183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44433", "title": "Danish West Indies", "text": "Former Danish colony in the Caribbean\nThe Danish West Indies () or Danish Virgin Islands () or Danish Antilles were a Danish colony in the Caribbean, consisting of the islands of Saint Thomas with , Saint John () with , Saint Croix with , and Water Island.\nWater Island was sold in 1905 to the Danish East Asiatic Company. The islands of St Thomas, St John, and St Croix were purchased by United States in 1917 and became known as the United States Virgin Islands. Water Island was bought by the US Government in 1944, and became part of the US Virgin Islands in 1996.\nHistorical overview.\nAcquisition.\nThe Danish West India-Guinea Company annexed uninhabited St. Thomas in 1672. It annexed St. John in 1718 and bought St. Croix from France (King Louis XV) on 28 June 1733. When the Danish West India-Guinea Company went bankrupt in 1754, King Frederik V of Denmark\u2013Norway assumed direct control of the three islands. Although, during the Napoleonic Wars, Britain twice occupied the Danish West Indies, first in 1801\u20131802 and again in 1807\u20131815. \nColonization and slavery.\nThe economy of the Danish West Indies depended on slavery. Danish colonizers in the West Indies aimed to exploit the profitable triangular trade, involving the export of firearms and other manufactured goods to Africa in exchange for slaves, who were then transported to the Caribbean to work the sugar plantations. Caribbean colonies, in turn, exported sugar, rum and molasses to Denmark. After a rebellion, slavery was officially abolished in 1848, leading to the near economic collapse of the plantations.\nDisposition.\nIn 1852, the Danish parliament first debated the sale of the increasingly unprofitable colony. Denmark tried several times to sell or exchange the Danish West Indies in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with the United States and the German Empire. The islands were eventually sold to the United States for $25\u00a0million ($ in 2024) which took over the administration on 31 March 1917 and renamed the territory the United States Virgin Islands.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nMerchants in Copenhagen asked King Christian IV for permission to establish a West Indian trading company in 1622, but, by the time an eight-year monopoly on trade with the West Indies, Virginia, Brazil and Guinea was granted on 25 January 1625, the failure of the Danish East India and Iceland Companies and the beginning of Danish involvement in the Thirty Years' War dried up any interest in the idea. Prince Frederick organized a trading mission to Barbados in 1647 under Gabriel Gomez and the de Casseres brothers, but it and a 1651 expedition of two ships were unsuccessful. It was not until Erik Smit's private 1652 expedition aboard the \"Fortuna\" was successful that interest in the West Indies' trade grew into an interest in the creation of a new Danish colony.\nSmit's 1653 expedition and a separate expedition of five ships were quite successful, but Smit's third expedition found his two vessels captured for a loss of 32,000 rigsdaler. Two years later, a Danish flotilla was destroyed by a hurricane in August. Smit returned from his fourth expedition in 1663 and formally proposed the settlement of St. Thomas to the king in April 1665. After only three weeks' deliberation, the scheme was approved and Smit was named governor. Settlers departed aboard the \"Eendragt\" on 1 July, but the expedition was ill-starred: The ship hit two large storms and suffered from fire before reaching its destination, and then it was raided by English privateers prosecuting the Second Anglo-Dutch War, in which Denmark was allied with the Netherlands. Smit died of illness, and a second band of privateers stole the ship and used it to trade with neighboring islands. Following a hurricane and a renewed outbreak of disease, the colony collapsed, with the English departing for the nearby French colony on Saint Croix, the Danes fleeing to Saint Christopher, and the Dutch assisting their countrymen on Ter Tholen in stealing everything of value, particularly the remaining Danish guns and ammunition.\nDanish West India Company.\nThe Danes formed a Board of Trade in 1668 and secured a commercial treaty with Britain, providing for the unmolested settlement of uninhabited islands, in July 1670. The Danish West India Company was organized in December and formally chartered by King Christian V the next year on 11 March 1671. J\u00f8rgen Iversen Dyppel, a successful trader on Saint Christopher, was made governor and the king provided convicts from his jails and two vessels for the establishment of the colony, the yacht \"Den forgyldte Krone\" and the frigate \"F\u00e6r\u00f8e\". \"Den forgyldte Krone\" was ordered to run ahead and wait but ended up returning to Denmark after the \"F\u00e6r\u00f8e\" under Capt. Zacharias Hansen Bang was delayed for repairs in Bergen. The \"F\u00e6r\u00f8e\" completed her mission alone, establishing a settlement on St. Thomas on 25 May 1672. From an original contingent of 190\u00a0\u2013 12 officials, 116 company \"employees\" (indentured servants), and 62 felons and former prostitutes\u00a0\u2013 only 104 remained, 9 having escaped and 77 having died in transit. Another 75 died within the first year, leaving only 29 to carry on the colony.\nIn 1675, Iversen claimed St. John and placed two men there; in 1684, Governor Esmit granted it to two English merchants from Barbados but their men were chased off the island by two British sloops sent by Governor Stapleton of the British Leeward Islands. Further instructions in 1688 to establish a settlement on St. John seem not to have been acted on until Governor Bredal made an official establishment on 25 March 1718.\nThe islands quickly became a base for pirates attacking ships in the vicinity and also for the Brandenburg African Company. Governor Lorentz raised enormous taxes upon them and seized warehouses and cargoes of tobacco, sugar, and slaves in 1689 only to have his actions repudiated by the authorities in Copenhagen; his hasty action to seize Crab Island prohibited the Brandenburgers from establishing their own Caribbean colony, however. Possession of the island was subsequently disputed with the Scottish in 1698 and fully lost to the Spanish in 1811.\nSt. Croix was purchased from the French West India Company in 1733. In 1754, the islands were sold to king Frederick V, becoming royal Danish-Norwegian colonies.\nLater history (1801\u20131917).\nTwo-daler banknote from Saint Croix in the Danish West Indies (1898)\nThe first British invasion and occupation of the Danish West Indies occurred during the French Revolutionary Wars, when at the end of March 1801 a British fleet arrived at St Thomas. The Danes accepted the Articles of Capitulation the British proposed and the British occupied the islands without a shot being fired. The British occupation lasted until April 1802, when the British returned the islands to Denmark.\nThe second British invasion of the Danish West Indies took place during the Napoleonic Wars in December 1807 when a British fleet captured St Thomas on 22 December and Saint Croix on 25 December. The Danes did not resist and the invasion was bloodless. This British occupation of the Danish West Indies lasted until 20 November 1815, when Britain returned the islands to Denmark.\nBy the 1850s, the Danish West Indies had a total population of about 41,000 people. The government of the islands was under a governor-general, whose jurisdiction extended to the other Danish colonies of the group. However, because the islands formerly belonged to Great Britain, the inhabitants were English in customs and in language. The islands of that period consisted of:\nThe United States had been interested in the islands since at least the 1860s, when President Andrew Johnson came close to obtaining St. Thomas and St. John. Denmark agreed to sell in 1867 for $7.5\u00a0million and the local population approved the transfer in a plebiscite, but the US Senate never voted on the treaty and it expired. In 1889, there were rumors of negotiations between the Danish and the Germans for sale of the islands. In 1902, the Danish Parliament rejected both a convention and a treaty with the United States.\nThe United States acted again in 1915 because of the islands' strategic position near the approach to the Panama Canal, and because of a fear that Germany might seize them to use as U-boat bases during World War I. A referendum was held in Denmark on the future of the islands, which had become both a financial burden and strategic concern. On 17 January 1917, according to the Treaty of the Danish West Indies, the Danish government sold the islands to the United States for $25\u00a0million ($ in current prices) when the United States removed its objections to Denmark taking control of the whole of Greenland, and the U.S. and Denmark exchanged their respective treaty ratifications. Danish administration ended on 31 March 1917, when the United States took formal possession of the territory and renamed it the United States Virgin Islands. Rear Admiral James H. Oliver was the first American governor of the Danish West Indies.\nAt the time of the US purchase of the Danish West Indies in 1917, the colony did not include Water Island, which had been sold by Denmark to the East Asiatic Company, a private shipping company, in 1905. The company eventually sold the island to the United States in 1944, during the German occupation of Denmark in the Second World War.\nPostage stamps.\nSt Thomas was a hub of the West Indies packet trade from 1851 to 1885. Denmark issued stamps for the Danish West Indies from 1856 onward.\nReligion.\nThe Danish West Indies were inhabited by many different cultures, and each had its own traditions and religions. The church looked after people's moral upbringing, and the king was responsible for civil order. \nFreedom of religion was partially granted to the colonies to help settle the islands, as there was a shortage of willing settlers from Europe. This resulted in a large proportion being Dutch and British natives fleeing religious persecution.\nJews began settling the colony in 1655, and by 1796 the first synagogue was inaugurated. In its heyday in the mid-19th century, the Jewish community made up half of the European population. One of the earliest colonial governors, Gabriel Milan, was a Sephardic Jew.\nIn spite of a general tolerance of faiths, many African religions were not recognized because they typically revolved around belief in animism and magic, beliefs that were consistently met with scorn, and were regarded as immoral and inferior. It was widely believed that if slaves could be converted to Christianity they could have a better life, and effort was made to do so.\nThere was no state-sponsored religion in Denmark until 1849, and authorities required that all citizens observe Danish holidays. \nBy 1900, with a population of 30,000, a fourth of the people were Catholics, while most of the rest were Anglican, Moravian, or other Protestant, including former slaves. For decades, the Moravians had organized missions and also taken charge of the educational system.\nSlavery.\nChattel slavery was practiced in the Danish West Indies from at least the 1670s until the abolition of slavery in 1848. Most slaves worked on plantations, particularly in sugar production, though some also worked at the harbors.\nDemographics.\nSlaves outnumbered Europeans on all islands, often by large margins. On Saint Thomas, population expansion was recorded as 422 Africans and 317 Europeans in 1688, 555 Africans and 383 Europeans in 1699, and 3,042 Africans and 547 Europeans in 1715 (a ratio of more than 5:1), and by 1755 slaves outnumbered Europeans 12:1. On Saint John, there were 677 Africans and 123 Europeans in 1728, 1,086 Africans and 208 Europeans in 1733 (a ratio of more than 5:1), and by 1770 slaves outnumbered Europeans 19:1. On Saint Croix in 1797, there were 25,452 slaves and 2,223 Europeans (a ratio of more than 11:1) as well as 1,164 freedmen, and in 1815 there were 24,330 slaves and 180 Europeans (a ratio of more than 135:1) as well as 2,480 freedmen. At that time, freedmen (many of whom had purchased their freedom) also outnumbered Europeans on Saint Thomas and Saint John.\nSlave trade.\nTrading African slaves was part of the transatlantic slave trade by Denmark\u2013Norway around 1671, when the Danish West India Company was chartered, until 1 January 1803, when the 1792 law to abolish the slave trade came into effect.\nBy 1778, it was estimated that the Danes were bringing about 3,000 Africans to the Danish West Indies yearly for enslavement. These transports continued until the end of 1802, when a 1792 law by Crown Prince Regent Frederik that banned the trade of slaves came into effect.\nSlave codes.\nLaws and regulations in the Danish West Indies were based on Denmark's laws, but the local government was allowed to adapt them to match local conditions. For example, things like animals, land, and buildings were regulated according to Danish law, but Danish law did not regulate slavery. Slaves were treated as common property, and therefore did not necessitate specific laws.\nIn 1733, differentiation between slaves and other property was implied by a regulation that stated that slaves had their own will and thus could behave inappropriately or be disobedient. There was a general consensus that if the slaves were punished too hard or were malnourished, the slaves would start to rebel. This was borne out by the 1733 slave insurrection on St. John, where many plantation owners and their families were killed by the Akwamu, including Breffu, before it was suppressed later the following year. In 1755 Frederick V of Denmark issued more new Regulations, in which slaves were guaranteed the right not to be separated from their children and the right to medical support during periods of illness or old age. However, the colonial government had the ability to amend laws and regulations according to local conditions, and thus the regulations were never enacted in the colony, on grounds that it was more disadvantageous than advantageous.\n1733 slave insurrection.\nThe 1733 slave insurrection on St. John, which lasted from November 1733 until August 1734, was one of the earliest and longest slave rebellions in the Americas. The insurrection started on 23 November 1733, when 150 slaves, primarily Akwamus, revolted against plantation owners and managers. The slaves captured the fort in Coral Bay and took control of most of the island.\nPlanters regained control by the end of May 1734, after the Akwamu were defeated by several hundred better-armed French and Swiss troops sent in April from Martinique, a French colony. Colony militia continued to hunt down maroons and finally declared the rebellion at an end in late August 1734.\nEmancipation.\nBy the 1830s and 1840s, the sugar beet industry had reduced the profitability of sugarcane. The British Slavery Abolition Act 1833 emancipated slaves in the neighboring British West Indies, fully effective as of 1840. Abolition in the Danish West Indies was discussed, with Governor von Scholten, who had been seeking reforms since 1830, in favor of emancipation. Scholarly consensus suggests von Scholten's views were influenced by his free-colored mistress Anna Heegaard.\nKing Christian VIII supported the gradual abolition of slavery and ruled in 1847 that every child born of an unfree woman should be free from birth, and that slavery would end entirely after 12 years. That ruling satisfied neither the slaves nor the plantation owners.\nMeanwhile, on 27 April 1848, France signed a law to abolish slavery in their colonies within two months, but a slave insurrection on Martinique led to immediate abolition on Martinique on 22 May and Guadeloupe on 27 May.\nThe slaves in the Danish West Indies did not want to wait for their freedom, either. On 2 July 1848, freedman John Gottlieb (also known as \"Moses Gottlieb\" or \"General Buddhoe\") and Admiral Martin King (among others) led a slave rebellion, taking over Frederiksted, Saint Croix. That evening, hundreds of slaves gathered peaceably outside Fort Frederik refusing to work the next day and demanding freedom. By 10 a.m. the following morning, about 8,000 slaves had joined.\nOn the afternoon of 3 July 1848 (now known as Emancipation Day), Peter von Scholten, to end the rebellion and prevent bloodshed and damages, went to Frederiksted and announced an immediate and total emancipation of all slaves. He then went to Christiansted, where a second rebellion had formed and some fires had been set, and had notices disseminated to the other islands. General Buddhoe worked with the governor and other officials to end the riots and violence that had broken out on a few estates.\nIn the aftermath, Buddhoe is said to have been jailed and exiled to Trinidad. Governor von Scholten also fared poorly. As governor, he did not actually have the authority to end slavery, but had found himself in a situation where he needed to take immediate action that could not wait for communicating with Denmark. For his actions, he was called back to Denmark to face a trial for treason. He was first denied his pension, but later cleared of the charges.\nWhen Denmark abolished slavery in 1848, many plantation owners wanted full reimbursement on the grounds that their assets were damaged by the loss of the slaves, and by the fact that they would have to pay for labor in the future. The Danish government paid fifty dollars for every slave the plantation owners had owned and recognized that the slaves' release had caused a financial loss for the owners.\nPost-slavery.\nThe lives of the formerly enslaved people changed very little because many continued to be bound to the plantation system through contractual servitude. Most were bound to serve the plantations where they had previously been enslaved. As employees, former slaves were not the plantation owners' responsibility and did not receive food or care from their employers. As part of a sharecropping system, some formerly enslaved people received a small hut, a little land, and some money; however, this one-time compensation did not change the harsh working conditions.\nThe Fireburn labor riot, considered to be the largest labor revolt in Danish colonial history, took place on 1 October 1878. The revolt began because the formerly enslaved continued to live and work in slave-like conditions even though three decades had passed since the abolition of slavery. Mary Leticia Thomas, today referred to as Queen Mary of St. Croix, spearheaded the revolt alongside three other women: Axeline \u2018Agnes\u2019 Elizabeth Salomon, Matilde McBean and Susanna \u2018Bottom Belly\u2019 Abrahamsson. The Fireburn uprising and its leaders continue to have a meaningful role in St. Croix.\n2017 marked the 100th anniversary of the sale of the colony by Denmark to the United States. With this centennial, conversations on the legacy of Danish\u2013Norwegian colonization and slavery were reignited in the Scandinavian mainstream. For example, the artists Jeannette Ehlers and La Vaughn Belle unveiled Denmark's first statue of a black woman, I Am Queen Mary, to memorialize Denmark's colonial impact.\nCurrency used at Danish West Indies 1672\u20131917.\n1773.\nThe Danes overstruck Spanish coins, issued by Charles III. However, the used stroke is of Christian VI (1730\u2013 1746) and not of Christian VII (1766\u20131808). Bearing witness to the difficulty not only of producing or procuring flans, but also even just obtaining new striking tools.\n1904.\nDanish West Indian daler\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44434", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44434", "title": "Tractor beam", "text": "Proposed technological device\nA tractor beam is a device that can attract one object to another from a distance. The concept originates in fiction: The term was coined by E. E. Smith (an update of his earlier \"attractor beam\") in his novel \"Spacehounds of IPC\" (1931). Since the 1990s, technology and research have labored to make it a reality, and have had some success on a microscopic level. Less commonly, a similar beam that repels is known as a pressor beam or repulsor beam. Gravity impulse and gravity propulsion beams are traditionally areas of research from fringe physics that coincide with the concepts of tractor and repulsor beams; tractor beams developed by mainstream researchers and engineers are generally not based on gravity, and practical designs typically use electromagnetism and/or motion of a medium.\nPhysics.\nA force field confined to a collimated beam with clean borders is one of the principal characteristics of tractor and repulsor beams. Several theories that have predicted that repulsive effects do not fall within the category of tractor and repulsor beams because of the absence of field collimation. For example, Robert L. Forward of Hughes Research Laboratories showed that general relativity theory allowed the generation of a very brief impulse of a gravity-like repulsive force along the axis of a helical torus containing accelerated condensed matter. The mainstream scientific community has accepted Forward's work.\nA variant of Burkhard Heim's theory by Walter Dr\u00f6scher, Institut f\u00fcr Grenzgebiete der Wissenschaft (IGW), Innsbruck, Austria, and Jocham H\u00e4user, University of Applied Sciences and CLE GmbH, Salzgitter, Germany, predicted a repulsive force field of gravitophotons could be produced by a ring rotating above a very strong magnetic field. Heim's theory, and its variants, have been treated by the mainstream scientific community as fringe physics. But the works by Forward, Dr\u00f6scher, and H\u00e4user could not be considered as a form of repulsor- or tractor-beam because the predicted impulses and field effects were not confined to a well-defined, collimated region.\nThe following are summaries of other notable experiments and theories that resemble repulsor and tractor beam concepts:\n1960s.\nIn July 1960, trade magazine \"Missiles and Rockets\" reported that Martin N. Kaplan, a research engineer at Ryan Aeronautical Company, had conducted experiments that could lead to an ability to direct an anti-gravitational force toward or away from a second body.\nIn 1964, physicists Leopold Halpern of the Niels Bohr Institute and B. Laurent of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics indicated general relativity theory and quantum theory allowed the generation and amplification of gravitons in a manner like the laser. They showed, in principle, gravitational radiation in the form of a beam of gravitons could be generated and amplified by using induced, resonant emissions.\n1990s \u2013 Podkletnov experiment.\nIn 1992, Professor Yevgeny Podkletnov and R. Nieminen, of the Tampere University of Technology, claimed to have discovered weight fluctuations in objects above an electromagnetically levitated, massive, composite superconducting disk. Three years later, Podkletnov reported the results of additional experiments with a toroidal disk superconductor. They reported the weight of the samples would fluctuate between \u22122.5% and +5.4% as the angular speed of the superconductor increased. Certain combinations of disk angular speeds and electromagnetic frequencies caused the fluctuations to stabilize at a 0.3% reduction. The experiments with the toroidal disk yielded reductions that reached a maximum of 1.9\u20132.1%. Reports about both sets of experiments stated the weight loss region was cylindrical, extending vertically for at least three meters above the disk. Qualitative observations of an expulsive force at the border of the shielded zone were reported in the Fall of 1995. Several groups around the world tried to replicate Podkletnov's gravity shielding observations.\nItalian physicist Giovanni Modanese, while a Von Humboldt Fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Physics, made the first attempt to provide a theoretical explanation of Podkletnov's alleged observations. He argued that the shielding effect and slight expulsive force at the border of the shielded zone could be explained in terms of induced changes in the local cosmological constant. Modanese described several effects regarding responses to modifications to the local cosmological constant within the superconductor. Ning Wu of the Institute of High Energy Physics (Beijing), used the quantum gauge theory of gravity he had developed in 2001 to explain Podkletnov's observations. Wu's theory approximated the relative gravity loss as 0.03% (an order of magnitude smaller than the reported range of 0.3\u20130.5%).\nC. S. Unnikrishan, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, showed that if the effect had been caused by gravitational shielding, the shape of the shielded region would be similar to a shadow from the gravitational shield. For example, the shape of the shielded region above a disk would be conical. The height of the cone's apex above the disk would vary directly with the height of the shielding disk above the earth. Podkletnov and Nieminen described the shape of the weight loss region as a cylinder that extended through the ceiling above the cryostat.\n2010s.\nA team of scientists at the Australian National University (ANU) led by Professor Andrei Rode created a device similar to a tractor beam to move small particles 1.5 meters through the air. Rather than create a new gravitational field, however, the device utilizes a doughnut-shaped Laguerre-Gaussian laser beam, which has a high-intensity ring of light that surrounds a dark core along the beam axis. This method confines particles to the center of the beam using photophoresis, whereby illuminated sections of the particle have a higher temperature and thus impart more momentum to air molecules incident on the surface. Owing to this method, such a device cannot work in space due to lack of air. Rode states that there are practical applications for the device on Earth, for example, the transportation of microscopic hazardous materials and other microscopic objects.\nJohn Sinko and Clifford Schlecht researched a form of reversed-thrust laser propulsion as a macroscopic laser tractor beam. Intended applications include remotely manipulating space objects at distances up to about 100\u00a0km, removal of space debris, and retrieval of adrift astronauts or tools on-orbit.\nFunctioning tractor beams based on solenoidal modes of light were demonstrated in 2010 by physicists at New York University.\nThe spiraling intensity distribution in these non-diffracting beams tends to trap illuminated objects and thus helps to overcome the radiation pressure that ordinarily would drive them down the optical axis. \nOrbital angular momentum transferred from the solenoid beam's helical wavefronts then drives the trapped objects upstream along the spiral. Both Bessel-beam and solenoidal tractor beams are being considered for applications in space exploration by NASA.\nIn March 2011, scientists from Fudan University and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology posited that a specific type of Bessel beam (a special kind of laser that does not diffract at the center) is capable of creating a pull-like effect on a given microscopic particle, forcing it toward the beam-source. The underlying physics is the maximization of forward scattering via interference of the radiation multipoles. They show explicitly that the necessary condition to realize a negative (pulling) optical force is the simultaneous excitation of multipoles in the particle. If the total photon momentum projection along the propagation direction is small, attractive optical force is possible. The Chinese scientists suggest this possibility may be implemented for optical micromanipulation.\nIn 2013, scientists at the Institute of Scientific Instruments (ISI) and the University of St Andrews created a tractor beam that pulls objects on a microscopic level. The study states that this technique may have potential for bio-medical research. \nProfessor Zemanek said: \"The whole team have spent a number of years investigating various configurations of particles delivery by light.\" Dr. Brzobohaty said: \"These methods are opening new opportunities for fundamental photonics as well as applications for life-sciences.\"\nDr Cizmar said: \"Because of the similarities between optical and acoustic particle manipulation we anticipate that this concept will inspire exciting future studies in areas outside the field of photonics.\"\nPhysicists from ANU built a reversible tractor beam, capable of transporting particles \"one fifth of a millimetre in diameter a distance of up to 20 centimetres, around 100 times further than previous experiments.\" According to Professor Wieslaw Krolikowski, of the Research School of Physics and Engineering, \"demonstration of a large scale laser beam like this is a kind of holy grail for laser physicists.\" The work was published in \"Nature\" in 2014. In the same year, Dr. Horst Punzmann and his team at ANU developed a tractor beam that works on water, which could potentially be used to contain oil spills, control floating objects, or study the formation of rips on beaches.\nIn 2015, a team of researchers built the world's first sonic tractor beam that can lift and move objects using sound waves. An \"Instructables\" webpage was made available with instructions to build a rudimentary device.\nIn 2016, Rice University scientists discovered that Tesla coils can generate force fields able to manipulate matter through a process called teslaphoresis.\nIn December 2016, researchers were able to manipulate the movement of bacterial cells using a tractor beam, thereby opening the possibility that tractor beams could have future applications in biological sciences.\nIn 2018, a research team from Tel-Aviv University, led by Dr. Alon Bahabad, experimentally demonstrated an optical analog of the Archimedes' screw where the rotation of a helical-intensity laser beam is transferred to the axial motion of optically trapped micrometer-scale, airborne, carbon-based particles. With this optical screw, particles were easily conveyed with controlled velocity and direction, upstream or downstream of the optical flow, over half a centimeter.\nIn 2019, researchers at the University of Washington used a tractor beam to assemble nanoscale materials in a process they describe as \"photonic nanosoldering\".\nFiction.\nScience fiction movies and telecasts normally depict tractor and repulsor beams as audible, narrow rays of visible light covering a small target area. Tractor beams are most commonly used on spaceships and space stations. They are generally used in three ways:\nIn the latter case, countermeasures can usually be employed against tractor beams. These may include pressor beams (a stronger pressor beam will counteract a weaker tractor beam) or \"plane shears\" \"shearing planes\" (a device to \"cut\" the tractor beam and render it ineffective). In some fictional realities, shields can block tractor beams, or the generators can be disabled by sending a large amount of energy along the beam to its source.\nTractor beams and pressor beams can be used together as a weapon: by attracting one side of an enemy spaceship while repelling the other, one can create severely damaging shear effects in its hull. Another mode of destructive use of such beams is rapid alternating between pressing and pulling force in order to cause structural damage to the ship as well as inflicting lethal forces on its crew.\nTwo objects being brought together by a tractor beam are usually attracted toward their common center of gravity. This means that if a small spaceship applies a tractor beam to a large object such as a planet, the ship will be drawn toward the planet, rather than vice versa.\nIn \"Star Trek\", tractor beams are imagined to work by placing a target in the focus of a subspace/graviton interference pattern created by two beams from an emitter. When the beams are manipulated correctly the target is drawn along with the interference pattern. The target may be moved toward or away from the emitter by changing the polarity of the beams. The range of the beam affects the maximum mass that the emitter can move, and the emitter subjects its anchoring structure to significant force.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44435", "revid": "32901939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44435", "title": "Rostrum", "text": "Rostrum may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44436", "revid": "46696839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44436", "title": "Wilhelm Johannsen", "text": "Danish botanist and geneticist\nWilhelm Johannsen (3 February 1857 \u2013 11 November 1927) was a Danish pharmacist, botanist, plant physiologist, and geneticist. He is best known for coining the terms gene, phenotype and genotype, and for his 1903 \"pure line\" experiments in genetics.\nBiography.\nJohannsen was born in Copenhagen. While very young, he was apprenticed to a pharmacist and worked in Denmark and Germany beginning in 1872 until passing his pharmacist's exam in 1879. In 1881, he became assistant in the chemistry department at the Carlsberg Laboratory under the chemist Johan Kjeldahl. Johannsen studied the metabolism of dormancy and germination in seeds, tubers and buds. He showed that dormancy could be broken by various anesthetic compounds, such as diethyl ether and chloroform.\nIn 1892, he was appointed lecturer at Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University and later became professor of botany and plant physiology. He taught plant physiology. His best-known research concerned so-called \"pure lines\" of the self-fertile common bean. He was able to show that even in populations homozygous for all traits, i.e. without genetic variation, seed size followed a normal distribution. This was attributable to resource provision to the mother plant and to the position of seeds in pods and of pods on the plant. \nJohannsen's findings led him to oppose contemporary Darwinists, most notably Francis Galton and Karl Pearson, who held the occurrence of normal distributed trait variation in populations as proof of gradual genetic variation on which selection could act. Only with the modern synthesis, was it established that variation needed to be heritable to act as the raw material for selection.\nHe coined the terms \"phenotype\" and \"genotype\", first using them in his book in German as \"Elemente der exakten Erblichkeitslehre\" (Elements of the exact theory of heredity). This book was based in large part on \"Om arvelighed i samfund og i rene linier\" (\"On heredity in society and in pure lines\") and in his book \"Arvelighedsl\u00e6rens Elementer\". It was in this book Johannsen also introduced the term \"gene\". This term was coined in opposition to the then common \"pangene\" that stemmed from Darwin's theory of pangenesis. The book became one of the founding texts of genetics.\nAlso in 1905, Johannsen was appointed professor of plant physiology at the University of Copenhagen, becoming vice-chancellor in 1917. In December 1910, Johannsen was invited to give an address before the American Society of Naturalists. This talk was printed in the American Naturalist. In 1911, he was invited to give a series of four lectures at Columbia University.\nJohannsen was a corresponding member of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (elected 1915). He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1916.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44437", "revid": "45620980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44437", "title": "The Great Ziegfeld", "text": "1936 film by Robert Zigler Leonard\nThe Great Ziegfeld is a 1936 American musical drama film directed by Robert Z. Leonard and produced by Hunt Stromberg. It stars William Powell as the theatrical impresario Florenz \"Flo\" Ziegfeld Jr., Luise Rainer as Anna Held, and Myrna Loy as Billie Burke.\nThe film, shot at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studios in Culver City, California in the fall of 1935, is a fictionalized and sanitized tribute to Florenz Ziegfeld Jr. and a cinematic adaptation of Broadway's \"Ziegfeld Follies\", with highly elaborate costumes, dances and sets. Many of the performers of the theatrical \"Ziegfeld Follies\" were cast in the film as themselves, including Fanny Brice and Harriet Hoctor, and the real Billie Burke acted as a supervisor for the film. The \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" set alone was reported to have cost US$220,000 (US$ in 2024 dollars), featuring a towering rotating volute of diameter with 175 spiral steps, weighing 100 tons. The music to the film was provided by Walter Donaldson, Irving Berlin, and lyricist Harold Adamson, with choreographed scenes. The extravagant costumes were designed by Adrian, taking some 250 tailors and seamstresses six months to prepare them using of silver sequins and of white ostrich plumes. Over a thousand people were employed in the production of the film, which required 16 reels of film after the cutting.\nOne of the biggest successes in film in the 1930s and the pride of MGM at the time, it was acclaimed as the greatest musical biography to be made in Hollywood and still remains a standard in musical film making. It won three Academy Awards, including Best Picture for producer Hunt Stromberg, Best Actress for Luise Rainer, and Best Dance Direction for Seymour Felix, and was nominated for four others.\nMGM made two more \"Ziegfeld\" films: \"Ziegfeld Girl\" (1941), starring James Stewart, Judy Garland, Hedy Lamarr and Lana Turner, which recycled some footage from \"The Great Ziegfeld\"; and \"Ziegfeld Follies\" (1946) by Vincente Minnelli. In 1951, the studio produced a Technicolor remake of \"Show Boat\", which Ziegfeld had presented as a stage musical.\nPlot.\nThe son of a highly respected music professor, Florenz \"Flo\" Ziegfeld Jr. yearns to make his mark in show business. He begins by promoting Eugen Sandow, the \"world's strongest man\", at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair, overcoming the competition of rival Jack Billings and his popular attraction, belly dancer Little Egypt, with savvy marketing (allowing women to feel Sandow's muscles).\nZiegfeld returns to his father and young Mary Lou at the Chicago Musical College, and departs to San Francisco, where he and Sandow are deemed frauds for putting on a show in which Sandow faces a lion who falls asleep as soon as it is let out of the cage. Flo travels to England on an ocean liner, where he runs into Billings again who is laughing at a newspaper article denouncing him as a fraud.\nFlo discovers that Billings is on his way to sign a contract with beautiful French star Anna Held. Despite losing all his money gambling at Monte Carlo, Flo charms Anna into signing with him instead, pretending that he doesn't know Billings. Anna twice almost sends him away for his rudeness and for being broke, before revealing that she appreciates his honesty. Ziegfeld promises to give her \"more publicity than she ever dreams of\" and to feature her alongside America's most prominent theatrical performers.\nAt first, Anna's performance at the Herald Square Theatre is not a success. However, Flo manages to generate publicity by sending 20 gallons of milk to Anna every day for a fictitious milk bath beauty treatment, then refusing to pay the bill. The newspaper stories soon bring the curious to pack his theater, and Ziegfeld introduces eight new performers to back her. Audience members comment on how the milk must make her skin beautiful and the show is a major success. Flo sends Anna flowers and jewelry and a note saying \"you were magnificent my wife\", and she agrees to marry him, flaunting her new diamonds to her fellow performers.\nHowever, one success is not enough for the showman. He has an idea for an entirely new kind of show featuring a bevy of blondes and brunettes, one that will \"glorify\" the American girl. The new show, the \"Ziegfeld Follies\", an opulent production filled with beautiful women and highly extravagant costumes and sets, is a smash hit, and is followed by more versions of the Follies.\nZiegfeld tries to make a star out of Audrey Dane, who is plagued with alcoholism, and he lures Fanny Brice from vaudeville, showering both with lavish gifts. He gives stagehand Ray Bolger his break as well. Mary Lou, now a young woman, visits Ziegfeld, who doesn't recognize her initially, and hires her as a dancer.\nThe new production upsets Anna, who realizes that Flo's world does not revolve around just her, and she becomes envious of the attention he pays to Audrey. She divorces him after walking in on Flo and a drunk Audrey at the wrong moment. Audrey walks out on Flo and the show after an angry confrontation. Broke, Flo borrows money from Billings for a third time for the new show.\nFlo meets the red-headed Broadway star Billie Burke and soon marries her. When she hears the news, a heartbroken Anna telephones Flo and pretends to be glad for him. Flo and Billie eventually have a daughter named Patricia.\nFlo's new shows are a success, but after a while, the public's taste changes, and people begin to wonder if the times have not passed him by. After a string of negative reviews in the press, Flo overhears three men in a barber's shop saying that he'll \"never produce another hit\". Stung, he vows to have \"four\" hits on Broadway at the same time.\nHe achieves his goal, with the hits \"Show Boat\" (1927), \"Rio Rita\" (1927), \"Whoopee!\" (1928), and \"The Three Musketeers\", and invests over $1 million (US$ in 2024 dollars) of his earnings in the stock market. However, the stock market crash of 1929 bankrupts him, forcing Billie to return to the stage.\nShaken by the reversal of his financial fortunes and the growing popularity of movies over live stage shows, he becomes seriously ill. Billings pays him a friendly visit, and the two men agree to become partners in a new, even grander production of \"The Ziegfeld Follies\". But the reality is that both men are broke and Ziegfeld realizes this. In the final scene in his apartment overlooking the Ziegfeld Theatre, in a half-delirium, he recalls scenes from several of his hits, exclaiming, \"I've got to have more steps, higher, higher\", before dying in his chair.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nZiegfeld Girls (uncredited)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nZiegfeld's widow, Billie Burke, was keen to pay off Ziegfeld's debts without filing for bankruptcy, and sold the rights to a biopic of him to Universal Pictures in late 1933. As a result, the film went into the pre-production phase in January 1934. In the early stages of script development, Burke was listed as coauthor with Macguire. Macguire had initially proposed the biographical film to them in the form of a \"filmusical entertainment\" set in a \"theatrical tradition\" and William Powell was cast as Ziegfeld. However, by February 1935, Macguire had fallen into disagreement with Universal over financial problems at the studio, and the entire production, including some already constructed sets and musical arrangements, was sold to MGM for US$300,000 (US$ in 2024 dollars). As part of the deal however, Universal retained the services of Powell for the classic screwball comedy \"My Man Godfrey\", which was released the same year as \"The Great Ziegfeld\".\nThe film was shot at MGM Studios in Culver City, California mostly in the latter half of 1935 under a budget of US$1,500,000 (US$ in 2024 dollars), produced by Hunt Stromberg. The cost exceeded US$2 million (US$ in 2024 dollars) by the end of the production in early 1936, exorbitant for the period, and it was MGM's most expensive film to date after \"\" (1925). The principal cinematography was shot by Oliver T. Marsh, and George J. Folsey and Karl Freund were brought in to shoot the Ziegfeld Roof numbers. Ray June shot the \"Melody\" number and Merritt B. Gerstad is credited for the Hoctor Ballet.\nIn the advertising for the film, MGM boasted of the film's ostentatious nature, bragging that it was \"SO BIG that only MGM could handle it\", with its \"countless beauties, trained lions, ponies, dogs and other animals\". Busby Berkeley, who had led Warner Brothers to become the leading producer of musicals in Hollywood in the 1930s, was a major influence on the producers which had \"glamorous, excessive 1930s cinematic musical numbers\". The film also came at a time when producers had begun seeing the economic and cultural importance of the cinematic medium in comparison to theater. \"Variety\" notes that the film producers were likely very concerned with the presentation of the film after production was wrapped up, and that the long length of the film at 176 minutes was understandable in that they probably \"wanted to preserve as much footage as possible\". William S. Gray was responsible for the editing of the film. Over a thousand people were employed in the production, and \"The Great Ziegfeld\" required 16 reels of film after the cutting.\nBy coincidence, Universal's 1936 film version of the Ziegfeld musical \"Show Boat\", the most faithful of all the film versions of the stage production, was filmed at the same time as \"The Great Ziegfeld\" and released in the same year.\nScreenplay.\nThe screenplay by William Anthony McGuire was a \"novelty\" to many audiences who were familiar with the theatrical Broadway shows of the follies. The script, although fictionalized with embellishments needed for the motion picture, did show some accuracies in the life of Ziegfeld. Frank S. Nugent of \"The New York Times\" said of the script: \"What William Anthony McGuire has attempted in his screen play, and with general success, is to encompass not merely the fantastic personal history of Ziegfeld but the cross-sectional story of the development of the Follies, the Midnight Frolic on the New Amsterdam Roof and the other theatrical enterprises floated under the Glorifier's aegis during a span of about forty years. The two biographies\u2014of the man and of his creations\u2014are, naturally, inseparable; but both have been told with such wealth of detail and circumstance (real and imaginative) that even the three-hour film narrative is fragmentary and, in some places, confused.\"\nAlthough it has some accuracies, \"The Great Ziegfeld\" takes many key liberties with Ziegfeld's life and the history of the \"Follies\", resulting in many inaccuracies. The earlier scenes with Sandow, the milk bath advertising scenario, and many other sequences including several of the dramatic ups and downs of the film were fictional. George Gershwin's \"Rhapsody in Blue\" was never featured in the \"Follies\", and the number \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" was written for the 1919 \"Follies\", not the first edition of the revue, as shown in the film. Ray Bolger was never cast in a \"Follies\" show, and although she was born in the U.S., Billie Burke grew up in England and spoke with a Mid-Atlantic accent throughout her life; Loy who portrays her clearly has an American accent in the film.\nIn the film, the last few lines of the song \"Ol' Man River\" (from \"Show Boat\") are sung by what sounds like a tenor, while the song was intended for bass Paul Robeson and sung in the original production by bass-baritone Jules Bledsoe. Further, the screenplay also gives the impression that the successful original production of \"Show Boat\", which Ziegfeld produced, closed because of the Great Depression. In fact \"Show Boat\" ended its original 1927 run in the spring of 1929 and the stock market crash did not occur until October of that year. It was the 1932 revival of the show (also produced by Ziegfeld shortly before his death), not the original production, that was affected by the Depression.\nIn real life, Ziegfeld did not die in his room at the Hotel Warwick (not mentioned) which stood in front of the Ziegfeld Theatre; he actually died in Los Angeles and had not even spent his last years in New York. However, McGuire did capture a number of Ziegfeld's traits, such as sending telegrams to people even in close proximity, his belief that elephants were a symbol of good luck, his exquisite taste in costumes and design, and perfectionism over his productions, especially lighting and rostrum pedestaling. McGuire's script, now in the Henry E. Huntington Library, San Marino, California, is dated September 21, 1935, probably the date when it was finalized.\nCasting.\nInitially, the main cast proposed for the film included Marilyn Miller, Gilda Gray, Ann Pennington, and Leon Errol. Featured in the film are William Powell as Ziegfeld, Myrna Loy as Billie Burke, Luise Rainer as Anna Held, Nat Pendleton as Eugen Sandow, and Frank Morgan. Powell admitted to being \"amazed\" with the film after viewing it and was very grateful at having had the privilege to portray Ziegfeld, considering it to be a very important moment in his career. He said \"After seeing this film I can see that most of the characters I have played before were contrived. They had no 'folks', as the character of Ziegfeld had in this picture. Their father was a pen and their mother was a bottle of ink. Here was a character with flesh, blood and sinews. I felt for the first time in my acting career I had tried the full measure of a man, regardless of my shortcomings in playing him.\"\nMany of the performers of the earlier Broadway version of the Ziegfeld Follies were cast in the film as themselves, including Fanny Brice and Harriet Hoctor, the ballet dancer and contortionist. \"The Great Ziegfeld\" marked Rainer's second Hollywood film role after \"Escapade\" (also with Powell). Fanny Brice appears as a comedian in the abridged song sequence \"My Man\" and played an effective version of herself in addition to her routine comic role as the funny girl. \nNat Pendleton, a freestyle wrestler who had won the silver medal at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp and had appeared alongside Powell in \"The Thin Man\" (1934), was cast as the circus strongman Eugen Sandow.\nBillie Burke objected to her role being cast with another actress (Myrna Loy) since she was also an actress under contract to the studio and could play herself, but the producers concluded that at that point she was not a big enough star to play herself in \"The Great Ziegfeld\". However, according to Emily W. Leider, Burke was not keen on playing her younger self and says that Billie Burke's biographer stated that Miriam Hopkins would have been her first choice to play her part, not Loy. Burke herself worked as technical consultant, and although she did not object to Marilyn Miller performing a number, she was influential in the studio's refusal to give her the higher billing and salary she had demanded, which led to Miller walking away from the film.\nBoth Miller and Lillian Lorraine threatened legal action if their names were so much as mentioned in the film. Thus Miller's character was renamed Sally Manners, and Lorraine's character was renamed Audrey Dane (played by Virginia Bruce). In real life, Ziegfeld reportedly was obsessed with Miller, and was involved in numerous sex scandals. In 1922, Miller had given an interview in which she accused him of \"making love to chorus girls\" and sending her a diamond ring as \"big as her hand\"; this essence of Ziegfeld's character is captured in the film. Incidentally, Miller died from toxicity complications after surgery just before the release of the film on April 7, 1936, which led one reviewer writing in \"Liberty\" to denounce an urban legend which had arisen surrounding the timing of her death, writing \"It's not true that Marilyn Miller died of a broken heart at not getting the lead in this.\" Another myth surrounding her untimely death at the age of 37 is that she had contracted syphilis.\nFrank Morgan, a stage and film character actor, played the role of promoter Billings in the film. Dennis Morgan, in an uncredited role, performs in \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" (dubbed by Allan Jones). Pat Ryan, the future Pat Nixon, wife of Richard Nixon and First Lady of the United States, was an extra in the film. Will Rogers was to appear in the film, but he was killed in a plane crash in August 1935. He was played by stand-in A.A. Trimble.\nCostumes.\nThe extravagant costumes, which even Ziegfeld initially considered too flamboyant, were designed by Adrian, who had worked with many of the greatest actresses of the period, including Greta Garbo, Norma Shearer, Jeanette MacDonald, Jean Harlow, Katharine Hepburn and Joan Crawford, and later designed for films such as \"Marie Antoinette\" (1938), \"The Women\" (1939), and \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939). Howard Gutner documents that due to MGM's wealth and the high budget, Adrian indulged in \"sheer lavishness\" in making the costumes, surpassing anything he had done previously. It took 250 tailors and seamstresses six months to sew the costumes that Adrian had designed for the film, using of silver sequins and of white ostrich plumes. The costumes worn by women in the film are diverse, varying from \"puffy hooped skirts to catlike leotards\" to \"layers of tulle and chiffron\", with the men mostly wearing black tuxedos.\nMise en sc\u00e8ne and music.\nLeonard, a film director who specialized in melodrama and musicals, anchored the music for the film, working with Walter Donaldson, Irving Berlin, and lyricist Harold Adamson. The extravagant dances and ensemble sequences were choreographed by Seymour Felix and Harold Adamson, including the song sequence of \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" (it was Irving Berlin's 13th annual edition in 1919). The \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" set, known as the \"Wedding Cake\", involved several weeks of shooting time and was reported to have cost US$220,000 (US$ in 2024 dollars). As many as 180 performers were involved in the scenes which included singers, dancers and musicians. The sequence starts with Stanley Morner (soon to be known as Dennis Morgan) alone in front of the curtain, apparently singing \u201cA Pretty Girl\u2026\u201d Apparently because, although he was an excellent singer \u201cthe song had previously been recorded by Allan Jones, another M-G-M contract player, and the studio apparently decided not to re-record the number.\u201d After he sings the entire first verse and refrain, the front curtain begins to pull away and the stage begins to rotate, revealing people in 18th century costumes. The chorus continues to sing as the stage rotates through excerpts from romantic musical history, eventually reaching \u201c\"Rhapsody in Blue\"\u201d and an elaborate dance number. Then Morgan re-appears, standing among a crowd of pretty girls who are seated on the stairs. As he finishes the song, Virginia Bruce is revealed seated atop the tower, wearing a voluminous gown that spills over the edge. She faces front as the tower continues to turn. The camera pulls back to show the entire structure, and the satin curtain descends, enclosing each level in turn until the stage curtain closes.\nThe curtains, made of rayon silk, measured . Sheldon Hall and Stephen Neale note the theatrical sense that the cinematographers achieved through shooting the sequence in virtually a single take. They mention that \"the camera traverses an enormous platform set contained within a curtained proscenium (also enormous)\", and that the \"set itself revolves to meet the camera, rather than the camera entering the space of the set.\" Linda Mizejewski, author of a book on the Ziegfeld girls, argues that the Pretty Girl sequence is more than just about being showy; it is symbolic of womanhood which \"powerfully visualizes women as the raw material for male aesthetic vision and design\". In the film she believes that womanhood is defined by the \"young, white, blond and slender\" female, which in the sequence are \"delineated as the fluffy, artificial tiers of costuming and staging\".\nThe Harriet Hoctor ballet music was scored by Con Conrad to lyrics written by Herb Magidson. The circus ballet was an adaptation from the old Ziegfeld stage shows. \"Variety\" called the Hoctor ballet \"in itself intricate with its maneuverings of six Russian wolfhounds in terp formations\", and said that the \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" sequence in the film is a \"nifty Berlin tune [which] becomes the fulcrum for one of Frank Skinner's best arrangements as Arthur Lange batons the crescendos into a mad, glittering potpourri of Saint-Sa\u00ebns and Gershwin, Strauss and Verdi, beautifully blended against the Berlinesque background. It's a scenic flash which makes the auditor wonder 'What can they do to follow that?' meaning in this or future film production.\" Juan Antonio Ram\u00edrez refers to the wedding cake as a \"famous spiral column\", citing it as one of the best known pieces of mobile architecture in film, but notes that in design the cake was not exclusive to \"The Great Ziegfeld\", explaining that a wedding cake, albeit less flamboyant, had appeared in previous films such as \"King of Jazz\" (1930), \"The Kid from Spain\" (1932), \"Top Hat\" (1935), and \"Follow the Fleet\" (1936). Ram\u00edrez describes the film's \"Mise en sc\u00e8ne\" as representing \"the last word in flashy vulgarity, Surrealist kitsch, or perhaps both at once\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFinale:\nAftermath.\nFarida Mazar filed a lawsuit against the filmmakers shortly before her death, claiming that they \"presented Little Egypt as a lewd character\". 14 witnesses who had seen the act at the 1893 Chicago World Fair supported this, although the lawsuit was dropped after Mahzar died from a heart attack. Burke caused much controversy and upset among many of Ziegfeld's friends and colleagues when she sold the rights to a production on Broadway, the \"Ziegfeld Follies\", also starring Fanny Brice, at the time the film was released in 1936, due to the fact that the show was produced by the Shubert brothers, whom Ziegfeld detested. Worse still for his associates, was that the show was a bigger success than Ziegfeld's last production of the Follies in 1931. The \"Ziegfeld Follies\" under Vincente Minnelli initially was performed in December 1935 before making its Broadway debut on January 30, 1936. It was performed in Boston and Philadelphia until the production was postponed after Brice collapsed on stage with exhaustion. When it reopened on Broadway in September 1936, five months after the release of the film, it was retitled \"The New Ziegfeld Follies of 1936\u20131937\", and was revamped considerably, with changes to the show's humor.\nIn 1941, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer produced a sequel titled \"Ziegfeld Girl\", starring James Stewart, Judy Garland, Hedy Lamarr, and Lana Turner, which recycled some film from \"The Great Ziegfeld\". In 1946, MGM made another sequel, \"Ziegfeld Follies\", directed by Vincente Minnelli, director of the stage show.\nReception.\nBox office.\nAccording to MGM records, the film earned a then-massive $3,089,000 in the US and Canada and $1,584,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $822,000.\nIt was the 5th most popular film at the British box office in 1935\u201336.\nCritical response at the time of release.\nThe film, which premiered in Los Angeles at the Carthay Circle Theatre, was the first musical film in history for which one of its cast members won an Academy Award. Luise Rainer received the Best Actress Oscar for her portrayal of Anna Held, Ziegfeld's first wife. The film, the pride of MGM at a time when Warner Brothers and RKO Pictures were the leading studios in Hollywood for musical production, was a major commercial and critical success and one of the most successful films of the 1930s, grossing US$4,673,000 (US$ in 2024 dollars) worldwide at the box office. It was acclaimed upon release as the greatest musical biography to be made in Hollywood and still remains a standard in musical film making. At just over three hours, \"The Great Ziegfeld\" was also the longest talking film of the time. (D.W. Griffith's \"The Birth of a Nation\" and \"Intolerance\", both silent films, had each run over three hours.) TCM has acclaimed the \"A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody\" sequence as one of \"the most famous musical numbers ever filmed\". Thomas S. Hischak has said that the film has rarely been topped for pure showmanship and glamor, and \"Variety\" considered it an \"outstanding picture\", a \"symbol of a tradition of show business\". \"Variety\" praised the performances of the cast, remarking that as Ziegfeld, William Powell \"endows the impersonation with all the qualities of a great entrepreneur and sentimentalist without sacrificing the shades and moods called for\" and noting that Luise Rainer is \"tops of the femmes with her vivacious Anna Held\". Stanley Green cited \"The Great Ziegfeld\" as \"the first of a number of elaborate show-business screen biographies\". Otis Ferguson, writing for \"New Republic\" magazine, remarked that the \"musical numbers seem as irresistible as Ziegfeld himself\". The \"New York American\" said that the film is \"pretty nearly everything such an extravaganza should be\", with \"romance and reality, song and dance, gaiety and beauty, pathos and bathos\". \"Time\" qualified it as \"Pretentious, packed with hokum and as richly sentimental as an Irving Berlin lyric, it is, as such, top-notch entertainment.\" A reviewer for the \"Spokane Chronicle\" praised the film for its superb acting, writing that \"[even] the great producer [Ziegfeld] would have been unable to produce scenes of magnitude and splendor that are given as part of the picture telling his life.\" Frank S. Nugent of \"The New York Times\" was also highly praising of the film, noting that it had \"more stars than there are in the heavens\" and remarking that \"the picture achieves its best moments in the larger sequences devoted to the Girls \u2014 ballet, chorus and show. At least one of these spectacular numbers, filmed to the music of Irving Berlin's 'A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody', with overtones of 'Rhapsody in Blue', never has been equaled on the musical comedy stage or screen.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" called it \"the most lavish display the screen has had to offer\" with chorus numbers that were \"gigantic and effective\", though he found the romance to be \"peculiarly average screen-story stuff.\" Both \"The New York Times\" and \"Film Daily\" rated the film in the \"Ten Best\" of the year.\nHowever, not all critics were as enthusiastic about the film; Graham Greene of the British \"Spectator\" called it a \"huge inflated gas-blown object\" and criticized its length, comparing it to the feat of a flagpole sitter. A number of critics, although praising the film in general, felt that Myrna Loy, who appears rather late on in the film, gave a lackluster performance as Billie Burke. Nugent said that \"Miss Loy is a stately Bille Burke, and somewhat lacking, we fear, in Miss Burke's effervescence and gaiety\", and Cecilia Agner thought she came across as \"stilted, like her rigidly waxed and set blonde wig\". Harrison Carroll of the \"Los Angeles Herald-Express\", however, sympathized with the difficulty of her role in portraying a prominent living actress, confessing that he was pleased that Loy did not attempt to imitate Burke's mannerisms. Emily W. Leider believes that any of her character flaws were due to a \"mushy\" script, rather than her performance as an actress.\nCritical re-evaluation.\nAlthough the film is still viewed as a symbol of glamour and excess during the Golden Age of Hollywood, the film's contemporary reception is mixed. Since its release, the film has been criticized in particular for its reliance on extravagance, being unnecessarily lengthy, and its overacting (particularly by Rainer). Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports a 71% approval rating based on 70 reviews, with a weighted average of 6.2/10. The site's consensus reads: \"This biopic is undeniably stylish, but loses points for excessive length, an overreliance on clich\u00e9s, and historical inaccuracies\". On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 69 out of 100 based on 16 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\nChristopher Null stated that \"The Great Ziegfeld\" is a \"textbook case of how a film can lose its appeal over the years\". The film is occasionally cited as a \"prime example of the Academy's fallibility\" in a year when other critically acclaimed pictures such as \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" were released, which some argue was more deserving of Best Picture.\nEmily W. Leider claims the film to be \"more remarkable for its \"legs and tinsel\" extravagance than for its excellence.\" David Parkinson of \"Empire\" gave the film three out of five stars and concluded that it \"Drags in places and doesn't even try for a true-to-life portrait of the great theatre entrepreneur but it's shiny and big spectacle with impressive choreography.\"\nDave Kehr of the \"Chicago Reader\" called it \"amazingly dull, even with William Powell in the lead and guest appearances by the likes of Ray Bolger and Fanny Brice.\" Emanuel Levy gave it a C grade and stated that it was \"overlong and overblown but ultimately mediocre as a musical movie and as a biopic of the legendary showman.\"\nJames Berardinelli awarded it two and a half out of four stars, stating that \"although some of the production's technical aspects remain impressive, the dramatic elements come across as trite and many of the musical numbers are dated\", but said that it was a \"reasonably competent \u2013 albeit \"airbrushed\" \u2013 presentation of the main character's life.\"\nAccolades.\nThe seven Academy Award nominations were announced on February 7, 1937, and on March 4, 1937, \"The Great Ziegfeld\" won three Oscars at the 9th Academy Awards for 1936:\nAlthough he was not nominated for an Academy Award for his performance, Powell did receive the Screen Actor's Guild award for Best Actor in a tie with C. Aubrey Smith who was in \"Little Lord Fauntleroy\". In addition, the Guild's Best Actress was given to Luise Rainer.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44438", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44438", "title": "Gosnells", "text": "The name Gosnells may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44439", "revid": "48513863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44439", "title": "Erotic spanking", "text": "Act of spanking another person for sexual arousal or gratification\nErotic spanking is the act of spanking another person for the sexual arousal or gratification of either or both parties. The intensity of the act can vary in both its duration and severity, and may include the use of one or more spanking implements (such as the wooden spoon or cane). Activities range from a spontaneous smack on bare buttocks during sexual activity to sexual roleplaying, such as ageplay or domestic discipline. Erotic spanking is often found within and associated with BDSM, but the activity is not exclusive to it. The term \"spankee\" is commonly used within erotic spanking to refer to the individual receiving a spanking.\nHistory.\nPre 19th century.\nOne of the earliest depictions of erotic spanking is found in the Etruscan Tomb of the Whipping from the fifth century BC.\nEarly sex manuals such as the Indian \"Kama Sutra\" (circa 400 BC), Indian \"Koka Shastra\" (ca. 1150 AD) and Arabic \"The Perfumed Garden\" (ca. 1400 AD) have among their recommendations the use of spanking to enhance sexual arousal.\n19th century.\nAn increase in interest in erotic spanking can be observed during the 19th century in the form of spanking literature and spanking photography, particularly in France and the United Kingdom. Numerous limited edition spanking novels were published, many of which are now classified as novellas.\nEarly 20th century.\nThis interest for spanking (both in regards to literature and photography) followed into the next century, with the early 20th century being considered the \"Golden Age\" of spanking literature. This period of spanking literature is marked by three notable characteristics. First, greater audiences were reached with the availability of less expensive editions and greater print runs. Second, many of the spanking novels contained numerous illustrations (many of which have fallen under public domain and are easily available online). Third, this period saw a gradual increase in the output and publication of spanking literature, growing particularly within the 1920s and peaking within the 1930s. Much of the output of spanking literature during this period was by French publishers, writers and illustrators. For example, Jules Malteste, known as Louis Malteste (1862\u20131928) was a French writer, painter, engraver, lithographer, draughtsman, and illustrator, commonly known for his depictions of spanking. Similarly, within the context of spanking photography, France was also the home to the creation of much content, with the most notable studios being the Biederer Studio and the related Ostra Studio. This \"Golden Age\" of spanking literature (and French spanking photography) came to an end as a result of the Second World War, more specifically due to the German occupation of France between 1940 and 1944 and later the enforcement of censorship laws. A somewhat notable exception to the decline of spanking literature during this period was John Willie's bondage \"Bizarre\" magazine (published between 1946 and 1959).\nOf the many French works from the \"Golden Age\" few at the time were translated into other languages within which spanking literature was popular, namely English and German, but beginning during the mid-1960s a number of these French works were translated into English and published, along with these works being republished in French and older British works also being republished. The occurrence of this was facilitated by the availability of mass-produced paperbacks and changes in censorship laws.\nLate 20th century.\nDuring the latter half of the 20th century changes in both censorship laws and improvements within technology enabled greater accessibility for those interested in obtaining content related to erotic spanking.\nAs an extension of the earlier developments within spanking literature and photography, during this period various fetish magazines devoted to stories and imagery of erotic spanking became legally available.\nThis period also saw an important development in both the production and consumer accessibility of erotic spanking films. Whilst recordings of erotic spanking had been produced as early as the 1920s, until the 1980s technology limited the quality of their recording and the ability for consumers to easily watch them. In addition to changes in censorship laws, the introduction of the videocassette recorder enabled creators to produce and distribute erotic spanking films that were far easier for consumers to both obtain and watch.\n21st century.\nThe proliferation of the internet has enabled individuals, of various level of pre-existing interest and/or knowledge, more ease than ever to explore and consume content relating to erotic spanking.\nPartially developing from earlier erotic spanking magazine and video producers, numerous pornographic websites (primary American or British based) within the 21st century are devoted to producing spanking films of various lengths and about various scenarios.\nThe internet has also resulted in the creation of various blogs which discuss the topic of erotic spanking and non-profit websites which publish erotic spanking stories.\nPractice.\nImplements.\nWhilst a spanking may be simply given with the palm of the hand, the use of spanking implements is common within erotic spanking. Spanking implements which are commonly used within erotic spanking are a reflection of the traditional spanking implements that were/are used in corporal punishment more broadly. Common and traditional spanking implements include those which have been specifically manufactured for such purpose (i.e. the cane, spanking paddle, strap/tawse, and martinet) and those which have been adapted/improvised from available items (such as the plimsoll, carpet slipper, wooden spoon, hairbrush, bath brush, carpet beater, leather belt, riding crop, switch, and birch). Other less common and atypical spanking implements include the (handle of a) feather duster (common, however, in China), fly swatter, flip-flop, wooden ruler, wooden yardstick, ping-pong paddle, hardcover book, and stinging nettles.\nSome spanking implements can be characterised as being either 'stingy' or 'thuddy'. Stingy implements (such as a rattan cane) produce a sharp and quick burning sensation which is mostly felt on the skin. Thuddy implements (such as a wooden paddle), in contrast, whilst not producing a stinging sensation penetrate deeper into tissue of the buttocks. As a general rule, the heavier a spanking implement is the greater thud it will produce. A person receiving an erotic spanking may have a preference for either a stingy or thuddy sensation.\nSafety.\nDue to obvious risks involved, experts have recommended that, during a spanking, particularly with spanking implements, great care be taken to avoid striking the tailbone and hipbones.\nApparatuses.\nErotic spanking can include the use of apparatuses, both those which are adapted/improvised and those which are specifically created for such use.\nThe use of adapted/improvised apparatuses within erotic spanking derives from how such apparatuses were used in non-erotic spanking. The gymnastic vaulting buck (which sees the receiver of the spanking bent-over it) was often employed during non-erotic school slipperings and canings; consequently erotic spanking, particularly that which involves school roleplay, may incorporate use of a vaulting buck.\nA spanking bench or spanking horse is a piece of erotic furniture explicitly created for erotic spanking. It is used to position a \"spankee\" on, with or without restraints. They come in many sizes and styles, the most popular design of which is similar to a sawhorse (used in woodworking) with a padded top and rings for restraints. The 19th-century British dominatrix Mrs. Theresa Berkley became famous for her invention of the Berkley Horse, a similar form of BDSM apparatus.\nFetish wear.\nOften erotic spanking will be combined with sexual roleplay which may see one or more parties dress-up in certain clothing, for example a female \"spankee\" wearing a schoolgirl uniform in a Teacher \u2013 Student scenario.\nA spank skirt or spanking skirt is a skirt that has an additional opening in back designed to expose the buttocks. While the name \"spank skirt\" suggests the intention that the wearer be spanked without removing or repositioning the skirt, this item may be worn for reasons other than spanking (for instance, exhibitionism.) Considered fetish wear, these kind of skirts are typically tight-fitting and made of fetishistic materials (such as leather, PVC or latex). Regardless of the gender of the wearer, spank skirts are usually considered female attire. The male gender role equivalent might be motorcycle chaps (a.k.a. \"assless chaps\").\nSelf-spanking.\nSelf-spanking is the practice in which the individual spanks themselves, thus making the spankee and the spanker one and the same. This can occur for a number of reasons: the individual is experimenting with spanking; the individual may lack someone (who is willing and the spankee is comfortable with doing so) to give them a spanking; the individual spanks themselves during masturbation; the individual is a submissive in a BDSM relationship and is self-spanking on orders of the dominant partner.\nPsychology and prevalence.\nA number of explanations have been put forward to account why an individual may enjoy erotic spanking, although there is almost certainly no universal explanation. Interest and gratification in spanking varies per the individual: an individual may gain gratification in spanking another and gain no gratification in being spanked themself; an individual may gain gratification in being spanked and gain no gratification in spanking another; an individual may gain gratification in both spanking another and being spanked themself.\nA scientific survey of 152 people who claimed to practice sadomasochism \u2014 of which spanking is a subset \u2014 categorised the origin of such interest to be either extrinsic (i.e. the interest originating from a source external to the person) or intrinsic (i.e. emerged naturally). 22% of those surveyed reported origins that were categorised by researchers as extrinsic, such as parental discipline or being introduced to sadomasochism in adulthood by another. In contrast, 78% reported intrinsically having such an interest. Most commonly an intrinsic interest was reported to have emerged in either childhood or adolescence (though at such age the interest was not necessarily sexualised); a small sub-group reported that only in adulthood did they accept or acknowledge what they now recognise to be an intrinsic interest. The majority of those that reported an intrinsic interest were unable to explain the origin of such interest.\nFrom the same scientific survey as above, a third of testimonies reported enjoying receiving pain as to why they practiced sadomasochism; researchers noted that practitioners commonly stressed the difference between \"bad\" and \"good\" pain. Interpersonal power (either through giving or exchanging power) was also a commonly reported reason as to why people practice sadomasochism, and researchers noted that this taking place with a trusted partner was a recurring specified need.\nJournalist Jillian Keenan has argued that spanking fetishism is a form of sexual orientation, which should not be considered a mental illness. Whilst there has been an increasing ability to talk openly about erotic spanking within mainstream society, individuals may still find it difficult to express that they have an interest in erotic spanking.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "44441", "revid": "47471001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44441", "title": "Pax Romana", "text": "Roman golden age (27 BC to 180)\nThe (Latin for 'Roman peace'; ) is a roughly 200-year-long period of ancient Rome that is identified as a golden age of increased and sustained Roman imperialism, prosperous stability, hegemonic power, regional expansion, and relative peace and order, although it still featured a number of internal revolts and external wars, including the Roman\u2013Persian wars. Traditionally, the onset is understood to be the ascent of Augustus, who also founded the Roman principate, in 27 BC. Conversely, the end of the era is considered as 180 AD with the death of Marcus Aurelius, the last of the \"Five Good Emperors\". \nIt was during this period that the Roman Empire achieved its greatest territorial extent under Trajan in 117. Additionally, the Roman Empire's population is estimated to have peaked at 70 million people during the Pax Romana, accounting for 33% of the world's population. Following the Pax Romana, and according to Cassius Dio, the dictatorial reign of Commodus, later followed by the Year of the Five Emperors and the Crisis of the Third Century, marked Rome's descent \"from a kingdom of gold to one of iron and rust\".\nOverview.\nThe Pax Romana, spanning from 27 BC to 180, stands as one of the longest enduring periods of peace in history. However, Walter Goffart wrote: \"The volume of the \"Cambridge Ancient History\" for the years AD 70\u2013192 is called 'The Imperial Peace', but peace is not what one finds in its pages\". On the other hand, Arthur M. Eckstein writes that the period must be viewed in contrast to the much more frequent warfare in the 3rd and 4th centuries BC under the Roman Republic. \nEckstein also notes that the initial Pax Romana appeared during the Republic, and that its temporal span varied upon geographical region as well: \"Although the standard textbook dates for the Pax Romana, the famous 'Roman Peace' in the Mediterranean, are 31 BC to AD 250, the fact is that the Roman Peace was emerging in large regions of the Mediterranean at a much earlier date: Sicily after 210 [BC], the Italian Peninsula after 200 [BC]; the Po Valley after 190 [BC]; most of the Iberian Peninsula after 133 [BC]; North Africa after 100 [BC]; and for ever longer stretches of time in the Greek East.\" Thomas F. Madden explained the dating of 27 BC as avoiding the civil wars of the 1st century BC. The real origins of Pax Romana for him are in the 2nd century BC, after Rome had eliminated all of its serious military rivals and brought an unprecedented peace and prosperity to the lands of their empire. Tim Cornell argued that Pax Romana in the sense of the absence of major inter-state wars began in the Second century BC. Over the course of the last two centuries of the Republic, the character and frequency of these wars declined. Almost continuous warfare in the Fourth and Third centuries BC became sporadic and punctuated by long periods of peace.\nThe first known record of the term \"Pax Romana\" appears in a writing by Seneca the Younger in AD 55. The concept was highly influential, and the subject of theories and attempts to copy it in subsequent ages. Arnaldo Momigliano noted that \"\"Pax Romana\" is a simple formula for propaganda, but a difficult subject for research.\"\nFor most historians, the Pax Romana began when Octavian (Augustus) defeated Mark Antony and Cleopatra in the Battle of Actium on 2 September 31 BC and became Roman emperor. He became princeps, or \"first citizen\". Lacking a good precedent of successful one-man rule, Augustus created a junta of the greatest military magnates and stood as the front man. By binding together these leading magnates in a coalition, he eliminated the prospect of civil war. The Pax Romana was not immediate, despite the end of the civil wars, because fighting continued in Hispania and in the Alps. Nevertheless, Augustus closed the Gates of Janus (a ceremony indicating that Rome was at peace) three times, first in 29 BC and again in 25 BC. The third closure is undocumented, but Inez Scott Ryberg (1949) and Gaius Stern (2006) have persuasively dated the third closure to 13 BC with the commissioning of the Ara Pacis. At the time of the Ludi Saeculares in 17 BC the Concept of Peace was publicized, and in 13 BC was proclaimed when Augustus and Agrippa jointly returned from pacifying Hispania and the Alps. The order to construct the Ara Pacis was probably part of this announcement.\nRomans regarded peace not as an absence of war, but as a rare situation which existed when all opponents had been beaten down and lost the ability to resist. Augustus' challenge was to persuade Romans that the prosperity they could achieve in the absence of warfare was better for the Empire than the potential wealth and honor acquired when fighting a risky war. Augustus succeeded by means of skillful propaganda. Subsequent emperors followed his lead, sometimes producing lavish ceremonies to close the Gates of Janus, issuing coins with Pax on the reverse, and patronizing literature extolling the benefits of the Pax Romana.\nAfter Augustus' death in AD 14, most of his successors as Roman emperors continued his politics. The last five emperors of the Pax Romana are known as the \"Five Good Emperors\".\nInfluence on trade.\nRoman trade in the Mediterranean increased during the Pax Romana. Romans sailed East to acquire silks, gems, onyx and spices. Romans benefited from large profits, and incomes in the Roman empire were raised due to trade in the Mediterranean.\nAs the Pax Romana of the western world by Rome was largely contemporaneous to the Pax Sinica of the eastern world by Han China, long-distance travel and trade in Eurasian history was significantly stimulated during these eras.\nPax imperia: analogous peaces.\nThe prominence of the concept of the \"Pax Romana\" led to historians coining variants of the term to describe other systems of relative peace that have been established, attempted, or argued to have existed. Some variants include:\nMore generically, the concept has been referred to as \"pax imperia\" (sometimes misspelled as \"pax imperium\"), meaning \"imperial peace\", or\u2014less literally\u2014\"hegemonic peace\". Raymond Aron notes that imperial peace\u2014peace achieved through hegemony can\u2014sometimes, but not always\u2014become civil peace. As an example, the German Empire's imperial peace of 1871 (over its internal components like Saxony) slowly evolved into the later German state. As a counter-example, the imperial peace of Alexander the Great's empire dissolved because the Greek city states maintained their political identity. Aron notes that during the Pax Romana, the First Jewish\u2013Roman War was a reminder that the overlapping of the imperial institutions over the local ones did not erase them and the overlap was a source of tension and flare-ups. Aron summarizes that, \"In other words, \"imperial peace\" becomes civil peace insofar as the memory of the previously independent political units are effaced, insofar as individuals within a pacified zone feel themselves less united to the traditional or local community and more to the conquering state.\"\nThe concept of Pax Romana was highly influential, and there were attempts to imitate it in the Byzantine Empire, and in the Christian West, where it morphed into the Peace and Truce of God (\"pax Dei\" and \"treuga Dei\"). A theoretician of the imperial peace during the Middle Ages was Dante Aligheri. Dante's works on the topic were analyzed at the beginning of the 20th century by William Mitchell Ramsay in the book \"The Imperial Peace: An Ideal in European History\" (1913).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44442", "revid": "38258374", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44442", "title": "Thora Birch", "text": "American actress (born 1982)\nThora Birch (born March 11, 1982) is an American actress. She made her film debut with a starring role in \"Purple People Eater\" (1988), receiving a Young Artist Award for \"Best Actress Under Nine Years of Age\". Birch rose to prominence as a child star during the 1990s through a string of parts in films such as \"Paradise\" (1991), \"Patriot Games\" (1992), \"Hocus Pocus\" (1993), \"Monkey Trouble\" (1994), \"Now and Then\" (1995), and \"Alaska\" (1996). Her breakthrough into adult-oriented roles came with her portrayal of Jane Burnham in \"American Beauty\" (1999), for which she was nominated for that year's BAFTA for Best Supporting Actress.\nBirch received further acclaim\u2014and a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress\u2014for starring as Enid Coleslaw in the cult hit \"Ghost World\" (2001). Her other film credits during the 2000s included \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (2000), \"The Hole\" (2001), \"Silver City\" (2004), and \"Dark Corners\" (2006). Birch took a break from acting after producing and starring in \"Petunia\" (2012). She returned in 2016 and has since appeared in various independent films, such as \"The Last Black Man in San Francisco\" (2019) and \"The Chronology of Water\" (2025).\nOn television, Birch played the title role in \"\"\u2014for which she received an Emmy nomination\u2014and the recurring role of Gamma / Mary on \"The Walking Dead\" (2019\u20132020). She made her directorial debut with the Lifetime film \"The Gabby Petito Story\".\nEarly life.\nBirch was born in Los Angeles, California to Jack Birch and Carol Connors, ex-pornographic film actors who both appeared in the 1972 cult classic, \"Deep Throat\". She is of German, Italian, Scandinavian, and French-Canadian ancestry. Her forename is derived from that of Norse god of thunder and lightning, \"Thor\", which would have been her name if she had been born a boy. She has a younger brother, Bolt.\nBecause of their own experiences with the entertainment industry, Birch's parents were reluctant to encourage her to act, but were persuaded to show Birch's photograph to talent agents by a babysitter who noticed her imitating commercials. Birch got her first big break at the age of four, when the babysitter accompanied her to a successful audition for a Quaker Oats commercial.\nCareer.\n1988\u20131998: Television work and film breakthrough.\nBirch appeared in commercials in the late 1980s for Burger King, California Raisins, Quaker Oats, and Vlasic Pickles. She made her film debut as Molly Johnson in the 1988 science fiction comedy \"Purple People Eater\", for which she received a Young Artist Award in the category of \"Best Young Actress Under Nine Years of Age\". That same year, she guest-starred in an episode of \"Doogie Howser, M.D.\", and was cast in the regular role of Molly on the NBC sitcom \"Day By Day\". The show ran for two seasons, earning Birch a further two Young Artist nominations.\nIn 1990, Birch was cast in a principal role on \"Parenthood\", a sitcom based on the 1989 film of the same name, which ran for a single season on NBC. Next, she played the supporting part of Billie Pike in the 1991 drama \"Paradise\", with Roger Ebert stating in his review for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" that she performed the role with \"strong, simple charm\". She starred in the family comedy \"All I Want for Christmas\" that same year, playing a girl who schemes to reunite her divorced parents. The film was a moderate financial success, but found an audience on television and home video in subsequent years. She then appeared as the daughter of Jack Ryan in the spy thriller \"Patriot Games\" (1992), a commercial success which grossed US$178 million at the worldwide box office.\nAt age 11, Birch starred in the Halloween-set fantasy film \"Hocus Pocus\" (1993), playing Dani Dennison, the younger sister of a teenage boy who inadvertently resurrects a trio of witches. Making US$39 million in the U.S. (against a budget of US$28 million), the film was not considered a financial success upon release, but quickly developed a sizeable cult following due to strong home video sales and television re-runs. \"I think the most surreal thing is that it keeps getting more popular instead of the other way around\", Birch later said, while admitting the experience was \"the most amount of fun I've ever had on a set\".\nIn the 1994 comedy \"Monkey Trouble\", Birch played a girl who befriends a Capuchin monkey. In a positive review for the \"Austin Chronicle\", Marjorie Baumgarten observed that Birch's \"nuanced performance (a rarity amongst child performers) no doubt lends [the film] its realistic touch\". That same year, she reprised her \"Patriot Games\" role in its sequel, \"Clear and Present Danger\", which grossed over US$215 million globally. She was then cast as \"Teeny\" Tercell in the 1995 coming-of-age drama, \"Now and Then\". The film was largely dismissed by critics upon release, but has since been recognised as a milestone of its genre. Next, Birch headlined the adventure film \"Alaska\" (1996), playing one of two siblings who cross the Alaskan wilderness in search of their lost father. The \"Austin Chronicle\" found it to be a \"decent kids' adventure movie\" with an \"impeccable\" performance by Birch. For the next two years, she did not appear on film but guest-starred in episodes of \"Promised Land\" and \"Touched by an Angel\".\n1999\u20132003: Transition to adult roles.\nBirch appeared in several projects in 1999: firstly, the made-for-television film \"Night Ride Home\", where she played a teenager grieving the loss of her older brother. Writing for \"Variety\", David Kronke called it \"a thoughtful and sensitive examination of how a family copes with grief\", while saying of the performances, \"De Mornay [...] digs deep and comes up with a character that seems true; Burstyn and Birch competently complement [her]\". Next, she played the small, uncredited role of Mary in \"Anywhere but Here\".\nBirch's portrayal of insecure teenager Jane Burnham in \"American Beauty\", Sam Mendes's dark dramedy about the struggles of a middle-class household, was roundly praised by critics, with Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" writing that she \"[glimmered] with grown-up radiance\". The performance earned her a BAFTA nomination for Best Supporting Actress, while the film was the recipient of the 1999 Academy Award for Best Picture and grossed over US$356 million worldwide, emerging as the biggest commercial success of Birch's career to date. She later said of the experience, \"There was a lot of therapy involved [...] A lot of opening up and sharing things from our own lives about why we related to these characters. Everybody brought a lot of themselves to it. I know Annette did a lot of research about women becoming obsessed with the self-help realm. Kevin was working out obsessively and already in the headspace of [his character] Lester, even in rehearsals. And then there was Wes, Mena and I, who were these kids just incredibly excited to be there and watching [these] masters at their craft \u2014 just trying to absorb as much as we could from them\".\nFollowing the success of \"American Beauty\", Birch appeared in two films released in 2000: low-budget drama \"The Smokers\", in which Birch was called \"a scene-stealer\" by \"The Hollywood Reporter\", and \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", a poorly-received adaptation of the fantasy role-playing game of the same name. British horror film \"The Hole\" came next, where she starred as Liz, a devious schoolgirl who lures a group of her friends into an underground bunker. In a mixed review for \"Variety\", Derek Elley stated that Birch gave \"an effectively creepy lead [performance]\", but called the film \"clunky\" in its \"attempt to merge the psychothriller and teen movie genres\".\nBirch's next project was the satirical 2001 comedy \"Ghost World\", directed by Terry Zwigoff. Based on the graphic novel of the same name, the film was released to an enthusiastic critical reception and developed a loyal cult following. James Berardinelli found Birch's part to be her \"first effectively developed role\" since \"American Beauty\", commending the actress for the \"quirkiness [and the] underlying sense of melancholy and ennui\" in her portrayal of Enid Coleslaw. Meanwhile, A. O. Scott said in his appraisal for \"The New York Times\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thora Birch, whose performance as Lester Burnham's alienated daughter was the best thing about \"American Beauty,\" plays a similar character here, with even more intelligence and restraint. Enid's capacity for scorn is unlimited: her plucked eyebrows might illustrate a dictionary entry for \"supercilious,\" and her quiet voice shoots darts of sarcasm in every direction.\nBirch received various accolades for \"Ghost World\", including a nomination for the 2002 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress.\nIn 2003, she appeared as the title character in the biographical television film \"\", starring as a young woman who, after becoming homeless at 15 amid personal tragedies, decides to finish her schooling. Birch's performance earned her a nomination for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress that year.\n2004\u20132012: Independent films.\nBirch played a supporting role in \"Silver City\", a political satire directed by John Sayles, which premiered at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival. The independent feature received mixed reviews, but \"Empire\"'s Angie Errigo thought Birch's portrayal of whistleblower Karen Cross was \"terrific\". She co-starred in the crime drama \"Slingshot\" (2005) the following year, with \"Variety\" stating that her \"standout\" performance \"commands attention\".\nIn \"Dark Corners\" (2006), a psychological horror-thriller about a young woman who wakes up one day as a different person, Birch starred in the dual role of Susan Hamilton and Karen Clarke. The film received a mixed reception, with Adam DiLeo of \"IGN\" praising its surreal, David Lynch-style elements, but criticizing Birch's performance. She followed this with roles in two more genre films: \"Train\"\u2014a slasher film about a group of college wrestlers who fall victim to a violent gang of thieves, released in 2008\u2014and the psychological thriller \"Deadline\", in which she co-starred with Brittany Murphy, who died shortly after the film's release in December 2009. Birch later revealed she had been concerned about Murphy's wellbeing during filming.\nIn the true crime drama \"Winter of Frozen Dreams\" (2009), Birch played Barbara Hoffman, a Wisconsin prostitute convicted of murder in the first-ever televised murder trial. In a review for \"Bloody Disgusting\", John Marrone described Birch's \"alluring\" performance as the highlight of the film. Next, she took on the role of journalist Sidney Bloom in \"The Pregnancy Pact\", a Lifetime movie based on the true story of a group of high schoolers in Gloucester, Massachusetts, who plotted to get pregnant at the same time and raise their children communally. The film was watched by 5.9 million viewers when it premiered in January 2010. Later that year, Birch was cast\u2014in what would have been her stage debut\u2014as Lucy in the off-Broadway revival of Hamilton Deane's \"Dracula\", but was subsequently dismissed from the production for the alleged behavior of her father\u2014her manager at the time\u2014who was reported to have physically threatened one of the show's cast members during a rehearsal.\nBirch played the role of Vivian in \"Petunia\" (2012), an independent dramedy depicting the lives and romantic relationships of a dysfunctional New York family. Her first outing as a producer, she described the \"intimate [and] honest\" feature as \"a little bit different\". Given a small theatrical release in the U.S., the film garnered mixed reviews, though Birch and the rest of the ensemble were praised.\n2013\u2013present: Break from acting, subsequent return, and directorial debut.\nAfter devoting herself to academic pursuits, which included securing a degree in legal studies through Kaplan University, Birch returned to acting in 2015 with a recurring role as software engineer Morgan on the first season of the USA Network sci-fi drama series, \"Colony\". It was later revealed that Birch would not return for the second season because of a scheduling conflict, with the part being recast.\nBirch starred as a left-wing activist in the 2018 political thriller \"Affairs of State\", which Noel Murray of \"The Los Angeles Times\" called \"refreshingly smart\". In a less favorable review for \"Forbes\", Luke Y. Thompson wrote, \"[cinematographer] Horacio Marquinez gamely films everything like it's an art movie, though there's one scene in which he shoots Birch so unflatteringly that you wonder what she must have done to make him mad\". She headlined and co-produced \"The Competition\" that same year, an independent romantic comedy.\nNext, Birch starred in the 2018 drama \"The Etruscan Smile\"\u2014an adaptation of Jos\u00e9 Luis Sampedro's novel\u2014which was filmed in Scotland and received strong reviews. The following year, she played a supporting role in the crime thriller \"Above Suspicion\", which\u2014after \"Patriot Games\" and \"Clear and Present Danger\" in the 1990s\u2014marked her third collaboration with director Phillip Noyce. In a positive review for \"The Guardian\", Peter Bradshaw commented, \"There's an interesting cameo from Thora Birch [as the] long-suffering Jolene\".\nBirch's appearance in \"The Last Black Man in San Francisco\" (2019), a drama about a young man's pursuit to reclaim the Victorian home built by his grandfather, was considered a crucial part of the film's success. Speaking of her casting and the symbolic nature of the part, director Joe Talbot said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thora is one of the great actresses of her generation and her work, in part, inspired me to want to make films. Her performance in \"Ghost World\" made me feel seen as a teenager when I was a bit lost. At the end of that film, [she] rides a bus off into the sunset. In our film, we meet her character on a bus in the heart of San Francisco\u2014almost as if she kept riding it all these years, and somehow wound up in the Bay Area working a tech job she loathed. Her exchange that follows with [main character] Jimmie, however brief, has been written about and quoted more than any other part of the film.\nThe film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2019, where it won awards for Best Directing and a Special Jury Prize for Creative Collaboration. It was released theatrically in the U.S. by A24.\nBetween 2019 and 2020, Birch appeared in the role of Mary\u2014aka \"Gamma\"\u2014on the tenth season of AMC's post-apocalyptic horror series, \"The Walking Dead\", with \"Collider\" commenting that she brought \"emotional depth\" to the part. Birch called the experience \"a fun, massive thing to have been a part of\". Next, in the independent drama \"13 Minutes\" (2021), she played a single mother struggling to keep her family together in the wake of a destructive tornado. Rex Reed of \"The New York Observer\" felt that the film succeeded on the strength of its \"compelling\" and \"likable\" ensemble, singling out Birch as a highlight.\nBirch made her directorial debut in 2022 with \"The Gabby Petito Story\", a Lifetime television movie in which she also co-starred. The film is based on the 2021 disappearance of Petito, a 22-year-old who was murdered by her boyfriend during a cross-country drive. Birch said she had been wanting to direct since she was \"nine or ten years old\" and that it was the subject matter which drew her to the project: \"There's an element of abusive relationships in this story that I think so many of us can relate to. Within five seconds, this story captured the entire nation's attention in the middle of Covid [...] Everyone stopped and took a minute and [said], \"Where\u2019s Gabby? What happened to Gabby?\" That kind of fascination and focus point was something that I thought was a third character in [the] story\". The ethical nature of dramatizing such recent events was met with public criticism, especially as the film\u2014which premiered on October 12, 2022, just over one year after Petito's death\u2014was made without the involvement of the Petito family.\nAlso in 2022, Birch played Audrey Beach in the ten-part fictional podcast \"Overleaper\", an espionage-style thriller about a female soldier embarking on a top-secret mission. Birch said it was the idea of \"a return to the old radio dramas [from the 1920s and '30s]\", as well as the luxury of acting with her voice and not having to endure \"the harsh physical positions that the character is in\", which drew her to the project.\nIt was announced at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival that Birch's next project as director\u2014her feature debut\u2014would be an adaptation of Elmore Leonard's novel \"Mr. Paradise\", making her the first woman to direct a Leonard adaptation. As of 2025, the project has yet to materialise.\nBirch's supporting role in the 2025 drama \"The Chronology of Water\", the directorial debut of Kristen Stewart, received praise from critics, with Clayton Davis of \"Variety\" commenting, \"Birch brings a weary resilience to her [portrayal of Claudia]. She doesn't beg for the audience's empathy. In [one particular] scene [she] executes a quiet, unflinching [heartbreak], something her character only reveals in faint and blurry reminders of her early life, how much she's buried and how survival can look like silence. It's a turn that hopefully will result in a triumphant new act for Birch, serving not just as a comeback, but as a new beginning\". He added that Birch's relatively brief screen time \"doesn't make her performance any less deserving\" of awards recognition.\nPersonal life.\nBirch married talent manager and philanthropist Michael Benton Adler on December 21, 2018.\nBirch is a long-time Democrat. She was a delegate at the 2012 Democratic National Convention. She has supported Joe Biden and local political efforts, such as Congressman Wiley Nickel's campaign.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44443", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44443", "title": "Anti-capitalism", "text": "Political ideology and movement opposed to capitalism\nAnti-capitalism is a political ideology and movement encompassing a variety of attitudes and ideas that oppose capitalism. Anti-capitalists seek to combat the worst effects of capitalism and to eventually replace capitalism with alternative economic systems such as socialism and communism.\nCharacteristics.\nAnti-capitalism can range from a reformist position, which aims to limit corporate power and oppose neoliberal policies, to a radical position, which entirely rejects capitalism and seeks to replace the existing social order. Key principles of anti-capitalism, as outlined by the charter of the World Social Forum, include a committent to democracy and egalitarianism. Anti-capitalists view capitalism either as a social relation or as a distinct economic and political system, and how they view it informs their methods of opposing it. Reformist anti-capitalism places itself in opposition to specific economic practices, including commodification and capital accumulation, and seeks to combat the negative externalities of capitalism without fundamentally altering the economic system; on the other hand, forms of revolutionary socialism see capitalism as a fundamentally flawed social system that needs to be overthrown and replaced. Although the reformist and revolutionary perspectives differ, they are not necessarily distinct, with anti-capitalists often taking aspects of one or the other depending on the material conditions they are faced with. \nVarious economic systems have been proposed as an alternative to capitalism. American economist Michael Albert proposed a system of participatory economics, a kind of democratic socialism which would involve social ownership, workers' self-management, participatory planning and system of remuneration based on contribution, among other factors. Neozapatismo emphasises the self-determination of indigenous peoples and a form of participatory democracy that stands in contrast to the centralisation and vanguardism of authoritarian socialist tendencies.\nHistory.\nEarly opposition to the rise of capitalism first arose during the 17th century, when feudal landowners first came under threat from the increasing power of business owners. During the 19th century, the Industrial Revolution gave rise to mass production, which accelerated the shift away from mercantilism as the predominant economic system and the globalization of capitalism. The division of labour within this industrial capitalist economy led to the rapid growth of the working class, who were increasingly drawn towards anti-capitalism and organised themselves in trade unions and socialist parties.\nContemporary anti-capitalist movement.\n1960s\u20131980s.\nContemporary anti-capitalism finds its roots among the New Left and the counterculture of the 1960s, which infused anti-capitalism with a postmodern tendency by the end of the Cold War. During this period, anti-capitalism began to developed within the environmental movement, with green politics drawing a lot of its influence from the New Left and groups such as Greenpeace aligning themselves against economic growth and pioneering new methods of direct action which had previously been advocated by anarchists. Radical environmentalists such as Earth First, which infused their green politics with anti-capitalism, used decentralised clandestine cell systems to carry out large-scale acts of sabotage; tactics which would later be taken up by the wider anti-capitalist movement. Capitalism was increasingly seen as responsible for environmental degradation, leading to the adoption of anti-capitalism by those who aimed to stop it. \n1990s.\nBy the 1990s, neoliberalism had asserted a hegemonic influence over the global economy. In reaction against the rise of neoliberalism, a new anti-capitalist movement began to take shape. The contemporary anti-capitalist movement first emerged in January 1994, with the Zapatista uprising against the implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Zapatista spokesperson Subcomandante Marcos explicitly expressed solidarity with minority groups throughout the world, seeking to make a common cause with others who experienced oppression under globalized capitalism. The Zapatista autonomous region in Chiapas inspired a new generation of anti-capitalists worldwide. Anti-capitalists began to defend cultural pluralism and stand in solidarity with indigenous rights movements, breaking from the 20th century's anti-capitalist movement, which had few links with the decolonial and anti-racist movements of its period.\nIn 1995, the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO), which sought to promote a neoliberal policy of economic globalization, met with opposition from the nascent anti-globalization movement (also known as the alter-globalization movement or global justice movement). Other opponents of neoliberal globalization included nationalists and religious fundamentalists, although these tendencies differed widely from anti-capitalism in their principles and objectives. The anti-capitalist movement provided a militant opposition to the WTO and its General Agreement on Trade in Services, distinguishing their progressive politics from the prevailing liberal democratic politics which upheld these institutions and had resigned to a belief that no alternative existed. English philosopher Mark Fisher referred to this phenomenon as capitalist realism.\nTowards the end of the 1990s, the British environmentalist group Reclaim the Streets sought to build ties with the anti-globalisation movement, culminating with the Carnival Against Capital on 18 June 1999 in London. Although the protest precipitated a decline in the British anti-capitalist movement, following the rise of Tony Blair's New Labour government, it also renewed contacts within the international anti-capitalist movement and accelerated a shift towards revolutionary anti-capitalism. During the late 1990s, confrontations between militant anti-capitalists and the police became commonplace at G8 summits and WTO conferences, which were regularly targeted for protests by a diverse and decentralised coalition of organisations. The largest of these were the 1999 Seattle WTO protests, where anarchists, environmentalists and trade unionists caused conference negotiations to collapse; this inspired a new wave of anti-capitalist activism in the 21st century, with large protests taking place against the 26th G8 summit in Prague and the 27th G8 summit in Genoa.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44445", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44445", "title": "Greg Bear", "text": "American writer and illustrator (1951\u20132022)\nGregory Dale Bear (August 20, 1951 \u2013 November 19, 2022) was an American science fiction writer. His work covered themes of galactic conflict (\"Forge of God\" books), parallel universes (\"The Way\" series), consciousness and cultural practices (\"Queen of Angels\"), and accelerated evolution (\"Blood Music\", \"Darwin's Radio\", and \"Darwin's Children\"). His last work was the 2021 novel \"The Unfinished Land\". Greg Bear wrote over 50 books in total. \nHe was one of the five co-founders of San Diego Comic-Con.\nEarly life.\nGreg Bear was born in San Diego, California. He attended San Diego State University (1968\u20131973), where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree. At the university, he was a teaching assistant to Elizabeth Chater in her course on science fiction writing; in later years, they were friends.\nCareer.\nBear is often classified as a hard science fiction author because of the level of scientific detail in his work. Early in his career, he also published work as an artist, including illustrations for an early version of the reference book \"Star Trek Concordance\" and covers for periodicals \"Galaxy\" and \"F&amp;SF\". He sold his first story, \"Destroyers\", to \"Famous Science Fiction\" in 1967.\nIn his fiction, Bear often addresses major questions in contemporary science and culture and proposes solutions. For example, \"The Forge of God\" offers an explanation for the Fermi paradox, supposing that the galaxy is filled with potentially predatory intelligences and that young civilizations that survive are those that do not attract their attention but stay quiet. In \"Queen of Angels\", Bear examines crime, guilt, and punishment in society. He frames these questions around an examination of consciousness and awareness, including the emergent self-awareness of highly advanced computers in communication with humans. In \"Darwin's Radio\" and \"Darwin's Children\", he addresses the problem of overpopulation with a mutation in the human genome making, basically, a new series of humans. The question of cultural acceptance of something new and unavoidable is also indicated.\nOne of Bear's favorite themes is reality as a function of observation. In \"Blood Music\", reality becomes unstable as the number of observers (trillions of intelligent single-cell organisms) spirals higher and higher. \"Anvil of Stars\" (sequel to \"The Forge of God\") and \"Moving Mars\" postulate a physics based on information exchange between particles, capable of being altered at the \"bit level.\" In \"Moving Mars\", that knowledge is used to remove Mars from the Solar System and transfer it to an orbit around a distant star.\n\"Blood Music\" was first published as a short story (1983) and then expanded to a novel (1985) features nanotechnology. In later works, beginning with \"Queen of Angels\" and continuing with its sequel, \"Slant\", Bear gives a detailed description of a near-future nanotechnological society. This historical sequence continues with \"Heads\"\u2014which may contain the first description of a so-called \"quantum logic computer\"\u2014and with \"Moving Mars\". The sequence also charts the historical development of self-awareness in artificial intelligence. Its continuing character Jill was inspired in part by Robert A. Heinlein's self-aware computer Mycroft HOLMES in \"The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress\" (1966).\nBear, Gregory Benford, and David Brin wrote a trilogy of prequel novels to Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" trilogy. Bear wrote the middle book named \"Foundation and Chaos\".\nWhile most of Bear's work is science fiction, he wrote in other fiction genres. Examples include \"Songs of Earth and Power\" (fantasy) and \"Psychlone\" (horror). Bear described his \"Dead Lines\", which straddles the line between science fiction and fantasy, as a \"high-tech ghost story\". He received many accolades, including five Nebula Awards and two Hugo Awards.\nBear cited Ray Bradbury as the most influential writer in his life. He met Bradbury in 1967 and had a lifelong correspondence. As a teenager, Bear attended Bradbury lectures and events in Southern California.\nHe also served on the Board of Advisors for the Museum of Science Fiction. Bear was one of the five co-founders of San Diego Comic-Con.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn 1975, Bear married Christina M. Nielson; they divorced in 1981. In 1983, he married Astrid Anderson, the daughter of the science fiction and fantasy authors Poul and Karen Anderson. They had two children, Chloe and Alexandra, and resided near Seattle, Washington.\nBear died on November 19, 2022, at the age of 71, from multiple strokes, caused by clots that had been concealed in a false lumen of the anterior artery to the brain since a surgery in 2014. After he had been on life support for two days and was not expected to recover, per his advance healthcare directive, life support was withdrawn.\nAwards and accolades.\nIn addition, Bear was also a singular award winner of the 1984 Inkpot Award, the 2006 Robert A. Heinlein Award, the 2017 \"Forry Award\" for lifetime achievement &amp; the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association's 2022 Kate Wilhelm Solstice Award.\nDoris Lessing, winner of the 2007 Nobel Prize in literature, wrote, \"I also admire the classic sort of science fiction, like \"Blood Music\", by Greg Bear. He's a great writer.\" The 2024 novel \"Halo: Epitaph\", a continuation of Bear's Forerunner Saga, was dedicated to Bear's memory by author Kelly Gay.\nBibliography.\nNovels.\nSeries.\nNovels in internal chronology:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44446", "revid": "18931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44446", "title": "Condorcet method", "text": "Pairwise-comparison electoral system\nA Condorcet method (; ) is an election method that elects the candidate who wins a majority of the vote in every head-to-head election against each of the other candidates, whenever there is such a candidate. A candidate with this property, the \"pairwise champion\" or \"beats-all winner\", is formally called the \"Condorcet winner\" or \"Pairwise Majority Rule Winner\" (PMRW). The head-to-head elections need not be done separately; a voter's choice within any given pair can be determined from the ranking.\nSome elections may not yield a Condorcet winner because voter preferences may be cyclic\u2014that is, it is possible that every candidate has an opponent that defeats them in a two-candidate contest. The possibility of such cyclic preferences is known as the Condorcet paradox. However, a smallest group of candidates that beat all candidates not in the group, known as the Smith set, always exists. The Smith set is guaranteed to have the Condorcet winner in it should one exist. Many Condorcet methods elect a candidate who is in the Smith set absent a Condorcet winner, and are thus said to be \"Smith-efficient\".\nCondorcet voting methods are named for the 18th-century French mathematician and philosopher Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas Caritat, the Marquis de Condorcet, who championed such systems. However, Ramon Llull devised the earliest known Condorcet method in 1299. It was equivalent to Copeland's method in cases with no pairwise ties.\nCondorcet methods may use preferential ranked, rated vote ballots, or explicit votes between all pairs of candidates. Most Condorcet methods employ a single round of preferential voting, in which each voter ranks the candidates from most (marked as number 1) to least preferred (marked with a higher number). A voter's ranking is often called their \"order of preference.\" Votes can be tallied in many ways to find a winner. All Condorcet methods will elect the Condorcet winner if there is one. If there is no Condorcet winner different Condorcet-compliant methods may elect different winners in the case of a cycle\u2014Condorcet methods differ on which other criteria they satisfy.\nThe procedure given in Robert's Rules of Order for voting on motions and amendments is also a Condorcet method, even though the voters do not vote by expressing their orders of preference. There are multiple rounds of voting, and in each round the vote is between two of the alternatives. The loser (by majority rule) of a pairing is eliminated, and the winner of a pairing survives to be paired in a later round against another alternative. Eventually, only one alternative remains, and it is the winner. This is analogous to a single-winner or round-robin tournament; the total number of pairings is one less than the number of alternatives. Since a Condorcet winner will win by majority rule in each of its pairings, it will never be eliminated by Robert's Rules. But this method cannot reveal a voting paradox in which there is no Condorcet winner and a majority prefer an early loser over the eventual winner (though it will always elect someone in the Smith set). A considerable portion of the literature on social choice theory is about the properties of this method since it is widely used and is used by important organizations (legislatures, councils, committees, etc.). It is not practical for use in public elections, however, since its multiple rounds of voting would be very expensive for voters, for candidates, and for governments to administer.\nCondorcet methods are recommended by the Equal Vote Coalition under the name Ranked Robin.\nSummary.\nIn a contest between candidates A, B and C using the preferential-vote form of Condorcet method, a head-to-head race is conducted between each pair of candidates. A and B, B and C, and C and A. If one candidate is preferred over all others, they are the Condorcet Winner and winner of the election.\nBecause of the possibility of the Condorcet paradox, it is possible, but unlikely, that a Condorcet winner may not exist in a specific election. This is sometimes called a \"Condorcet cycle\" or just \"cycle\" and can be thought of as Rock beating Scissors, Scissors beating Paper, and Paper beating Rock. Various Condorcet methods differ in how they resolve such a cycle. (Most elections do not have cycles. See Condorcet paradox#Likelihood for estimates.) If there is no cycle, all Condorcet methods elect the same candidate and are operationally equivalent.\nFor most Condorcet methods, those counts usually suffice to determine the complete order of finish (i.e. who won, who came in 2nd place, etc.). They always suffice to determine whether there is a Condorcet winner.\nAdditional information may be needed in the event of ties. Ties can be pairings that have no majority, or they can be majorities that are the same size. Such ties will be rare when there are many voters. Some Condorcet methods may have other kinds of ties. For example, with Copeland's method, it would not be rare for two or more candidates to win the same number of pairings, when there is no Condorcet winner.\nDefinition.\nA Condorcet method is a voting system that will always elect the Condorcet winner (if there is one); this is the candidate whom voters prefer to each other candidate, when compared to them one at a time. This candidate can be found (if they exist; see next paragraph) by checking if there is a candidate who beats all other candidates; this can be done by using Copeland's method and then checking if the Copeland winner has the highest possible Copeland score. They can also be found by conducting a series of pairwise comparisons, using the procedure given in Robert's Rules of Order described above. For \"N\" candidates, this requires \"N\" \u2212 1 pairwise hypothetical elections. For example, with 5 candidates there are 4 pairwise comparisons to be made, since after each comparison, a candidate is eliminated, and after 4 eliminations, only one of the original 5 candidates will remain.\nTo confirm that a Condorcet winner exists in a given election, first do the Robert's Rules of Order procedure, declare the final remaining candidate the procedure's winner, and then do at most an additional \"N\" \u2212 2 pairwise comparisons between the procedure's winner and any candidates they have not been compared against yet (including all previously eliminated candidates). If the procedure's winner does not win all pairwise matchups, then no Condorcet winner exists in the election (and thus the Smith set has multiple candidates in it).\nComputing all pairwise comparisons requires \u00bd\"N\"(\"N\"\u22121) pairwise comparisons for \"N\" candidates. For 10 candidates, this means 0.5*10*9=45 comparisons, which can make elections with many candidates hard to count the votes for.\nThe family of Condorcet methods is also referred to collectively as Condorcet's method. A voting system that always elects the Condorcet winner when there is one is described by electoral scientists as a system that satisfies the Condorcet criterion. Additionally, a voting system can be considered to have Condorcet consistency, or be Condorcet consistent, if it elects any Condorcet winner.\nIn certain circumstances, an election has no Condorcet winner. This occurs as a result of a kind of tie known as a \"majority rule cycle\", described by Condorcet's paradox. The manner in which a winner is then chosen varies from one Condorcet method to another. Some Condorcet methods involve the basic procedure described below, coupled with a Condorcet completion method, which is used to find a winner when there is no Condorcet winner. Other Condorcet methods involve an entirely different system of counting, but are classified as Condorcet methods, or Condorcet consistent, because they will still elect the Condorcet winner if there is one.\nNot all single winner, ranked voting systems are Condorcet methods. For example, instant-runoff voting and the Borda count are not Condorcet methods.\nBasic procedure.\nVoting.\nIn a Condorcet election the voter ranks the list of candidates in order of preference. If a ranked ballot is used, the voter gives a \"1\" to their first preference, a \"2\" to their second preference, and so on. Some Condorcet methods allow voters to rank more than one candidate equally so that the voter might express two first preferences rather than just one. If a scored ballot is used, voters rate or score the candidates on a scale, for example as is used in Score voting, with a higher rating indicating a greater preference. When a voter does not give a full list of preferences, it is typically assumed that they prefer the candidates that they have ranked over all the candidates that were not ranked, and that there is no preference between candidates that were left unranked. Some Condorcet elections permit write-in candidates.\nFinding the winner.\nThe count is conducted by pitting every candidate against every other candidate in a series of hypothetical one-on-one contests. The winner of each pairing is the candidate preferred by a majority of voters. Unless they tie, there is always a majority when there are only two choices. The candidate preferred by each voter is taken to be the one in the pair that the voter ranks (or rates) higher on their ballot paper. For example, if Alice is paired against Bob it is necessary to count both the number of voters who have ranked Alice higher than Bob, and the number who have ranked Bob higher than Alice. If Alice is preferred by more voters then she is the winner of that pairing. When all possible pairings of candidates have been considered, if one candidate beats every other candidate in these contests then they are declared the Condorcet winner. As noted above, if there is no Condorcet winner a further method must be used to find the winner of the election, and this mechanism varies from one Condorcet consistent method to another. In any Condorcet method that passes Independence of Smith-dominated alternatives, it can sometimes help to identify the Smith set from the head-to-head matchups, and eliminate all candidates not in the set before doing the procedure for that Condorcet method.\nPairwise counting and matrices.\nCondorcet methods use pairwise counting. For each possible pair of candidates, one pairwise count indicates how many voters prefer one of the paired candidates over the other candidate, and another pairwise count indicates how many voters have the opposite preference. The counts for all possible pairs of candidates summarize all the pairwise preferences of all the voters.\nPairwise counts are often displayed in a \"pairwise comparison matrix\", or \"outranking matrix\", such as those below. In these matrices, each row represents each candidate as a 'runner', while each column represents each candidate as an 'opponent'. The cells at the intersection of rows and columns each show the result of a particular pairwise comparison. Cells comparing a candidate to themselves are left blank.\nImagine there is an election between four candidates: A, B, C, and D. The first matrix below records the preferences expressed on a single ballot paper, in which the voter's preferences are (B, C, A, D); that is, the voter ranked B first, C second, A third, and D fourth. In the matrix a '1' indicates that the runner is preferred over the 'opponent', while a '0' indicates that the runner is defeated.\nUsing a matrix like the one above, one can find the overall results of an election. Each ballot can be transformed into this style of matrix, and then added to all other ballot matrices using matrix addition. The sum of all ballots in an election is called the sum matrix. Suppose that in the imaginary election there are two other voters. Their preferences are (D, A, C, B) and (A, C, B, D). Added to the first voter, these ballots would give the following sum matrix:\nWhen the sum matrix is found, the contest between each pair of candidates is considered. The number of votes for runner over opponent (runner, opponent) is compared with the number of votes for opponent over runner (opponent, runner) to find the Condorcet winner. In the sum matrix above, A is the Condorcet winner because A beats every other candidate. When there is no Condorcet winner Condorcet completion methods, such as Ranked Pairs and the Schulze method, use the information contained in the sum matrix to choose a winner.\nCells marked '\u2014' in the matrices above have a numerical value of '0', but a dash is used since candidates are never preferred to themselves. The first matrix, that represents a single ballot, is inversely symmetric: (runner, opponent) is \u00ac(opponent, runner). Or (runner, opponent) + (opponent, runner) = 1. The sum matrix has this property: (runner, opponent) + (opponent, runner) = N for N voters, if all runners were fully ranked by each voter.\nExample.\nSuppose Tennessee is holding an election on the location of its capital. The population is split between four cities, and all the voters want the capital to be as close to them as possible. The options are:\nTo find the Condorcet winner every candidate must be matched against every other candidate in a series of imaginary one-on-one contests. In each pairing the winner is the candidate preferred by a majority of voters. When results for every possible pairing have been found they are as follows:\nThe results can also be shown in the form of a matrix:\nAs can be seen from both of the tables above, Nashville beats every other candidate. This means that Nashville is the Condorcet winner. Nashville will thus win an election held under any possible Condorcet method.\nWhile any Condorcet method will elect Nashville as the winner, if instead an election based on the same votes were held using first-past-the-post or instant-runoff voting, these systems would select Memphis and Knoxville respectively. This would occur despite the fact that most people would have preferred Nashville to either of those \"winners\". Condorcet methods make these preferences obvious rather than ignoring or discarding them.\nOn the other hand, in this example Chattanooga also defeats Knoxville and Memphis when paired against those cities. If we changed the basis for defining preference and determined that Memphis voters preferred Chattanooga as a second choice rather than as a third choice, Chattanooga would be the Condorcet winner even though finishing in last place in a first-past-the-post election.\nAn alternative way of thinking about this example if a Smith-efficient Condorcet method that passes ISDA is used to determine the winner is that 58% of the voters, a mutual majority, ranked Memphis last (making Memphis the majority loser) and Nashville, Chattanooga, and Knoxville above Memphis, ruling Memphis out. At that point, the voters who preferred Memphis as their 1st choice could only help to choose a winner among Nashville, Chattanooga, and Knoxville, and because they all preferred Nashville as their 1st choice among those three, Nashville would have had a 68% majority of 1st choices among the remaining candidates and won as the majority's 1st choice.\nCircular ambiguities.\nAs noted above, sometimes an election has no Condorcet winner because there is no candidate who is preferred by voters to all other candidates. When this occurs the situation is known as a 'Condorcet cycle', 'majority rule cycle', 'circular ambiguity', 'circular tie', 'Condorcet paradox', or simply a 'cycle'. This situation emerges when, once all votes have been tallied, the preferences of voters with respect to some candidates form a circle in which every candidate is beaten by at least one other candidate (Intransitivity).\nFor example, if there are three candidates, Candidate Rock, Candidate Scissors, and Candidate Paper, there will be no Condorcet winner if voters prefer Candidate Rock over Candidate Scissors and Scissors over Paper, but also Candidate Paper over Rock. Depending on the context in which elections are held, circular ambiguities may or may not be common, but there is no known case of a governmental election with ranked-choice voting in which a circular ambiguity is evident from the record of ranked ballots. Nonetheless, a cycle is always possible, and so every Condorcet method should be capable of determining a winner when this contingency occurs. A mechanism for resolving an ambiguity is known as ambiguity resolution, cycle resolution method, or \"Condorcet completion method\".\nCircular ambiguities arise as a result of the voting paradox\u2014the result of an election can be intransitive (forming a cycle) even though all individual voters expressed a transitive preference. In a Condorcet election it is impossible for the preferences of a single voter to be cyclical, because a voter must rank all candidates in order, from top-choice to bottom-choice, and can only rank each candidate once, but the paradox of voting means that it is still possible for a circular ambiguity in voter tallies to emerge.\nThe idealized notion of a political spectrum is often used to describe political candidates and policies. Where this kind of spectrum exists, and voters prefer candidates who are closest to their own position on the spectrum, there is a Condorcet winner (Black's Single-Peakedness Theorem).\nIn Condorcet methods, as in most electoral systems, there is also the possibility of an ordinary tie. This occurs when two or more candidates tie with each other but defeat every other candidate. As in other systems this can be resolved by a random method such as the drawing of lots. Ties can also be settled through other methods like seeing which of the tied winners had the most first choice votes, but this and some other non-random methods may re-introduce a degree of tactical voting, especially if voters know the race will be close.\nThe method used to resolve circular ambiguities is the main difference between the various Condorcet methods. There are countless ways in which this can be done, but every Condorcet method involves ignoring the majorities expressed by voters in at least some pairwise matchings. Some cycle resolution methods are Smith-efficient, meaning that they pass the Smith criterion. This guarantees that when there is a cycle (and no pairwise ties), only the candidates in the cycle can win, and that if there is a mutual majority, one of their preferred candidates will win.\nCondorcet methods fit within two categories:\nMany one-method systems and some two-method systems will give the same result as each other if there are fewer than 4 candidates in the circular tie, and all voters separately rank at least two of those candidates. These include Smith-Minimax (Minimax but done only after all candidates not in the Smith set are eliminated), Ranked Pairs, and Schulze. For example, with three candidates in the Smith set in a Condorcet cycle, because Schulze and Ranked Pairs pass ISDA, all candidates not in the Smith set can be eliminated first, and then for Schulze, dropping the weakest defeat of the three allows the candidate who had that weakest defeat to be the only candidate who can beat or tie all other candidates, while with Ranked Pairs, once the first two strongest defeats are locked in, the weakest cannot, since it'd create a cycle, and so the candidate with the weakest defeat will have no defeats locked in against them).\nTwo-method systems.\nOne family of Condorcet methods consists of systems that first conduct a series of pairwise comparisons and then, if there is no Condorcet winner, fall back to an entirely different, non-Condorcet method to determine a winner. The simplest such fall-back methods involve entirely disregarding the results of the pairwise comparisons. For example, the Black method chooses the Condorcet winner if it exists, but uses the Borda count instead if there is a cycle (the method is named for Duncan Black).\nA more sophisticated two-stage process is, in the event of a cycle, to use a separate voting system to find the winner but to restrict this second stage to a certain subset of candidates found by scrutinizing the results of the pairwise comparisons. Sets used for this purpose are defined so that they will always contain only the Condorcet winner if there is one, and will always, in any case, contain at least one candidate. Such sets include the\nOne possible method is to apply instant-runoff voting in various ways, such as to the candidates of the Smith set. One variation of this method has been described as \"Smith/IRV\", with another being Tideman's alternative methods. It is also possible to do \"Smith/Approval\" by allowing voters to rank candidates, and indicate which candidates they approve, such that the candidate in the Smith set approved by the most voters wins; this is often done using an approval threshold (i.e. if voters approve their 3rd choices, those voters are automatically considered to approve their 1st and 2nd choices too). In Smith/Score, the candidate in the Smith set with the highest total score wins, with the pairwise comparisons done based on which candidates are scored higher than others.\nSingle-method systems.\nSome Condorcet methods use a single procedure that inherently meets the Condorcet criteria and, without any extra procedure, also resolves circular ambiguities when they arise. In other words, these methods do not involve separate procedures for different situations. Typically these methods base their calculations on pairwise counts. These methods include:\nRanked Pairs and Schulze are procedurally in some sense opposite approaches (although they very frequently give the same results):\nMinimax could be considered as more \"blunt\" than either of these approaches, as instead of removing defeats it can be seen as immediately removing candidates by looking at the strongest defeats (although their victories are still considered for subsequent candidate eliminations). One way to think of it in terms of removing defeats is that Minimax removes each candidate's weakest defeats until some group of candidates with only pairwise ties between them have no defeats left, at which point the group ties to win.\nKemeny method.\nThe Kemeny method considers every possible sequence of choices in terms of which choice might be most popular, which choice might be second-most popular, and so on down to which choice might be least popular. Each such sequence is associated with a Kemeny score that is equal to the sum of the pairwise counts that apply to the specified sequence. The sequence with the highest score is identified as the overall ranking, from most popular to least popular.\nWhen the pairwise counts are arranged in a matrix in which the choices appear in sequence from most popular (top and left) to least popular (bottom and right), the winning Kemeny score equals the sum of the counts in the upper-right, triangular half of the matrix (shown here in bold on a green background).\nIn this example, the Kemeny Score of the sequence Nashville &gt; Chattanooga &gt; Knoxville &gt; Memphis would be 393.\nCalculating every Kemeny score requires considerable computation time in cases that involve more than a few choices. However, fast calculation methods based on integer programming allow a computation time in seconds for some cases with as many as 40 choices.\nRanked pairs.\nThe order of finish is constructed a piece at a time by considering the (pairwise) majorities one at a time, from largest majority to smallest majority. For each majority, their higher-ranked candidate is placed ahead of their lower-ranked candidate in the (partially constructed) order of finish, except when their lower-ranked candidate has already been placed ahead of their higher-ranked candidate.\nFor example, suppose the voters' orders of preference are such that 75% rank B over C, 65% rank A over B, and 60% rank C over A. (The three majorities are a rock paper scissors cycle.) Ranked pairs begins with the largest majority, who rank B over C, and places B ahead of C in the order of finish. Then it considers the second largest majority, who rank A over B, and places A ahead of B in the order of finish. At this point, it has been established that A finishes ahead of B and B finishes ahead of C, which implies A also finishes ahead of C. So when ranked pairs considers the third largest majority, who rank C over A, their lower-ranked candidate A has already been placed ahead of their higher-ranked candidate C, so C is not placed ahead of A. The order of finish is \"A, B, C\" and A is the winner.\nAn equivalent definition is to find the order of finish that minimizes the size of the largest reversed majority. (In the 'lexicographical order' sense. If the largest majority reversed in two orders of finish is the same, the two orders of finish are compared by their second largest reversed majorities, etc. See the discussion of MinMax, MinLexMax and Ranked Pairs in the 'Motivation and uses' section of the Lexicographical Order article). (In the example, the order of finish \"A, B, C\" reverses the 60% who rank C over A. Any other order of finish would reverse a larger majority.) This definition is useful for simplifying some of the proofs of Ranked Pairs' properties, but the \"constructive\" definition executes much faster (small polynomial time).\nSchulze method.\nThe Schulze method resolves votes as follows:\nAt each stage, we proceed as follows:\n# For each pair of undropped candidates X and Y: If there is a directed path of undropped links from candidate X to candidate Y, then we write \"X \u2192 Y\"; otherwise we write \"not X \u2192 Y\".\n# For each pair of undropped candidates V and W: If \"V \u2192 W\" and \"not W \u2192 V\", then candidate W is dropped and all links, that start or end in candidate W, are dropped.\n# The weakest undropped link is dropped. If several undropped links tie as weakest, all of them are dropped.\nThe procedure ends when all links have been dropped. The winners are the undropped candidates.\nIn other words, this procedure repeatedly throws away the weakest pairwise defeat within the top set, until finally the number of votes left over produce an unambiguous decision.\nDefeat strength.\nSome pairwise methods\u2014including minimax, Ranked Pairs, and the Schulze method\u2014resolve circular ambiguities based on the relative strength of the defeats. There are different ways to measure the strength of each defeat, and these include considering \"winning votes\" and \"margins\":\nIf voters do not rank their preferences for all of the candidates, these two approaches can yield different results. Consider, for example, the following election:\nThe pairwise defeats are as follows:\nUsing the winning votes definition of defeat strength, the defeat of B by C is the weakest, and the defeat of A by B is the strongest. Using the margins definition of defeat strength, the defeat of C by A is the weakest, and the defeat of A by B is the strongest.\nUsing winning votes as the definition of defeat strength, candidate B would win under minimax, Ranked Pairs and the Schulze method, but, using margins as the definition of defeat strength, candidate C would win in the same methods.\nIf all voters give complete rankings of the candidates, then winning votes and margins will always produce the same result. The difference between them can only come into play when some voters declare equal preferences amongst candidates, as occurs implicitly if they do not rank all candidates, as in the example above.\nThe choice between margins and winning votes is the subject of scholarly debate. Because all Condorcet methods always choose the Condorcet winner when one exists, the difference between methods only appears when cyclic ambiguity resolution is required. The argument for using winning votes follows from this: Because cycle resolution involves disenfranchising a selection of votes, then the selection should disenfranchise the fewest possible number of votes. When margins are used, the difference between the number of two candidates' votes may be small, but the number of votes may be very large\u2014or not. Only methods employing winning votes satisfy Woodall's plurality criterion.\nAn argument in favour of using margins is the fact that the result of a pairwise comparison is decided by the presence of more votes for one side than the other and thus that it follows naturally to assess the strength of a comparison by this \"surplus\" for the winning side. Otherwise, changing only a few votes from the winner to the loser could cause a sudden large change from a large score for one side to a large score for the other. In other words, one could consider losing votes being in fact disenfranchised when it comes to ambiguity resolution with winning votes. Also, using winning votes, a vote containing ties (possibly implicitly in the case of an incompletely ranked ballot) does not have the same effect as a number of equally weighted votes with total weight equaling one vote, such that the ties are broken in every possible way (a violation of Woodall's symmetric-completion criterion), as opposed to margins.\nUnder winning votes, if two more of the \"B\" voters decided to vote \"BC\", the A-&gt;C arm of the cycle would be overturned and Condorcet would pick C instead of B. This is an example of \"Unburying\" or \"Later does harm\". The margin method would pick C anyway.\nUnder the margin method, if three more \"BC\" voters decided to \"bury\" C by just voting \"B\", the A-&gt;C arm of the cycle would be strengthened and the resolution strategies would end up breaking the C-&gt;B arm and giving the win to B. This is an example of \"Burying\". The winning votes method would pick B anyway.\nRelated terms.\nOther terms related to the Condorcet method are:\nCondorcet ranking methods.\nSome Condorcet methods produce not just a single winner, but a ranking of all candidates from first to last place. A Condorcet ranking is a list of candidates with the property that the Condorcet winner (if one exists) comes first and the Condorcet loser (if one exists) comes last, and this holds recursively for the candidates ranked between them.\nSingle winner methods that satisfy this property include:\nProportional forms which satisfy this property include:\nThough there will not always be a Condorcet winner or Condorcet loser, there is always a Smith set and \"Smith loser set\" (smallest group of candidates who lose to all candidates not in the set in head-to-head elections). Some voting methods produce rankings that sort all candidates in the Smith set above all others, and all candidates in the Smith loser set below all others, with this holding recursively for all candidates ranked between them; in essence, this guarantees that when the candidates can be split into two groups, such that every candidate in the first group beats every candidate in the second group head-to-head, then all candidates in the first group are ranked higher than all candidates in the second group. Because the Smith set and Smith loser set are equivalent to the Condorcet winner and Condorcet loser when they exist, methods that always produce Smith set rankings also always produce Condorcet rankings.\nComparison with instant runoff and first-past-the-post (plurality).\nOne claim of some instant-runoff voting (IRV) proponents is that if a voter's first choice does not win, then their vote will transfer to their second choice; if their second choice does not win, their vote will transfer to their third choice, etc. In practice, it is not true for every voter with IRV. If someone voted for a strong candidate, and their 2nd and 3rd choices are eliminated before their first choice is eliminated, IRV transfers their vote to their 4th choice candidate, not their 2nd choice. Condorcet voting takes all rankings into account simultaneously, but at the expense of violating the later-no-harm criterion and the later-no-help criterion. With IRV, indicating a second choice will never affect your first choice. With Condorcet voting, it is possible that indicating a second choice will cause your first choice to lose.\nPlurality voting is simple, and theoretically provides incentives for voters to compromise for centrist candidates rather than throw away their votes on candidates who cannot win. Opponents to plurality voting point out that voters often vote for the lesser of evils because they heard on the news that those two are the only two with a chance of winning, not necessarily because those two are the two natural compromises. This gives the media significant election powers. And if voters do compromise according to the media, the post election counts will prove the media right for next time. Condorcet runs each candidate against the other head to head, so that voters elect the candidate who would win the most sincere runoffs, instead of the one they thought they had to vote for.\nThere are circumstances, as in the examples above, when both instant-runoff voting and the \"first-past-the-post\" plurality system will fail to pick the Condorcet winner. (In fact, FPTP can elect the Condorcet loser and IRV can elect the second-worst candidate, who would lose to every candidate except the Condorcet loser.) In cases where there is a Condorcet Winner, and where IRV does not choose it, a majority would by definition prefer the Condorcet Winner to the IRV winner. Proponents of the Condorcet criterion see it as a principal issue in selecting an electoral system. They see the Condorcet criterion as a natural extension of majority rule. Condorcet methods tend to encourage the selection of centrist candidates who appeal to the median voter. Here is an example that is designed to support IRV at the expense of Condorcet:\nB is preferred by a 501\u2013499 majority to A, and by a 502\u2013498 majority to C. So, according to the Condorcet criterion, B should win, despite the fact that very few voters rank B in first place. By contrast, IRV elects C and plurality elects A. The goal of a ranked voting system is for voters to be able to vote sincerely and trust the system to protect their intent. Plurality voting forces voters to do all their tactics before they vote, so that the system does not need to figure out their intent.\nThe significance of this scenario, of two parties with strong support, and the one with weak support being the Condorcet winner, may be misleading, though, as it is a common mode in plurality voting systems (see Duverger's law), but much less likely to occur in Condorcet or IRV elections, which unlike Plurality voting, punish candidates who alienate a significant block of voters.\nHere is an example that is designed to support Condorcet at the expense of IRV:\nB would win against either A or C by more than a 65\u201335 margin in a one-on-one election, but IRV eliminates B first, leaving a contest between the more \"polar\" candidates, A and C. Proponents of plurality voting state that their system is simpler than any other and more easily understood.\nAll three systems are susceptible to tactical voting, but the types of tactics used and the frequency of strategic incentive differ in each method.\nPotential for tactical voting.\nLike all voting methods, Condorcet methods are vulnerable to compromising. That is, voters can help avoid the election of a less-preferred candidate by insincerely raising the position of a more-preferred candidate on their ballot. However, Condorcet methods are only vulnerable to compromising when there is a majority rule cycle, or when one can be created.\nCondorcet methods are vulnerable to burying. In some elections, voters can help a more-preferred candidate by insincerely lowering the position of a less-preferred candidate on their ballot. For example, in an election with three candidates, voters may be able to falsify their second choice to help their preferred candidate win.\nExample with the Schulze method:\nSupporters of Condorcet methods which exhibit this potential problem could rebut this concern by pointing out that pre-election polls are most necessary with plurality voting, and that voters, armed with ranked choice voting, could lie to pre-election pollsters, making it impossible for Candidate A to know whether or how to bury. It is also nearly impossible to predict ahead of time how many supporters of A would actually follow the instructions, and how many would be alienated by such an obvious attempt to manipulate the system.\nEvaluation by criteria.\nScholars of electoral systems often compare them using mathematically defined voting system criteria. The criteria which Condorcet methods satisfy vary from one Condorcet method to another. However, the Condorcet criterion is incompatible with the consistency, independence of irrelevant alternatives (though it implies a weaker analogous form of IIA: when there is a Condorcet winner, losing candidates can drop out of the election without changing the result), later-no-harm, later-no-help, participation, and sincere favorite criteria.\nUse of Condorcet voting.\nCondorcet methods are not known to be currently in use in government elections anywhere in the world, but a Condorcet method known as Nanson's method was used in city elections in the U.S. town of Marquette, Michigan in the 1920s, and today Condorcet methods are used by a number of political parties and private organizations.\nIn Vermont, Bill H.424 would enable towns, cities, and villages to adopt a Condorcet-based voting system for single-seat office elections through a majority vote at a town meeting. The system first checks for a majority winner among first preferences. If none, pairwise Condorcet comparisons are counted and the Condorcet winner is elected. If none, it resorts to a first-past-the-post tiebreaker. Once adopted, the system remains in effect until the community decides to revert to a previous method or another system through a subsequent town meeting vote.\nOrganizations which currently use some variant of the Condorcet method are:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44447", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44447", "title": "The Forge of God", "text": "1987 novel by Greg Bear\nThe Forge of God is a 1987 science fiction novel by American writer Greg Bear. Earth faces destruction when an inscrutable and overwhelming alien form of life attacks.\nPlot.\nThe novel features scenes and events, including the discovery of a nearly-dead alien in the desert, who clearly says in English, \"I'm sorry, but there is bad news,\" and the alien's subsequent interrogation and autopsy; the discovery of an artificial geological formation and its subsequent nuclear destruction by a desperate military; and the Earth's eventual destruction by the mutual annihilation of a piece of neutronium and a piece of antineutronium dropped into Earth's core.\nThere is another alien faction at work, however, represented on Earth by small spider-like robots that recruit human agents through some form of mind control. They frantically collect all the human data, biological records, tissue samples, seeds, and DNA from the biosphere that they can and evacuate a handful of people from Earth. In outer space, this faction's machines combat and eventually destroy the attackers but not before Earth's fate is sealed. The evacuees eventually settle a newly terraformed Mars while some form the crew of a Ship of the Law to hunt down the home world of the killers, a quest described in the sequel, \"Anvil of Stars\".\nOne of the point-of-view characters is Arthur Gordon, a scientist. He, his wife Francine and son Martin are among those rescued from the destruction of Earth. Some other characters are close to an American president, who fails to take action against the threat.\nThe two books show at least one solution to the Fermi paradox, with electromagnetically noisy civilizations being snuffed out by the arrival of self-replicating machines designed to destroy any potential threat to their (possibly long-dead) creators. (A similar theme is explored in Fred Saberhagen's \"Berserker\" novels.)\nCultural reference.\nIt features a character, Lawrence Van Cott, that is modelled on science fiction author Larry Niven, whose full name is \"Laurence van Cott Niven\".\nReception.\nDave Langford reviewed \"The Forge of God\" for \"White Dwarf\" #95, and stated that \"A good nasty read [...] with a flicker of optimism: in the jungle Out There, someone is on our side ...\"\n\"The Forge of God\" was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1987, and was also nominated for the Hugo and Locus Awards in 1988.\nMovie.\nIn the early 2000s, \"The Forge of God\" and \"Anvil of Stars\", as well as an as-yet-unwritten third book, were optioned by Warner Bros. to be made into movies. It was reported that Stephen Susco worked on a script for \"The Forge of God\". In July 2006, Greg Bear mentioned on his website that the movie is \"Still under option. Studio engaged in 'silent running.'\u00a0\"\nHowever, in October 2010, Bear commented on his website that Ken Nolan (who wrote the screen adaptation for Ridley Scott's \"Black Hawk Down\" film), was actively working on a screenplay.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44449", "revid": "44967271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44449", "title": "Blood Music (novel)", "text": "1985 novel by Greg Bear\nBlood Music is a 1985 science fiction novel by American writer Greg Bear.\nIt is an expanded version of a short story of the same title, originally published in the June 1983 issue of \"Analog\" and the winner of both the 1983 Nebula and 1984 Hugo awards for Best Novelette. The novel won the 1986 Prix Apollo Award, given to the best science fiction novel published in France during the preceding year, under the title \"La Musique du sang\".\n\"Blood Music\" deals with themes including biotechnology, nanotechnology (including the grey goo hypothesis), the nature of reality, consciousness, and artificial intelligence.\nPlot summary.\nRenegade biotechnologist Vergil Ulam creates simple biological computers based on his own lymphocytes. Faced with orders from his nervous employer to destroy his work, he injects them into his own body, intending to smuggle the \"noocytes\"[#endnote_] (as he calls them) out of the company and work on them elsewhere. Inside Ulam's body, the noocytes multiply and evolve rapidly, altering their own genetic material and quickly becoming self-aware.\nThe nanoscale civilization they construct soon begins to transform Ulam, then others. The people who are infected start to find that genetic faults such as myopia and high blood pressure are fixed. Ulam's eyesight, posture, strength, and intelligence are all improved. The infected can even have conversations with their noocytes, with some reporting that the cells seem to sing.\nThrough infection, conversion, and assimilation of humans and other organisms, the cells eventually aggregate most of the biosphere of North America into a region wide. This civilization, which incorporates both the evolved noocytes and recently assimilated conventional humans, is eventually forced to abandon the normal plane of existence in favor of one in which thought does not require a physical substrate. The reason for the noocytes' inability to remain in this reality is somewhat related to the strong anthropic principle.\nThe book's structure is titled \"inter-phase\", \"prophase\", \"metaphase\", \"anaphase\", \"telophase\", and \"interphase\". This mirrors the major phases of cell cycle: interphase and mitosis.\nCharacters.\nSource:\nReception.\nDave Langford reviewed \"Blood Music\" for \"White Dwarf\" #79. He stated that \"The finale is magnificent. The only problem is that it's nigglingly close to the conclusion reached by an author extrapolating from a different start-point: Arthur C. Clarke in \"Childhood's End\". But Bear, I think does it better \u2013 and goes beyond even Clarke. Strongly recommended.\"\nMartin Lewis of the SF Site writes in a 2002 review, \"For a novel that moves so quickly you might expect some fudge for the sake of plot, but the ideas that are presented are fully explored and the characters are all well drawn... Bear also succeeds in pulling off probably the hardest task in SF, depicting a believable strongly superhuman AI.\" He adds, \"As can be expected, Bear explicitly references both \"Frankenstein\" and Prometheus. However, although the novel charts the demise of humanity, \"Blood Music\" is optimistic in tone. Despite the prejudices of the masses Frankenstein's monster is triumphant. The noocytes, cultured in Ulam's body, are genuinely better than humans and happy to invite them to share this new future.\" Placing \"Blood Music\" among its contemporaries, specifically the cyberpunk fiction of the 1980s, Lewis calls it \"a modern classic\" in its handling of Transhumanism, which explores ideas such as genetic engineering and translation of consciousness. Lewis concludes, \"To this day, it remains the defining novel of \"wet\" nanotechnology\".\nDrawing parallel literary connections, Thomas Christensen (in a 1999 retrospective review) calls it \"a DNA based Frankenstein's fantastic voyage-story for the last quarter of the twentieth century. The story may seem a bit simplistic and stereotypical these days (the mad scientist and the ignorant environmental activists),\" yet it offers \"a fairly well written and fairly interesting story about the wonders that bioengineering can give us, if we use it right and the horrors it can bring us if we aren't careful.\"\nThe Worlds Without End site calls the novel both \"suspenseful and grotesque\" but also \"compelling and exciting... especially considering the ideas that it touches upon (E.g. genetic memory, consciousness, &amp; reality).\" The reviewer muses, \"I think that some consider this to fall into the horror genre, but I don't know if I agree fully. Suspenseful? Sure. Body horror? Absolutely. But I don't think that the horror elements are really the focus. A stunner for sure, highly recommended.\"\nThe novel won the 1986 Prix Apollo Award, given to the best science fiction novel published in France during the preceding year, under the title \"La Musique du sang\". It was also nominated for the Nebula Award in 1985 and for the Hugo, Campbell, and British Science Fiction Awards in 1986.\n1.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Reviewer Martin Lewis writes, \"What he has injected himself with is a solution containing cellular organisms, noocytes, as intelligent as rhesus monkeys. These noocytes continue to evolve within him, getting smarter, learning about his body.\" The term derives from the Greek \"noos\" or \"nous\", indicating \"mind, intelligence, perception, intellect.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44450", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44450", "title": "Postcyberpunk", "text": ""}
{"id": "44452", "revid": "4183803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44452", "title": "Paul McCauley", "text": ""}
{"id": "44453", "revid": "4183803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44453", "title": "Paul J. McCauley", "text": ""}
{"id": "44454", "revid": "28677324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44454", "title": "Battle of Passchendaele", "text": "1917 campaign of the First World War\nThe Third Battle of Ypres (; ; ), also known as the Battle of Passchendaele ( ), was a campaign of the First World War, fought by the Allies against the German Empire. The battle took place on the Western Front, from July to November 1917, for control of the ridges south and east of the Belgian city of Ypres in West Flanders, as part of a strategy decided by the Entente at conferences in November 1916 and May 1917. Passchendaele (now Passendale) lies on the last ridge east of Ypres, from Roulers (now Roeselare), a junction of the Bruges-(Brugge)-to-Kortrijk railway. The station at Roulers was on the main supply route of the German 4th Army. Once Passchendaele Ridge had been captured, the Allied advance was to continue to a line from Thourout (now Torhout) to Couckelaere (Koekelare).\nFurther operations and a British supporting attack along the Belgian coast from Nieuport (Nieuwpoort), combined with an amphibious landing (Operation Hush), were to have reached Bruges and then the Dutch frontier. Although a general withdrawal had seemed inevitable in early October, the Germans were able to avoid one due to the resistance of the 4th Army, unusually wet weather in August, the beginning of the autumn rains in October and the diversion of British and French resources to Italy. The campaign ended in November, when the Canadian Corps captured Passchendaele, apart from local attacks in December and early in the new year. The Battle of the Lys (Fourth Battle of Ypres) and the Fifth Battle of Ypres of 1918, were fought before the Allies occupied the Belgian coast and reached the Dutch frontier.\nA campaign in Flanders was controversial in 1917 and has remained so. The British Prime Minister, David Lloyd George, opposed the offensive, as did General Ferdinand Foch, the Chief of Staff of the French Army. Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig, commander of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), did not receive approval for the Flanders operation from the War Cabinet until 25 July. Matters of dispute by the participants, writers and historians since 1917 include the wisdom of pursuing an offensive strategy in the wake of the Nivelle Offensive, rather than waiting for the arrival of the American Expeditionary Force (AEF) in France.\nRemaining controversial are the choice of Flanders, its climate, the selection of General Hubert Gough and the Fifth Army to conduct the offensive, and debates over the nature of the opening attack and between advocates of shallow and deeper objectives. Also debated are the time between the Battle of Messines (7\u201314 June) and the first Allied attack (the Battle of Pilckem Ridge, 31 July), the extent to which the French Army mutinies influenced the British, the effect of the exceptional weather, the decision to continue the offensive in October and the human costs of the campaign.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nFlanders.\n1914.\nBelgium had been recognised in the Treaty of London (1839) as a sovereign and neutral state after the secession of the southern provinces of the Netherlands in 1830. The German invasion of Belgium on 4 August 1914, in violation of Article VII of the treaty, was the British against Germany. British military operations in Belgium began with the arrival of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) at Mons on 22 August. Operations in Flanders began during the Race to the Sea, reciprocal attempts by the French and German armies to turn their opponents' northern flank, through Picardy, Artois and Flanders. On 10 October, Lieutenant-General Erich von Falkenhayn, the Chief of Staff of the (OHL, supreme army command), ordered an attack towards Dunkirk and Calais, followed by a turn south behind the Allied armies, to gain a decisive victory. On 16 October, the Belgians and some French reinforcements began the defence of western Belgium and the French Channel ports, at the Battle of the Yser. When the German offensive failed, Falkenhayn ordered the capture of Ypres to gain a local advantage. By 18 November, the First Battle of Ypres had also ended in failure, at a cost of 160,000 German casualties. In December, the British Admiralty began discussions with the War Office, for a combined operation to re-occupy the Belgian coast but were obliged to conform to French strategy and participate in offensives further south.\n1915.\nLarge British offensive operations in Flanders were not possible in 1915, due to a lack of resources. The Germans conducted their own Flanders offensive at the Second Battle of Ypres (22 April \u2013 15 May 1915), making the Ypres salient more costly to defend. Sir Douglas Haig succeeded Sir John French as Commander-in-Chief of the BEF on 19 December. A week after his appointment, Haig met Rear-Admiral Reginald Bacon, who emphasised the importance of obtaining control of the Belgian coast, to end the threat posed by German U-boats. Haig was sceptical of a coastal operation, believing that a landing from the sea would be far more difficult than anticipated and that an advance along the coast would require so much preparation, that the Germans would have ample warning. Haig preferred an advance from Ypres, to bypass the flooded area around the Yser and the coast, before attempting a coastal attack to clear the coast to the Dutch border.\n1916.\nMinor operations took place in the Ypres salient in 1916, some being German initiatives to distract the Allies from their preparations for the offensive at Verdun and later attempts to divert Allied resources from the Battle of the Somme. Other operations were begun by the British to regain territory or to evict the Germans from ground overlooking their positions. Engagements took place on 12 February at Boesinghe and on 14 February at Hooge and Sanctuary Wood. There were actions from 14 to 15 February and 1 to 4 March at The Bluff, 27 March \u2013 16 April at the St \u00c9loi Craters and the Battle of Mont Sorrel from 2 to 13 June. In January 1917, the Second Army (General Herbert Plumer) with the II Anzac, IX, X and VIII corps, held the Western Front in Flanders from Laventie to Boesinghe, with eleven divisions and up to two in reserve. There was much trench mortaring, mining and raiding by both sides and from January to May, the Second Army suffered 20,000 casualties. In May, reinforcements began arriving in Flanders from the south; the II Corps headquarters and 17 divisions had arrived by the end of the month.\nIn January 1916, Plumer began to plan offensives against Messines Ridge, Lille and Houthulst Forest. General Henry Rawlinson was also ordered to plan an attack from the Ypres Salient on 4 February; planning continued but the Battle of Verdun and the Battle of the Somme took up the rest of the year. In November, Haig, the French commander-in-chief Joseph Joffre and the other Allies met at Chantilly. The commanders agreed on a strategy of simultaneous attacks, to overwhelm the Central Powers on the Western, Eastern and Italian fronts, by the first fortnight of February 1917. A meeting in London of the Admiralty and the General Staff urged that the Flanders operation be undertaken in 1917 and Joffre replied on 8 December, agreeing to a Flanders campaign after the spring offensive. The plan for a year of attrition offensives on the Western Front, with the main effort to be made in the summer by the BEF, was scrapped by the new French Commander-in-Chief Robert Nivelle in favour of a return to a strategy of decisive battle.\nAllied strategy.\nNivelle planned preliminary offensives to pin German reserves by the British at Arras and the French between the Somme and the Oise, then a French breakthrough offensive on the Aisne, followed by pursuit and exploitation. Haig had reservations and on 6 January Nivelle agreed to a proviso that if the first two parts of the operation failed to lead to a breakthrough, the operations would be stopped and the British could move their forces north for the Flanders offensive, which was of great importance to the British government. On 23 January, Haig wrote that it would take six weeks to move British troops and equipment to Flanders and on 14 March, noted that the Messines Ridge operation could begin in May. On 21 March, he wrote to Nivelle that it would take two months to prepare the offensive from Messines to Steenstraat but that the Messines operation could be ready in five or six weeks.\nThe main French attack took place from 9 April to 9 May and failed to achieve a breakthrough. On 16 May, Haig wrote that he had divided the Flanders operation into two parts, one to take Messines Ridge and the main attack several weeks later. British determination to clear the Belgian coast took on more urgency after the Germans resumed unrestricted submarine warfare on 1 February 1917. On 1 May 1917, Haig wrote that the Nivelle Offensive had weakened the German army but that an attempt at a decisive blow would be premature. The wearing-out process would continue on a front where the Germans had no room to retreat. Even limited success would improve the tactical situation in the Ypres salient, reducing the exceptional wastage, even in quiet periods. In early May, Haig set the date for the Flanders offensive, the attack on Messines Ridge to begin on 7 June.\nKerensky offensive.\nThe Russian army conducted the Kerensky Offensive in Galicia, to honour the agreement struck with the Allies at the Chantilly meeting of 15 to 16 November 1916. After a brief period of success from 1 to 19 July, the Russian offensive was contained by the German and Austro-Hungarian armies, which counter-attacked and forced the Russian armies to retreat. On the Baltic coast from 1 to 5 September 1917, the Germans attacked with their strategic reserve of six divisions and captured Riga. In Operation Albion (September\u2013October 1917), the Germans took the islands at the mouth of the Gulf of Riga. The British and French commanders on the Western Front had to reckon on the German western army () being strengthened by reinforcements from the on the Eastern Front by late 1917. Haig wished to exploit the diversion of German forces in Russia for as long as it continued and urged the British War Cabinet to commit the maximum amount of manpower and munitions to the battle in Flanders.\nPrelude.\nYpres salient.\nYpres is overlooked by Kemmel Hill in the south-west and from the east by a line of low hills running south-west to north-east. Wytschaete (Wijtschate) and Hill 60 are to the east of Verbrandenmolen, Hooge, Polygon Wood and Passchendaele (Passendale). The high point of the ridge is at Wytschaete, from Ypres, while at Hollebeke the ridge is distant and recedes to at Polygon Wood. Wytschaete is about above the plain; on the Ypres\u2013Menin road at Hooge, the elevation is about and at Passchendaele. The rises are slight, apart from the vicinity of Zonnebeke, which has a gradient of 1:33. From Hooge and further east, the slope is 1:60 and near Hollebeke, it is 1:75; the heights are subtle and resemble a saucer lip around the city. The main ridge has spurs sloping east and one is particularly noticeable at Wytschaete, which runs south-east to Messines (Mesen) with a gentle slope on the east side and a 1:10 decline westwards. Further south, is the muddy valley of the River Douve, Ploegsteert Wood (Plugstreet to the British) and Hill 63. West of Messines Ridge is the parallel Wulverghem (Spanbroekmolen) Spur and on the east side, the Oosttaverne Spur, which is also parallel to the main ridge. The general aspect south and east of Ypres, is one of low ridges and dips, gradually flattening northwards beyond Passchendaele, into a featureless plain.\nPossession of the higher ground to the south and east of Ypres, gives an army ample scope for ground observation, enfilade fire and converging artillery bombardments. An occupier also has the advantage that artillery deployments and the movement of reinforcements, supplies and stores can be screened from view. The ridge had woods from Wytschaete to Zonnebeke giving good cover, some being of notable size, like Polygon Wood and those later named Battle Wood, Shrewsbury Forest and Sanctuary Wood. In 1914, the woods usually had undergrowth but by 1917, artillery bombardments had reduced the woods to tree stumps, shattered tree trunks tangled with barbed wire and more wire festooning the ground, which was full of shell-holes; fields in the gaps between the woods were wide and devoid of cover. The main road to Ypres from Poperinge to Vlamertinge is in a defile, easily observed from the ridge. Roads in the area were unpaved, except for the main ones from Ypres, with occasional villages and houses dotted along them. The lowland west of the ridge was a mixture of meadows and fields, with high hedgerows dotted with trees, cut by streams and a network of drainage ditches emptying into canals.\nTopography.\nIn Flanders, sands, gravels and marls predominate, covered by silts in places. The coastal strip is sandy but a short way into the hinterland, the ground rises towards the Vale of Ypres, which before 1914 was a flourishing market garden. Ypres is above sea level; Bixschoote to the north is at . To the east the land is at for several miles, with the Steenbeek river at near St Julien. There is a low ridge from Messines, at its highest point, running north-east past Clapham Junction at the west end of Gheluvelt plateau (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 miles from Ypres at and Gheluvelt, above to Passchendaele, (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442 miles from Ypres at declining from there to a plain further north. Gradients vary from negligible, to 1:60 at Hooge and 1:33 at Zonnebeke.\nUnderneath the soil is London clay, sand and silt; according to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission categories of \"sand\", \"sandy soils\" and \"well-balanced soils\", Messines ridge is well-balanced soil and the ground around Ypres is sandy soil. The ground is drained by many streams, canals and ditches, which need regular maintenance. Since 1914 much of the drainage had been destroyed, though some parts were restored by land drainage companies from England. The British considered the area drier than Loos, Givenchy and Plugstreet Wood further south. A study of weather data recorded at Lille, from Ypres from 1867\u20131916, published in 1989, showed that August was more often dry than wet, that there was a trend towards dry autumns (September\u2013November) and that average rainfall in October had decreased since the 1860s.\nBritish plans.\nPreparations for operations in Flanders began in 1915, with the doubling of the Hazebrouck\u2013Ypres rail line and the building of a new line from Bergues to Proven, which was doubled in early 1917. Progress on roads, rail lines, railheads and spurs in the Second Army zone was continuous and by mid-1917, gave the area the most efficient supply system of the BEF. Several plans and memoranda for a Flanders offensive were produced between January 1916 and May 1917, in which the writers tried to relate the offensive resources available to the terrain and the likely German defence. In early 1916, the importance of the capture of the Gheluvelt plateau for an advance further north was emphasised by Haig and the army commanders. On 14 February 1917, Colonel Norman MacMullen of GHQ proposed that the plateau be taken by a massed tank attack, reducing the need for artillery; in April a reconnaissance by Captain Giffard LeQuesne Martel found that the area was unsuitable for tanks.\nOn 9 February, Rawlinson, commander of the Fourth Army, suggested that Messines Ridge could be taken in one day and that the capture of the Gheluvelt plateau should be fundamental to the attack further north. He suggested that the southern attack from St Yves to Mont Sorrel should come first and that Mont Sorrel to Steenstraat should be attacked within 48 to 72 hours. After discussions with Rawlinson and Plumer and the incorporation of Haig's changes, Macmullen submitted his memorandum on 14 February. With amendments the memorandum became the \"GHQ 1917\" plan. A week after the Battle of Messines Ridge, Haig gave his objectives to his army commanders, the wearing out of the enemy, securing the Belgian coast and connecting with the Dutch frontier by capturing Passchendaele ridge, followed by an advance on Roulers and Operation Hush, an attack along the coast with a combined amphibious landing. If manpower and artillery were insufficient, only the first part of the plan might be fulfilled. On 30 April, Haig told Gough, the Fifth Army commander, that he would lead the Northern Operation and the coastal force, although Cabinet approval for the offensive was not granted until 21 June.\nGerman defences.\nThe 4th Army held a front of with three , composed of a corps headquarters and a varying complement of divisions; Group Staden, based on the headquarters of the Guards Reserve Corps was added later. Group Dixmude held with four front divisions and two divisions, Group Ypres held from Pilckem to Menin Road with three front divisions and two divisions and Group held a similar length of front south of the Menin road, with three front divisions and three divisions. The divisions were stationed behind the Menin and Passchendaele ridges. About further back, were four more divisions and beyond them, another two in OHL reserve.\nThe Germans were anxious that the British would attempt to exploit the victory of the Battle of Messines, with an advance to the Tower Hamlets spur beyond the north end of Messines Ridge. On 9 June, Crown Prince Rupprecht proposed a withdrawal to the line east of Messines. Construction of defences began but was terminated after Fritz von Lo\u00dfberg was appointed Chief of Staff of the 4th Army. Lo\u00dfberg rejected the proposed withdrawal to the line and ordered that the front line east of the \"Oosttaverne\" line be held rigidly. The (Flanders Position) along Passchendaele Ridge, in front of the line, would become and a new position, , would run west of Menin, northwards to Passchendaele. Construction of a east of Menin northwards to Moorslede was also begun. From July 1917, the area east of Ypres was defended by the front position, the (second position), (third position), (fourth position), (fifth position) and , the sixth position (incomplete). Between the German defences lay villages such as Zonnebeke and Passchendaele, which were fortified and prepared for all-round defence.\nOn 25 June, Erich Ludendorff, the First Quartermaster General, suggested to Crown Prince Rupprecht that Group Ypres should withdraw to the , leaving only outposts in the . On 30 June, the army group Chief of Staff, General von Kuhl, suggested a withdrawal to the along Passchendaele ridge, meeting the old front line in the north near Langemarck and Armenti\u00e8res in the south. Such a withdrawal would avoid a hasty retreat from Pilckem Ridge and force the British into a time-consuming redeployment. Lo\u00dfberg disagreed, believing that the British would launch a broad front offensive, that the ground east of the was easy to defend and that the Menin road ridge could be held if it was made the (point of main effort) of the German defensive system. Pilckem Ridge deprived the British of ground observation over the Steenbeek Valley, while the Germans could see the area from Passchendaele Ridge, allowing German infantry to be supported by observed artillery-fire. Lo\u00dfberg's judgement was accepted and no withdrawal was made.\nBattle of Messines.\nThe first stage in the British plan was a preparatory attack on the German positions south of Ypres at Messines Ridge. The Germans on the ridge had observation over Ypres and unless it was captured, observed enfilade artillery-fire could be fired against a British attack from the salient further north. Since mid-1915, the British had been mining under the German positions on the ridge and by June 1917, 21 mines had been filled with nearly of explosives. The Germans knew the British were mining and had taken counter-measures but they were surprised at the extent of the British effort. Two of the mines failed to detonate but 19 went off on 7 June, at 3:10\u00a0a.m. British Summer Time. The final objectives were largely gained before dark and the British had fewer losses than the expected 50 per cent in the initial attack. As the infantry advanced over the far edge of the ridge, German artillery and machine-guns east of the ridge opened fire and the British artillery was less able to suppress them. The attack removed the Germans from the dominating ground on the southern face of the Ypres salient, which the 4th Army had held since the First Battle of Ypres in 1914.\nBattles.\nJuly\u2013August.\nHaig selected Gough to command the offensive on 30 April and on 10 June Gough and the Fifth Army headquarters took over the Ypres salient north of Messines Ridge. Gough planned an offensive based on the \"GHQ 1917\" plan and the instructions he had received from Haig. Gough held meetings with his corps commanders on 6 and 16 June, where the third objective, which included the (third line), a second-day objective in earlier plans, was added to the two objectives due to be taken on the first day. A fourth objective, the red line, was also given for the first day, to be attempted by fresh troops, at the discretion of divisional and corps commanders, in places where the German defence had collapsed. The attack was not planned as a breakthrough operation and , the fourth German defensive position, lay behind the front line and was not an objective on the first day.\nThe Fifth Army plan was more ambitious than the plans devised by Rawlinson and Plumer, which had involved an advance of on the first day, by compressing their first three attacks into one day instead of three. Major-General John Davidson, Director of Operations at GHQ, wrote in a memorandum that there was \"ambiguity as to what was meant by a step-by-step attack with limited objectives\" and suggested reverting to a advance on the first day to increase the concentration of British artillery. Gough stressed the need to plan to exploit opportunities to take ground left temporarily undefended, more likely in the first attack, which would have the benefit of long preparation. This had not been done in earlier battles and vacant ground, there for the taking, had been re-occupied by the Germans. At the end of June, Haig added a division to II Corps (Lieutenant-General Claud Jacob) from the Second Army and next day, after meeting with Gough and General Herbert Plumer, the Second Army commander, Haig endorsed the Fifth Army plan.\nBattle of Pilckem Ridge.\nThe British attack began at 3:50\u00a0a.m. on 31 July; the attack was to commence at dawn but a layer of unbroken low cloud meant that it was still dark when the infantry advanced. The main attack, by II Corps across the Ghelveult Plateau to the south, confronted the principal German defensive concentration of artillery, ground-holding divisions () and divisions. The attack had most success on the northern flank, on the fronts of XIV Corps and the French First Army, both of which advanced to the line of the Steenbeek river. In the centre, XVIII Corps and XIX Corps pushed forward to the line of the Steenbeek (black line) to consolidate and sent fresh troops towards the green line and on the XIX Corps front to the red line, for an advance of about . Group Ypres counter-attacked the flanks of the British break-in, supported by every artillery piece and aircraft within range, around noon. The Germans were able to drive the three British brigades back to the black line with 70 per cent casualties; the German advance was stopped at the black line by mud, artillery and machine-gun fire.\nCapture of Westhoek.\nAfter rain delays from 2 August, II Corps attacked again on 10 August, to capture the rest of the black line (second objective) on the Gheluvelt plateau. The infantry advance succeeded but German artillery-fire and infantry counter-attacks isolated the infantry of the 18th (Eastern) Division in Glencorse Wood. At about 7:00\u00a0p.m., German infantry attacked behind a smokescreen and recaptured all but the north-west corner of the wood; only the 25th Division gains on Westhoek Ridge to the north were held. Lieutenant-Colonel Albrecht von Thaer, Chief of Staff of (Group Wytschaete, the headquarters of the IX Reserve Corps), noted that casualties after 14 days in the line averaged 1,500\u20132,000 men, compared to 4,000 men on the Somme in 1916 and that German troop morale was higher than the year before.\nBattle of Hill 70.\nAttacks to threaten Lens and Lille were to be made by the First Army in late June near Gavrelle and Oppy, along the Souchez river. The objective was to eliminate a German salient between Avion and the west end of Lens, by taking reservoir Hill (Hill 65) and Hill 70. The attacks were conducted earlier than planned to use heavy and siege artillery before it was transferred to Ypres, the Souchez operation being cut back and the attack on Hill 70 postponed. The Battle of Hill 70, south of Ypres, eventually took place from 15 to 25 August. The Canadian Corps fought four divisions of the German 6th Army in the operation. The capture of Hill 70 was a costly success in which three Canadian divisions inflicted many casualties on the German divisions opposite and pinned down troops reserved for the relief of tired divisions in Flanders. Hermann von Kuhl, chief of staff of Army Group Crown Prince Rupprecht, wrote later that it was a costly defeat and wrecked the plan for relieving fought-out (exhausted) divisions in Flanders.\nBattle of Langemarck.\nThe Battle of Langemarck was fought from 16 to 18 August; the Fifth Army headquarters was influenced by the effect that delay would have on Operation Hush, which needed the high tides due at the end of August or it would have to be postponed for a month. Gough intended that the rest of the green line, just beyond the (German third line), from Polygon Wood to Langemarck, was to be captured and the Steenbeek crossed further north. In the II Corps area, the disappointment of 10 August was repeated, with the infantry managing to advance, then being isolated by German artillery and forced back to their start line by German counter-attacks, except in the 25th Division area near Westhoek. Attempts by the German infantry to advance further were stopped by British artillery-fire with many casualties. The advance further north in the XVIII Corps area retook and held the north end of St Julien and the area south-east of Langemarck, while XIV Corps captured Langemarck and the north of the Ypres\u2013Staden railway, near the Kortebeek stream. The French First Army conformed, pushing up to the Kortebeek and St Jansbeck stream west of the northern stretch of the , where it crossed to the east side of the Kortebeek.\nLocal attacks.\nOn the higher ground, the Germans continued to inflict many losses on the British divisions beyond Langemarck but on 19 August, after two fine dry days, XVIII Corps conducted a novel infantry, tank, aircraft and artillery operation. German strongpoints and pillboxes along the St Julien\u2013Poelcappelle road in front of the were captured. On 22 August, more ground was gained by XIX and XVIII corps but the tactical disadvantage of being overlooked by the Germans continued. An attack by II Corps on the Gheluvelt Plateau from 22 to 24 August, to capture Nonne Bosschen, Glencorse Wood and Inverness Copse, failed in fighting that was costly to both sides. Gough laid down a new infantry formation of skirmish lines to be followed by \"worms\" on 24 August and Cavan noted that pillboxes should be attacked on a broad front to engage them simultaneously. Another general offensive, intended for 25 August, was delayed by the failure of the preliminary attacks and then postponed due to more bad weather. On 27 August, II Corps tried a combined tank and infantry attack but the tanks bogged, the attack failed and Haig called a halt to operations until the weather improved.\nWeather.\nIn \"Field Marshal Earl Haig\" (1929), Brigadier-General John Charteris, the BEF Chief of Intelligence from 1915 to 1918, wrote that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Careful investigation of records of more than eighty years showed that in Flanders the weather broke early each August with the regularity of the Indian monsoon: once the Autumn rains set in difficulties would be greatly enhanced...Unfortunately, there now set in the wettest August for thirty years.\u2014\u200a\nonly the first part of which was quoted by Lloyd George (1934), Liddell Hart (1934) and Leon Wolff (1959); in a 1997 essay, John Hussey called the passage by Charteris \"baffling\". The BEF had set up a Meteorological Section under Ernest Gold in 1915, which by the end of 1917 had 16 officers and 82 men. The section predicted the warm weather and thunderstorms of 7 to 14 June; in a letter to the press of 17 January 1958, Gold wrote that the facts of the Flanders climate contradicted Charteris. In 1989, Philip Griffiths examined August weather in Flanders for the thirty years before 1916 and found that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...there is no reason to suggest that the weather broke early in the month with any regularity.\u2014\u200a\nFrom 1901 to 1916, records from a weather station at Cap Gris Nez showed that 65 per cent of August days were dry and that from 1913 to 1916, there were 26, 23, 23 and 21 rainless days and monthly rainfall of ;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...during the summers preceding the Flanders campaign August days were more often dry than wet.\u2014\u200a\nThere were of rain in August 1917 and of the total fell on 1, 8, 14, 26 and 27 August. The month was overcast and windless, which much reduced evaporation. Divided into two ten-day and an eleven-day period, there were of rain; in the 61 hours before 6:00\u00a0p.m. on 31 July, fell. From 6:00\u00a0p.m. on 31 July to 6:00\u00a0p.m. on 4 August, there was another of rain. August 1917 had three dry days and 14 days with less than of rain. Three days were sunless and one had six minutes of sunshine; from 1 to 27 August there were 178.1 hours of sunshine, an average of 6.6 hours per day. Hussey wrote that the wet weather in August 1917 was exceptional and that Haig had been justified in expecting little rain and that it would be dried swiftly by sunshine and breezes.\nVerdun.\nPetain had committed the French Second Army to an attack at Verdun in mid-July, in support of the Flanders offensive. The attack was delayed, partly due to mutinies in the French army after the failure of the Nivelle Offensive and because of a German attack at Verdun from 28 to 29 June, which captured some of the French jumping-off points. A French counter-attack on 17 July re-captured the ground, the Germans regained it on 1 August, then took ground on the east bank on 16 August. The French attacked on 20 August and by 9 September had taken 10,000 prisoners. Sporadic fighting continued into October, adding to the German difficulties on the Western Front and elsewhere. Ludendorff wrote\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the left bank, close to the Meuse, one division had failed\u00a0... and yet both here and in Flanders everything possible had been done to avoid failure\u00a0... The French army was once more capable of the offensive. It had quickly overcome its depression.\u2014\u200a\nNo German counter-attack was possible because the local divisions had been transferred to Flanders.\nSeptember\u2013October.\nThe 4th Army had held on to the Gheluvelt Plateau in August but its casualties worsened the German manpower shortage. Haig transferred the main offensive effort to the Second Army on 25 August and moved the northern boundary of the Second Army closer to the Ypres\u2013Roulers railway. More heavy artillery was sent to Flanders from the armies further south and placed opposite the Gheluvelt Plateau. Plumer continued the tactical evolution of the Fifth Army during its slow and costly progress in August. After a pause of about three weeks, Plumer intended to capture the plateau in four steps, with six-day intervals to bring forward artillery and supplies. The Second Army attacks were to remain limited and infantry brigade tactics were changed to attack the first objective with a battalion each and the final one with two battalions, the opposite of the Fifth Army practice on 31 July, to adapt to the dispersed defences being encountered between the and the .\nPlumer arranged for the medium and heavy artillery reinforcements reaching Flanders to be added to the creeping bombardment, which had been impossible with the amount of artillery available to the Fifth Army. The tactical changes ensured that more infantry attacked on narrower fronts, to a shallower depth than on 31 July, like the Fifth Army attacks in August. The shorter and quicker advances possible once the ground dried were intended to be consolidated on tactically advantageous ground, especially on any reverse slopes in the area, with the infantry still in contact with the artillery and aircraft, ready to repulse counter-attacks. The faster tempo of operations was intended to add to German difficulties in replacing tired divisions through the railway bottlenecks behind the German front. The pause in British attacks misled some of the German commanders and Albrecht von Thaer, the chief of staff of , wrote that it was \"almost boring\". Kuhl doubted that the offensive had ended but had changed his mind by 13 September; two divisions, thirteen heavy artillery batteries, twelve field batteries, three fighter squadrons and four other units of the were transferred from the 4th Army.\nGerman tactical changes.\nAfter setting objectives distant on 31 July, the British attempted shorter advances of approximately in August but were unable to achieve these lesser objectives in the south of the battlefield, because the rain soaked ground and poor visibility were to the advantage of the defenders. After the dry spell in early September, British advances had been much quicker and the final objective was reached a few hours after dawn, which confounded the German counter-attack divisions. Having crossed of mud, the divisions found the British already dug in, with the German forward battle zone and its weak garrison gone beyond recapture. In August, German front-line divisions had two regiments deployed in the front line, with the third regiment in reserve. The front battalions had needed to be relieved much more frequently than expected due to the power of British attacks, constant artillery-fire and the weather. Replacement units became mixed up with ones holding the front and reserve regiments had failed to intervene quickly, leaving front battalions unsupported until divisions arrived some hours later.\nIn July and August, German counter-attack () divisions had conducted an \"advance to contact during mobile operations\", which had given the Germans several costly defensive successes. After the Battle of the Menin Road Ridge, German tactics were changed. After another defeat on 26 September, the German commanders made more tactical changes to counter the more conservative form of limited attacks adopted by the British. German counter-attacks in September had been \"assaults on reinforced field positions\", due to the restrained nature of British infantry advances. The fine weather in early September had greatly eased British supply difficulties, especially in ammunition and the British made time to establish a defence in depth on captured ground, protected by standing artillery barrages. The British attacked in dry, clear conditions, with more aircraft over the battlefield for counter-attack reconnaissance. It had also been found in 1916 that corps headquarters had become aware of the situation from the reports of aircrew on contact-patrol, where reconnaissance aircraft flew low over the battlefield to map the positions of British troops. Brigade headquarters had been ignorant of events and arrangements were made for the swift transmission of information forwards. Systematic defensive artillery-fire was forfeited by the Germans, due to uncertainty over the position of their infantry, just when the British infantry benefited from the opposite. German counter-attacks were costly failures and on 28 September, Thaer wrote that the experience was \"awful\" and that he did not know what to do.\nLudendorff ordered the (ground holding divisions) to reinforce their front garrisons; all machine-guns, including those of the support and reserve battalions were sent into the forward zone, to form a cordon of four to eight guns every . The were reinforced by the (shock) regiments of divisions, which were moved into the artillery protective line behind the forward battle zone, to counter-attack sooner. The other regiments of the divisions were to be held back and used for a methodical counter-attack () a day or two after and for spoiling attacks as the British reorganised. More tactical changes were ordered on 30 September; operations to increase British infantry losses were to continue and gas bombardments were to be increased, weather permitting. Every effort was to be made to induce the British to reinforce their forward positions with infantry for the German artillery to bombard them. Between 26 September and 3 October, the Germans attacked at least 24 times and Operation High Storm , a (methodical counter-attack), to recapture the area around Zonnebeke was planned for 4 October.\nBattle of the Menin Road Ridge.\nThe British plan for the battle fought from 20 to 25 September, included more emphasis on the use of heavy and medium artillery to destroy German concrete pill-boxes and machine-gun nests, which were more numerous in the battle zones being attacked, than behind the original July front line and to engage in more counter-battery fire. The British had 575 heavy and medium and 720 field guns and howitzers, more than double the quantity of artillery available at the Battle of Pilckem Ridge. Aircraft were to be used for systematic air observation of German troop movements, to avoid the failures of previous battles, where too few aircrews had been burdened with too many duties and had flown in bad weather, which made their difficulties worse.\nOn 20 September, the Allies attacked on a front and by mid-morning had captured most of their objectives, to a depth of about . The Germans made many hasty counter-attacks (), beginning around 3:00\u00a0p.m. until early evening, all of which failed to gain ground or made only a temporary penetration of the new British positions. The German defence had failed to stop a well-prepared attack made in good weather. Minor attacks took place after 20 September, as both sides jockeyed for position and reorganised their defences. A mutually-costly attack by the Germans on 25 September, recaptured pillboxes at the south western end of Polygon Wood. Next day, the German positions near the wood were swept away in the Battle of Polygon Wood.\nGerman counter-attack, 25 September.\nTwo regiments of the German 50th Reserve Division attacked on a front, either side of the Reutelbeek stream, supported by aircraft and 44 field and 20 heavy batteries of artillery, four times the usual amount for a division. The German infantry managed to advance on the flanks, about near the Menin road and north of the Reutelbeek. The infantry were supported by artillery-observation and ground-attack aircraft; a box-barrage was fired behind the British front-line, which isolated the British infantry from reinforcements and ammunition. Return-fire from the 33rd Division and the 15th Australian Brigade of the 5th Australian Division along the southern edge of Polygon Wood to the north, forced the attackers under cover around some of the pillboxes, near Black Watch Corner, at the south-western edge of Polygon Wood. German attempts to reinforce the attacking troops failed, due to British artillery observers isolating the advanced German troops with artillery barrages.\nPlumer ordered the attack due on 26 September to go ahead but reduced the objectives of the 33rd Division. The 98th Brigade was to advance and cover the right flank of the 5th Australian Division and the 100th Brigade was to re-capture the lost ground further south. The 5th Australian Division advance the next day began with uncertainty as to the security of its right flank; the attack of the depleted 98th Brigade was delayed and only managed to reach Black Watch Corner, short of its objectives. Reinforcements moved into the 5th Australian Division area and attacked south-westwards at noon as a silent (without artillery support) frontal attack was made from Black Watch Corner, because British troops were known to be holding out in the area. The attack succeeded by 2:00\u00a0p.m. and later in the afternoon, the 100th Brigade re-took the ground lost north of the Menin road. Casualties in the 33rd Division were so great that it was relieved on 27 September by the 23rd Division, which had only been withdrawn on the night of 24/25 September.\nBattle of Polygon Wood.\nThe Second Army altered its Corps frontages soon after the attack of 20 September, for the next effort (26 September \u2013 3 October) so that each attacking division could be concentrated on a front. Roads and light railways were extended to the new front line, to allow artillery and ammunition to be moved forward. The artillery of VIII Corps and IX Corps on the southern flank, simulated preparations for attacks on Zandvoorde and Warneton. At 5.50\u00a0a.m. on 26 September, five layers of barrage fired by British artillery and machine-guns began. Dust and smoke thickened the morning mist and the infantry advanced using compass bearings. Each of the three German ground-holding divisions attacked on 26 September had an division in support, twice the ratio of 20 September. No ground captured by the British was lost and German counter-attacks managed only to reach ground to which survivors of the front-line divisions had retired.\nOctober\u2013November.\nGerman counter-attacks, 30 September \u2013 4 October.\nAt 4:00\u00a0a.m. on 30 September, a thick mist covered the ground and at 4:30\u00a0a.m. German artillery began a bombardment between the Menin road and the Reutelbeek. At 5:15\u00a0a.m., German troops emerged from the mist on an front. The attack was supported by flame-throwers and German infantry throwing smoke- and hand-grenades. The British replied with small-arms fire and bombs, forcing the Germans to retreat in confusion but a post was lost south of the Menin road, then retaken by an immediate counter-attack. SOS rockets were not seen in the mist and the British artillery remained silent. The Germans were repulsed again at 6:00\u00a0a.m. but German artillery-fire continued during the day.\nOn 1 October, at 5:00\u00a0a.m., a German hurricane bombardment began from the Reutelbeek north to Polygon Wood and Black Watch Corner; by coincidence a Second Army practice barrage began at 5:15\u00a0a.m. The British front line was cut off and German infantry attacked in three waves at 5:30\u00a0a.m. Two determined German attacks were repulsed south of Cameron Covert, then at 7:00\u00a0p.m. German troops massed near the Menin road. The German attack was defeated by small-arms fire and the British artillery, whose observers had seen the SOS rockets. The British were forced out of Cameron Covert and counter-attacked but a German attack began at the same time and the British were repulsed. Another German attack failed and the German troops dug in behind some old German barbed wire; after dark, more German attacks around Cameron Covert failed. North of the covert near Polygon Wood, deep mud smothered German shells before they exploded but they still caused many casualties. Communication with the rear was lost and the Germans attacked all day but British SOS rockets remained visible and the attacks took no ground; after dark German attacks were repulsed by another three SOS barrages.\n (Operation High Storm) was planned by to recapture the Tokio Spur from Zonnebeke south to Molenaarelsthoek at the eastern edge of Polygon Wood on 3 October. The attacking infantry from the 45th Reserve and the 4th Guard divisions were commanded by Major Kurt von Schleinitz in the north and Lieutenant-Colonel Rave in the south. After the costly failure of the methodical counter-attack () on 1 October, the attack was put back to 4 October, rehearsals taking place from 2 to 3 October. On the night of 3/4 October, the German commanders had doubts about the attack but decided to press on, warning the artillery to be ready to commence defensive bombardments. A contact patrol aircraft was arranged to fly over the area at 7:30 a.m.\nBattle of Broodseinde.\nOn 4 October, the British began the Battle of Broodseinde to complete the capture of the Gheluvelt Plateau and occupy Broodseinde Ridge. By coincidence, the Germans sought to recapture their defences around Zonnebeke with a at the same time. The rains returned on the first day of the battle and became torrential by the time the British advanced. The British attacked along a front and as the I Anzac Corps divisions began their advance towards Broodseinde Ridge, men were seen rising from shell-holes in no man's land and more German troops were found concealed in shell-craters. Most of the German troops of the 45th Reserve Division were overrun or retreated through the British barrage, then the Australians attacked pillboxes one-by-one and captured the village of Zonnebeke north of the ridge. When the British barrage began on Broodseinde Ridge, the Keiberg Spur and Waterdamhoek, some of the German forward headquarters staffs only realised that they were under attack when British and Australian troops appeared.\nAs news arrived of the great success of the attack, the head of GHQ Intelligence went to the Second Army headquarters to discuss exploitation. Plumer declined the suggestion, as eight fresh German divisions were behind the battlefield, with another six beyond them. Later in the day, Plumer had second thoughts and ordered I Anzac Corps to push on to the Keiberg spur, with support from the II Anzac Corps. The II Anzac Corps commander wanted to advance north-east towards Passchendaele village but the I Anzac Corps commander preferred to wait until artillery had been brought up and supply routes improved. The X Corps commander proposed an attack northward from In de Ster into the southern flank of the Germans opposite I Anzac Corps. The 7th Division commander objected, due to uncertainty about the situation and the many casualties suffered by the 21st Division on the right flank and Plumer changed his mind again. During the morning, Gough had told the Fifth Army corps commanders to push on but when reports arrived of a repulse at 19 Metre Hill, the order was cancelled.\nGerman tactical changes.\nOn 7 October, the 4th Army again dispersed its troops in the front defence zone. Reserve battalions moved back behind the artillery protective line and the divisions were organised to intervene as swiftly as possible once an attack commenced, despite the risk from British artillery-fire. Counter-battery fire to suppress the British artillery was to be increased, to protect the divisions as they advanced. All of the German divisions holding front zones were relieved and an extra division brought forward, because the British advances had lengthened the front line. Without the divisions necessary for a counter-offensive south of the Gheluvelt Plateau towards Kemmel Hill, Rupprecht began to plan for a slow withdrawal from the Ypres Salient, even at the risk of uncovering German positions further north and on the Belgian coast.\nBattle of Poelcappelle.\nThe French First Army and British Second and Fifth armies attacked on 9 October, on a front, from south of Broodseinde to St Jansbeek, to advance half of the distance from Broodseinde ridge to Passchendaele, on the main front, which led to many casualties on both sides. Advances in the north of the attack front were retained by British and French troops but most of the ground taken in front of Passchendaele and on the Becelaere and Gheluvelt spurs was lost to German counter-attacks. General William Birdwood later wrote that the return of heavy rain and mud sloughs was the main cause of the failure to hold captured ground. Kuhl concluded that the fighting strained German fighting power to the limit but that the German forces managed to prevent a breakthrough, although it was becoming much harder to replace losses.\nFirst Battle of Passchendaele.\nThe First Battle of Passchendaele on 12 October 1917 was another Allied attempt to gain ground around Passchendaele. Heavy rain and mud again made movement difficult and little artillery could be brought closer to the front. Allied troops were exhausted and morale had fallen. After a modest British advance, German counter-attacks recovered most of the ground lost opposite Passchendaele, except for an area on the right of the Wallemolen spur. North of Poelcappelle, the XIV Corps of the Fifth Army advanced along the Broembeek some way up the Watervlietbeek and the Stadenrevebeek streams and the Guards Division captured the west end of the Vijwegen spur, gaining observation over the south end of Houthulst Forest. There were 13,000 Allied casualties, including 2,735 New Zealanders, 845 of whom were dead or stranded in the mud of no-man's-land; it was one of the worst days in New Zealand military history.\nAt a conference on 13 October, Haig and the army commanders agreed that attacks would stop until the weather improved and roads could be extended, to carry more artillery and ammunition forward. The offensive was to continue, to reach a suitable line for the winter and to keep German attention on Flanders, with a French attack due on 23 October and the Third Army operation south of Arras scheduled for mid-November. The battle was also costly for the Germans, who lost more than 1,000 prisoners. The German 195th Division at Passchendaele suffered 3,325 casualties from 9 to 12 October and had to be relieved by the 238th Division. Ludendorff became optimistic that Passchendaele Ridge could be held and ordered the 4th Army to stand fast. On 18 October, Kuhl advocated a retreat as far to the east as possible; Sixt von Armin and Lo\u00dfberg wanted to hold on, because the ground beyond the Passchendaele watershed was untenable, even in winter.\nAction of 22 October.\nOn 22 October the 18th (Eastern) Division of XVIII Corps attacked the east end of Poelcappelle as XIV Corps to the north attacked with the 34th Division between the Watervlietbeek and Broenbeek streams and the 35th Division northwards into Houthulst Forest. The attack was supported by a regiment of the French 1st Division on the left flank of the 35th Division and was intended to obstruct a possible German counter-attack on the left flank of the Canadian Corps as it attacked Passchendaele and the ridge. The artillery of the Second and Fifth armies conducted a bombardment to simulate a general attack as a deception. Poelcappelle was captured but the attack at the junction between the 34th and 35th divisions was repulsed. German counter-attacks pushed back the 35th Division in the centre but the French attack captured all its objectives. Attacking on ground cut up by bombardments and soaked by rain, the British had struggled to advance in places and lost the ability to move quickly to outflank pillboxes. The 35th Division reached the fringe of Houthulst Forest but was outflanked and pushed back in places. German counter-attacks made after 22 October, were at an equal disadvantage and were costly failures. The German 4th Army was prevented from transferring troops away from the Fifth Army and from concentrating its artillery-fire on the Canadians as they prepared for the Second Battle of Passchendaele (26 October \u2013 10 November 1917).\nBattle of La Malmaison.\nAfter numerous requests from Haig, Petain began the Battle of La Malmaison, a long-delayed French attack on the Chemin des Dames, by the Sixth Army (General Paul Maistre). The artillery preparation started on 17 October and on 23 October, the German defenders were swiftly defeated and the French advanced up to , capturing the village and fort of La Malmaison, gaining control of the Chemin des Dames ridge. The Germans lost 38,000 men killed or missing and 12,000 prisoners, along with 200 guns and 720 machine-guns, against 14,000 French casualties, fewer than a third of the German total. The Germans had to withdraw from their remaining positions on the Chemin des Dames to the north of the Ailette Valley early in November. Haig was pleased with the French success but regretted the delay, which had lessened its effect on the Flanders operations.\nSecond Battle of Passchendaele.\nThe British Fifth Army undertook minor operations from 20 to 22 October, to maintain pressure on the Germans and support the French attack at La Malmaison, while the Canadian Corps prepared for a series of attacks from 26 October to 10 November. The four divisions of the Canadian Corps had been transferred to the Ypres Salient from Lens, to capture Passchendaele and the ridge. The Canadians relieved the II Anzac Corps on 18 October and found that the front line was mostly the same as that occupied by the 1st Canadian Division back in April 1915. The Canadian operation was to be three limited attacks, on 26 October, 30 October and 6 November. On 26 October, the 3rd Canadian Division captured its objective at Wolf Copse, then swung back its northern flank to link with the adjacent division of the Fifth Army. The 4th Canadian Division captured its objectives but was forced slowly to retire from Decline Copse by German counter-attacks and communication failures between the Canadians and the Australian units to the south. \nThe second stage began on 30 October, to complete the previous stage and gain a base for the final assault on Passchendaele. The attackers on the southern flank quickly captured Crest Farm and sent patrols beyond the final objective into Passchendaele. The attack on the northern flank again met with exceptional German resistance. The 3rd Canadian Division captured Vapour Farm on the corps boundary, Furst Farm to the west of Meetcheele and the crossroads at Meetcheele but remained short of its objective. During a seven-day pause, the Second Army took over another section of the Fifth Army front adjoining the Canadian Corps. Three rainless days from 3 to 5 November eased preparation for the next stage, which began on the morning of 6 November, with the 1st Canadian Division and the 2nd Canadian Division. In less than three hours, many units reached their final objectives and Passchendaele was captured. The Canadian Corps attacked on 10 November to gain control of the remaining high ground north of the village near Hill 52.\nDecember.\nNight action of 1/2 December 1917.\nOn 18 November the VIII Corps on the right and II Corps on the left (northern) side of the Passchendaele Salient took over from the Canadian Corps. The area was subjected to constant German artillery bombardments and its vulnerability to attack led to a suggestion by Brigadier C. F. Aspinall, that either the British should retire to the west side of the Gheluvelt Plateau or advance to broaden the salient towards Westroosebeke. Expanding the salient would make the troops in it less vulnerable to German artillery-fire and provide a better jumping off line for a resumption of the offensive in the spring of 1918. The British attacked towards Westroozebeke on the night of 1/2 December but the plan to mislead the Germans by not bombarding the German defences until eight minutes after the infantry began their advance came undone. The noise of the British assembly and the difficulty of moving across muddy and waterlogged ground had also alerted the Germans. In the moonlight, the Germans had seen the British troops when they were still away. Some ground was captured and about 150 prisoners were taken but the attack on the redoubts failed and observation over the heads of the valleys on the east and north sides of the ridge was not achieved.\nAction on the Polderhoek Spur.\nThe attack on the Polderhoek Spur on 3 December 1917, was a local operation by the British Fourth Army (renamed from the Second Army on 8 November). Two battalions of the 2nd New Zealand Brigade of the New Zealand Division attacked the low ridge, from which German observers could view the area from Cameron Covert to the north and the Menin road to the south-west. A New Zealand advance of on a front, would shield the area north of the Reutelbeek stream from German observers on the Gheluvelt spur. Heavy artillery bombarded the ruins of Polderhoek Ch\u00e2teau and the pillboxes in the grounds to mislead the defenders and the attack was made in daylight as a ruse to surprise the Germans, who would be under cover sheltering from the routine bombardments. Smoke and gas bombardments on the Gheluvelt and Becelaere spurs on the flanks and the infantry attack began at the same time as the \"routine\" bombardment. The ruse failed, some British artillery-fire dropped short on the New Zealanders and the Germans engaged the attackers with small-arms fire from Polderhoek Spur and Gheluvelt ridge. A strong west wind ruined the smoke screens and the British artillery failed to suppress the German machine-guns. New Zealand machine-gunners repulsed a counter-attack but the New Zealand infantry were short of the first objective; another attempt after dark was cancelled because of the full moon and the arrival of German reinforcements.\nAftermath.\nAnalysis.\nIn a German General Staff publication, it was written that \"Germany had been brought near to certain destruction () by the Flanders battle of 1917\". In his \"Memoirs\" of 1938, Lloyd George wrote, \"Passchendaele was indeed one of the greatest disasters of the war\u00a0... No soldier of any intelligence now defends this senseless campaign\u00a0...\". In 1939, G. C. Wynne wrote that the British had eventually reached Passchendaele Ridge and captured but beyond them were and . The German submarine bases on the coast had not been captured but the objective of diverting the Germans from the French further south, while they recovered from the Nivelle Offensive in April, had succeeded. In 1997, Paddy Griffith wrote that the \"bite and hold\" system kept moving until November, because the BEF had developed a workable system of offensive tactics, against which the Germans ultimately had no answer. A decade later, Jack Sheldon wrote that relative casualty figures were irrelevant, because the German army could not afford the losses or to lose the initiative by being compelled to fight another defensive battle on ground of the Allies' choosing. The Third Battle of Ypres had pinned the German army to Flanders and caused unsustainable casualties.\nIn 2018, Jonathan Boff wrote that after the war the official historians, many of whom were former staff officers, wrote of the tactical changes after 26 September and their scrapping after the Battle of Broodseinde on 4 October, as the work of Lo\u00dfberg. By blaming an individual, the rest of the German commanders were exculpated, which gave a false impression that OHL operated in a rational manner, when Ludendorff imposed another defensive scheme on 7 October. Boff wrote that this narrative was facile and that it avoided the problem faced by the Germans in late 1917. OHL had issued orders to change tactics again days before Lo\u00dfberg was blamed for giving new orders to the 4th Army. Boff also doubted that all of the divisions in Flanders could act on top-down changes. The 119th Division was in the front line from 11 August to 18 October and replied that new tactics were difficult to implement due to lack of training. The tempo of British attacks and the effect of attrition meant that although six divisions were sent to the 4th Army by 10 October, they were either novice units deficient in training or veteran formations with low morale after earlier defeats; good divisions had been diluted with too many replacements. Boff wrote that the Germans consciously sought tactical changes for an operational dilemma for want of an alternative. On 2 October, Rupprecht had ordered the 4th Army HQ to avoid over-centralising command, only to find that Lo\u00dfberg had issued an artillery plan detailing the deployment of individual batteries.\nAt a British conference on 13 October, the Third Army (General Julian Byng) scheme for an attack in mid-November was discussed. Byng wanted the operations at Ypres continued, to hold German troops in Flanders. The Battle of Cambrai began on 20 November and the British breached the first two parts of the Hindenburg Line, in the first successful mass use of tanks in a combined arms operation. The experience of the failure to contain the British attacks at Ypres and the drastic reduction in areas of the western front that could be considered \"quiet\" after the tank and artillery surprise at Cambrai, left the OHL with little choice but to return to a strategy of decisive victory in 1918. On 24 October, the Austro-German 14th Army ( Otto von Below), attacked the Italian Second Army on the Isonzo at the Battle of Caporetto and in 18 days, inflicted casualties of 650,000 men and 3,000 guns. In fear that Italy might be put out of the war, the French and British governments offered reinforcements. British and French troops were swiftly moved from 10 November to 12 December but the diversion of resources from the BEF forced Haig to conclude the Third Battle of Ypres short of Westrozebeke; the last substantial British attack took place on 10 November.\nCasualties.\nVarious casualty figures have been published for the Third Battle of Ypres, sometimes with acrimony; the highest estimates for British and German casualties appear to be discredited but the British claim to have taken 24,065 prisoners has not been disputed. In 1940, C. R. M. F. Cruttwell recorded 300,000 British casualties and 400,000 German. In the History of the Great War volume \"Military Operations...\" published in 1948, James Edmonds put British casualties at 244,897 and wrote that equivalent German figures were not available, estimating German losses at 400,000. A. J. P. Taylor wrote in 1972 that no one believed Edmonds' \"farcical calculations\". Taylor put British wounded and killed at 300,000 and German losses at 200,000, \"a proportion slightly better than the Somme\". In 2007, Jack Sheldon wrote that although German casualties from 1 June to 10 November were 217,194, a figure available in Volume III of the (Medical Report, 1934), Edmonds may not have included these data as they did not fit his case, using the phrases \"creative accounting\" and \"cavalier handling of the facts\". Sheldon wrote that the German casualties could only be brought up to 399,590 by including the 182,396 soldiers who were sick or treated at regimental aid posts for \"minor cuts and wounds\" but \"not struck off unit strength\"; Sheldon wrote \"it is hard to see any merit\" in doing so.\nLeon Wolff, writing in 1958, gave German casualties as 270,713 and British casualties as 448,688. Wolff's British figure was refuted by John Terraine in a 1977 publication. Despite writing that 448,614 British casualties was the BEF total for the second half of 1917, Wolff had neglected to deduct 75,681 casualties for the Battle of Cambrai, given in the \"Official Statistics\" from which he quoted or \"normal wastage\", averaging 35,000 per month in \"quiet\" periods. In 1959, Cyril Falls estimated 240,000 British, 8,525 French and 260,000 German casualties. In his 1963 biography of Haig, Terraine accepted Edmonds' figure of 244,897 British casualties and agreed that German losses were at least equal to and probably greater than British, owing to the strength of British artillery and the high number of German counterattacks; he did not accept Edmonds' calculation that German losses were as high as 400,000. In his 1977 work, Terraine wrote that the German figure ought to be increased because their statistics were incomplete and because their data omitted some lightly wounded men, who would have been included under British casualty criteria, revising the German figure by twenty per cent, which made German casualties 260,400. Prior and Wilson, in 1997, gave British losses of 275,000 and German casualties at just under 200,000. In 1997, Heinz Hagenl\u00fccke gave c.\u2009217,000 German casualties. Gary Sheffield wrote in 2002 that Richard Holmes guessed that both sides suffered 260,000 casualties, which seemed about right to him.\nSubsequent operations.\nWinter 1917\u20131918.\nThe area to the east and south of the ruins of Passchendaele village was held by posts, those to the east being fairly habitable, unlike the southern ones; from Passchendaele as far back as Potijze, the ground was far worse. Each brigade spent four days in the front line, four in support and four in reserve. The area was quiet apart from artillery-fire and in December the weather turned cold and snowy, which entailed a great effort to prevent trench foot. In January, spells of freezing cold were followed by warmer periods, one beginning on 15 January with torrential rain and gale-force winds, washing away plank roads and duckboard tracks. Conditions in the salient improved with the completion of transport routes and the refurbishment of German pillboxes. Both sides raided and the British used night machine-gun fire and artillery barrages to great effect. On the evening of 3 March 1918, two companies of the 8th Division raided Teal Cottage, supported by a smoke and shrapnel barrage, killed many of the garrison and took six prisoners for one man wounded. A German attack on 11 March was repulsed; after that the Germans made no more attacks, keeping up frequent artillery bombardments and machine-gun fire instead. When the German armies further south began the Spring Offensive on 21 March 1918, \"good\" divisions in Flanders were sent south; the 29th Division was withdrawn on 9 April and transferred to the Lys.\nRetreat, 1918.\nOn 23 March, Haig ordered Plumer to make contingency plans to shorten the line and release troops for the other armies. Worn-out divisions from the south had been sent to Flanders to recuperate closer to the coast. On 11 April, Plumer authorised a withdrawal of the southern flank of the Second Army. On 12 April, the VIII Corps HQ ordered the infantry retirement to begin that night and the 59th Division was replaced by part of the 41st Division and transferred south. The II Corps had begun to withdraw its artillery at the same time as VIII Corps, on the night of 11/12 April and ordered the 36th (Ulster) and 30th divisions to conform to the VIII Corps retirement, which was complete by 13 April, with no German interference. On 13 April, Plumer agreed to a retirement in the south side of the salient to a line from Mt Kemmel to Voormezeele [ south of Ypres], White Ch\u00e2teau [ east of Ypres] and Pilckem Ridge. The 4th Army diary recorded that the withdrawal was discovered at 4:40\u00a0a.m. Next day, at the Battle of Merckem, the Germans attacked from Houthulst Forest, north-east of Ypres and captured Kippe but were forced out by Belgian counter-attacks, supported by the II Corps artillery. On the afternoon of 27 April, the south end of the Second Army outpost line was driven in near Voormezeele and another British outpost line was established north-east of the village.\nCommemoration.\nThe Menin Gate Memorial to the Missing commemorates those of all Commonwealth nations (except New Zealand and Newfoundland) who died in the Ypres Salient and have no known grave. In the case of the United Kingdom only casualties before 16 August 1917 are commemorated on the memorial. United Kingdom and New Zealand servicemen who died after that date are named on the memorial at Tyne Cot Cemetery. There is a New Zealand Memorial marking where New Zealand troops fought at Gravenstafel Ridge on 4 October, located on Roeselarestraat. There are numerous tributes and memorials in Australia and New Zealand to Anzac soldiers who died in the battle, including plaques at the Christchurch and Dunedin railway stations. The Canadian Corps' participation in the Second Battle of Passchendaele is commemorated with the Passchendaele Memorial at site of the Crest Farm on the south-west fringe of Passchendaele village.\nOne of the newest monuments to be dedicated to the fighting contribution of a group is the Celtic Cross memorial, commemorating the Scottish contribution to the fighting in Flanders during the Great War. This memorial is on Frezenberg Ridge where the 9th (Scottish) Division and the 15th (Scottish) Division fought during the Third Battle of Ypres. The monument was dedicated by Linda Fabiani, the Minister for Europe of the Scottish Parliament, during the late summer of 2007, the 90th anniversary of the battle. In July 2017 a two-day event was organised in Ypres to mark the centenary of the battle. Members of the British royal family and Prime Minister Theresa May joined the ceremonies, which started in the evening of 30 July with the service at Menin Gate, followed by ceremonies at the Market Square. On the following day, a ceremony was held at Tyne Cot cemetery, headed by the Prince of Wales.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nJournals\nNewspapers\nTheses\nWebsites"}
{"id": "44456", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44456", "title": "Cosmonaut", "text": ""}
{"id": "44457", "revid": "11554556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44457", "title": "Green Card (film)", "text": "1990 film by Peter Weir\nGreen Card is a 1990 American romantic comedy film written, produced, and directed by Peter Weir and starring G\u00e9rard Depardieu and Andie MacDowell.\nThe screenplay focuses on an American woman who enters into a marriage of convenience with a Frenchman so he can obtain a green card and remain in the United States.\nDepardieu won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor. The film won the Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy, and was nominated for an Oscar for Best Original Screenplay.\nPlot.\nBront\u00eb Parrish, a horticulturalist and an environmentalist, enters into a Green Card marriage with Georges Faur\u00e9, an undocumented immigrant from France, so he may stay in the United States. In turn, Bront\u00eb uses her fake marriage credentials to rent the apartment of her dreams. After moving in, and in order to explain her spouse's absence, she tells the doorman and neighbors he is conducting musical research in Africa.\nContacted by the Immigration and Naturalization Service for an interview to determine if her marriage is legitimate, Bront\u00eb tracks down Georges, who is working as a waiter. Although the two have little time to get their facts straight, the agents who question them appear to be satisfied with their answers. But when one of the agents asks to use the bathroom and Georges directs him to a closet, their suspicions are aroused, and they schedule a full, formal interview to be conducted two days later at their office.\nAdvised by her attorney that she could face criminal charges if their deception is uncovered, Bront\u00eb reluctantly invites Georges to move in with her. They try to learn about each other's past and their quirks and habits but quickly find they can barely tolerate each other. Georges is a fiery-tempered selfish slob and smoker who prefers red meat to vegetarian food, while Bront\u00eb is shown as uptight and cold, obsessed with her plants and wrapped up in environmental issues.\nMeanwhile, the parents of Lauren Adler, Bront\u00eb's best friend, plan to leave New York City and consider donating their trees and plants to the Green Guerrillas, a group overseeing the development of inner-city gardens. Bront\u00eb is invited to a dinner party to discuss the issue and discovers Georges is there, having been asked by Lauren. He so impresses the Adlers with an impressionistic piano piece, set to a poem about children and trees, that they agree to donate their plants to the Green Guerrillas. When Bront\u00eb's parents later arrive at the apartment for an unannounced visit, Georges pretends to be the handyman.\nWhen Bront\u00eb's boyfriend Phil returns from a trip, Georges reveals that he is married to her. Bront\u00eb angrily kicks Georges out, but the pair nonetheless appear at the immigration interview the next day. The two are questioned separately, and when Georges is caught out by the interviewer, he confesses the marriage is a sham. He agrees to deportation but insists Bront\u00eb not be charged for her role in the charade. He lets Bront\u00eb believe the interview was a success and the two go their separate ways.\nA few days later, Georges invites Bront\u00eb to join him at the cafe where they first met. When she notices one of the immigration agents is waiting outside, she realizes Georges is being deported and tries to stop him from being sent away as they've both realized they are in love with each other.\nGeorges promises to write every day asking the same question \"When are you coming, \"ch\u00e9rie\"?\", a line he had also used when describing their fabricated courtship to the INS. Just before he leaves with the immigration agent, Bront\u00eb asks if he still has their wedding rings; he pulls them out of his pocket and they quickly exchange rings again, laughing and kissing. Then Georges departs with the agent as Bront\u00eb watches from the sidewalk.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* G\u00e9rard Depardieu as Georges Faur\u00e9\nProduction.\nPeter Weir wrote the script, an original, specifically as a vehicle for G\u00e9rard Depardieu to introduce him to a wide English-speaking audience. The film had a similar theme and plot to \"The Paper Wedding\" (French: \"Les noces de papier\"), a 1989 made for television Canadian film directed by Michel Brault, which was subsequently entered into the 40th Berlin International Film Festival.\nPartial funding for the film was provided by the Film Finance Corporation Australia and Union G\u00e9n\u00e9rale Cin\u00e9matographique. Although the film was set in America and did not feature Australian actors, the fact it was written, directed, filmed, designed and edited by an Australian enabled it to receive funding from the Australian government. This was $3.8 million from the FFC.\nMusic.\nOriginal soundtrack.\n\"Green Card: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack\" was released on 22 January 1991 on Var\u00e8se Sarabande.\nSome of the music like \"River\", \"Watermark\", and \"Storms in Africa\" by Enya, \"Holdin' On\" by Soul II Soul, \"Oyin Momo Ado\" by Babatunde Olatunji and \"Surfin' Safari\" by The Beach Boys are heard in the movie, but not included in the soundtrack.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes the film holds a 59% approval rating based on 32 reviews, with an average rating of 5.5/10. On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"mixed or average\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nJanet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" called it \"as breezily escapist as a film this facile can be\" and added, \"Ms. MacDowell ... has a lovely, demure ease that makes George's appreciative gaze quite understandable. Mr. Depardieu, in the role that gets him into a New York Yankees cap, proves that he is nothing if not a sport ... He comes to life most fully when he lapses into French or is otherwise momentarily freed from the story's constraints.\" Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" observed the film \"is not blindingly brilliant, and is not an example of the very best work of the director who made \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" or the actor who starred in \"Cyrano de Bergerac\". But it is a sound, entertaining work of craftsmanship, a love story between two people whose meet is not as cute as it might have been.\"\nPeter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" called the film a \"captivating romantic bonbon\" and added, \"Don't look for the originality and grit that distinguished Weir's Australian films \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" and \"Gallipoli\", \"Green Card\" has all the heft of a potato chip. But Depardieu's charm recognizes no language barriers, and MacDowell, the revelation of \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\", proves a fine, sexy foil.\" Rita Kempley of \"The Washington Post\" said, \"Like \"Ghost\" and \"Pretty Woman\", this romance is blissfully dependent on our staying good and starry-eyed, seduced by the charisma of the leads. And we do, despite its lackadaisical pace and disappointing ending.\"\n\"Variety\" said, \"Although a thin premise endangers its credibility at times, \"Green Card\" is a genial, nicely played romance.\" \"Time Out London\" stated \"Weir's first romantic comedy boasts a central relationship which is tentative and hopeful, a mood beautifully realised by Depardieu (venturing into new territory with a major English-speaking role). Complemented by the refined MacDowell, his gracious, generous performance is never dominating, and their exchanges offer unexpected pleasures. In terms of the genre's conventions, Weir likens this film to 'a light meal.' It's one to savour.\" Channel 4 said, \"Weir's film has its fair share of cute moments as the opposites slowly begin to attract, but this is largely over rated stuff, which proved curiously popular with critics on its release. Depardieu does his obnoxious-yet-strangely-lovable act with ease; however, the romantic comedy fixture MacDowell is less convincing.\"\nBox office.\n\"Green Card\" grossed $29.9 million in the United States and Canada. In Australia, it was the highest-grossing local film with a gross of A$10,585,060 (US$8 million).\nHome media release.\nTouchstone released the film on VHS on 12 June 1991 and Touchstone Home Entertainment released the film on Region 1 DVD on 4 March 2003. It is in anamorphic widescreen format with audio tracks in English and French.\n\"Green Card\" was released on DVD by Umbrella Entertainment in February 2004. The DVD is compatible with all region codes and includes special features such as the original theatrical trailer, Umbrella Entertainment trailers, and interviews with Peter Weir, G\u00e9rard Depardieu and Andie MacDowell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44458", "revid": "44422690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44458", "title": "Peter Weir", "text": "Australian film director (born 1944)\nPeter Lindsay Weir ( ; born 21 August 1944) is a retired Australian film director. He is known for directing films crossing various genres over forty years with films such as \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" (1975), \"Gallipoli\" (1981), \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" (1982), \"Witness\" (1985), \"Dead Poets Society\" (1989), \"Fearless\" (1993), \"The Truman Show\" (1998), \"\" (2003), and \"The Way Back\" (2010). He has received six Academy Award nominations. In 2022, he was awarded the Academy Honorary Award for his lifetime achievement career. In 2024, he received an honorary life-time achievement award at the Venice Film Festival (Golden Lion).\nEarly in his career as a director, Weir was a leading figure in the Australian New Wave cinema movement (1970\u20131990). Weir made his feature film debut with \"Homesdale\" (1971), and continued with the mystery drama \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" (1975), the supernatural thriller \"The Last Wave\" (1977) and the historical drama \"Gallipoli\" (1981). Weir gained tremendous success with the multinational production \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" (1982).\nAfter the success of \"The Year of Living Dangerously\", Weir directed a diverse group of American and international films covering most genres\u2014many of them major box office hits\u2014including Academy Award\u2013nominated films such as the thriller \"Witness\" (1985), the drama \"Dead Poets Society\" (1989), the romantic comedy \"Green Card\" (1990), the social science fiction comedy-drama \"The Truman Show\" (1998) and the epic historical drama \"\" (2003). His final feature before his retirement was \"The Way Back\" (2010).\nEarly life and education.\nPeter Lindsay Weir was born in Sydney, in 1944, the son of Peggy (n\u00e9e Barnsley Sutton) and Lindsay Weir, a real estate agent. Weir attended The Scots College and Vaucluse Boys High School before studying arts and law at the University of Sydney. His interest in film was sparked by him meeting fellow students, including Phillip Noyce and the future members of the Sydney filmmaking collective Ubu Films.\nCareer.\n1960s.\nAfter leaving university in the mid-1960s, he joined Sydney television station ATN-7, where he worked as a production assistant on the groundbreaking satirical comedy program \"The Mavis Bramston Show\". During this period, using station facilities, Weir made his first two experimental short films, \"Count Vim's Last Exercise\" and \"The Life and Flight of Reverend Buck Shotte\".\nIn 1969, the founders of Producers Authors Composers and Talent (now PACT Centre for Emerging Artists) attended a Sydney University Architecture Revue, with sets by Geoffrey Atherden and Grahame Bond. They invited Bond, Atherden, Weir, and Weir's friend, composer Peter Best, a chance to do a show at the National Art School. Sir Robert Helpmann saw the show and took it to the Adelaide Festival. Soon afterward Weir and Best were commissioned to write a Christmas special TV show for ABC Television titled \"Man on a Green Bike\".\n1970s.\nWeir took a position with the Commonwealth Film Unit (later renamed Film Australia), for which he made several documentaries, as well as one fiction film, a section of the three-part, three-director feature film \"3 to Go\" (1970), which won an AFI award. Another notable film in this period was the short rock music performance film \"Three Directions in Australian Pop Music\" (1972), which featured in-concert colour footage of three of the most significant Melbourne rock acts of the period, Spectrum, The Captain Matchbox Whoopee Band, and Wendy Saddington. Weir's last major work for the CFU concerned an underprivileged outer Sydney suburb, \"Whatever Happened to Green Valley\" (1973); here, residents were invited to make their own film segments.\nWeir made his first major independent film, the short feature \"Homesdale\" (1971), an offbeat black comedy. It co-starred rising young actress Kate Fitzpatrick and musician and comedian Grahame Bond, who came to fame in 1972 as the star of \"The Aunty Jack Show\"; Weir also played a small role, but this was to be his last significant screen appearance.\nWeir's first full-length feature film was the underground cult classic, \"The Cars That Ate Paris\" (1974), a low-budget black comedy about the inhabitants of a small country town who deliberately cause fatal car crashes and live off the proceeds. It was a minor success in cinemas but proved very popular on the then-thriving drive-in circuit. The plot had been inspired by a press report Weir had read about two young English women who had vanished while on a driving holiday in France. With this film, along with the earlier \"Homesdale\", Weir set the basic thematic pattern which has persisted throughout his career: nearly all his feature films deal with people who face some form of crisis after finding themselves isolated from society in some way \u2013 either physically (\"Witness\", \"The Mosquito Coast\", \"The Truman Show\", \"Master and Commander\"), socially/culturally (\"Picnic at Hanging Rock\", \"The Last Wave\", \"Dead Poets Society\", \"Green Card\"), or psychologically (\"Fearless\").\nWeir's major breakthrough in Australia and internationally was the lush, atmospheric period mystery \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" (1975), made with substantial backing from the state-funded South Australian Film Corporation and filmed on location in South Australia and rural Victoria. Based on the novel by Joan Lindsay and set at the turn of the 20th century, the film relates the purportedly \"true\" story of a group of students from an exclusive girls' school who mysteriously vanish from a school picnic on Valentine's Day 1900. Widely credited as a key work in the \"Australian film renaissance\" of the mid-1970s, \"Picnic\" was the first Australian film of its era to gain both critical praise and be given substantial international theatrical releases. It also helped launch the career of internationally renowned Australian cinematographer Russell Boyd. It was widely acclaimed by critics, many of whom praised it as a welcome antidote to the so-called \"ocker film\" genre, typified by \"The Adventures of Barry McKenzie\" and \"Alvin Purple\".\nWeir's next film, \"The Last Wave\" (1977), was a supernatural thriller about a man who begins to experience terrifying visions of an impending natural disaster. It starred American actor Richard Chamberlain, who was well known to Australian and world audiences as the eponymous physician in the popular \"Dr. Kildare\" TV series. He later starred in the major series \"The Thorn Birds\", set in Australia. \"The Last Wave\" was a pensive, ambivalent work that expanded on themes from \"Picnic\", exploring the interactions between the native Aboriginal and European cultures. It co-starred the Aboriginal actor David Gulpilil, whose performance won the Golden Ibex (Oscar equivalent) at the Tehran International Festival in 1977, but it was only a moderate commercial success at the time.\nBetween \"The Last Wave\" and his next feature, Weir wrote and directed the offbeat low-budget telemovie \"The Plumber\" (1979). It starred Australian actors Judy Morris and Ivar Kants and was filmed in three weeks. Inspired by an account told to him by friends, it is a black comedy about a woman whose life is disrupted by a subtly menacing plumber.\n1980s.\nWeir scored a major Australian hit and further international praise with his next film, the historical adventure-drama \"Gallipoli\" (1981). Scripted by the Australian playwright David Williamson, it is regarded as classic Australian cinema. \"Gallipoli\" was instrumental in making Mel Gibson (\"Mad Max\") into a major star, although his co-star Mark Lee, who also received high praise for his role, has made relatively few screen appearances since.\nThe climax of Weir's early career was the $6\u00a0million multi-national production \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" (1982), again starring Gibson, playing opposite top Hollywood female lead Sigourney Weaver in a story about journalistic loyalty, idealism, love and ambition in the turmoil of Sukarno's Indonesia of 1965. It was an adaptation of the novel by Christopher Koch, which was based in part on the experiences of Koch's journalist brother Philip, the ABC's Jakarta correspondent and one of the few western journalists in the city during the 1965 attempted coup. The film also won Linda Hunt (who played a man in the film) an Oscar for Best Actress in a Supporting Role. The film was again produced by Hal and Jim McElroy, who had also produced Weir's first three films, \"The Cars That Ate Paris\", \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" and \"The Last Wave\".\nWeir's first American film was the successful thriller \"Witness\" (1985), the first of two films he made with Harrison Ford, about a boy who sees the murder of an undercover police officer by corrupt coworkers and has to be hidden in his Amish community to protect him. Weir directed Ford in his only performance to receive an Academy Award nomination, while child star Lukas Haas also received wide praise for his debut film performance. \"Witness\" also earned Weir his first Academy Award nomination as Best Director, and was his first of several films to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture\u2014it later won two for Best Film Editing and Best Original Screenplay.\nIt was followed by the darker, less commercial \"The Mosquito Coast\" (1986), Paul Schrader's adaptation of Paul Theroux's novel. \nWeir's next film, \"Dead Poets Society\", was a major international success, with Weir again receiving credit for expanding the acting range of its Hollywood star. Robin Williams was mainly known for his anarchic stand-up comedy and his popular TV role as the wisecracking alien in \"Mork &amp; Mindy\"; in this film he played an inspirational teacher in a dramatic story about conformity and rebellion at an exclusive New England prep school in the 1950s. The film was nominated for four Oscars, including Best Picture and Best Director for Weir. It won Best Original Screenplay and launched the acting careers of young actors Ethan Hawke and Robert Sean Leonard. It became a major box-office hit.\n1990s.\nWeir's first romantic comedy \"Green Card\" (1990) was another casting risk. Weir chose French screen icon G\u00e9rard Depardieu in the lead\u2014Depardieu's first English-language role\u2014and paired him with American actress Andie MacDowell. \"Green Card\" was a box-office hit but was regarded as less of a critical success, although it helped Depardieu's path to international fame. Weir received an Oscar nomination for his original screenplay.\n\"Fearless\" (1993) returned to darker themes and starred Jeff Bridges as a man who believes he has become invincible after surviving a catastrophic air crash. Though well reviewed, particularly the performances of Bridges and Rosie Perez\u2014who received an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress\u2014the film was less commercially successful than Weir's two preceding films. It was entered into the 44th Berlin International Film Festival.\nAfter five years, Weir returned to direct his biggest success to date, \"The Truman Show\" (1998), a fantasy-satire of the media's control of life starring Jim Carrey. \"The Truman Show\" was both a box office and a critical success, receiving positive reviews and numerous awards, including three Academy Award nominations: Andrew Niccol for Best Original Screenplay, Ed Harris for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and Weir himself for Best Director. In addition to the Academy Award nominations, the film won the 1999 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.\n2000s.\nIn 2003, Weir returned to period dramas with \"\", starring Russell Crowe. A screen adaptation from various episodes in Patrick O'Brian's blockbuster adventure series set during the Napoleonic Wars, the film was well received by critics, but only mildly successful with mainstream audiences. The film was nominated for Best Picture and \u2014for frequent collaborator Russell Boyd's cinematography and for sound effects editing. While it underperformed at the North American box office and grossed $93\u00a0million, it had grossed slightly better overseas, gleaning an additional $118\u00a0million.\nWeir had developed several other projects in the 2000s that never came to fruition, including an adaptation of \"The War Magician\" with actor Tom Cruise, an adaptation of Robert Kurson's novel \"Shadow Divers\", early development of a proposed \"Shantaram\" film starring Johnny Depp, and an adaptation of William Gibson's sci-fi novel \"Pattern Recognition\".\n2010s.\nIn 2010, Weir resurfaced with the historical epic \"The Way Back\", about escapees from a Soviet gulag. The film, while generally well-received critically, was not a financial success.\nIn 2012, it was reported that Weir would direct his own adapted script of Jennifer Egan's gothic thriller \"The Keep\" the following year and shoot in Europe. Weir described the project as, \"Basically, ... a studio-shoot movie.\" As the years passed, however, without an official announcement, he started to be described as \"retired\".\n2020s.\nSpeaking in July 2022, speculating about Weir's unannounced retirement, Ethan Hawke said, \"I think [Weir] lost interest in movies. He really enjoyed that work when he didn't have actors giving him a hard time. Russell Crowe and Johnny Depp broke him.\"\nIn November 2022, Weir received an Academy Honorary Award from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.\nOn the occasion of this award, he also gave his first interview in many years, to \"The Sydney Morning Herald\". In the interview, he said Hawke's quote \"must have been taken out of context. I find it puzzling.\" However, Weir confirmed his retirement, saying that \"for film directors, like volcanoes, there are three major stages: active, dormant and extinct. I think I've reached the latter! Another generation is out there calling 'action' and 'cut' and good luck to them.\" He stated that he has enjoyed visiting ancient ruins and battlefields and diving on the WWII shipwrecks of the Truk Lagoon during his retirement.\nPersonal life.\nOn 14 June 1982, Weir was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) for his service to the film industry.\nAwards and nominations.\nDirected Academy Award Performances\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44459", "revid": "50011528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44459", "title": "Glenn Close", "text": "American actress (born 1947)\nGlenn Close (born March 19, 1947) is an American actress. In a career spanning over five decades on screen and stage, she has received numerous accolades, including three Primetime Emmy Awards, three Tony Awards and three Golden Globe Awards, in addition to nominations for eight Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, and three Grammy Awards. She was named by \"Time\" as one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2019.\nClose received eight Academy Award nominations for playing a feminist mother in \"The World According to Garp\" (1982), a baby boomer in \"The Big Chill\" (1983), a love interest in \"The Natural\" (1984), a psychotic ex-lover in \"Fatal Attraction\" (1987), a cunning aristocrat in \"Dangerous Liaisons\" (1988), an English butler in \"Albert Nobbs\" (2011), a troubled wife in \"The Wife\" (2017), and an eccentric grandmother in \"Hillbilly Elegy\" (2020). As of 2025, she shares the record for the most Oscar nominations for acting without a win with Peter O'Toole.\nHer other films include \"Reversal of Fortune\" (1990), \"The Paper\" (1994), \"Mars Attacks!\" (1996), \"Air Force One\" (1997), and \"Guardians of the Galaxy\" (2014). Close also portrayed Cruella de Vil in \"101 Dalmatians\" (1996) and its 2000 sequel, and voiced Kala in \"Tarzan\" (1999).\nIn television, Close received her first Primetime Emmy Award nomination for her role in the ABC film \"Something About Amelia\" (1984) and later won three\u2014Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie for portraying Margarethe Cammermeyer in the NBC film \"Serving in Silence\" (1995) and Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series twice consecutively for playing Patty Hewes in \"Damages\" (2007\u20132012).\nOn stage, Close made her Broadway debut in the play \"Love for Love\" (1974). She later won three Tony Awards, two for Best Actress in a Play for her roles in the plays \"The Real Thing\" (1983) and \"Death and the Maiden\" (1992), and one for Best Actress in a Musical, the musical \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1995). She was Tony-nominated for \"Barnum\" (1980). She returned to the Broadway stage in a 2014 revival of \"A Delicate Balance\". In 2016 she returned to \"Sunset Boulevard\" on the West End stage earning a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Musical nomination.\nClose is the president of Trillium Productions and co-founder of the website FetchDog. She has made political donations in support of Democratic politicians and is vocal on issues such as women's rights, same-sex marriage, and mental health. Married three times, she has one daughter, Annie Starke, from her relationship with producer John Starke.\nEarly life and background.\nGlenn Close was born on March 19, 1947, in Greenwich, Connecticut, to socialite Elizabeth Mary Hester \"Bettine\" (n\u00e9e Moore) and William Taliaferro Close, a doctor who operated a clinic in the Belgian Congo and served as a personal physician to Congolese dictator Mobutu Sese Seko. She has two sisters, Tina and Jessie, and two brothers, Alexander (nicknamed Sandy) and Tambu Misoki, whom Close's parents adopted while living in Congo.\nDuring her childhood, Close lived with her parents in a stone cottage on her maternal grandfather's estate in Greenwich. She began honing her acting abilities in her early years, \"I have no doubt that the days I spent running free in the evocative Connecticut countryside with an unfettered imagination, playing whatever character our games demanded, is one of the reasons that acting has always seemed so natural to me.\" Although Close has an affluent background, she has stated that her family chose not to participate in WASP society. She would also avoid mentioning her birthplace, the wealthy town Greenwich, whenever asked because she did not want people to think she was a \"\"dilettante\" who didn't have to work.\"\nWhen Close was seven years old, her parents joined the Moral Re-Armament (MRA), a movement in which her family was involved for 15 years. During this period, Close's family lived in communal centers. She has described MRA as a \"cult\" that dictated every aspect of her life, from the clothes that had to be worn to what she was allowed to say. Close also spent time in Switzerland when studying at St. George's School, and attended Rosemary Hall (now Choate Rosemary Hall), graduating in 1965. She traveled for several years in the mid-to-late 1960s with the nonprofit encouragement singing group Up With People. During her time in Up With People, Close organized a small singing group called the Green Glenn Singers, consisting of herself, Kathe Green, Jennie Dorn, and Vee Entwistle. The group's stated mission was \"to write and sing songs which would give people a purpose and inspire them to live the way they were meant to live\".\nWhen she was 22, Close broke away from MRA. She once stated that her desire to become an actress allowed her to leave the group, adding, \"I have long forgiven my parents for any of this. They had their reasons for doing what they did, and I understand them. It had terrible effects on their kids, but that's the way it is. We all try to survive, right? And I think what actually saved me more than anything was my desire to be an actress.\" She attended The College of William &amp; Mary, double majoring in theater and anthropology. During her senior year of college, Close became inspired to pursue a career in acting after watching an interview of Katharine Hepburn on \"The Dick Cavett Show\". It was in the college's theater department that Close began to train as a serious actor under Howard Scammon, William and Mary's long-time professor of theater. During her years at school in Williamsburg, she also starred in the summer-time outdoor drama, \"The Common Glory\", written by Pulitzer Prize author Paul Green. She was elected to membership in the honor society of Phi Beta Kappa. Through the years, Close has returned to William &amp; Mary to lecture and to visit the theater department.\nThrough her appearance on the first episode of the seventh season of \"Finding Your Roots\", she came to find out that she is related to Princess Diana through her seven times great-grandparents, is also distantly related to fellow actor Clint Eastwood, and that some of her ancestors were slaveholders. She also has a tangential connection to Marjorie Post who was once married to her grandfather, Edward Bennett Close.\nCareer.\n1970s: Early work.\nClose started her professional career on the stage in 1974 at age 27. In her senior year of college, she called her school's theater department to be nominated for a series of auditions through the University Resident Theatre Association and TCG. Eventually, she was given a callback and hired for one season to do three plays at the Helen Hayes Theatre, one of those plays being \"Love for Love\" directed by Hal Prince. She made her television debut in 1975 with a small role in the anthology series \"Great Performances\". In 1975, Close also appeared as Cordelia in \"King Lear\" at the Milwaukee Repertory Theatre. In 1976, she played Mary I in the short-lived Broadway musical \"Rex\", with a score by Richard Rodgers and Sheldon Harnick.\nFrom September 1978 to April 1979, Glenn appeared on Broadway in \"The Crucifer of Blood\" playing the part of Irene St. Claire, with Paxton Whitehead and Dwight Schultz. In 1979, she filmed the television movies \"Orphan Train\" and \"Too Far to Go\". The latter film included Blythe Danner and Michael Moriarty in the cast, and Close played Moriarty's lover. Her last major stage role before beginning her motion picture career was playing Chairy, the female lead in the Broadway musical \"Barnum\", from April 1980 to March 1981.\n1980s: Breakthrough and rise to prominence.\nThe 1980s proved to be Close's breakthrough in Hollywood. In 1980, director George Roy Hill discovered Close on Broadway and asked her to audition with Robin Williams for a role in \"The World According to Garp\", which would become her first film role, as well as her first Academy Award nominated performance. She played Robin Williams's mother, despite being just four years older. The following year she played Sarah Cooper in \"The Big Chill\", a character that director Lawrence Kasdan said he specifically wrote for her. The movie received positive reviews and was a financial success. Close became the third actor to receive a Tony, Emmy, and Oscar (Academy Award) nomination all in the same calendar year after the release of \"The Big Chill\". Also in 1980, she received her first Tony Award nomination for her performance in the musical \"Barnum\".\nIn 1984, Close was given a part in Robert Redford's baseball drama \"The Natural\", and although it was a small supporting role, she earned a third consecutive Oscar nomination. Close, to this day, credits her nomination to cinematographer Caleb Deschanel, stating \"That hat was designed so the sunlight would come through. We waited for a certain time of day, so the sun was shining through the back of the stadium. And he had a lens that muted the people around me. It was an incredibly well thought-out shot. And I honestly think that's the reason I got nominated.\" Close also starred opposite Robert Duvall in the drama \"The Stone Boy\" (1984), a film about a family coping after their youngest child accidentally kills his older brother in a hunting accident. She continued to appear in television films in the following years, beginning with \"The Elephant Man\", and in 1984, she starred in the critically acclaimed drama \"Something About Amelia\", a television film about a family destroyed by sexual abuse. She won her first Tony Award in 1984 for \"The Real Thing\", directed by Mike Nichols.\nEventually, Close began to seek different roles to play because she did not want to be typecast as a motherly figure. She starred in the 1985 romantic comedy \"Maxie\", alongside Mandy Patinkin. Close was given favorable reviews and even received her second Golden Globe Award nomination, but the movie was critically panned and under-performed at the box office. In 1985, Close starred in the legal thriller \"Jagged Edge\", opposite Jeff Bridges. Initially, Jane Fonda was attached to the role, but was replaced with Close when she requested changes in the script. Producer Martin Ransohoff was against the casting of Close because he said she was \"too ugly\" for the part. Close eventually heard about this and said she didn't want Ransohoff on set while she was making her scenes. Director Richard Marquand stood by her side and sent Ransohoff away. Infuriated, Ransohoff went to the studio heads trying to get Close and Marquand fired from the picture. The studio refused, stating they were pleased with their work in the film. \"Jagged Edge\" received mixed-to-positive reviews and grossed $40-million on a $15-million budget.\nIn 1987, Close played the disturbed book editor Alex Forrest in the psychological thriller \"Fatal Attraction\". The film became a huge box-office success, the highest-grossing film worldwide of that year. The film propelled Close to international stardom and the character of Alex Forrest is considered one of her most iconic roles; the phrase \"bunny boiler\" has even been added to the dictionary, referring to a scene from the movie. During the re-shoot of the ending, Close suffered a concussion from one of the takes when her head smashed against a mirror. After being rushed to the hospital, she discovered, much to her horror, that she was actually a few weeks pregnant with her daughter. Close stated in an interview that, \"\"Fatal Attraction\" was really the first part that took me away from the Jenny Fields, Sarah Coopers\u2014good, nurturing women roles. I did more preparation for that film than I've ever done.\" Close received her fourth Oscar nomination for this role, her first in the leading role and also won the People's Choice Award for Favorite Motion Picture Actress.\nShe played a scheming aristocrat, the Marquise de Merteuil, in 1988's period romantic drama \"Dangerous Liaisons\". Close earned stellar reviews for this performance, and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress. In addition, she received her first BAFTA Award nomination. Also in 1988, she appeared alongside Keith Carradine in \"Stones for Ibarra\", a television film adapted from the book written by Harriet Doerr and produced by the Hallmark company. Close's final film role of the decade was \"Immediate Family\" (1989), a drama about a married couple seeking to adopt a child. Producer Lawrence Kasdan had Close star in the film, as he directed her previously in \"The Big Chill\".\n1990s: Established actress.\nIn 1990, Close went on to play the role of Sunny von B\u00fclow opposite Jeremy Irons in \"Reversal of Fortune\" to critical acclaim. The film drew some controversy since it dealt with the Claus von B\u00fclow murder trial, while the real Sunny von B\u00fclow was still in a vegetative state. Sunny's children publicly criticized the movie. In the same year, Close played Gertrude in Franco Zeffirelli's film adaption of \"Hamlet\". It was the first Shakespeare role that Close had ever attempted on screen (she appeared in 1975 in a stage production of \"King Lear\" in Milwaukee). Close would later go on to join the cast of \"The House of the Spirits\", reuniting her with Jeremy Irons. She also had a cameo appearance in Steven Spielberg's \"Hook\" (1991) as a pirate. In 1991, she starred in the highly rated \"Hallmark Hall of Fame\" television movie \"Sarah, Plain and Tall\", as well as its two sequels.\nIn 1992, Close starred in \"Meeting Venus\" for which she received critical acclaim and won Best Actress (Golden Ciak) at the Venice Film Festival. In the same year, Close became a trustee emeritus of The Sundance Institute. She also portrayed the title subject of the fact-based made-for-TV movie \"\" in 1995, for which she won her first Primetime Emmy Award. Additionally, she has also provided the voice of Mona Simpson, from \"The Simpsons\", since 1995. \"Entertainment Weekly\" named Close one of the 16 best \"Simpsons\" guest stars. Close has also hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" twice, in 1989 and in 1992. In 1992, she won her second Tony Award for \"Death and the Maiden\".\nOne of her most notable roles on stage was Norma Desmond in the Andrew Lloyd Webber production of \"Sunset Boulevard\", for which Close won her third Tony Award, playing the role on Broadway in 1993\u201394. For her role, Close was met with critical acclaim. David Richards of \"The New York Times\" wrote in 1994 that \"Glenn is giving one of those legendary performances people will be talking about years from now. The actress takes breathtaking risks, venturing so far out on a limb at times that you fear it will snap. It doesn't.\" She would later re-team with the show's director, Trevor Nunn, in London for his Royal National Theatre revival of \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" in 2002.\nClose appeared in the newsroom comedy-drama \"The Paper\" (1994), directed by her good friend Ron Howard and in 1996 she acted alongside the cast of Tim Burton's alien invasion satire \"Mars Attacks!\" (1996). That same year, she portrayed the sinister Cruella de Vil in the Disney live-action hit of \"101 Dalmatians.\" Her role as Cruella de Vil was universally praised and earned her a nomination for Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. The film was also a commercial success, grossing $320.6 million in theaters against a $75 million budget. Per Close's contract, she is allowed to keep any costumes from her films. The producers attempted to make copies of Close's wardrobe due to the expensive materials being used, but, to their dismay, she rejected their suggestion and kept the originals. The following year, Close appeared in another box office hit with \"Air Force One\" (1997), playing the trustworthy vice president to Harrison Ford's president. Ford stated in an interview that the role of the vice president was already written for a woman and that he personally chose Close for the role after meeting her at a birthday party for then-president Bill Clinton. Close would later star in the war film \"Paradise Road\" (1997) as a choir conductor of the women imprisoned by the Japanese in World War II. In 1999, Close provided the voice of Kala in Disney's animated film \"Tarzan\". She later went on to receive great reviews for her comedic role as Camille Dixon in \"Cookie's Fortune\" (1999).\n2000s: Focus on television.\nClose began to appear in television movies rather than doing theatrical films in the early 2000s. She returned as Cruella de Vil in \"102 Dalmatians\" (2000). Although the film received mixed reviews, it performed well at the box office. Close later filmed \"The Safety of Objects\" which premiered in 2001, a movie about four suburban families dealing with maladies. This was Kristen Stewart's first film role, and Close and Stewart would later reunite in the 2015 film \"Anesthesia\". Close starred in \"Things You Can Tell Just by Looking at Her\" in the same year, this would be one of many future collaborations with director Rodrigo Garcia. In 2004, she played Claire Wellington, an uptight socialite in the comedy \"The Stepford Wives\" opposite Nicole Kidman and Christopher Walken. She provided the voice of the Blue Fairy in the English version of \"Pinocchio\" (2002) and Granny in the animated film \"Hoodwinked\" (2005). Close continued to do smaller films like \"Le Divorce\" (2003) and \"The Chumscrubber\" (2005). In 2005, she reunited with director Rodrigo Garcia to do \"Nine Lives\"; he would later direct Close in the film \"Albert Nobbs\" (2011). In the same year, she starred in the film \"Heights\" (2005), an independent drama centered on the lives of five New Yorkers. Close's performance was lauded by critics.\nIn 2001, she starred in a production of Rodgers and Hammerstein's classic musical \"South Pacific\" as Nellie Forbush on ABC. She guest-starred on \"Will and Grace\" in 2002, portraying a satirical version of Annie Leibovitz, which earned her an Emmy nomination for Guest Actress in a Comedy Series. In 2003, Close played Eleanor of Aquitaine in the Showtime-produced film \"The Lion in Winter\". Close won a Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for her performance. In 2005, Close joined the FX crime series \"The Shield\", in which she played Monica Rawling, a no-nonsense precinct captain, which became her first TV role in a series. Close stated that she made the right move because television was in a \"golden era\" and the quality of some programs had already risen to the standards of film. John Landgraf, CEO of FX, stated that network was the \"first to bring a female movie star of Glenn Close's stature to television.\" He also credits her collaboration with the network with promoting roles for women on television, as well as influencing other film actors to switch to the small screen.\nIn 2007, she appeared in the same film as her previous co-star Meryl Streep in the ensemble drama \"Evening\". This would be Close's final theatrical film role of the decade, since she began to star in her own television series, \"Damages\" (2007). Close was asked about her contributions to independent films, to which she responded \"I love the casts that gather around a good piece of writing certainly not for the money but because it is good and challenging. Sometimes I've taken a role for one scene that I thought was phenomenal. Also my presence can help them get money, so it's I think a way for me to give back.\" Shortly after her stint on \"The Shield\", Close was approached by FX executives who pitched a television series for her to star in. Also in 2007, Close began a five-season run playing the ruthless and brilliant lawyer Patty Hewes on \"Damages\". Her portrayal of this character was met with rave reviews and a plethora of award nominations, in addition she went on to win two consecutive Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series. Close's win also made her the first Best Actress winner in a drama series at the Emmy's for a cable show. Throughout the show's run, she became one of the highest-paid actresses on cable, earning $200,000 per episode. Close stated that her role of Patty Hewes was the role of her life. She also kept in contact with her co-star Rose Byrne, and the two have become friends. After the series ended, Close stated that she would not return to television in a regular role, but that she was open to do a miniseries or guest spot. In 2008, Close performed at Carnegie Hall, narrating the violin concerto \"The Runaway Bunny\", a concerto for reader, violin and orchestra, composed and conducted by Glen Roven.\n2010s: Return to film and stage.\nIn December 2010, Close began filming \"Albert Nobbs\" in Dublin. She had previously won an Obie in 1982 for her role in the play on stage. She had been working on the project, in which she appeared alongside \"101 Dalmatians\" co-star Mark Williams, for almost twenty years, and aside from starring in it, she co-wrote the script and produced the film. Close stated it became more important for her to make the film in order to stimulate discussion on transgender issues, commenting, \"There came a point where I asked, 'Am I willing to live the rest of my life having given up on this?' And I said, 'No I won't.' Some people will change their point of view, and those who are either too old, or too blinkered, to accept the beauty of difference will just have to 'die off'.\" In the film, Close played the title role of \"Albert Nobbs\", a woman living as a man in 19th century Ireland after being sexually assaulted as a young girl.\nWhile the film overall received mixed reviews, Close's performance received critical acclaim, as it was noted for being the most subtle and introverted of her career to that point and a departure from her previous roles. When asked during the film's awards campaign about the fact of not having an Oscar, Close said: \"I remember being astounded that I met some people who were really kind of almost hyper-ventilating as to whether they were going to win or not, and I have never understood that. Because if you just do the simple math, the amount of people who are in our two unions, the amount of people who in our profession are out of work at any given time, the amount of movies that are made every year, and then you're one of five [nominees]. How could you possibly think of yourself as a loser?\"\nShe provided the voice of the \"Giant\" in the Summer 2012 production of the musical \"Into the Woods\" at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. The production also featured Amy Adams as The Baker's Wife and Donna Murphy as The Witch. In 2014, she starred in a production of the \"Pirates of Penzance\" for the Public Theater in New York, playing the role of Ruth. This production featured Kevin Kline, Martin Short and Anika Noni Rose. In October 2014, Close returned to Broadway in the starring role of Agnes in Pam MacKinnon's revival of Edward Albee's \"A Delicate Balance\" at the John Golden Theatre. Her co-stars were John Lithgow as Tobias, Martha Plimpton as Julia and Lindsay Duncan as Claire. The production grossed $884,596 over eight preview performances during the week ending October 25, setting a new house record at the Golden Theatre. The production received mixed reviews, although the cast was praised. After her television series \"Damages\" ended, Close returned to film in 2014, in which she played Nova Prime Rael in the Marvel Studios film \"Guardians of the Galaxy\", directed by James Gunn. She also appeared in the independent movies \"5 to 7\" (2014) and \"Low Down\" (2014). In 2015, Close made a cameo on Louis C.K.'s \"Louie\" on FX, in the season five episode \"Sleepover\" alongside John Lithgow, Michael Cera, and Matthew Broderick.\nIn 2016, she appeared in \"The Great Gilly Hopkins\" and starred in the British zombie horror drama \"The Girl with All the Gifts\" (2016) as Dr. Caldwell, a scientist researching a cure to save humanity. In April 2016, she returned as Norma Desmond in the musical \"Sunset Boulevard\" in an English National Opera production in London. Close was met with rave reviews after returning to this same role twenty-three years later. Both \"The Times\" and \"The Daily Telegraph\" gave the production five stars and praised her performance. During the production Close was forced to cancel three shows due to a chest infection. She was hospitalized but later recovered and finished the remaining shows. Close won the Evening Standard Theatre Award for Best Musical Performance, and was nominated for her first Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Musical. That same year, she was inducted into American Theater Hall of Fame for her work on the stage.\nThe ENO London production of \"Sunset Boulevard\" transferred to the Palace Theatre on Broadway, with Close reprising her role. It opened on February 9, 2017, in a limited run, selling tickets through June 25, 2017. The production featured a 40-piece orchestra, the largest in Broadway history. Close in particular was lauded by critics for her new incarnation of Norma Desmond. As \"The New York Times\" called it \"one of the great stage performances of this century.\" \"Variety\", \"Parade\", \"The Guardian\" and \"Entertainment Weekly\" also gave the new production positive reviews. That same year, Close starred in a half hour comedy pilot for Amazon, titled \"Sea Oak\". The pilot premiered online with viewers voting to choose if it wanted Amazon to produce the series. Although it received favorable reviews it was not picked up. Also in 2017, she was honored with the Lifetime Achievement Award at the Theatre World Awards. In 2017, Close appeared alongside Noomi Rapace and Willem Dafoe in \"What Happened to Monday\", a science fiction thriller produced by Netflix. Also that year, she was reunited with actors John Malkovich (her co-star in \"Dangerous Liaisons\") and Patrick Stewart (co-star in \"The Lion in Winter\") in the romantic comedy \"The Wilde Wedding\", and co-starred in \"Crooked House\", a film adaptation of the novel by Agatha Christie.\nClose garnered widespread critical acclaim for her performance in the 2018 drama \"The Wife\", which had first premiered at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival. An adaptation of Meg Wolitzer's novel of the same name, the film stars Close as Joan Castleman, who questions her life choices as she travels with her husband to Stockholm, where he is set to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature. The film also features Close's daughter, Annie Starke, as a younger version of Castleman. Close won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama, the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role, and the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress. She received her seventh Academy Award nomination, her fourth nomination in the Best Actress category, which has made her the most nominated actress without a win. She was widely considered to be the frontrunner to win the Oscar\u2014which would be the first of her career\u2014but ultimately lost to Olivia Colman for \"The Favourite\". In addition, Close received a nomination, her second overall, for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, which she also lost to Colman. Also in 2018, Close made a return to the stage, where, from September to December, she featured in the Off-Broadway play, \"Mother of the Maid\", at the Public Theater in New York City.\n2020s: Continued film work and further acclaim.\nIn 2020, Close starred in Netflix's film adaptation of \"Hillbilly Elegy\", reuniting with Ron Howard and starring alongside Amy Adams. Close played the Mamaw of JD Vance. While the film, which was released for streaming on Netflix on November 24, 2020, received mixed-to-negative critical reviews, Close received acclaim for her performance. Richard Roeper praised Close for her \"masterful, screen-commanding, pitch-perfect performance\", while Peter Travers at ABC News called her \"simply sensational\" and Owen Gleiberman at Variety wrote that \"as long as Close is acting up an award-worthy storm (her performance is actually quite meticulous), \"Hillbilly Elegy\" is never less than alive\". For the role, she received the San Francisco International Film Festival's Award for Acting along with Academy Award, Golden Globe, and SAG Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress. Close also received a Razzie Award nomination for Worst Supporting Actress for \"Hillbilly Elegy\", making her the third performer\u2014after James Coco for \"Only When I Laugh\" and Amy Irving for \"Yentl\"\u2014to receive both an Oscar nomination and a Razzie nomination for the same performance.\nAlso in 2020, Close co-starred with Mila Kunis in the drama \"Four Good Days\", directed by Rodrigo Garc\u00eda and presented at the Sundance Film Festival. In 2021, Close served as an executive producer alongside Emma Stone for \"Cruella\", a Disney live-action spin-off/prequel of \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\", directed by Craig Gillespie. Stone plays the younger version of Cruella de Vil (the titular character whom Close portrayed in the 1996 live-action adaptation and its 2000 sequel). The same year, Close appeared opposite Mahershala Ali in the Apple TV+ drama film \"Swan Song\". In 2022, she starred in season two of the Apple TV+ thriller series \"Tehran\". Close learned Persian for her role in \"Tehran\". She also portrayed former Harper's Bazaar editor Carmel Snow in the Apple TV+ series \"The New Look\", reuniting her with \"Damages\" creator Todd A. Kessler.\nIn 2022, it was announced that Close would star alongside Andra Day and Mo'Nique in the exorcism drama \"The Deliverance\" directed by Lee Daniels for Netflix. The film was released in August 2024. She also stars alongside Josh Brolin and Peter Dinklage in the Amazon MGM Studios film \"Brothers\", which was released theatrically on October 10, 2024.\nIn March 2023, it was announced that Close would star in the upcoming film \"The Summer Book\", based on the novel by Tove Jansson The film, directed by Charlie McDowell, was released in 2024.\nClose was cast alongside Jamie Foxx, Cameron Diaz, and Kyle Chandler in the action-comedy \"Back in Action\", for Netflix. The film was released on Netflix globally on January 17, 2025.\nUpcoming projects.\nIn May 2024, Close joined the cast of the upcoming \"Wake Up Dead Man\", the sequel to \"Knives Out\" and \"\". Other cast members for the film include Daniel Craig, Jeremy Renner, Andrew Scott, Cailee Spaeny, Josh O'Connor, and Kerry Washington. On June 19, 2024, it was revealed that Close's participation in the filming for \"Wake Up Dead Man\", which by that point in time had only occurred for two days, was delayed, with Close revealing that she got \"really hit hard\" with both COVID-19 and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).\nClose is set to reprise her stage role of Norma Desmond in a film adaptation of the musical \"Sunset Boulevard\", though the film remains in development. In May 2024, it was announced that Close was reuniting with her \"Reversal of Fortune\" costar Jeremy Irons in the upcoming Simon Curtis-directed retirement home comedy \"Encores\", with Henry Winkler and Don Johnson also co-starring.\nIn June 2025 it was announced that Close would be undertaking the role of Drusilla Sickle in the upcoming film adaptation of \"The Hunger Games: Sunrise on the Reaping\", alongside Billy Porter.\nIn August 2025, it was announced that Close would star in the six-part Channel 4 British crime drama \"Maud\", based on the short story collections \"An Elderly Lady Is Up to No Good\" and \"An Elderly Lady Must Not Be Crossed\" by Swedish crime writer Helene Tursten. In October 2025, Close was reported to have joined the cast of the drama film \"The Black Ball\".\nReception, acting style, and legacy.\nClose is regarded as an extraordinarily versatile actress with an immersive acting style and a considerable range. Vanity Fair remarked how Close is \"long considered one of the great actresses of our time.\" James Lipton described her as an actor who \"can find an outstanding number of layers in a role or a single moment; she is a supple actor who performs subtle feats.\" Close was also professionally trained by acting coach Harold Guskin, who also mentored Kevin Kline, Bridget Fonda, and James Gandolfini. Working with Guskin, Close learned several important lessons, which she said she's applied to her career as well as her life. One such lesson, she claims, was to \"read the lines off the page\" and remembering to breathe. Close states, \"You have to maintain a certain openness, and if you don't maintain that, you lose something vital as an actor. It's how we're wired, and it's not a bad thing.\" Close says that she went to every rehearsal in order to master her acting skills.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I love the chemistry that can be created onstage between the actors and the audience. It's molecular even, the energies that can go back and forth. I started in theater, and when I first went into movies, I felt that my energy was going to blow out the camera.\"\n\u2014 Close on acting\nOn method acting, Close claims that while she found it an interesting technique, it was not her preferred style. Although Close does extensive research and preparation for her roles, she also relies less on the technicality of a performance saying, \"Good acting I think is like being a magician, in that you make people believe; because it's only when they believe that they are moved. And I want people to get emotionally involved. I think technique is important but it isn't everything. You can have a great technical actor who'll leave people cold. That's not my idea of great acting. As audience, I don't want to be aware of acting.\" Longtime collaborator and playwright Christopher Hampton describes Close as an actress who can very easily convey \"a sense of strength and intelligence.\" Hampton worked on \"Sunset Boulevard\" and the stage production of \"Dangerous Liaisons\", later casting Close in the movie version of the latter production. \"Glenn is often described as having a glacial or distant quality about her, but in person she's the absolute opposite: warm and intimate,\" says actor Iain Glen, who co-starred with her in the 2002 stage production of \"A Streetcar Named Desire\". \"She was able to bring strength to the role, she was able to completely access that vulnerability. There was a real softness to her.\"\nHowever, Close is consistently praised for her roles as the villain or antagonist in her performances. Her character in \"Fatal Attraction\" was ranked number 7 on AFI's 100 years...100 heroes and villains list. Regarding her role in the series \"Damages\", \"The New York Times\" remarked, \"There is no actor dead or alive as scary as a smiling Glenn Close.\" Journalist Christopher Hooton also praised her, saying, \"Christopher Walken, Glenn Close, Al Pacino, and many others have a surprising danger in them. They're a little scary to be around, because you feel they might jump you or blow up at you at any time. They are ticking time bombs.\" Film historian Cari Beauchamp has stated, \"When you look at the top 10 actresses of the past 80 years, since sound came in, first you have Bette Davis, Katharine Hepburn and Meryl Streep \u2013 but I think Glenn Close is definitely in that list. It's a combination of her guts, in the roles she chooses, and her perseverance. We're talking about 30 years of nominated performances.\"\nOn January 12, 2009, Close was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7000 Hollywood Boulevard, in front of the Roosevelt Hotel. As of 2018[ [update]], films featuring Close have grossed over $1.3 billion in North America. She is also regarded as a gay icon, after having played numerous campy roles on screen and stage. She was named one of the most influential people in the world by \"Time\" magazine in 2019.\nIn 1989, Close was the commencement speaker at William &amp; Mary and received an honorary doctor of arts degree. In 2023, she returned to the college to serve as the grand marshal of their annual homecoming event. She also helped dedicate William &amp; Mary's newly renovated Phi Beta Kappa Memorial Hall, whose main stage theater was named the Glenn Close Theatre in her honor.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and family.\nClose has been married three times, with each marriage ending in divorce. Her first marriage at age 22 \u2014 which Close has described as \"kind of an arranged marriage\" \u2014 ended before she attended college. This marriage (from 1969 to 1971) was to Cabot Wade, a guitarist and songwriter with whom she had performed during her time at Up with People. From 1979 to 1983, she lived with actor Len Cariou. She was married to grocery heir James Marlas from 1984 to 1987. Later, Close began a relationship with producer John Starke, whom she had met on the set of \"The World According to Garp\". Their daughter, Annie Starke, was born in 1988 and is an actress. Close and Starke separated in 1991. In 1991, Close had a 5-month relationship with Woody Harrelson. In 1995, Close was engaged to carpenter Steve Beers, who had worked on \"Sunset Boulevard\"; the two never married, and their relationship ended in 1999. In February 2006, Close married executive and venture capitalist David Evans Shaw in Maine, but they divorced in August 2015. Her first grandchild was born in February 2025.\nBusiness ventures and assets.\nAs of 2016, Close primarily resides in Bedford Hills, New York, and also owns a condo in the West Village. She also owns properties in Wellington, Florida, and Bozeman, Montana. In the early 1990s she owned a coffee shop in Bozeman but sold it in 2006. In 2011 Close sold her apartment in The Beresford for $10.2 million. She also runs a ranch in Wyoming.\nClose is the president of Trillium Productions Inc. Her company has produced films like \"Albert Nobbs\", \"Sarah, Plain and Tall\", and \"South Pacific\". With Barbra Streisand she produced the TV film \"Serving in Silence\" (1995), for which both were nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Television Movie.\nIn 2007 she co-founded FetchDog, a dog accessories catalog and Internet site. Part of her work was publishing blogs in which she interviewed other celebrities about their relationships with their dogs. She sold the business in 2012.\nInterests and views.\nClose was born into a Democratic family. Her political donations have mostly been made in support of Democratic politicians, including Hillary Clinton, Howard Dean, John Edwards, Angus King, and Barack Obama. Close also spoke at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. She voted for Obama in the 2008 presidential election and attended his inauguration. In a 2016 interview with Andrew Marr for the BBC, Close criticized then-presidential candidate Donald Trump, calling his campaign \"terribly frightening.\" She reiterated her sentiments about Trump in 2017, stating that \"he doesn't stand for anything I believe in.\"\nClose keeps all of her costumes after completing films and rents them out to exhibits. She lent one of the dresses she wore in \"Dangerous Liaisons\" to Madonna for her 1990 VMA performance of \"Vogue\". In 2017, she donated her entire costume collection to Indiana University Bloomington.\nClose is a New York Mets fan, and has sung the national anthem at Shea Stadium and Citi Field numerous times since 1986.\nDue to her upbringing, Close has stated that she is a spiritual but irreligious person.\nActivism.\nPhilanthropy.\nClose has campaigned for several issues such as women's rights, same-sex marriage, and mental health. In 1989 she attended pro-choice marches in Washington, D.C., with Gloria Steinem and Jane Fonda. In 1998, Close was a part of a star-studded cast that performed \"The Vagina Monologues\" at a benefit. It raised $250,000 in a single evening with proceeds going to the effort to stop violence against women. She was honored with a GLAAD Media Award in 2002 for promoting equal rights among the LGBT community. She volunteered and produced a documentary for \"Puppies Behind Bars\", an organization that provides service dogs for wounded war veterans.\nClose is also a trustee of The Wildlife Conservation Society and volunteers at Fountain House in New York City, a facility dedicated to the recovery of those suffering from mental illness. She is a founding member of the Panthera Conservation Advisory Committee. Panthera is an international nonprofit whose sole mission is conservation of the world's 36 species of wild cats. Close has also been a longtime supporter of late friend Christopher Reeve's foundation. She is also a member of the CuriosityStream Advisory Board.\nMental health initiatives.\nClose was a founder and is chairperson of Bring Change to Mind, a US campaign to eradicate the stigma and discrimination surrounding mental illness, supporting her sister Jessie who has bipolar disorder. She contributed chapters to her sister's 2015 book about mental illness, \"\". In 2010, Close announced to the public that she had her DNA sequenced in order to publicize her family's history of mental illness. During the month of July 2013, Close put over 380 designer items up for auction on eBay from the wardrobe of her \"Damages\" character Patty Hewes. All proceeds were raised to go to her charity Bring Change to Mind. Close had director and friend Ron Howard direct the foundation's first PSA. John Mayer also lent his song \"Say\" for the advert.\nIn 2013, Close delivered an address at the White House urging passage of the Excellence in Mental-Health Act, which was written to expand treatment for the mentally ill and to provide access to mental-health services. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama in April 2014, and will provide $1.1 billion in funding to help strengthen the mental-health-care system in the US. She was awarded the WebMD Health Hero award in 2015 for her contributions to mental-health initiatives. On June 16, 2016, Close donated $75,000 to the Mental-Health Association of Central Florida in order to fund counseling and other assistance to victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting. She frequently promotes her charitable causes on her Instagram account.\nActing credits and awards.\nShe is one of the few performers to be nominated for the Triple Crown of Acting and EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, Tony). Among her numerous accolades for her acting work, Close has earned three Primetime Emmy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, two Screen Actors Guild Awards, and three Tony Awards as well as nominations for eight Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, three Grammy Awards, and a Laurence Olivier Award.\nOver her distinguished career she has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44460", "revid": "14457240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44460", "title": "Interpretation of dreams", "text": "Interpretation of dreams may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44463", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44463", "title": "Sophia Loren", "text": "Italian actress (born 1934)\nSofia Costanza Brigida Villani Scicolone (; born 20 September 1934), known professionally as Sophia Loren ( , ), is an Italian actress, active in her native country and the United States. With a career spanning over 70 years, she is one of the last surviving major stars from the Golden Age of Hollywood cinema.\nEncouraged to enroll in acting lessons after entering a beauty pageant, Loren began her film career at age 16 in 1950. She appeared in several bit parts and minor roles in the early part of the decade, until her five-picture contract with Paramount in 1956 launched her international career. Her film appearances around this time include \"The Pride and the Passion\", \"Houseboat\", and \"It Started in Naples\". During the 1950s, she starred in films as a sexually emancipated persona and was one of the best known sex symbols of the time.\nLoren's performance as Cesira in the film \"Two Women\" (1960), directed by Vittorio De Sica, won her the Academy Award for Best Actress, making her the first performer to ever win an Oscar for a non-English-language performance. She holds the record for having earned seven David di Donatello Awards for Best Actress: \"Two Women\"; \"Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow\" (1963); \"Marriage Italian Style\" (1964, for which she was nominated for a second Oscar); \"Sunflower\" (1970); \"The Voyage\" (1974); \"A Special Day\" (1977) and \"The Life Ahead\" (2020). She has won five special Golden Globes (including the Cecil B. DeMille Award), a BAFTA Award, a Laurel Award, a Grammy Award, the Volpi Cup for Best Actress at the Venice Film Festival and the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival. In 1991, she received the Academy Honorary Award for lifetime achievements. In 1999, the American Film Institute named her one of the greatest stars of American film history.\nAt the start of the 1980s, Loren chose to make rarer film appearances. Since then, she has appeared in films such as \"Pr\u00eat-\u00e0-porter\" (1994), \"Grumpier Old Men\" (1995), \"Nine\" (2009), and \"The Life Ahead\" (2020). Loren was appointed Knight of the Legion of Honour in France in July 1991, and Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (OMRI) in June 1996.\nEarly life.\nFamily and childhood.\nSofia Costanza Brigida Villani Scicolone was born on September 20, 1934, in the Clinica Regina Margherita in Rome, the daughter of Romilda Villani (1910\u20131991) and Riccardo Scicolone Murillo (1907\u20131976). Her mother was a piano teacher and aspiring actress, and her father a failed engineer who worked temporarily for the national railway Ferrovie dello Stato Italiane. Loren claimed in her autobiography that he was of noble descent, by virtue of which she is entitled to call herself \"Viscountess of Pozzuoli, Lady of Caserta, a title given by the House of Hohenstaufen, Marchioness of Licata Scicolone Murillo\".\nLoren's father refused to marry her mother, leaving her without financial support. Loren met her father three times, at age five, age seventeen and in 1976 at his deathbed, stating that she forgave him but had never forgotten his abandonment of her mother. Loren's parents had another child together, her sister Maria, in 1938. Scicolone did not want to formally recognise Maria as his daughter. When Loren became successful, she paid her father in order to have her sister Maria take the Scicolone last name. Loren has two younger paternal half-brothers, Giuliano and Giuseppe. Romilda, Sofia, and Maria lived with Loren's grandmother in Pozzuoli, near Naples.\nDuring the Second World War, the harbour and munitions plant in Pozzuoli was a frequent bombing target of the Allies. During one raid, as Loren ran to the shelter, she was struck by shrapnel and wounded in the chin. After that, the family moved to Naples, where they were taken in by distant relatives. After the war, Loren and her family returned to Pozzuoli. Loren's grandmother Luisa opened a pub in their living room, selling homemade cherry liquor. Romilda played the piano, Maria sang, and Loren waited on tables and washed dishes. The place was popular with the American GIs stationed nearby.\nPageantry.\nSofia participated in her first beauty pageant at the age of 15. \"The Queen of the Sea\" contest, organized by the newspaper \"Corriere di Napoli\" was held in Naples, on 2 October 1949. She had travelled with her mother via train from Pozzuoli while wearing her pageant dress made by her grandmother out of taffeta curtains. She was one of 12 girls to win a consolation prize as \"princesses\". The princesses along with the queen were paraded through the city streets in a carriage. The winnings included 23,000 lire and a train ticket to Rome. Later, the train ticket would facilitate her and her mother's move to Rome in search of work at Cinecitt\u00e0.\nAlso at age 15, Loren (as \"Sofia Lazzaro\") entered the Miss Italia 1950 beauty pageant and was assigned as Candidate No. 2, being one of the four contestants representing the Lazio region. She was selected as one of the last three finalists and won the title of Miss Elegance 1950, while Liliana Cardinale won the title of Miss Cinema and Anna Maria Bugliari won the grand title of Miss Italia. She returned in 2001 as president of the jury for the 61st edition of the pageant. In 2010, Loren crowned the 71st Miss Italia pageant winner.\nCareer.\nEarly roles.\nSofia was placed in a Neapolitan acting school by her mother who earned the money by teaching piano lessons. It was through the school's instructor, Pino Serpe, that Sophia obtained her first film roles. These were small, uncredited parts in films such as \"Hearts at Sea\" (1950) and \"The Vow\" (1950). Sophia and her mother relocated to Rome after learning that MGM was filming the epic film \"Quo Vadis\" there and were looking for extras.\nSofia Lazzaro enrolled in the Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia, the national film school of Italy and appeared as an uncredited extra in Mervyn LeRoy's 1951 film \"Quo Vadis\", when she was 16 years old. She was noticed by Michal Waszysnki, who promoted her and helped her get her first significant role.\nThat same year, Loren appeared in the Italian film \"Era lui... s\u00ec! s\u00ec!\", in which she played an odalisque, and was credited as \"Sofia Lazzaro\". In the early part of the decade, she played bit parts and had minor roles in several films, including \"La Favorita\" (1952).\nCarlo Ponti changed her name and public image to appeal to a wider audience as \"Sophia Loren\", being a twist on the name of the Swedish actress M\u00e4rta Tor\u00e9n and suggested by Goffredo Lombardo. Her first starring role was in \"Aida\" (1953), for which she received critical acclaim.\nAfter playing the lead role in \"Two Nights with Cleopatra\" (1953), her breakthrough role was in \"The Gold of Naples\" (1954), directed by Vittorio De Sica. \"Too Bad She's Bad\", also released in 1954, and \"La Bella Mugnaia\" (1955) became the first of many films in which Loren co-starred with Marcello Mastroianni. Over the next three years, she acted in many films, including \"Scandal in Sorrento\", \"Lucky to Be a Woman\", \"Boy on a Dolphin\", \"Legend of the Lost\" and \"The Pride and the Passion\" (1957), the latter film a Napoleonic era war-epic set in Spain starring Cary Grant and Frank Sinatra.\nInternational stardom.\nLoren became an international film star following her five-picture contract with Paramount Pictures in 1958. Among her films at this time were \"Desire Under the Elms\" with Anthony Perkins, based upon the Eugene O'Neill play; \"Houseboat\", a romantic comedy co-starring Cary Grant; and George Cukor's \"Heller in Pink Tights\", in which she appeared as a blonde for the first time.\nIn 1960, Loren starred in Vittorio De Sica's \"Two Women\", a stark, gritty story of a mother who is trying to protect her 12-year-old daughter in war-torn Italy. The two end up gang-raped inside a church as they travel back to their home city following cessation of bombings there. Originally cast as the daughter, Loren fought against type and was eventually cast as the mother (actress Eleonora Brown would portray the daughter). Loren's performance earned her many awards, including the Cannes Film Festival's best performance prize, and an Academy Award for Best Actress, the first major Academy Award for a non-English-language performance or to an Italian actress. She won 22 international awards for \"Two Women\". The film was extremely well received by critics and a huge commercial success. Though proud of this accomplishment, Loren did not show up to this award, citing fear of fainting at the award ceremony. Nevertheless, Cary Grant telephoned her in Rome the next day to inform her of the Oscar award.\nDuring the 1960s, Loren was one of the most popular actresses in the world, and continued to make films in the United States and Europe, starring with prominent leading men. In 1961 and 1964, her career reached its pinnacle when she received $1 million to appear in \"El Cid\" and \"The Fall of the Roman Empire\". In 1965, she received a second Academy Award nomination for her performance in \"Marriage Italian-Style\" opposite Marcello Mastroianni.\nAmong Loren's best-known films of this period are Samuel Bronston's epic production of \"El Cid\" with Charlton Heston, \"The Millionairess\" (1960) with Peter Sellers, \"It Started in Naples\" (1960) with Clark Gable, Vittorio De Sica's triptych \"Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow\" (1963) with Marcello Mastroianni, Peter Ustinov's \"Lady L\" (1965) with Paul Newman, \"Arabesque\" (1966) with Gregory Peck, and Charlie Chaplin's final film, \"A Countess from Hong Kong\" (1967) with Marlon Brando.\nLoren received four Golden Globe Awards between 1964 and 1977 as \"World Film Favorite\u00a0\u2013 Female\".\nContinued success.\nLoren appeared in fewer movies after becoming a mother in 1968. During the next decade, most of her roles were in Italian features. During the 1970s, she was paired with Richard Burton in the last De Sica-directed film, \"The Voyage\" (1974), and a remake of the film \"Brief Encounter\" (1974). The film had its premiere on US television on 12 November 1974 as part of the \"Hallmark Hall of Fame\" series on NBC. In 1976, she starred in \"The Cassandra Crossing\". It fared extremely well internationally, and was a respectable box office success in the US market. She co-starred with Marcello Mastroianni again in Ettore Scola's \"A Special Day\" (1977). This movie was nominated for 11 international awards such as two Oscars (best actor in leading role, best foreign picture). It won a Golden Globe Award and a C\u00e9sar Award for best foreign movie. Loren's performance was awarded with a David di Donatello Award, the seventh in her career. The movie was extremely well received by American reviewers.\nFollowing this success, Loren starred in an American thriller \"Brass Target\". This movie received mixed reviews, although it was moderately successful in the United States and internationally. In 1978, she won her fourth Golden Globe for \"world film favorite\". Other movies of this decade were Academy Award nominee \"Sunflower\" (1970), which was a critical success, and Arthur Hiller's \"Man of La Mancha\" (1972), which was a critical and commercial failure despite being nominated for several awards, including two Golden Globes. Peter O'Toole and James Coco were nominated for two NBR awards, in addition the NBR listed \"Man of La Mancha\" in its best ten pictures of 1972 list. Loren headlined the action thriller \"Firepower\" (1979) co-starring James Coburn and O. J. Simpson, whom she had previously worked with on \"The Cassandra Crossing\".\nIn 1980, after the international success of the biography \"Sophia Loren: Living and Loving, Her Own Story\" by A. E. Hotchner, Loren portrayed herself and her mother in a made-for-television biographical film adaptation of her autobiography, \"Sophia Loren: Her Own Story\". Ritza Brown and Chiara Ferrari each portrayed the younger Loren. In 1981, she became the first female celebrity to launch her own perfume, 'Sophia', and a brand of eyewear soon followed.\nLoren acted infrequently during the 1980s, preferring to devote more time to raising her sons. In 1981 she turned down the role of Alexis Carrington in the television series \"Dynasty\". Although she was set to star in 13 episodes of CBS's \"Falcon Crest\" in 1984 as Angela Channing's half-sister Francesca Gioberti, negotiations fell through at the last moment and the role went to Gina Lollobrigida instead. She played the title role in the 1984 TV movie \"Aurora\", in which she acted alongside her 11-year-old real-life son Edoardo Ponti.\nLoren has recorded more than two dozen songs throughout her career, including a best-selling album of comedic songs with Peter Sellers; reportedly, she had to fend off his romantic advances. Partly owing to Sellers's infatuation with Loren, he split with his first wife, Anne Howe. Loren has made it clear to numerous biographers that Sellers's affections were reciprocated only platonically. This collaboration was covered in \"The Life and Death of Peter Sellers\" where actress Sonia Aquino portrayed Loren. The song \"Where Do You Go To (My Lovely)?\" by Peter Sarstedt was said to have been inspired by Loren.\nLater career.\nIn 1991, Loren received an Academy Honorary Award, which described her as \"One of the genuine treasures of world cinema who, in a career rich with memorable performances, has added permanent luster to our art form.\" In 1995, she received the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, a similar honorary award, bestowed by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, for outstanding contributions to the world of entertainment.\nShe presented Federico Fellini with his honorary Oscar in April 1993. In 2009, Loren stated on \"Larry King Live\" that Fellini had planned to direct her in a film shortly before his death in 1993. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Loren was selective about choosing her films and ventured into various areas of business, including cookbooks, eyewear, jewelry, and perfume. She received a Golden Globe nomination for her performance in Robert Altman's film \"Ready to Wear\" (1994), co-starring Julia Roberts.\nIn 1994, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to her.\nIn \"Grumpier Old Men\" (1995), Loren played a \"femme fatale\" opposite Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, and Ann-Margret. The film was a box-office success and became Loren's biggest US hit in years. At the 20th Moscow International Film Festival in 1997, she was awarded an Honorable Prize for contribution to cinema. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Loren among the greatest female stars of American film history. In 2001, Loren received a Special Grand Prix of the Americas Award at the Montreal World Film Festival for her body of work. She filmed two projects in Canada during this time: the independent film \"Between Strangers\" (2002), directed by her son Edoardo and co-starring Mira Sorvino, and the television miniseries \"Lives of the Saints\" (2004).\nIn 2009, after five years off the set and 14 years since she starred in a prominent US theatrical film, Loren starred in Rob Marshall's film version of \"Nine\", based on the Broadway musical that tells the story of a director whose midlife crisis causes him to struggle to complete his latest film; he is forced to balance the influences of numerous formative women in his life, including his deceased mother. Loren was Marshall's first and only choice for the role. The film also stars Daniel Day-Lewis, Pen\u00e9lope Cruz, Kate Hudson, Marion Cotillard, and Nicole Kidman. As a part of the cast, she received her first nomination for a Screen Actors Guild Award.\nIn 2010, Loren played her own mother in a two-part Italian television miniseries about her early life, directed by Vittorio Sindoni with Margareth Mad\u00e8 as Loren, entitled \"La mia casa \u00e8 piena di specchi\" (\"My House Is Full of Mirrors\"), based on the memoir by her sister Maria. In July 2013 Loren made her film comeback in an Italian short-film adaptation of Jean Cocteau's 1930 play \"The Human Voice\" (\"La voce umana\"), which charts the breakdown of a woman who is left by her lover\u00a0\u2013 with her younger son, Edoardo Ponti, as director. Filming took under a month during July in various locations in Italy, including Rome and Naples. It was Loren's first theatrical film since \"Nine\". She returned to feature-length film, as Holocaust survivor Madame Rosa, in Ponti's 2020 feature film \"The Life Ahead\". In 2021 she received AARP Best Actress and AWFJ Grand Dame awards for her role. After turning 90 in September 2024, despite having been inactive since the release of \"The Life Ahead\", Loren dismissed rumors about her retirement and expressed her hopes to star in new productions.\nOn 16 November 2017, Loren received a star at Almeria Walk of Fame in Spain for her work on \"White Sister\". She received the Almer\u00eda Tierra de Cine award.\nPersonal life.\nLoren is a Roman Catholic. Since 2006, her primary residence has been in Geneva, Switzerland. Loren's real estate portfolio has included a ranch in Hidden Valley, California, an apartment in the Hampshire House building in Manhattan, a condo on Williams Island in South Florida, and a villa in Rome.\nLoren is an ardent fan of the football club S.S.C. Napoli. In May 2007, when the team was third in Serie\u00a0B, she (then aged 72) told the \"Gazzetta dello Sport\" that she would do a striptease if the team won. She had recently posed for the 2007 Pirelli Calendar.\nIn February 2021, Loren was the guest on BBC Radio 4's \"Desert Island Discs\" and chose a pizza oven as her luxury item. Her musical choices included Cole Porter's \"I've Got You Under My Skin\" as sung by Ella Fitzgerald, and Debussy's \"Clair de lune\" as played by Tam\u00e1s V\u00e1s\u00e1ry. She revealed that fellow actor Richard Burton was furious with her for cheating at Scrabble.\nOn 24 September 2023, Loren received emergency surgery following fractures to her hip and femur sustained from a fall at her home in Switzerland.\nMarriage and family.\nLoren first met Carlo Ponti in 1950, when she was 15 and he was 37, and they soon began an affair. Since divorce was not permitted in Italian law at the time, Ponti was not legally divorced from his wife, Giuliana Fiastri, when Loren married him by proxy (two male lawyers stood in for them) in Mexico on 17 September 1957. The couple had their marriage annulled in 1962 to escape bigamy charges, but continued to live together. In 1965, they became French citizens after their application was approved by then French Prime Minister Georges Pompidou. Ponti then obtained a divorce from Giuliana in France, allowing him to marry Loren on 9 April 1966. The marriage lasted until Ponti's death on 10 January 2007 from pulmonary complications, aged 94.\nThe couple had two sons, Carlo Ponti Jr., born on 29 December 1968, and Edoardo Ponti, born on 6 January 1973. Loren's daughters-in-law are Sasha Alexander and Andrea Meszaros. Loren has four grandchildren and is one of Drew Barrymore's godparents, along with Anna Strasberg and Steven Spielberg.\nIn 1962, Loren's sister Maria married the youngest son of Benito Mussolini, Romano, with whom she had two daughters, Alessandra, a former MP and MEP, and Elisabetta.\nAffair with Cary Grant.\nLoren and Cary Grant co-starred in \"Houseboat\" (1958). Grant's wife Betsy Drake wrote the original script, and Grant originally intended that Drake would star with him. After he began an affair with Loren while filming \"The Pride and the Passion\" (1957), Grant arranged for Loren to take Drake's place with a rewritten script for which Drake asked not to receive credit. The affair ended in bitterness before \"The Pride and the Passion\"'s filming ended, causing problems on the \"Houseboat\" set. Grant hoped to resume the relationship, but Loren decided to marry Carlo Ponti instead.\nLegal issues and lawsuits.\nIn 1982, while in Italy, Loren made headlines after serving 17 days in prison on tax evasion charges. Loren said her accountant had made a mistake on her tax return. The matter did not hamper her popularity or career. In 2013, the Supreme Court of Italy cleared her of the charges in a separate decades-long dispute over the tax she should have paid on her 1974 earnings.\nIn September 1999, Loren filed a lawsuit against 79 adult websites for posting altered nude photos of her on the internet.\nRecognitions.\nBox office rating.\nIn The Motion Picture Herald, both British and American exhibitors voted for Loren within the Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44464", "revid": "50873644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44464", "title": "Imereti", "text": "Administrative region of Georgia\nImereti (Georgian: \u10d8\u10db\u10d4\u10e0\u10d4\u10d7\u10d8, ) is a region of Georgia situated in the central-western part of the republic along the middle and upper reaches of the Rioni River. Imereti is the most populous region in Georgia. It consists of 11 municipalities and the city of Kutaisi, which is the capital of the region.\nSubdivisions.\nThe Imereti region has one self governing city (Kutaisi) and 11 municipalities with 163 administrative communities (temi), totalling to 549 populated settlements:\nEconomy.\nAside from the capital Kutaisi, significant towns and regional centres include Samtredia, Chiatura (manganese production centre), Tkibuli (coal mining centre), Zestaponi (known for metals production), Vani, Khoni, and Sachkhere. Traditionally, Imereti is an agricultural region, known for its mulberries and grapes.\nDemographics.\nThe Imeretians (Georgian: \u10d8\u10db\u10d4\u10e0\u10da\u10d4\u10d1\u10d8) are one of the ethnographic groups of Georgians, inhabiting Imereti. Imeretians are Orthodox Christians and speak the Imeretian dialect, one of the Northwest dialects of the Georgian language. It is itself subdivided into Upper and Lower Imeretian.\nHistory.\nIn ancient times, the region was a part of the Kingdom of Colchis, until it was conquered by the Kingdom of Pontus. After the Third Mithridatic War, Colchis was under loose Roman control, and unsuccessfully revolted in 69 AD under Anicetus. After the collapse of Colchis, the kingdom of Lazica was established in 131\u00a0AD as a Roman vassal. Tzath I was the first Christian king of Lazica, being baptized in Constantinople in 523\u00a0AD, and fighting alongside Eastern Roman emperor Justinian I in the Iberian War. In 541\u00a0AD, the region became the theatre of the Lazic War between Justinian I and Sasanian Persian emperor Khosrow I.\nBetween 750 and 985, Imereti was ruled by a dynasty of native princes, but was devastated by hostile incursions, reviving only after it became united to Georgia. After the Mongol invasions of Georgia, Imereti was intermittently part of the independent Kingdom of Western Georgia, until being reunited in 1415 as the Duchy of Samokalako under the united Georgian Kingdom. Since that kingdom's disintegration in the 15th century, Imereti was an independent kingdom from 1466 onwards.\nIn the 17th\u201318th centuries, the kingdom of Imereti experienced frequent invasions by the Turks and paid patronage to the Ottoman Empire until 1810, when it was invaded and annexed by the Russian Empire. The last King of Imereti was Solomon II (1789\u20131810).\nFrom 1918 to 1921, Imereti was part of the independent Democratic Republic of Georgia. Within the USSR, the region was part of the Transcaucasian SFSR from 1922 to 1936, and part of the Georgian SSR from 1936 to 1991. Since Georgian independence in 1991, Imereti has been a region of Georgia with Kutaisi as the regional capital.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44466", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44466", "title": "Open Source Software", "text": ""}
{"id": "44468", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44468", "title": "Allen G. Thurman", "text": "American politician and judge (1813\u20131895)\nAllen Granberry Thurman (November 13, 1813 \u2013 December 12, 1895) was an American politician who served as a United States representative, Ohio Supreme Court justice, and United States senator. A Democrat, he unsuccessfully ran for vice president of the United States in 1888 as the running mate of President Grover Cleveland.\nBorn in Lynchburg, Virginia, he and his family moved to Chillicothe, Ohio, when Thurman was young. Thurman established a legal practice in Chillicothe with his uncle, William Allen, who later represented Ohio in the U.S. Senate. Thurman won election to the House of Representatives in 1844, becoming the youngest member of that body. He supported the James K. Polk administration during the Mexican\u2013American War and voted for the Wilmot Proviso, which would have banned slavery from any territory gained from Mexico. He served a single term in the House before joining the Supreme Court of Ohio. He narrowly lost the 1867 Ohio gubernatorial election to Rutherford B. Hayes. He won election to the Senate in 1869, becoming an opponent to the Republican Reconstruction policy. He actively campaigned against African-American voting rights and worked to reverse the civil rights advances of Reconstruction. He offered an amendment to continue to segregate public schools in the District of Columbia. During the disputed 1876 presidential election, Thurman helped establish the Electoral Commission. Thurman lost re-election in 1881 as the Republicans had won control of the Ohio legislature.\nThurman was a \"favorite son\" candidate for president in 1880 and 1884. The 1888 Democratic National Convention selected him as President Grover Cleveland's running mate, as Vice President Thomas A. Hendricks had died in office. The aging Thurman did not actively campaign and the Democratic ticket was defeated.\nEarly years.\nAllen Granberry Thurman was born in Lynchburg, Virginia, to Pleasant Thurman and Mary Granberry Allen Thurman. Both of his parents were teachers; his father also a Methodist minister. In 1815, his parents emancipated their slaves and moved to Chillicothe, Ohio. He attended Chillicothe Academy, an academy run by his mother, and then studied law as an apprentice to his uncle, William Allen (who later became a senator from Ohio). At the age of eighteen, Thurman worked on a land survey, and at twenty-one became private secretary to the Governor of Ohio, Robert Lucas. In 1835 he was admitted to the Ohio bar and became his uncle's law partner. In 1837 his uncle entered the Senate.\nCareer in government.\nCongressman.\nThe same year he was elected to the House of Representatives as its youngest member. He generally supported the majority of the Democrats on all issues except internal improvements, on which he tended to vote with the Whigs. He supported the Polk Administration's conduct of the Mexican\u2013American War, spoke in favor of the 54\u00b040' northern limit to the Oregon territory, and voted for the Wilmot Proviso, which would have banned slavery from the territory gained from Mexico. His support for the latter was due to anti-African-American prejudice, as he wanted to reserve this territory for white settlement. After a single two-year term, he left the House voluntarily to resume private law practice.\nState Supreme Court Justice.\nIn 1851 he was elected to a four-year term (February 1852 \u2013 February 1856) on the Ohio Supreme Court, the last year as the chief justice. He then returned to private law practice in Columbus. Thurman spoke out against the repeal of the Missouri Compromise and opposed the pro-slavery Lecompton constitution for Kansas. In 1860 he was a supporter of Stephen A. Douglas for President. A \"peace Democrat\" or \"Copperhead,\" he never accepted the right of a state to secede but felt it was unwise to fight a state that had already left the Union, and during the American Civil War he was opposed to Lincoln's policies, especially on emancipation. While he supported the war effort, he encouraged compromise and a political settlement.\nCandidate for Governor.\nIn 1867, he ran for Governor of Ohio, on a platform opposed to extending suffrage to blacks, but lost to future U.S. president Rutherford B. Hayes in a close election. Statewide Democrats including Thurman ran a banner under the slogan \"No Negro Equality!\"\nDuring the campaign, Thurman appealed to white supremacist attitudes in virulent tones, vowing to fight \"the thralldom of n*****ism.\" In Ohio, like most Northern states, black suffrage referendums failed to pass due to small fractions of Republican voters joining Democratic opposition. The issue thus became seized upon by Democratic politicians in race-baiting rhetoric.\nU.S. Senator.\nThe Ohio voters chose a Democratic state legislature, however, which selected Thurman as senator for the term beginning in 1869. He there became a strong opponent of the Republicans' Reconstruction measures. In 1873 Thurman crafted a strategy that led to Ohio choosing once more a Democratic legislature, and electing Thurman's uncle William Allen as governor. The legislature elected Thurman to another term in the Senate. During the twelve years he served in the Senate, he became the leader of the Democrats in that body. He was known for constant hard work, good preparation, and courteous treatment of his opponents, and other members ranked him among the top three senators of his time, in terms of ability. He came nearest, a Washington correspondent concluded, to \"the beau ideal of a Senator of any man on his side of the House. He has fine passing power of cutting up his political opponents, saying a word of encouragement to some Republican when he is down, and scattering the caucuses of the opposite side with a pistol shot.\" His prepared speeches were clear and cogent, but it was in debate that he showed himself at his most picturesque. \"He would wave his red bandana pocket handkerchief like a guidon, give his nose a trumpet-blast, take a fresh pinch of snuff, and dash into the debate, dealing rough blows, and scattering the carefully prepared arguments of his adversaries like chaff,\" a Washington long-time reporter remembered. He kept up a close friendship with his chief sparring partner on the opposite side, George F. Edmunds of Vermont. Journalists told how at a given signal\u2014a long blow of his nose\u2014he would get ready to exit the Senate so that the two could meet in the Judiciary Committee room to share a liberal amount of Kentucky Bourbon.\n\"When I speak of the law,\" Senator Roscoe Conkling of New York once said, \"I turn to the Senator as the Mussulman turns towards Mecca. I look to him only as I would look to the common law of England, the world's most copious volume of human jurisprudence.\" In particular he made himself the critic of giveaways to the large railroad corporations and of Republicans' Reconstruction policies. \"A fine juicy roast of land grants is what sends Thurman's tongue a-wagging,\" wrote one reporter.\nAn advocate of free trade, Thurman bemoaned of protective tariffs as a taxation upon \"everything one wears from the crown of his head to the soles.\"\nIn the 1876\u20131877 electoral college crisis, he helped to arrive at the solution of creating the Electoral Commission to settle the controversy, and ultimately served as one of the members of the commission, as one of the five Senators (one of the two Senate Democrats, and one of the seven Democrats altogether). As a Democrat, he voted with the seven-member minority, in favor of the Samuel J. Tilden electors in all cases, but the Republican majority prevailed in all the votes, and Thurman's 1867 gubernatorial opponent, Rutherford B. Hayes (who had returned to the governorship by defeating Thurman's uncle), became president. One of the House of Representatives' members of the commission, fellow Ohioan James Garfield, was to become the president four years later, after being chosen by the now-Republican Ohio legislature to succeed Thurman. Both men were lifelong friends.\n\"To look at Thurman one would suppose that his favorite reading was \"Foxe's Book of the Martyrs' and \"Baxter's Saints' Rest,'\" a reporter wrote, \"for Thurman's face certainly carries a heavier pressure of solemnity to the square inch than any face I ever saw.\" In fact, he was a wide reader, fond of Voltaire, Chateaubriand, Renan, and the lighter French novels, and colleagues admitted him the best French scholar in the Senate. He had picked up French from one Monsieur Gregoire, a tutor in his childhood, and in retirement continued reading French novels in the original language.\nIn the Senate, Thurman served on the Judiciary Committee, becoming its chairman when the Democrats won control of the Senate in the 46th Congress. He became President pro tempore of the Senate on April 15, 1879, being the first Democrat to hold this position in nearly twenty years. He briefly served as president of the Senate because of the illness of Vice President William A. Wheeler, before Ohio chose a Republican legislature, which would not reelect Thurman. They first chose Garfield, but on his election to the Presidency, selected John Sherman to succeed Thurman beginning in 1881. Garfield did appoint Thurman as American representative to the international monetary conference in Paris, a selection that Republican senators welcomed: they regretted his departure from among them. It was noted that in twelve years in the chamber, he had never had an angry word with any colleague, and noted, too, that he left the Senate as poor as he had come to it.\nCandidate for vice president.\nThurman spent his retirement reading French novels in the original language, playing whist, and amusing himself with mathematical problems; he had a reputation as one of the best mathematicians in Ohio. He was put forth as a favorite son candidate in the Democratic presidential nominating conventions in 1880 and 1884. In 1888, he was selected as President Grover Cleveland's running mate, because Vice President Thomas Hendricks had died in office in November 1885. Democrats turned his red bandana handkerchief into an emblem of the campaign, tying red bandanas to the top of canes in political parades, and manufacturing bandanas with the candidates' faces on them. Thurman's appeal came from his popularity among old-line Democrats, distrustful of Grover Cleveland's liberalism, and his known hostility to railroad monopolists. All the same, Thurman, who had retired from active politics, could not put on an active campaign, and added little to the ticket's chances.\nAmong the issues emphasized by the Cleveland/Thurman campaign included support for a reduction of taxes and protective tariffs.\nIn the concurrent 1884 United States Senate election in Ohio, Thurman did not oppose the campaign of incumbent Democratic senator George H. Pendleton, who faced opposition from the statewide party due to his sponsoring of the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act that ended patronage politics in the United States.\nWhen Cleveland was re-nominated for the presidency in June 1892, Thurman supported him but was not a candidate for vice president. Cleveland and running mate Adlai Stevenson went on to win the general election that November.\nPersonal life.\nOn November 14, 1844, Thurman married Mary Anderson Dun Tompkins of Lexington, Kentucky. Her father was a wealthy landowner named Walter Dun, and she had been married until 1840 when her first husband died. Together, Thurman and his wife had five children, including:\nHe was known as the \"Old Roman\".\nDeath and burial.\nThurman died on December 12, 1895, at his home in Columbus and is buried at Green Lawn Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nFollowing the 2021 United States Capitol attack, Democrats charged that Donald Trump was responsible for the violence and sought to impeach and remove him from office. When the articles of impeachment passed the U.S. House of Representatives and reached the Senate, by which Trump already left office, Chuck Schumer of New York cited a resolution by Thurman against Ulysses S. Grant's Secretary of War William W. Belknap as a precedent for convicting Trump.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "44469", "revid": "15816808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44469", "title": "Pluto", "text": "Largest dwarf planet\nPluto (minor-planet designation: 134340 Pluto) is a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt, a ring of bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune. It is the ninth-largest and tenth-most-massive known object to directly orbit the Sun. It is the largest known trans-Neptunian object by volume by a small margin, but is less massive than Eris. Like other Kuiper belt objects, Pluto is made primarily of ice and rock and is much smaller than the inner planets. Pluto has roughly one-sixth the mass of the Moon and one-third of its volume. Originally considered a planet, its status was changed when astronomers adopted a new definition of the word with new criteria.\nPluto has a moderately eccentric and inclined orbit, ranging from from the Sun. Light from the Sun takes 5.5 hours to reach Pluto at its orbital distance of . Pluto's eccentric orbit periodically brings it closer to the Sun than Neptune, but a stable orbital resonance prevents them from colliding.\nPluto has five known moons: Charon, the largest, whose diameter is just over half that of Pluto; Styx; Nix; Kerberos; and Hydra. Pluto and Charon are sometimes considered a binary system because the barycenter of their orbits does not lie within either body, and they are tidally locked. \"New Horizons\" was the first spacecraft to visit Pluto and its moons, making a flyby on July\u00a014,\u00a02015, and taking detailed measurements and observations.\nPluto was discovered in 1930 by Clyde W. Tombaugh, making it the first known object in the Kuiper belt. It was immediately hailed as the ninth planet. However, its planetary status was questioned when it was found to be much smaller than expected. These doubts increased following the discovery of additional objects in the Kuiper belt starting in the 1990s, particularly the more massive scattered disk object Eris in 2005. In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) formally redefined the term \"planet\" to exclude dwarf planets such as Pluto. Many planetary astronomers, however, continue to consider Pluto and other dwarf planets to be planets.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nIn the 1840s, Urbain Le Verrier used Newtonian mechanics to predict the position of the then-undiscovered planet Neptune after analyzing perturbations in the orbit of Uranus. Subsequent observations of Neptune in the late 19th century led astronomers to speculate that Uranus's orbit was being disturbed by another planet besides Neptune.\nIn 1906, Percival Lowell\u2014a wealthy Bostonian who had founded Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, in 1894\u2014started an extensive project in search of a possible ninth planet, which he termed \"Planet X\". In 1909, Lowell and William H. Pickering suggested several possible celestial coordinates for such a planet. Lowell and his observatory conducted his search, using mathematical calculations made by Elizabeth Williams, until his death in 1916, but to no avail. Unknown to Lowell, his surveys had captured two faint images of Pluto on March 19 and April 7, 1915, but they were not recognized for what they were. There are fourteen other known precovery observations, with the earliest made by the Yerkes Observatory on August 20, 1909.\nPercival's widow, Constance Lowell, entered into a ten-year legal battle with the Lowell Observatory over her husband's legacy, and the search for Planet X did not resume until 1929. Vesto Melvin Slipher, the observatory director, gave the job of locating Planet X to 23-year-old Clyde Tombaugh, who had just arrived at the observatory after Slipher had been impressed by a sample of his astronomical drawings.\nTombaugh's task was to systematically image the night sky in pairs of photographs, then examine each pair and determine whether any objects had shifted position. Using a blink comparator, he rapidly shifted back and forth between views of each of the plates to create the illusion of movement of any objects that had changed position or appearance between photographs. On February 18, 1930, after nearly a year of searching, Tombaugh discovered a possible moving object on photographic plates taken on January 23 and 29. A lesser-quality photograph taken on January 21 helped confirm the movement. After the observatory obtained further confirmatory photographs, news of the discovery was telegraphed to the Harvard College Observatory on March 13, 1930.\nOne Plutonian year corresponds to 247.94 Earth years; thus, in 2178, Pluto will complete its first orbit since its discovery.\nName.\nThe name \"Pluto\" came from the Roman god of the underworld; and it is also an epithet for Hades (the Greek equivalent of Pluto).\nUpon the announcement of the discovery, Lowell Observatory received over a thousand suggestions for names. Three names topped the list: Minerva, Pluto and Cronus. 'Minerva' was the Lowell staff's first choice but was rejected because it had already been used for an asteroid; Cronus was disfavored because it was promoted by an unpopular and egocentric astronomer, Thomas Jefferson Jackson See. A vote was then taken and 'Pluto' was the unanimous choice. To make sure the name stuck, and that the planet would not suffer changes in its name as Uranus had, Lowell Observatory proposed the name to the American Astronomical Society and the Royal Astronomical Society; both approved it unanimously. The name was published on May 1, 1930.\nThe name \"Pluto\" had received some 150 nominations among the letters and telegrams sent to Lowell. The first had been from Venetia Burney (1918\u20132009), an eleven-year-old schoolgirl in Oxford, England, who was interested in classical mythology. She had suggested it to her grandfather Falconer Madan when he read the news of Pluto's discovery to his family over breakfast; Madan passed the suggestion to astronomy professor Herbert Hall Turner, who cabled it to colleagues at Lowell on March 16, three days after the announcement.\nThe name 'Pluto' was mythologically appropriate: the god Pluto was one of six surviving children of Saturn, and the others had already all been chosen as names of major or minor planets (his brothers Jupiter and Neptune, and his sisters Ceres, Juno and Vesta). Both the god and the planet inhabited \"gloomy\" regions, and the god was able to make himself invisible, as the planet had been for so long. \nThe choice was further helped by the fact that the first two letters of \"Pluto\" were the initials of Percival Lowell; indeed, 'Percival' had been one of the more popular suggestions for a name for the new planet.\nSymbol.\nOnce named, Pluto's planetary symbol \u27e8\u27e9 was then created as a monogram of the letters \"PL\". This symbol is rarely used in astronomy anymore, though it is still common in astrology. However, the most common astrological symbol for Pluto, occasionally used in astronomy as well, is an orb (possibly representing Pluto's invisibility cap) over Pluto's bident \u27e8\u27e9, which dates to the early 1930s.\nThe name 'Pluto' was soon embraced by wider culture. In 1930, Walt Disney was apparently inspired by it when he introduced for Mickey Mouse a canine companion named Pluto, although Disney animator Ben Sharpsteen could not confirm why the name was given. In 1941, Glenn T. Seaborg named the newly created element plutonium after Pluto, in keeping with the tradition of naming elements after newly discovered planets, following uranium, which was named after Uranus, and neptunium, which was named after Neptune.\nMost languages use the name \"Pluto\" in various transliterations. In Japanese, Houei Nojiri suggested the calque , and this was borrowed into Chinese and Korean. Some languages of India use the name Pluto, but others, such as Hindi, use the name of \"Yama\", the God of Death in Hinduism. Polynesian languages also tend to use the indigenous god of the underworld, as in M\u0101ori \"Whiro\".\nVietnamese does not follow the Chinese usage due to a phonological constraint: the Sino-Vietnamese word \"minh\" \"dark\" is homophonous with \"minh\" \"bright\". Instead, Vietnamese uses Yama, which is also a Buddhist deity, in the form of \"Sao Di\u00eam V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" \"Yama's Star\", derived from Chinese \"Y\u00e1n W\u00e1ng / Y\u00echm W\u00f2hng\" \"King Yama\".\nPlanet X disproved.\nOnce Pluto was found, its faintness and lack of a viewable disc cast doubt on the idea that it was Lowell's Planet X. Estimates of Pluto's mass were revised downward throughout the 20th century.\nAstronomers initially calculated its mass based on its presumed effect on Neptune and Uranus. In 1931, Pluto was calculated to be roughly the mass of Earth, with further calculations in 1948 bringing the mass down to roughly that of Mars. In 1976, Dale Cruikshank, Carl Pilcher and David Morrison of the University of Hawai\u02bbi calculated Pluto's albedo for the first time, finding that it matched that for methane ice; this meant Pluto had to be exceptionally luminous for its size and therefore could not be more than 1 percent the mass of Earth. (Pluto's albedo is 1.4\u20131.9 times that of Earth.)\nIn 1978, the discovery of Pluto's moon Charon allowed the measurement of Pluto's mass for the first time: roughly 0.2% that of Earth, and far too small to account for the discrepancies in the orbit of Uranus. Subsequent searches for an alternative Planet X, notably by Robert Sutton Harrington, failed. In 1992, Myles Standish used data from \"Voyager 2\"'s flyby of Neptune in 1989, which had revised the estimates of Neptune's mass downward by 0.5%\u2014an amount comparable to the mass of Mars\u2014to recalculate its gravitational effect on Uranus. With the new figures added in, the discrepancies, and with them the need for a Planet X, vanished. \nAs of 2000[ [update]] the majority of scientists agree that Planet X, as Lowell defined it, does not exist. Lowell had made a prediction of Planet X's orbit and position in 1915 that was fairly close to Pluto's actual orbit and its position at that time. Ernest W. Brown concluded soon after Pluto's discovery that this was a coincidence.\nClassification.\nFrom 1992 onward, many bodies were discovered orbiting in the same volume as Pluto, showing that Pluto is part of a population of objects called the Kuiper belt. This made its official status as a planet controversial, with many questioning whether Pluto should be considered together with or separately from its surrounding population. Museum and planetarium directors occasionally created controversy by omitting Pluto from planetary models of the Solar System. In February 2000 the Hayden Planetarium in New York City displayed a Solar System model of only eight planets, which made headlines almost a year later.\nCeres, Pallas, Juno and Vesta lost their planet status among most astronomers after the discovery of many other asteroids in the 1840s. On the other hand, planetary geologists often regarded Ceres, and less often Pallas and Vesta, as being different from smaller asteroids because they were large enough to have undergone geological evolution. Although the first Kuiper belt objects discovered were quite small, objects increasingly closer in size to Pluto were soon discovered, some large enough (like Pluto itself) to satisfy geological but not dynamical ideas of planethood. \nIn 1998, Brian G. Marsden of Harvard University's Minor Planet Center suggested that Pluto be given the minor planet number 10000 while still retaining its official position as a planet. The prospect of Pluto's \"demotion\" created a public outcry, and in response the International Astronomical Union clarified that it was not at that time proposing to remove Pluto from the planet list.\nIn the early 2000's, astronomers at Caltech led by Michael E. Brown undertook a wide survey of the skies using digital detection technology, finding numerous Trans-Neptunian objects. Many of these objects were initially measured as larger than or equal in size to Pluto, igniting a debate over whether or not to consider them planets. Later, estimates were revised down due to higher than expected albedos. \nThe debate became unavoidable when, in July 2005, these astronomers announced the discovery of a new object, Eris, which was substantially more massive than Pluto and the most massive object discovered in the Solar System since Triton in 1846. The press initially called it the tenth planet, although there was no official consensus at the time on whether to call it a planet. Others in the astronomical community considered the discovery the strongest argument for reclassifying Pluto as a minor planet.\nIAU classification.\nThe debate came to a head in August 2006 during the triennial meeting of the IAU, when Uruguayan astronomers Julio \u00c1ngel Fern\u00e1ndez and Gonzalo Tancredi first proposed the new definition for the term \"planet\". According to their proposal, there are three conditions for an object in the Solar System to be considered a planet:\nPluto fails to meet the third condition. Its mass is substantially less than the combined mass of the other objects in its orbit: 0.07 times, in contrast to Earth, which is 1.7\u00a0million times the remaining mass in its orbit (excluding the moon). The IAU further decided that bodies that, like Pluto, meet criteria 1 and 2, but do not meet criterion 3 would be called dwarf planets. In September 2006, the IAU included Pluto, and Eris and its moon Dysnomia, in their Minor Planet Catalogue, giving them the official minor-planet designations \"(134340) Pluto\", \"(136199) Eris\", and \"(136199) Eris I Dysnomia\". Had Pluto been included upon its discovery in 1930, it would have likely been designated 1164, following 1163 Saga, which was discovered a month earlier.\nThere has been some resistance within the astronomical community toward the reclassification, and in particular planetary scientists often continue to reject it, considering Pluto, Charon, and Eris to be planets for the same reason they do so for Ceres. In effect, this amounts to accepting only the second clause of the IAU definition. Alan Stern, principal investigator with NASA's \"New Horizons\" mission to Pluto, derided the IAU resolution. He also stated that because less than five percent of astronomers voted for it, the decision was not representative of the entire astronomical community. Marc W. Buie, then at the Lowell Observatory, petitioned against the definition. Others have supported the IAU, for example Mike Brown, the astronomer who discovered Eris.\nPublic reception to the IAU decision was mixed. A resolution introduced in the California State Assembly facetiously called the IAU decision a \"scientific heresy\". The New Mexico House of Representatives passed a resolution in honor of Clyde Tombaugh, the discoverer of Pluto and a longtime resident of that state, that declared that Pluto will always be considered a planet while in New Mexican skies and that March 13, 2007, was Pluto Planet Day. The Illinois Senate passed a similar resolution in 2009 on the basis that Tombaugh was born in Illinois. The resolution asserted that Pluto was \"unfairly downgraded to a 'dwarf' planet\" by the IAU.\" \nSome members of the public have also rejected the change, citing the disagreement within the scientific community on the issue, or for sentimental reasons, maintaining that they have always known Pluto as a planet and will continue to do so regardless of the IAU decision. In 2006, in its 17th annual words-of-the-year vote, the American Dialect Society voted \"plutoed\" as the word of the year. To \"pluto\" is to \"demote or devalue someone or something\". In April 2024, Arizona (where Pluto was first discovered in 1930) passed a law naming Pluto as the official state planet.\nResearchers on both sides of the debate gathered in August 2008, at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory for a conference that included back-to-back talks on the IAU definition of a planet. Entitled \"The Great Planet Debate\", the conference published a post-conference press release indicating that scientists could not come to a consensus about the definition of planet. In June 2008, the IAU had announced in a press release that the term \"plutoid\" would henceforth be used to refer to Pluto and other planetary-mass objects that have an orbital semi-major axis greater than that of Neptune, though the term has not seen significant use.\nOrbit.\nPluto's orbital period is about 248 years. Its orbital characteristics are substantially different from those of the planets, which follow nearly circular orbits around the Sun close to a flat reference plane called the ecliptic. In contrast, Pluto's orbit is moderately inclined relative to the ecliptic (over 17\u00b0) and moderately eccentric (elliptical). This eccentricity means a small region of Pluto's orbit lies closer to the Sun than Neptune's. The Pluto\u2013Charon barycenter came to perihelion on September 5, 1989, and was last closer to the Sun than Neptune between February 7, 1979, and February 11, 1999.\nAlthough the 3:2 resonance with Neptune (see below) is maintained, Pluto's inclination and eccentricity behave in a chaotic manner. Computer simulations can be used to predict its position for several million years (both forward and backward in time), but after intervals much longer than the Lyapunov time of 10\u201320\u00a0million years, calculations become unreliable: Pluto is sensitive to immeasurably small details of the Solar System, hard-to-predict factors that will gradually change Pluto's position in its orbit.\nThe semi-major axis of Pluto's orbit varies between about 39.3 and 39.6\u00a0AU with a period of about 19,951 years, corresponding to an orbital period varying between 246 and 249 years. The semi-major axis and period are presently getting longer.\nRelationship with Neptune.\nDespite Pluto's orbit appearing to cross that of Neptune when viewed from north or south of the Solar System, the two objects' orbits do not intersect. When Pluto is closest to the Sun, and close to Neptune's orbit as viewed from such a position, it is also the farthest north of Neptune's path. Pluto's orbit passes about 8 AU north of that of Neptune, preventing a collision.\nThis alone is not enough to protect Pluto; perturbations from the planets (especially Neptune) could alter Pluto's orbit (such as its orbital precession) over millions of years so that a collision could happen. However, Pluto is also protected by its 2:3 orbital resonance with Neptune: for every two orbits that Pluto makes around the Sun, Neptune makes three, in a frame of reference that rotates at the rate that Pluto's perihelion precesses (about degrees per year). \nEach cycle lasts about 495 years. There are many other objects in this same resonance, called plutinos. At present, in each 495-year cycle, the first time Pluto is at perihelion (such as in 1989), Neptune is 57\u00b0 ahead of Pluto. By Pluto's second passage through perihelion, Neptune will have completed a further one and a half of its own orbits, and will be 123\u00b0 behind Pluto. Pluto and Neptune's minimum separation is over 17\u00a0AU, which is greater than Pluto's minimum separation from Uranus (11\u00a0AU). The minimum separation between Pluto and Neptune actually occurs near the time of Pluto's aphelion.\nThe 2:3 resonance between the two bodies is highly stable and has been preserved over millions of years. This prevents their orbits from changing relative to one another, so the two bodies can never pass near each other. Even if Pluto's orbit were not inclined, the two bodies could never collide. \nWhen Pluto's period is slightly different from 3/2 of Neptune's, the pattern of its distance from Neptune will drift. Near perihelion Pluto moves interior to Neptune's orbit and is therefore moving faster, so during the first of two orbits in the 495-year cycle, it is approaching Neptune from behind. At present it remains between 50\u00b0 and 65\u00b0 behind Neptune for 100 years (e.g. 1937\u20132036). \nThe gravitational pull between the two causes angular momentum to be transferred to Pluto. This situation moves Pluto into a slightly larger orbit, where it has a slightly longer period, according to Kepler's third law. After several such repetitions, Pluto is sufficiently delayed that at the second perihelion of each cycle it will not be far ahead of Neptune coming behind it, and Neptune will start to decrease Pluto's period again. The whole cycle takes about 20,000 years to complete.\nOther factors.\nNumerical studies have shown that over millions of years, the general nature of the alignment between the orbits of Pluto and Neptune does not change. There are several other resonances and interactions that enhance Pluto's stability. These arise principally from two additional mechanisms (besides the 2:3 mean-motion resonance).\nFirst, Pluto's argument of perihelion, the angle between the point where it crosses the ecliptic (or the invariant plane) and the point where it is closest to the Sun, librates around 90\u00b0. This means that when Pluto is closest to the Sun, it is at its farthest north of the plane of the Solar System, preventing encounters with Neptune. This is a consequence of the Kozai mechanism, which relates the eccentricity of an orbit to its inclination to a larger perturbing body\u2014in this case, Neptune. Relative to Neptune, the amplitude of libration is 38\u00b0, and so the angular separation of Pluto's perihelion to the orbit of Neptune is always greater than 52\u00b0 (90\u00b0\u201338\u00b0). The closest such angular separation occurs every 10,000 years.\nSecond, the longitudes of ascending nodes of the two bodies\u2014the points where they cross the invariant plane\u2014are in near-resonance with the above libration. When the two longitudes are the same\u2014that is, when one could draw a straight line through both nodes and the Sun\u2014Pluto's perihelion lies exactly at 90\u00b0, and hence it comes closest to the Sun when it is furthest north of Neptune's orbit. This is known as the \"1:1 superresonance\". All the Jovian planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) play a role in the creation of the superresonance.\nRotation.\nPluto's rotation period, its day, is equal to 6.387 Earth days. Like Uranus and 2 Pallas, Pluto rotates on its \"side\" in its orbital plane, with an axial tilt of 120\u00b0, and so its seasonal variation is extreme; at its solstices, one-fourth of its surface is in continuous daylight, whereas another fourth is in continuous darkness. The reason for this unusual orientation has been debated. Research from the University of Arizona has suggested that it may be due to the way that a body's spin will always adjust to minimize energy. This could mean a body reorienting itself to put extraneous mass near the equator and regions lacking mass tend towards the poles. This is called \"polar wander\". \nAccording to a paper released from the University of Arizona, this could be caused by masses of frozen nitrogen building up in shadowed areas of the dwarf planet. These masses would cause the body to reorient itself, leading to its unusual axial tilt of 120\u00b0. The buildup of nitrogen is due to Pluto's vast distance from the Sun. At the equator, temperatures can drop to , causing nitrogen to freeze as water would freeze on Earth. The same polar wandering effect seen on Pluto would be observed on Earth were the Antarctic ice sheet several times larger.\nGeology.\nSurface.\nThe plains on Pluto's surface are composed of more than 98 percent nitrogen ice, with traces of methane and carbon monoxide. Nitrogen and carbon monoxide are most abundant on the anti-Charon face of Pluto (around 180\u00b0 longitude, where Tombaugh Regio's western lobe, Sputnik Planitia, is located), whereas methane is most abundant near 300\u00b0 east. The mountains are made of water ice. Pluto's surface is quite varied, with large differences in both brightness and color. \nPluto is one of the most contrastive bodies in the Solar System, with as much contrast as Saturn's moon Iapetus. The color varies from charcoal black, to dark orange and white. Pluto's color is more similar to that of Io with slightly more orange and significantly less red than Mars. Notable geographical features include Tombaugh Regio, or the \"Heart\" (a large bright area on the side opposite Charon), Belton Regio, or the \"Whale\" (a large dark area on the trailing hemisphere), and the \"Brass Knuckles\" (a series of equatorial dark areas on the leading hemisphere).\nSputnik Planitia, the western lobe of the \"Heart\", is a 1,000\u00a0km-wide basin of frozen nitrogen and carbon monoxide ices, divided into polygonal cells, which are interpreted as convection cells that carry floating blocks of water ice crust and sublimation pits towards their margins; there are obvious signs of glacial flows both into and out of the basin. It has no craters that were visible to \"New Horizons\", indicating that its surface is less than 10\u00a0million years old. Latest studies have shown that the surface has an age of years.\nThe New Horizons science team summarized initial findings as \"Pluto displays a surprisingly wide variety of geological landforms, including those resulting from glaciological and surface\u2013atmosphere interactions as well as impact, tectonic, possible cryovolcanic, and mass-wasting processes.\"\nIn Western parts of Sputnik Planitia there are fields of transverse dunes formed by the winds blowing from the center of Sputnik Planitia in the direction of surrounding mountains. The dune wavelengths are in the range of 0.4\u20131\u00a0km and likely consist of methane particles 200\u2013300\u00a0\u03bcm in size.\nInternal structure.\nPluto's density is . Because the decay of radioactive elements would eventually heat the ices enough for the rock to separate from them, scientists expect that Pluto's internal structure is differentiated, with the rocky material having settled into a dense core surrounded by a mantle of water ice. The pre\u2013\"New Horizons\" estimate for the diameter of the core is , 70% of Pluto's diameter. \nIt is possible that such heating continues, creating a subsurface ocean of liquid water 100 to 180 km thick at the core\u2013mantle boundary. In September 2016, scientists at Brown University simulated the impact thought to have formed Sputnik Planitia, and showed that it might have been the result of liquid water upweling from below after the collision, implying the existence of a subsurface ocean at least 100\u00a0km deep. \nIn June 2020, astronomers reported evidence that Pluto may have had a subsurface ocean, and consequently may have been habitable, when it was first formed. In March 2022, a team of researchers proposed that the mountains Wright Mons and Piccard Mons are actually a merger of many smaller cryovolcanic domes, suggesting a source of heat on the body at levels previously thought not possible.\nMass and size.\nPluto's diameter is and its mass is , 17.7% that of the Moon (0.22% that of Earth). Its surface area is , or just slightly bigger than Russia or Antarctica (particularly including the Antarctic sea ice during winter). Its surface gravity is 0.063 \"g\" (compared to 1 \"g\" for Earth and 0.17 \"g\" for the Moon). This gives Pluto an escape velocity of 4,363.2\u00a0km per hour / 2,711.167 miles per hour (as compared to Earth's 40,270\u00a0km per hour / 25,020 miles per hour). Pluto is more than twice the diameter and a dozen times the mass of Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt. It is less massive than the dwarf planet Eris, a trans-Neptunian object discovered in 2005, though Pluto has a larger diameter of 2,376.6\u00a0km compared to Eris's approximate diameter of 2,326\u00a0km.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith less than 0.2 lunar masses, Pluto is much less massive than the terrestrial planets, and also less massive than seven moons: Ganymede, Titan, Callisto, Io, the Moon, Europa, and Triton. The mass is much less than thought before Charon was discovered.\nThe discovery of Pluto's satellite Charon in 1978 enabled a determination of the mass of the Pluto\u2013Charon system by application of Newton's formulation of Kepler's third law. Observations of Pluto in occultation with Charon allowed scientists to establish Pluto's diameter more accurately, whereas the invention of adaptive optics allowed them to determine its shape more accurately.\nDeterminations of Pluto's size have been complicated by its atmosphere and hydrocarbon haze. In March 2014, Lellouch, de Bergh et al. published findings regarding methane mixing ratios in Pluto's atmosphere consistent with a Plutonian diameter greater than 2,360\u00a0km, with a \"best guess\" of 2,368\u00a0km. On July 13, 2015, images from NASA's \"New Horizons\" mission Long Range Reconnaissance Imager (LORRI), along with data from the other instruments, determined Pluto's diameter to be , which was later revised to be on July 24, and later to . Using radio occultation data from the \"New Horizons\" Radio Science Experiment (REX), the diameter was found to be .\nAtmosphere.\nPluto has a tenuous atmosphere consisting of nitrogen (N2), methane (CH4), and carbon monoxide (CO), which are in equilibrium with their ices on Pluto's surface. According to the measurements by \"New Horizons\", the surface pressure is about 1\u00a0Pa (10\u00a0\u03bcbar), roughly one million to 100,000 times less than Earth's atmospheric pressure. It was initially thought that, as Pluto moves away from the Sun, its atmosphere should gradually freeze onto the surface; studies of \"New Horizons\" data and ground-based occultations show that Pluto's atmospheric density increases, and that it likely remains gaseous throughout Pluto's orbit. \n\"New Horizons\" observations showed that atmospheric escape of nitrogen to be 10,000 times less than expected. Alan Stern has contended that even a small increase in Pluto's surface temperature can lead to exponential increases in Pluto's atmospheric density; from 18\u00a0hPa to as much as 280\u00a0hPa (three times that of Mars to a quarter that of the Earth). At such densities, nitrogen could flow across the surface as liquid. Just like sweat cools the body as it evaporates from the skin, the sublimation of Pluto's atmosphere cools its surface. Pluto has no or almost no troposphere; observations by \"New Horizons\" suggest only a thin tropospheric boundary layer. Its thickness in the place of measurement was 4\u00a0km, and the temperature was 37\u00b13 K. The layer is not continuous.\nIn July 2019, an occultation by Pluto showed that its atmospheric pressure, against expectations, had fallen by 20% since 2016. In 2021, astronomers at the Southwest Research Institute confirmed the result using data from an occultation in 2018, which showed that light was appearing less gradually from behind Pluto's disc, indicating a thinning atmosphere.\nThe presence of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, in Pluto's atmosphere creates a temperature inversion, with the average temperature of its atmosphere tens of degrees warmer than its surface, though observations by \"New Horizons\" have revealed Pluto's upper atmosphere to be far colder than expected (70\u00a0K, as opposed to about 100\u00a0K). Pluto's atmosphere is divided into roughly 20 regularly spaced haze layers up to 150\u00a0km high, thought to be the result of pressure waves created by airflow across Pluto's mountains.\nNatural satellites.\nPluto has five known natural satellites. The largest and closest to Pluto is Charon. First identified in 1978 by astronomer James Christy, Charon is the only moon of Pluto that may be in hydrostatic equilibrium. Charon's mass is sufficient to cause the barycenter of the Pluto\u2013Charon system to be outside Pluto. Beyond Charon there are four much smaller circumbinary moons. In order of distance from Pluto they are Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra. Nix and Hydra were both discovered in 2005, Kerberos was discovered in 2011, and Styx was discovered in 2012. The satellites' orbits are circular (eccentricity &lt; 0.006) and coplanar with Pluto's equator (inclination &lt; 1\u00b0), and therefore tilted approximately 120\u00b0 relative to Pluto's orbit. The Plutonian system is highly compact: the five known satellites orbit within the inner 3% of the region where prograde orbits would be stable.\nThe orbital periods of all Pluto's moons are linked in a system of orbital resonances and near-resonances. When precession is accounted for, the orbital periods of Styx, Nix, and Hydra are in an exact 18:22:33 ratio. There is a sequence of approximate ratios, 3:4:5:6, between the periods of Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra with that of Charon; the ratios become closer to being exact the further out the moons are.\nThe Pluto\u2013Charon system is one of the few in the Solar System whose barycenter lies outside the primary body; the Patroclus\u2013Menoetius system is a smaller example, and the Sun\u2013Jupiter system is the only larger one. The similarity in size of Charon and Pluto has prompted some astronomers to call it a double dwarf planet. The system is also unusual among planetary systems in that each is tidally locked to the other, which means that Pluto and Charon always have the same hemisphere facing each other \u2014 a property shared by only one other known system, Eris and Dysnomia. From any position on either body, the other is always at the same position in the sky, or always obscured. This also means that the rotation period of each is equal to the time it takes the entire system to rotate around its barycenter.\nPluto's moons are hypothesized to have been formed by a collision between Pluto and a similar-sized body, early in the history of the Solar System. The collision released material that consolidated into the moons around Pluto.\nQuasi-satellite.\nIn 2012, it was calculated that 15810 Arawn could be a quasi-satellite of Pluto, a specific type of co-orbital configuration. According to the calculations, the object would be a quasi-satellite of Pluto for about 350,000 years out of every two-million-year period. Measurements made by the \"New Horizons\" spacecraft in 2015 made it possible to calculate the orbit of Arawn more accurately, and confirmed the earlier ones. However, it is not agreed upon among astronomers whether Arawn should be classified as a quasi-satellite of Pluto based on its orbital dynamics, since its orbit is primarily controlled by Neptune with only occasional perturbations by Pluto.\nOrigin.\nPluto's origin and identity had long puzzled astronomers. One early hypothesis was that Pluto was an escaped moon of Neptune knocked out of orbit by Neptune's largest moon, Triton. This idea was eventually rejected after dynamical studies showed it to be impossible because Pluto never approaches Neptune in its orbit.\nPluto's true place in the Solar System began to reveal itself only in 1992, when astronomers began to find small icy objects beyond Neptune that were similar to Pluto not only in orbit but also in size and composition. This trans-Neptunian population is thought to be the source of many short-period comets. Pluto is the largest member of the Kuiper belt, a stable belt of objects located between 30 and 50 AU from the Sun. As of 2011, surveys of the Kuiper belt to magnitude 21 were nearly complete and any remaining Pluto-sized objects are expected to be beyond 100\u00a0AU from the Sun. \nLike other Kuiper-belt objects (KBOs), Pluto shares features with comets; for example, the solar wind is gradually blowing Pluto's surface into space. It has been claimed that if Pluto were placed as near to the Sun as Earth, it would develop a tail, as comets do. This claim has been disputed with the argument that Pluto's escape velocity is too high for this to happen. It has been proposed that Pluto may have formed as a result of the agglomeration of numerous comets and Kuiper-belt objects.\nThough Pluto is the largest Kuiper belt object discovered, Neptune's moon Triton, which is larger than Pluto, is similar to it both geologically and atmospherically, and is thought to be a captured Kuiper belt object. Eris (see above) is about the same size as Pluto (though more massive) but is not strictly considered a member of the Kuiper belt population. Rather, it is considered a member of a linked population called the scattered disc.\nLike other members of the Kuiper belt, Pluto is thought to be a residual planetesimal; a component of the original protoplanetary disc around the Sun that failed to fully coalesce into a full-fledged planet. Most astronomers agree that Pluto owes its position to a sudden migration undergone by Neptune early in the Solar System's formation. As Neptune migrated outward, it approached the objects in the proto-Kuiper belt, setting one in orbit around itself (Triton), locking others into resonances, and knocking others into chaotic orbits. The objects in the scattered disc, a dynamically unstable region overlapping the Kuiper belt, are thought to have been placed in their positions by interactions with Neptune's migrating resonances. \nA 2004 computer model by Alessandro Morbidelli of the Observatoire de la C\u00f4te d'Azur in Nice suggested that the migration of Neptune into the Kuiper belt may have been triggered by the formation of a 1:2 resonance between Jupiter and Saturn, which created a gravitational push that propelled both Uranus and Neptune into higher orbits and caused them to switch places, ultimately doubling Neptune's distance from the Sun. The resultant expulsion of objects from the proto-Kuiper belt could also explain the Late Heavy Bombardment 600\u00a0million years after the Solar System's formation and the origin of the Jupiter trojans. It is possible that Pluto had a near-circular orbit about 33 AU from the Sun before Neptune's migration perturbed it into a resonant capture. The Nice model requires that there were about a thousand Pluto-sized bodies in the original planetesimal disk, which included Triton and Eris.\nObservation and exploration.\nObservation.\nPluto's distance from Earth makes its in-depth study and exploration difficult. Pluto's visual apparent magnitude averages 15.1, brightening to 13.65 at perihelion. To see it, a telescope is required; around 30\u00a0cm (12\u00a0in) aperture being desirable. It looks star-like and without a visible disk even in large telescopes, because its angular diameter is maximum 0.11\".\nThe earliest maps of Pluto, made in the late 1980s, were brightness maps created from close observations of eclipses by its largest moon, Charon. Observations were made of the change in the total average brightness of the Pluto\u2013Charon system during the eclipses. For example, eclipsing a bright spot on Pluto makes a bigger total brightness change than eclipsing a dark spot. Computer processing of many such observations can be used to create a brightness map. This method can also track changes in brightness over time.\nBetter maps were produced from images taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), which offered higher resolution, and showed considerably more detail, resolving variations several hundred kilometers across, including polar regions and large bright spots. These maps were produced by complex computer processing, which finds the best-fit projected maps for the few pixels of the Hubble images. These remained the most detailed maps of Pluto until the flyby of \"New Horizons\" in July 2015, because the two cameras on the HST used for these maps were no longer in service.\nExploration.\nThe \"New Horizons\" spacecraft, which flew by Pluto in July 2015, is the first and so far only attempt to explore Pluto directly. Launched in 2006, it captured its first (distant) images of Pluto in late September 2006 during a test of the Long Range Reconnaissance Imager. The images, taken from a distance of approximately 4.2\u00a0billion kilometers, confirmed the spacecraft's ability to track distant targets, critical for maneuvering toward Pluto and other Kuiper belt objects. In early 2007 the craft made use of a gravity assist from Jupiter.\n\"New Horizons\" made its closest approach to Pluto on July 14, 2015, after a 3,462-day journey across the Solar System. Scientific observations of Pluto began five months before the closest approach and continued for at least a month after the encounter. Observations were conducted using a remote sensing package that included imaging instruments and a radio science investigation tool, as well as spectroscopic and other experiments. The scientific goals of \"New Horizons\" were to characterize the global geology and morphology of Pluto and its moon Charon, map their surface composition, and analyze Pluto's neutral atmosphere and its escape rate. On October 25, 2016, at 05:48 pm ET, the last bit of data (of a total of 50\u00a0billion bits of data; or 6.25 gigabytes) was received from \"New Horizons\" from its close encounter with Pluto.\nSince the \"New Horizons\" flyby, scientists have advocated for an orbiter mission that would return to Pluto to fulfill new science objectives. They include mapping the surface at per pixel, observations of Pluto's smaller satellites, observations of how Pluto changes as it rotates on its axis, investigations of a possible subsurface ocean, and topographic mapping of Pluto's regions that are covered in long-term darkness due to its axial tilt. The last objective could be accomplished using laser pulses to generate a complete topographic map of Pluto.\n\"New Horizons\" principal investigator Alan Stern has advocated for a \"Cassini\"-style orbiter that would launch around 2030 (the 100th anniversary of Pluto's discovery) and use Charon's gravity to adjust its orbit as needed to fulfill science objectives after arriving at the Pluto system. The orbiter could then use Charon's gravity to leave the Pluto system and study more KBOs after all Pluto science objectives are completed. A conceptual study funded by the NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts (NIAC) program describes a fusion-enabled Pluto orbiter and lander based on the Princeton field-reversed configuration reactor.\n\"New Horizons\" imaged all of Pluto's northern hemisphere, and the equatorial regions down to about 30\u00b0 South. Higher southern latitudes have only been observed, at very low resolution, from Earth. Images from the Hubble Space Telescope in 1996 cover 85% of Pluto and show large albedo features down to about 75\u00b0 South. This is enough to show the extent of the temperate-zone maculae. Later images had slightly better resolution, due to minor improvements in Hubble instrumentation. The equatorial region of the sub-Charon hemisphere of Pluto has only been imaged at low resolution, as \"New Horizons\" made its closest approach to the anti-Charon hemisphere.\nSome albedo variations in the higher southern latitudes could be detected by \"New Horizons\" using Charon-shine (light reflected off Charon). The south polar region seems to be darker than the north polar region, but there is a high-albedo region in the southern hemisphere that may be a regional nitrogen or methane ice deposit.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44471", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44471", "title": "Trojan war", "text": ""}
{"id": "44472", "revid": "39761822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44472", "title": "The World According to Garp", "text": "1978 novel by John Irving\nThe World According to Garp is John Irving's fourth novel, about a man who is born out of wedlock to a feminist leader, then grows up to be a writer. Published in 1978, the book was a bestseller for several years. It was a finalist for the National Book Award for Fiction in 1979, and its first paperback edition won the award the following year.\nSynopsis.\nJenny Fields is a strong-willed nurse who wants a child but not a husband. A dying ball turret gunner known only as Technical Sergeant Garp, who was severely brain damaged in combat, is admitted to the ICU where Jenny works. She nurses Garp, observing his infantile state and frequent erections. Unconstrained by convention and driven by her desire for a child, Jenny impregnates herself by raping the brain-damaged soldier, and names the bastard son \"T. S.\" (derived from \"Technical Sergeant\"). Jenny raises young Garp alone, taking a position as the live-in nurse at an all-boys preparatory school in New England.\nGarp grows up, becoming interested in sex, wrestling, and writing fiction\u2014three topics in which his mother has little interest. After his graduation in 1961, his mother takes him to Vienna, where he writes his first novella. At the same time, his mother begins writing her autobiography, \"A Sexual Suspect\". After Jenny and Garp return to Steering, Garp marries Helen, the wrestling coach's daughter, and begins his family\u2014he a struggling writer, she a teacher of English. The publication of \"A Sexual Suspect\" makes his mother famous. She becomes a feminist icon, because feminists view her book as a manifesto of a woman who does not care to bind herself to a man, and who chooses to raise a child on her own. She nurtures and supports women traumatized by men, among them the Ellen Jamesians, a group of women named after an eleven-year-old girl whose tongue was cut out by her rapists to silence her. The members of the group cut out their own tongues in solidarity with Ellen, even though James herself opposes the practice.\nGarp becomes a devoted parent, wrestling with anxiety for the safety of his children. He and his family inevitably experience dark and violent events through which the characters change and grow. Garp learns (often painfully) from the women in his life (including transgender ex-football player Roberta Muldoon), who are struggling to become more tolerant in the face of intolerance. The story contains a great deal of (in the words of Garp's fictional teacher) \"lunacy and sorrow\".\nThe novel contains several narratives: Garp's first piece of fiction, a short story entitled \"The Pension Grillparzer\"; \"Vigilance\", an essay; and the first chapter of his third novel, \"The World According to Bensenhaver\". The book also contains some motifs that appear in other Irving novels: bears, New England, Vienna, hotels, wrestling, a person who prefers abstinence over sex, and adultery.\nBackground.\nJohn Irving's mother, Frances Winslow, had not been married at the time of his conception, and Irving never met his biological father. As a child, he was not told anything about his father, and he told his mother that unless she gave him some information about his biological father, in his writing he would invent the father and the circumstances of how she got pregnant. Winslow would reply \"Go ahead, dear.\"\nIn 1981, \"Time\" magazine quoted the novelist's mother as saying \"There are parts of \"Garp\" that are too explicit for me.\"\nAdaptations.\nA movie adaptation of the novel starring Robin Williams was released in 1982, with a screenplay written by Steve Tesich.\nBBC Radio 4's \"Classic Serial\" broadcast a three-part adaptation of the novel by Linda Marshall Griffiths in January 2014. The production was directed by Nadia Molinari and featured Miranda Richardson as Jenny, Lee Ingleby as Garp, Jonathan Keeble as Roberta and Lyndsey Marshal as Helen.\nOn 3 November 2015, Irving revealed that he'd been approached by HBO and Warner Brothers to reconstruct \"The World According to Garp\" as a miniseries. He described the project as being in the early stages.\nAccording to the byline of a self-penned, 20 February 2017 essay for \"The Hollywood Reporter\", Irving completed his teleplay for the five-part series based on \"The World According to Garp\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44473", "revid": "84755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44473", "title": "Ctesiphon", "text": "Ancient city in present-day Iraq\nCtesiphon ( ; , \"Tyspwn\" or \"Tysfwn\"; ; , ; ) was an ancient city in modern Iraq, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, about 35 kilometres (22\u00a0mi) southeast of Baghdad. Ctesiphon served as a royal capital of the Iranian empires for over eight hundred years, in the Parthian and Sasanian periods. Ctesiphon was the administrative capital of the Sasanian Empire from 226 to 637 (when it was conquered by the Arabs), or until the conclusion of the Muslim conquest of Persia in 651 AD.\nCtesiphon developed into a rich commercial metropolis, merging with the surrounding cities along both shores of the river, including the Hellenistic city of Seleucia. Ctesiphon and its environs were therefore sometimes referred to as \"The Cities\" (, ). In the late 6th and early 7th century, it was listed as the largest city in the world by some accounts.\nDuring the Roman\u2013Parthian Wars, Ctesiphon fell three times to the Romans, and later fell once during Sasanian rule. It was also the site of the Battle of Ctesiphon in 363 AD. After the Muslim invasion and conquest, the city fell into decline and was depopulated by the end of the 8th century, its place as a political and economic center being taken by Baghdad, the Abbasid capital. The most conspicuous structure remaining today is the Taq Kasra, sometimes called the Archway of Ctesiphon.\nNames.\nThe Latin name derives from Ancient Greek \"Kt\u0113siph\u00f4n\" (). This is ostensibly a Greek toponym based on a personal name, although it may be a Hellenized form of a local name, reconstructed as \"Tisf\u014dn\" or \"Tisb\u014dn\". In Iranian-language texts of the Sasanian era, it is spelled as \"Tyspwn\", which can be read as \"T\u012bsf\u014dn\", \"T\u0113sif\u014dn\", etc. in Manichaean Parthian, in Middle Persian and in Christian Sogdian (in Syriac alphabet) languages. The New Persian form is \"Tisfun\" ().\nTexts from the Church of the East's synods referred to the city as \"Q\u1e6d\u0113sp\u014dn\" () or some times \"M\u0101\u1e25\u00f4z\u0113\" () when referring to the metropolis of Seleucia-Ctesiphon.\nIn modern Arabic, the name is usually \"\u1e6caysaf\u016bn\" () or \"Qa\u1e6daysf\u016bn\" () or as \"al-Mada'in\" ( \"The Cities\", referring to Greater Ctesiphon). \"According to Y\u0101q\u016bt [...], quoting \u1e24amza, the original form was \u1e6c\u016bsf\u016bn or T\u016bsf\u016bn, which was arabicized as \u1e6caysaf\u016bn.\" The Armenian name of the city was \"Tizbon\" (). Ctesiphon is first mentioned in the Book of Ezra of the Old Testament as Kasfia/Casphia (a derivative of the ethnic name Cas, and a cognate of Caspian and Qazvin). It is also mentioned in the Talmud as Aktisfon. In another Talmudic reference it is written as Akistfon, located across the Tigris River from the city of Ardashir.\nLocation.\nCtesiphon is located approximately at Al-Mada'in, southeast of the modern city of Baghdad, Iraq, along the river Tigris. Ctesiphon measured 30 square kilometers, more than twice the surface of a 13.7-square-kilometer fourth-century imperial Rome.\nThe archway of Chosroes (\"Taq Kasra\") was once a part of the royal palace in Ctesiphon and is estimated to date between the 3rd and 6th centuries AD. It is located in what is now the Iraqi town of Salman Pak.\nHistory.\nParthian period.\nCtesiphon was founded in the late 120s BC. It was built on the site of a military camp established across from Seleucia by Mithridates I of Parthia. The reign of Gotarzes I saw Ctesiphon reach a peak as a political and commercial center. The city became the Empire's capital circa 58\u00a0BC during the reign of Orodes II. Gradually, the city merged with the old Hellenistic capital of Seleucia and other nearby settlements to form a cosmopolitan metropolis.\nThe reason for this westward relocation of the capital could have been in part due to the proximity of the previous capitals (Mithradatkirt, and Hecatompylos at Hyrcania) to the Scythian incursions.\nStrabo abundantly describes the foundation of Ctesiphon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBecause of its importance, Ctesiphon was a major military objective for the leaders of the Roman Empire in their eastern wars. The city was captured by Rome four or five times in its history \u2013 three times in the 2nd century alone. The emperor Trajan captured Ctesiphon in 116, but his successor, Hadrian, decided to willingly return Ctesiphon in 117 as part of a peace settlement. The Roman general Avidius Cassius captured Ctesiphon in 164 during another Parthian war, but abandoned it when peace was concluded. In 197, the emperor Septimius Severus sacked Ctesiphon and carried off thousands of its inhabitants, whom he sold into slavery.\nSasanian period.\nBy 226, Ctesiphon was in the hands of the Sasanian Empire, who also made it their capital and had laid an end to the Parthian dynasty of Iran. Ctesiphon was greatly enlarged and flourished during their rule, thus turning into a metropolis, which was known by in Arabic as al-Mada'in, and in Aramaic as Mahoze. The oldest inhabited places of Ctesiphon were on its eastern side, which in Islamic Arabic sources is called \"the Old City\" ( \"Mad\u012bnah al-'At\u012bqah\"), where the residence of the Sasanians, known as the White Palace (), was located. The southern side of Ctesiphon was known as Asb\u0101nbar or Asp\u0101nbar, which was known by its prominent halls, riches, games, stables, and baths. Taq Kasra was located in the latter.\nThe western side was known as Veh-Ardashir (meaning \"the good city of Ardashir\" in Middle Persian), known as Mahoza by the Jews, Kokhe by the Christians, and Behrasir by the Arabs. Veh-Ardashir was populated by many wealthy Jews, and was the seat of the church of the Nestorian patriarch. To the south of Veh-Ardashir was Valashabad. Ctesiphon had several other districts which were named Hanbu Shapur, Darzanidan, Veh Jondiu-Khosrow, Nawinabad and Kardakadh.\nSeverus Alexander advanced towards Ctesiphon in 233, but as corroborated by Herodian, his armies suffered a humiliating defeat against Ardashir I. In 283, emperor Carus sacked the city uncontested during a period of civil upheaval. Some historians have claimed that Galerius marched on Ctesiphon and was able to capture it. However, this is never explicitly stated in any source and is still a matter of debate among scholars.\nHence that he returned it to the Persian king Narses in exchange for Armenia and western Mesopotamia is also likely to have never happened. In c.\u2009325 and again in 410, the city, or the Greek colony directly across the river, was the site of church councils for the Church of the East.\nAfter the conquest of Antioch in 541, Khosrow I built a new city near Ctesiphon for the inhabitants he captured. He called this new city Veh-Antiok-Xusr\u014d, or literally, \"better than Antioch Khosrow built this\". Local inhabitants of the area called the new city \"Rumagan\", meaning \"town of the Romans\" and Arabs called the city \"al-Rumiyya\". Along with Weh Antiok, Khosrow built a number of fortified cities. After a campaign in 573, John of Ephesus wrote that no fewer than 292,000 persons had been deported from Dara, Apamia, and other Syrian towns to Veh-Antiokh. John would later cite a letter stating no more than 30,000 prisoners were deported. It's thought that the first number he gave is not to be taken literally.\nIn 590, a member of the House of Mihran, Bahram Chobin repelled the newly ascended Sasanian ruler Khosrow II from Iraq, and conquered the region. One year later, Khosrow II, with aid from the Byzantine Empire, reconquered his domains. During his reign, some of the great fame of al-Mada'in decreased, due to the popularity of Khosrow's new winter residence, Dastagerd. In 627, the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius surrounded the city, the capital of the Sassanid Empire, leaving it after the Persians accepted his peace terms. In 628, a deadly plague hit Ctesiphon, al-Mada'in and the rest of the western part of the Sasanian Empire, which even killed Khosrow's son and successor, Kavad II.\nIn 629, Ctesiphon was briefly under the control of Mihranid usurper Shahrbaraz, but the latter was shortly assassinated by the supporters of Khosrow II's daughter Borandukht. Ctesiphon then continued to be involved in constant fighting between two factions of the Sasanian Empire, the Pahlav (Parthian) faction under the House of Ispahbudhan and the Parsig (Persian) faction under Piruz Khosrow.\nDownfall of the Sasanians and the Islamic conquests.\nIn the mid-630s, the Muslim Arabs, who had invaded the territories of the Sasanian Empire, defeated them during a great battle known as the Battle of al-Q\u0101disiyyah. The Arabs then attacked Ctesiphon, and occupied it in early 637.\nThe Muslim military officer Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas quickly seized Valashabad and made a peace treaty with the inhabitants of Veh-Antiok-Xusr\u014d and Veh-Ardashir. The terms of the treaty were that the inhabitants of Veh-Antiok-Xusr\u014d were allowed to leave if they wanted to, but if they did not, they were forced to acknowledge Muslim authority, and also pay tribute (\"jizya\"). Later on, when the Muslims arrived at Ctesiphon, it was completely desolated, due to flight of the Sasanian royal family, nobles, and troops. However, the Muslims had managed to take some of troops captive, and many riches were seized from the Sasanian treasury and were given to the Muslim troops. Furthermore, the throne hall in Taq Kasra was briefly used as a mosque.\nStill, as political and economic fortune had passed elsewhere, the city went into a rapid decline, especially after the founding of the Abbasid capital at Baghdad in the 760s, and soon became a ghost town. Caliph Al-Mansur took much of the required material for the construction of Baghdad from the ruins of Ctesiphon. He also attempted to demolish the palace and reuse its bricks for his own palace, but he desisted only when the undertaking proved too vast. Al-Mansur also used the al-Rumiya town as the Abbasid capital city for a few months.\nIt is believed to be the basis for the city of Isbanir in \"One Thousand and One Nights\".\nModern era.\nThe ruins of Ctesiphon were the site of a major battle of World War I in November 1915. The Ottoman Empire defeated troops of Britain attempting to capture Baghdad, and drove them back some before trapping the British force and compelling it to surrender.\nPopulation and religion.\nUnder Sasanian rule, the population of Ctesiphon was heavily mixed: it included Arameans, Persians, Greeks and Assyrians. Several religions were also practiced in the metropolis, which included Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism. In 497, the first Nestorian patriarch Mar Babai I, fixed his see at Seleucia-Ctesiphon, supervising their mission east, with the Merv metropolis as pivot. The population also included Manicheans, a dualist church, who continued to be mentioned in Ctesiphon during Umayyad rule fixing their \"patriarchate of Babylon\" there. Much of the population fled from Ctesiphon after the Arab capture of the metropolis. However, a portion of Persians remained there, and some important figures of these people are known to have provided Ali with presents, which he, however, refused to take. In the ninth century, the surviving Manicheans fled and displaced their patriarchate up the Silk Road, in Samarkand.\nArchaeology.\nA German Oriental Society expedition led by Oscar Reuther excavated at Ctesiphon in 1928\u201329 mainly at Qasr bint al-Qadi on the western part of the site. In winter of 1931\u20131932 a joint expedition of the German State Museums (Staatliche Museen zu Berlin) and The Metropolitan Museum of Art continued excavations at the site, focusing on the areas of Ma'aridh, Tell Dheheb, the Taq-i Kisra, Selman Pak and Umm ez-Za'tir under the direction of Ernst K\u00fchnel.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, an Italian team from the University of Turin directed by Antonio Invernizzi and Giorgio Gullini worked at the part of the site on the other side of the Tigris, which they identified as Veh Ardashir. Work mainly concentrated on restoration at the palace of Khosrow II. In 2013, the Iraqi government contracted to restore the Taq Kasra, as a tourist attraction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44474", "revid": "651047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44474", "title": "Saturn", "text": "Sixth planet from the Sun\nSaturn is the sixth planet from the Sun and the second largest in the Solar System, after Jupiter. It is a gas giant, with an average radius of about 9 times that of Earth. It has an eighth of the average density of Earth, but is over 95 times more massive. Even though Saturn is almost as big as Jupiter, Saturn has less than a third of its mass. Saturn orbits the Sun at a distance of , with an orbital period of 29.45\u00a0years.\nSaturn's interior is thought to be composed of a rocky core, surrounded by a deep layer of metallic hydrogen, an intermediate layer of liquid hydrogen and liquid helium, and an outer layer of gas. Saturn has a pale yellow hue, due to ammonia crystals in its upper atmosphere. An electrical current in the metallic hydrogen layer is thought to give rise to Saturn's planetary magnetic field, which is weaker than Earth's, but has a magnetic moment 580 times that of Earth because of Saturn's greater size. Saturn's magnetic field strength is about a twentieth that of Jupiter. The outer atmosphere is generally bland and lacking in contrast, although long-lived features can appear. Wind speeds on Saturn can reach .\nThe planet has a bright and extensive system of rings, composed mainly of ice particles, with a smaller amount of rocky debris and dust. At least 274 moons orbit the planet, of which 63 are officially named; these do not include the hundreds of moonlets in the rings. Titan, Saturn's largest moon and the second largest in the Solar System, is larger (but less massive) than the planet Mercury and is the only moon in the Solar System that has a substantial atmosphere.\nName and symbol.\nSaturn is named after the Roman god of wealth and agriculture, who was the father of the god Jupiter. Its astronomical symbol has been traced back to the Greek Oxyrhynchus Papyri, where it can be seen to be a Greek kappa-rho ligature with a horizontal stroke, as an abbreviation for \"\u039a\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2\" (Cronus), the Greek name for the planet (). It later came to look like a lower-case Greek eta, with the cross added at the top in the 16th century to Christianize this pagan symbol.\nThe Romans named the seventh day of the week Saturday, \"S\u0101turni di\u0113s\", \"Saturn's Day\", for the planet Saturn.\nPhysical characteristics.\nSaturn is a gas giant, composed predominantly of hydrogen and helium. It lacks a definite surface, though it is likely to have a solid core. The planet's rotation makes it an oblate spheroid\u2014a ball flattened at the poles and bulging at the equator. Its equatorial radius is more than 10% larger than the polar radius: 60,268\u00a0km versus 54,364\u00a0km (37,449\u00a0mi versus 33,780\u00a0mi). \nJupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, the other giant planets in the Solar System, are less oblate. The combination of the bulge and the rotation rate means that the effective surface gravity along the equator, , is 74% of what it is at the poles and is lower than the surface gravity of Earth. However, the equatorial escape velocity, nearly , is much higher than that of Earth.\nSaturn is the only planet of the Solar System that is less dense than water\u2014about 30% less. Although Saturn's core is considerably denser than water, the average specific density of the planet is , because of the atmosphere. Jupiter has 318 times Earth's mass, and Saturn is 95 times Earth's mass. Together, Jupiter and Saturn hold 92% of the total planetary mass in the Solar System.\nInternal structure.\nDespite consisting mostly of hydrogen and helium, most of Saturn's mass is not in the gas phase, because hydrogen becomes a non-ideal liquid when the density is above , which is reached at a radius containing 99.9% of Saturn's mass. The temperature, pressure, and density inside Saturn all rise steadily toward the core, which causes hydrogen to be a metal in the deeper layers.\nStandard planetary models suggest that the interior of Saturn is similar to that of Jupiter, having a small rocky core surrounded by hydrogen and helium, with trace amounts of various volatiles. Analysis of the distortion shows that Saturn is substantially more centrally condensed than Jupiter and therefore contains much more material denser than hydrogen near its center. Saturn's central regions are about 50% hydrogen by mass, and Jupiter's are about 67% hydrogen.\nThis core is similar in composition to Earth, but is more dense. The examination of Saturn's gravitational moment, in combination with physical models of the interior, has allowed constraints to be placed on the mass of Saturn's core. In 2004, scientists estimated that the core must be 9\u201322 times the mass of Earth, which corresponds to a diameter of about . Measurements of Saturn's rings suggest a much more diffuse core, with a mass equal to about 17 Earths and a radius equal to about 60% of Saturn's entire radius. This is surrounded by a thicker, liquid metallic hydrogen layer, followed by a liquid layer of helium-saturated molecular hydrogen, which gradually transitions to a gas as altitude increases. The outermost layer spans about and consists of gas.\nSaturn has a hot interior, reaching at its core, and radiates 2.5 times more energy into space than it receives from the Sun. Jupiter's thermal energy is generated by the Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz mechanism of slow gravitational compression; but such a process alone may not be sufficient to explain heat production for Saturn, because it is less massive. An alternative or additional mechanism may be the generation of heat through the \"raining out\" of droplets of helium deep in Saturn's interior. As the droplets descend through the lower-density hydrogen, the process releases heat by friction and leaves Saturn's outer layers depleted of helium. These descending droplets may have accumulated into a helium shell surrounding the core. Rainfalls of diamonds have been suggested to occur within Saturn, as well as in Jupiter and ice giants Uranus and Neptune.\nAtmosphere.\nThe outer atmosphere of Saturn contains 96.3% molecular hydrogen and 3.25% helium by volume. The proportion of helium is significantly deficient compared to the abundance of this element in the Sun. The quantity of elements heavier than helium (metallicity) is not known precisely, but the proportions are assumed to match the primordial abundances from the formation of the Solar System. The total mass of these heavier elements is estimated to be 19\u201331 times the mass of Earth, with a significant fraction located in Saturn's core region.\nTrace amounts of ammonia, acetylene, ethane, propane, phosphine, and methane have been detected in Saturn's atmosphere. The upper clouds are composed of ammonia crystals, while the lower level clouds appear to consist of either ammonium hydrosulfide () or water. Ultraviolet radiation from the Sun causes methane photolysis in the upper atmosphere, leading to a series of hydrocarbon chemical reactions with the resulting products being carried downward by eddies and diffusion. This photochemical cycle is modulated by Saturn's annual seasonal cycle. \"Cassini\" observed a series of cloud features found in northern latitudes, nicknamed the \"String of Pearls\". These features are cloud clearings that reside in deeper cloud layers.\nCloud layers.\nSaturn's atmosphere exhibits a banded pattern similar to Jupiter's, but Saturn's bands are much fainter and are much wider near the equator. The nomenclature used to describe these bands is the same as on Jupiter. Saturn's finer cloud patterns were not observed until the flybys of the \"Voyager\" spacecraft during the 1980s. Since then, Earth-based telescopy has improved to the point where regular observations can be made.\nThe composition of the clouds varies with depth and increasing pressure. In the upper cloud layers, with temperatures in the range of 100\u2013160\u00a0K and pressures extending between 0.5\u20132 bar, the clouds consist of ammonia ice. Water ice clouds begin at a level where the pressure is about 2.5 bar and extend down to 9.5 bar, where temperatures range from 185 to 270\u00a0K. Intermixed in this layer is a band of ammonium hydrosulfide ice, lying in the pressure range 3\u20136 bar with temperatures of 190\u2013235\u00a0K. The lower layers, where pressures are between 10 and 20 bar and temperatures are 270\u2013330\u00a0K, contains a region of water droplets with ammonia in aqueous solution.\nSaturn's usually bland atmosphere occasionally exhibits long-lived ovals and other features common on Jupiter. In 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope imaged an enormous white cloud near Saturn's equator that was not present during the \"Voyager\" encounters, and in 1994 another smaller storm was observed. The 1990 storm was an example of a Great White Spot, a short-lived phenomenon that occurs once every Saturnian year, roughly every 30 Earth years, around the time of the northern hemisphere's summer solstice. \nPrevious Great White Spots were observed in 1876, 1903, 1933, and 1960, with the 1933 storm being the best observed. The latest giant storm was observed in 2010. In 2015, researchers used Very Large Array telescope to study Saturnian atmosphere, and reported that they found \"long-lasting signatures of all mid-latitude giant storms, a mixture of equatorial storms up to hundreds of years old, and potentially an unreported older storm at 70\u00b0N\".\nThe winds on Saturn are the second fastest among the Solar System's planets, after Neptune's. \"Voyager\" data indicate peak easterly winds of . In images from the \"Cassini\" spacecraft during 2007, Saturn's northern hemisphere displayed a bright blue hue, similar to Uranus. The color was most likely caused by Rayleigh scattering. Thermography has shown that Saturn's south pole has a warm polar vortex, the only known example of such a phenomenon in the Solar System. Whereas temperatures on Saturn are normally \u2212185\u00a0\u00b0C, temperatures on the vortex often reach as high as \u2212122\u00a0\u00b0C, suspected to be the warmest spot on Saturn.\nHexagonal cloud patterns.\nA persisting hexagonal wave pattern around the north polar vortex in the atmosphere at about 78\u00b0N was first noted in the \"Voyager\" images. The sides of the hexagon are each about long, which is longer than the diameter of the Earth. The entire structure rotates with a period of 10h 39m 24s (the same period as that of the planet's radio emissions) which is assumed to be equal to the period of rotation of Saturn's interior. The hexagonal feature does not shift in longitude like the other clouds in the visible atmosphere. The pattern's origin is a matter of much speculation. Most scientists think it is a standing wave pattern in the atmosphere. Polygonal shapes have been replicated in the laboratory through differential rotation of fluids.\nHST imaging of the south polar region indicates the presence of a jet stream, but no strong polar vortex nor any hexagonal standing wave. NASA reported in November 2006 that \"Cassini\" had observed a \"hurricane-like\" storm locked to the south pole that had a clearly defined eyewall. Eyewall clouds had not previously been seen on any planet other than Earth. For example, images from the \"Galileo\" spacecraft did not show an eyewall in the Great Red Spot of Jupiter.\nThe south pole storm may have been present for billions of years. This vortex is comparable to the size of Earth, and it has winds of 550\u00a0km/h.\nMagnetosphere.\nSaturn has an intrinsic magnetic field that has a simple, symmetric shape\u2014a magnetic dipole. Its strength at the equator\u20140.2\u00a0gauss (20\u00a0\u03bcT)\u2014is approximately one twentieth of that of the field around Jupiter and slightly weaker than Earth's magnetic field. As a result, Saturn's magnetosphere is much smaller than Jupiter's.\nWhen \"Voyager 2\" entered the magnetosphere, the solar wind pressure was high and the magnetosphere extended only 19 Saturn radii, or 1.1\u00a0million km (684,000\u00a0mi), although it enlarged within several hours, and remained so for about three days. Most probably, the magnetic field is generated similarly to that of Jupiter\u2014by currents in the liquid metallic-hydrogen layer called a metallic-hydrogen dynamo. This magnetosphere is efficient at deflecting the solar wind particles from the Sun. The moon Titan orbits within the outer part of Saturn's magnetosphere and contributes plasma from the ionized particles in Titan's outer atmosphere. Saturn's magnetosphere, like Earth's, produces aurorae.\nOrbit and rotation.\nThe average distance between Saturn and the Sun is over 1.4\u00a0billion kilometers (9\u00a0AU). With an average orbital speed of 9.68\u00a0km/s, it takes Saturn 10,759 Earth days (or about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;29+1\u20442\u00a0years) to finish one revolution around the Sun. As a consequence, it forms a near 5:2 mean-motion resonance with Jupiter. The elliptical orbit of Saturn is inclined 2.48\u00b0 relative to the orbital plane of the Earth. The perihelion and aphelion distances are, respectively, 9.195 and 9.957\u00a0AU, on average. The visible features on Saturn rotate at different rates depending on latitude, and multiple rotation periods have been assigned to various regions (as in Jupiter's case).\nAstronomers use three different systems for specifying the rotation rate of Saturn. \"System\u00a0I\" has a period of 10h 14m 00s (844.3\u00b0/d) and encompasses the Equatorial Zone, the South Equatorial Belt, and the North Equatorial Belt. The polar regions are considered to have rotation rates similar to \"System\u00a0I\". All other Saturnian latitudes, excluding the north and south polar regions, are indicated as \"System\u00a0II\" and have been assigned a rotation period of 10h 38m 25.4s (810.76\u00b0/d). \"System\u00a0III\" refers to Saturn's internal rotation rate. Based on radio emissions from the planet detected by \"Voyager 1\" and \"Voyager 2\", System\u00a0III has a rotation period of 10h 39m 22.4s (810.8\u00b0/d). System\u00a0III has largely superseded System\u00a0II.\nA precise value for the rotation period of the interior remains elusive. While approaching Saturn in 2004, \"Cassini\" found that the radio rotation period of Saturn had increased appreciably, to approximately 10h 45m 45s \u00b1. An estimate of Saturn's rotation (as an indicated rotation rate for Saturn as a whole) based on a compilation of various measurements from the \"Cassini\", \"Voyager\", and \"Pioneer\" probes is 10h 32m 35s. Studies of the planet's C Ring yield a rotation period of 10h 33m 38s \u00b1\u2009.\nIn March 2007, it was found that the variation in radio emissions from the planet did not match Saturn's rotation rate. This variance may be caused by geyser activity on Saturn's moon Enceladus. The water vapor emitted into Saturn's orbit by this activity becomes charged and creates a drag upon Saturn's magnetic field, slowing its rotation slightly relative to the rotation of the planet.\nSaturn only has one known trojan asteroid, designated , whose trojan configuration was announced in September 2024, orbiting the Sun at the stable L4 Lagrange point 60\u00b0 ahead of the planet along its orbit. This discovery leaves only Mercury without any known trojans at all. Orbital resonance mechanisms, including secular resonance, are believed to be the cause of the low number of known Saturnian trojans.\nNatural satellites.\nSaturn has 274 known moons, 63 of which have formal names. There is evidence of dozens to hundreds of moonlets with diameters of 40\u2013500 meters in Saturn's rings, which are not considered to be true moons. Titan, the largest moon, comprises more than 90% of the mass in orbit around Saturn, including the rings. Saturn's second-largest moon, Rhea, may have a tenuous ring system of its own, along with a tenuous atmosphere.\nMany of the other moons are small: 131 are less than 50\u00a0km in diameter. Traditionally, most of Saturn's moons have been named after Titans of Greek mythology. Titan is the only satellite in the Solar System with a major atmosphere, in which a complex organic chemistry occurs. It is the only satellite with hydrocarbon lakes.\nOn 6 June 2013, scientists at the IAA-CSIC reported the detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the upper atmosphere of Titan, a possible precursor for life. On 23 June 2014, NASA claimed to have strong evidence that nitrogen in the atmosphere of Titan came from materials in the Oort cloud, associated with comets, and not from the materials that formed Saturn in earlier times.\nSaturn's moon Enceladus, which seems similar in chemical makeup to comets, has often been regarded as a potential habitat for microbial life. Evidence of this possibility includes the satellite's salt-rich particles having an \"ocean-like\" composition that indicates most of Enceladus's expelled ice comes from the evaporation of liquid salt water. A 2015 flyby by \"Cassini\" through a plume on Enceladus found most of the ingredients to sustain life forms that live by methanogenesis.\nIn April 2014, NASA scientists reported the possible beginning of a new moon within the A Ring, which was imaged by \"Cassini\" on 15 April 2013.\nPlanetary rings.\nSaturn is probably best known for the system of planetary rings that makes it visually unique. The rings extend from outward from Saturn's equator and average approximately in thickness. They are composed predominantly of water ice, with trace amounts of tholin impurities and a peppered coating of approximately 7% amorphous carbon. The particles that make up the rings range in size from specks of dust up to 10\u00a0m. While the other gas giants also have ring systems, Saturn's is the largest and most visible.\nThere is a debate on the age of the rings. One side supports that they are ancient, and were created simultaneously with Saturn from the original nebular material (around 4.6\u00a0billion years ago), or shortly after the LHB (around 4.1 to 3.8\u00a0billion years ago). The other side supports that they are much younger, created around 100 million years ago. An MIT research team, supporting the latter theory, proposed that the rings are remnant of a destroyed moon of Saturn, named \u2033Chrysalis\u2033.\nBeyond the main rings, at a distance of 12\u00a0million\u00a0km (7.5\u00a0million\u00a0mi) from the planet is the sparse Phoebe ring. It is tilted at an angle of 27\u00b0 to the other rings and, like Phoebe, orbits in retrograde fashion.\nSome of the moons of Saturn, including Pandora and Prometheus, act as shepherd moons to confine the rings and prevent them from spreading out. Pan and Atlas cause weak, linear density waves in Saturn's rings that have yielded more reliable calculations of their masses.\nHistory of observation and exploration.\nThe observation and exploration of Saturn can be divided into three phases: (1) pre-modern observations with the naked eye, (2) telescopic observations from Earth beginning in the 17th century, and (3) visitation by space probes, in orbit or on flyby. In the 21st century, telescopic observations continue from Earth (including Earth-orbiting observatories like the Hubble Space Telescope) and, until its 2017 retirement, from the \"Cassini\" orbiter around Saturn.\nPre-telescopic observation.\nSaturn has been known since prehistoric times, and in early recorded history it was a major character in various mythologies. Babylonian astronomers systematically observed and recorded the movements of Saturn. In ancient Greek, the planet was known as Phainon, and in Roman times it was known as the \"star of Saturn\" or the \"star of the Sun (i.e. Helios)\". In ancient Roman mythology, the planet Phainon was sacred to this agricultural god, from which the planet takes its modern name. The Romans considered the god Saturnus the equivalent of the Greek god Cronus. In modern Greek, the planet retains the name \"Cronus\"\u2014: \"Kronos\".\nThe Greek scientist Ptolemy based his calculations of Saturn's orbit on observations he made while it was in opposition. In Hindu astrology, there are nine astrological objects, known as Navagrahas. Saturn is known as \"Shani\" and judges everyone based on the good and bad deeds performed in life. Ancient Chinese and Japanese culture designated the planet Saturn as the \"earth star\" or \"soil star\" (). This was based on Five Elements which were traditionally used to classify natural elements.\nIn Hebrew, Saturn is called \"Shabbathai\". Its angel is Cassiel. Its intelligence or beneficial spirit is 'Ag\u020b\u0207l (), and its darker spirit (demon) is Z\u0203z\u0207l (). Zazel has been described as a great angel, invoked in Solomonic magic, who is \"effective in love conjurations\". In Ottoman Turkish, Urdu, and Malay, the name of Zazel is 'Zuhal', derived from the Arabic language ().\nTelescopic pre-spaceflight observations.\nSaturn's rings require at least a 15-mm-diameter telescope to resolve and were not known to exist until Christiaan Huygens saw them in 1655 and published his observations in 1659. Galileo, with his primitive telescope in 1610, incorrectly thought of Saturn's appearing not quite round as two moons on Saturn's sides. \nWhen Huygens used greater telescopic magnification this notion was refuted, and the rings were truly seen for the first time. Huygens discovered Saturn's moon Titan. Giovanni Domenico Cassini later discovered four other moons: Iapetus, Rhea, Tethys, and Dione. In 1675, Cassini discovered the gap now known as the Cassini Division.\nNo further discoveries of significance were made until 1789 when William Herschel discovered two further moons, Mimas and Enceladus. The irregularly shaped satellite Hyperion, which has a resonance with Titan, was discovered in 1848 by a British team.\nIn 1899, William Henry Pickering discovered Phoebe, a highly irregular satellite that does not rotate synchronously with Saturn as the larger moons do. Phoebe was the first such satellite found and it took more than a year to orbit Saturn in a retrograde orbit. During the early 20th century, research on Titan led to the confirmation in 1944 that it had a thick atmosphere\u2014a feature unique among the Solar System's moons.\nSpaceflight missions.\n\"Pioneer 11\" flyby.\n\"Pioneer 11\" made the first flyby of Saturn in September 1979, when it passed within of the planet's cloud tops. Images were taken of the planet and a few of its moons, although their resolution was too low to discern surface detail. The spacecraft also studied Saturn's rings, revealing the thin F-ring and the fact that dark gaps in the rings are bright when viewed at a high phase angle (towards the Sun), meaning that they contain fine light-scattering material. In addition, \"Pioneer 11\" measured the temperature of Titan.\n\"Voyager\" flybys.\nIn November 1980, the \"Voyager 1\" probe visited the Saturn system. It sent back the first high-resolution images of the planet, its rings and satellites. Surface features of various moons were seen for the first time. \"Voyager 1\" performed a close flyby of Titan, increasing knowledge of the atmosphere of the moon. It proved that Titan's atmosphere is impenetrable at visible wavelengths; therefore no surface details were seen. The flyby changed the spacecraft's trajectory out of the plane of the Solar System.\nAlmost a year later, in August 1981, \"Voyager 2\" continued the study of the Saturn system. More close-up images of Saturn's moons were acquired, as well as evidence of changes in the atmosphere and the rings. During the flyby, the probe's turnable camera platform stuck for a couple of days and some planned imaging was lost. Saturn's gravity was used to direct the spacecraft's trajectory towards Uranus.\nThe probes discovered and confirmed several new satellites orbiting near or within the planet's rings, as well as the small Maxwell Gap (a gap within the C Ring) and Keeler gap (a 42\u00a0km-wide gap in the A Ring).\n\"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" spacecraft.\nThe \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" space probe entered orbit around Saturn on 1 July 2004. In June 2004, it conducted a close flyby of Phoebe, sending back high-resolution images and data. \"Cassini\"'s flyby of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, captured radar images of large lakes and their coastlines with numerous islands and mountains. The orbiter completed two Titan flybys before releasing the \"Huygens\" probe on 25 December 2004. \"Huygens\" descended onto the surface of Titan on 14 January 2005.\nStarting in early 2005, scientists used \"Cassini\" to track lightning on Saturn. The power of the lightning is approximately 1,000\u00a0times that of lightning on Earth.\nIn 2006, NASA reported that \"Cassini\" had found evidence of liquid water reservoirs no more than tens of meters below the surface that erupt in geysers on Saturn's moon Enceladus. These jets of icy particles are emitted into orbit around Saturn from vents in the moon's south polar region. Over 100 geysers have been identified on Enceladus. In May 2011, NASA scientists reported that Enceladus \"is emerging as the most habitable spot beyond Earth in the Solar System for life as we know it\".\n\"Cassini\" photographs have revealed a previously undiscovered planetary ring, outside the brighter main rings of Saturn and inside the G and E\u00a0rings. The source of this ring is hypothesized to be the crashing of a meteoroid off Janus and Epimetheus. In July 2006, images were returned of hydrocarbon lakes near Titan's north pole, the presence of which were confirmed in January 2007. In March 2007, hydrocarbon seas were found near the North pole, the largest of which is almost the size of the Caspian Sea. In October 2006, the probe detected an diameter cyclone-like storm with an eyewall at Saturn's south pole.\nFrom 2004 to 2 November 2009, the probe discovered and confirmed eight new satellites. In April 2013, \"Cassini\" sent back images of a hurricane at the planet's north pole 20 times larger than those found on Earth, with winds faster than . On 15 September 2017, the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" spacecraft performed the \"Grand Finale\" of its mission: a number of passes through gaps between Saturn and Saturn's inner rings. The atmospheric entry of \"Cassini\" ended the mission.\nPossible future missions.\nThe continued exploration of Saturn is still considered to be a viable option for NASA as part of their ongoing New Frontiers program of missions. NASA previously requested for plans to be put forward for a mission to Saturn that included the Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe, and possible investigations into the habitability and possible discovery of life on Saturn's moons Titan and Enceladus by \"Dragonfly\".\nObservation.\nSaturn is the most distant of the five planets easily visible to the naked eye from Earth, the other four being Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Jupiter. (Uranus, and occasionally 4 Vesta, are visible to the naked eye in dark skies.) Saturn appears to the naked eye in the night sky as a bright, yellowish point of light. The mean apparent magnitude of Saturn is 0.46 with a standard deviation of 0.34. Most of the magnitude variation is due to the inclination of the ring system relative to the Sun and Earth. The brightest magnitude, \u22120.55, occurs near the time when the plane of the rings is inclined most highly, and the faintest magnitude, 1.17, occurs around the time when they are least inclined. \nIt takes approximately 29.4\u00a0years for the planet to complete an entire circuit of the ecliptic against the background constellations of the zodiac. Most people will require an optical aid (very large binoculars or a small telescope) that magnifies at least 30 times to achieve an image of Saturn's rings in which a clear resolution is present. \nWhen Earth passes through the ring plane, which occurs twice every Saturnian year (roughly every 15 Earth years), the rings briefly disappear from view because they are so thin. Such a \"disappearance\" most recently occurred in 2025, but Saturn was too close to the Sun for observations.\nSaturn and its rings are best seen when the planet is at, or near, opposition, the configuration of a planet when it is at an elongation of 180\u00b0, and thus appears opposite the Sun in the sky. A Saturnian opposition occurs every year\u2014approximately every 378 days\u2014and results in the planet appearing at its brightest. Both the Earth and Saturn orbit the Sun on eccentric orbits, which means their distances from the Sun vary over time, and therefore so do their distances from each other, hence varying the brightness of Saturn from one opposition to the next. Saturn also appears brighter when the rings are angled such that they are more visible. For example, during the opposition of 17 December 2002, Saturn appeared at its brightest due to the favorable relative to the Earth, even though Saturn was closer to the Earth and Sun in late 2003.\nFrom time to time, Saturn is occulted by the Moon (that is, the Moon covers up Saturn in the sky). As with all the planets in the Solar System, occultations of Saturn occur in \"seasons\". Saturnian occultations will take place monthly for about a 12-month period, followed by about a five-year period in which no such activity is registered. The Moon's orbit is inclined by several degrees relative to Saturn's, so occultations will only occur when Saturn is near one of the points in the sky where the two planes intersect (both the length of Saturn's year and the 18.6-Earth-year nodal precession period of the Moon's orbit influence the periodicity).\nIn fiction.\nSaturn has frequently appeared in fiction since at least 1752, when Voltaire published his novel \"Microm\u00e9gas\". Early works generally depicted it as solid, whereas Saturn is later correctly described as a gaseous planet. Saturn's moons are also featured in fiction, especially Titan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44475", "revid": "19571773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44475", "title": "Uranus", "text": "Seventh planet from the Sun\nUranus is the seventh planet from the Sun. It is a gaseous cyan-coloured ice giant. Most of the planet is made of water, ammonia, and methane in a supercritical phase of matter, which astronomy calls \"ice\" or volatiles. The planet's atmosphere has a complex layered cloud structure and has the lowest minimum temperature () of all the Solar System's planets. It has a marked axial tilt of 82.23\u00b0 with a retrograde rotation period of 17 hours and 14 minutes. This means that in an 84-Earth-year orbital period around the Sun, its poles get around 42 years of continuous sunlight, followed by 42 years of continuous darkness.\nUranus has the third-largest diameter and fourth-largest mass among the Solar System's planets. Based on current models, inside its volatile mantle layer is a rocky core, and a thick hydrogen and helium atmosphere surrounds it. Trace amounts of hydrocarbons (thought to be produced via hydrolysis) and carbon monoxide along with carbon dioxide (thought to have originated from comets) have been detected in the upper atmosphere. There are many unexplained climate phenomena in Uranus's atmosphere, such as its peak wind speed of , variations in its polar cap, and its erratic cloud formation. The planet also has very low internal heat compared to other giant planets, the cause of which remains unclear.\nLike the other giant planets, Uranus has a ring system, a magnetosphere, and many natural satellites. The extremely dark ring system reflects only about 2% of the incoming light. Uranus's 29 natural satellites include 19 known regular moons, of which 14 are small inner moons. Further out are the larger five major moons of the planet: Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania, and Oberon. Orbiting at a much greater distance from Uranus are the ten known irregular moons. The planet's magnetosphere is highly asymmetric and has many charged particles, which may be the cause of the darkening of its rings and moons.\nUranus is visible to the naked eye, but it is very dim and moves very slowly relative to the background stars and was not classified as a planet until 1781, when it was first observed by William Herschel. About seven decades after its discovery, consensus was reached that the planet be named after the Greek god Uranus (Ouranos), one of the Greek primordial deities. As of 2025, it has been visited only once when in 1986 the \"Voyager 2\" probe flew by the planet. Though nowadays it can be resolved and observed by telescopes, there is much desire to revisit the planet, as shown by Planetary Science Decadal Survey's decision to make the proposed Uranus Orbiter and Probe mission a top priority in the 2023\u20132032 survey, and the CNSA's proposal to fly by the planet with a subprobe of \"Tianwen-4\".\nHistory.\nLike the classical planets, Uranus is visible to the naked eye, but it was never recognised as a planet by ancient observers because of its dimness and slow orbit. William Herschel first observed Uranus on 13 March 1781, leading to its discovery as a planet, expanding the known boundaries of the Solar System for the first time in history and making Uranus the first planet classified as such with the aid of a telescope. The discovery of Uranus also effectively doubled the size of the known Solar System because Uranus is around twice as far from the Sun as the planet Saturn.\nDiscovery.\nBefore its recognition as a planet, Uranus had been observed many times, but was generally misidentified as a star. It was apparently observed by Hipparchus, who measured the positions of stars in 128 BC for his catalog that was later incorporated into Ptolemy's \"Almagest\". The catalog gives the positions of four stars forming a quadrilateral in Virgo. One of the four stars does not exist, but Uranus was at that position in April of 128 BC. The earliest definite sighting was in 1690, when John Flamsteed observed it at least six times, cataloguing it as 34 Tauri. James Bradley observed it 3 times, in 1748, 1750, and 1753.\u00a0Tobias Mayer, observed it once in 1756. The French astronomer Pierre Charles Le Monnier observed Uranus at least twelve times between 1750 and 1769, including on four consecutive nights.\nWilliam Herschel observed Uranus on 13 March 1781 from the garden of his house at 19 New King Street in Bath, Somerset, England (now the Herschel Museum of Astronomy), and initially reported it (on 26 April 1781) as a comet. With a homemade 6.2-inch reflecting telescope, Herschel \"engaged in a series of observations on the parallax of the fixed stars.\"\nHerschel recorded in his journal: \"In the quartile near \u03b6 Tauri\u00a0... either [a] Nebulous star or perhaps a comet.\" On 17 March he noted: \"I looked for the Comet or Nebulous Star and found that it is a Comet, for it has changed its place.\" When he presented his discovery to the Royal Society, he continued to assert that he had found a comet, but also implicitly compared it to a planet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHerschel notified the Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne of his discovery and received this flummoxed reply from him on 23 April 1781: \"I don't know what to call it. It is as likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit nearly circular to the sun as a Comet moving in a very eccentric ellipsis. I have not yet seen any coma or tail to it.\"\nAlthough Herschel continued to describe his new object as a comet, other astronomers had already begun to suspect otherwise. Finnish-Swedish astronomer Anders Johan Lexell, working in Russia, was the first to compute the orbit of the new object. Its nearly circular orbit suggested that it was a planet rather than a comet. Berlin astronomer Johann Elert Bode described Herschel's discovery as \"a moving star that can be deemed a hitherto unknown planet-like object circulating beyond the orbit of Saturn\". Bode concluded that its near-circular orbit was more like a planet's than a comet's.\nThe object was soon accepted as a new planet. By 1783, Herschel acknowledged this to Royal Society president Joseph Banks: \"By the observation of the most eminent Astronomers in Europe it appears that the new star, which I had the honour of pointing out to them in March 1781, is a Primary Planet of our Solar System.\" In recognition of his achievement, King George III gave Herschel an annual stipend of \u00a3200 () on condition that he moved to Windsor so that the Royal Family could look through his telescopes.\nName.\nThe name Uranus references the ancient Greek deity of the sky Uranus (), known as Caelus in Roman mythology, the father of Cronus (Saturn), grandfather of Zeus (Jupiter) and the great-grandfather of Ares (Mars), which was rendered as in Latin (). It is the only one of the eight planets whose English name derives from a figure of Greek mythology. The pronunciation of the name \"Uranus\" preferred among astronomers is , with the long \"u\" of English and stress on the first syllable as in Latin , in contrast to , with stress on the second syllable and a long \"a\", though both are considered acceptable.\nConsensus on the name was not reached until almost 70 years after the planet's discovery. During the original discussions following discovery, Maskelyne asked Herschel to \"do the astronomical world the faver [\"sic\"] to give a name to your planet, which is entirely your own, [and] which we are so much obliged to you for the discovery of\". In response to Maskelyne's request, Herschel decided to name the object (George's Star), or the \"Georgian Planet\", in honour of his new patron, King George III. He explained this decision in a letter to Joseph Banks:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the fabulous ages of ancient times the appellations of Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn were given to the Planets, as being the names of their principal heroes and divinities. In the present more philosophical era it would hardly be allowable to have recourse to the same method and call it Juno, Pallas, Apollo or Minerva, for a name to our new heavenly body. The first consideration of any particular event, or remarkable incident, seems to be its chronology: if in any future age it should be asked, when this last-found Planet was discovered? It would be a very satisfactory answer to say, 'In the reign of King George the Third'.\nHerschel's proposed name was not popular outside Britain and Hanover, and alternatives were soon proposed. Astronomer J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande proposed that it be named \"Herschel\" in honour of its discoverer. Swedish astronomer Erik Prosperin proposed the names \"Astraea,\" \"Cybele\" (now the names of asteroids), and \"Neptune\", which later became the name of the next planet to be discovered. Georg Lichtenberg from G\u00f6ttingen also supported \"Astraea\" (as \"Austr\u00e4a\"), but she is traditionally associated with Virgo instead of Taurus. \"Neptune\" was supported by other astronomers who liked the idea of commemorating the victories of the British Royal Naval fleet in the course of the American Revolutionary War by calling the new planet either \"Neptune George III\" or \"Neptune Great Britain\", a compromise Lexell suggested as well. Daniel Bernoulli suggested \"Hypercronius\" and \"Transaturnis\". \"Minerva\" was also proposed.\nIn a March 1782 treatise, Johann Elert Bode proposed \"Uranus\", the Latinised version of the Greek god of the sky, Ouranos. Bode argued that the name should follow the mythology so as not to stand out as different from the other planets, and that Uranus was an appropriate name as the father of the first generation of the Titans. He also noted the elegance of the name in that just as Saturn was the father of Jupiter, the new planet should be named after the father of Saturn. However, he was apparently unaware that \"Uranus\" was only the Latinised form of the deity's name, and the Roman equivalent was Caelus. In 1789, Bode's Royal Academy colleague Martin Klaproth named his newly discovered element uranium in support of Bode's choice. Ultimately, Bode's suggestion became the most widely used, and became universal in 1850 when HM Nautical Almanac Office, the final holdout, switched from using \"Georgium Sidus\" to \"Uranus\".\nUranus has two astronomical symbols. The first to be proposed, \u26e2, was proposed by Johann Gottfried K\u00f6hler at Bode's request in 1782. K\u00f6hler suggested that the new planet be given the symbol for platinum, which had been described scientifically only 30 years before. As there was no alchemical symbol for platinum, he suggested \u26e2 or \u26e2, a combination of the planetary-metal symbols \u2609 (gold) and \u2642 (iron), as platinum (or 'white gold') is found mixed with iron. Bode thought that an upright orientation, \u26e2, fit better with the symbols for the other planets while remaining distinct. This symbol predominates in modern astronomical use in the rare cases that symbols are used at all. The second symbol, \u2645, was suggested by Lalande in 1784. In a letter to Herschel, Lalande described it as \"\" (\"a globe surmounted by the first letter of your surname\"). The second symbol is nearly universal in astrology.\nIn English-language popular culture, humour is often derived from the common pronunciation of Uranus's name, which resembles that of the phrase \"your anus\".\nUranus is called by a variety of names in other languages. Uranus's name is literally translated as the \"Heavenly King star\" in Chinese (), Japanese (\u5929\u738b\u661f \"Tenn\u014dsei\"), Korean (\ucc9c\uc655\uc131 \"Cheonwangseong\"), and Vietnamese (\"sao Thi\u00ean V\u01b0\u01a1ng\"). In Thai, its official name is (), as in English. Its other name in Thai is (, Star of M\u1e5btyu), after the Sanskrit word for 'death', (). In Mongolian, its name is (), translated as 'King of the Sky', reflecting its namesake god's role as the ruler of the heavens. In Hawaiian, its name is , the Hawaiian rendering of the name 'Herschel'.\nFormation.\nIt is argued that the differences between the ice giants and the gas giants arise from their formation history. The Solar System is hypothesised to have formed from a rotating disk of gas and dust known as the presolar nebula. Much of the nebula's gas, primarily hydrogen and helium, formed the Sun, and the dust grains collected together to form the first protoplanets. As the planets grew, some of them eventually accreted enough matter for their gravity to hold on to the nebula's leftover gas. The more gas they held onto, the larger they became; the larger they became, the more gas they held onto until a critical point was reached, and their size began to increase exponentially. The ice giants, with only a few Earth masses of nebular gas, never reached that critical point. Recent simulations of planetary migration have suggested that both ice giants formed closer to the Sun than their present positions, and moved outwards after formation (the Nice model).\nOrbit and rotation.\nUranus orbits the Sun once every 84 years. As viewed against the background of stars, since being discovered in 1781, the planet has returned to the point of its discovery northeast of the binary star Zeta Tauri twice\u2014in March 1865 and March 1949\u2014and will return to this location again in April 2033.\nBecause the period is very close to 84 years, its apparent position in the stars is very close to what it was exactly 84 years earlier (see graph). The retrograde motion of Uranus brings it back each year to approximately the most easterly position it had the previous year.\nIts average distance from the Sun is roughly . The difference between its minimum and maximum distance from the Sun is 1.8 AU, larger than that of any other planet, though not as large as that of dwarf planet Pluto. The intensity of sunlight varies inversely with the square of the distance\u2014on Uranus (at about 20 times the distance from the Sun compared to Earth), it is about 1/400 the intensity of light on Earth.\nThe orbital elements of Uranus were first calculated in 1783 by Pierre-Simon Laplace. With time, discrepancies began to appear between predicted and observed orbits, and in 1841, John Couch Adams first proposed that the differences might be due to the gravitational tug of an unseen planet. In 1845, Urbain Le Verrier began his own independent research into Uranus's orbit. On 23 September 1846, Johann Gottfried Galle located a new planet, later named Neptune, at nearly the position predicted by Le Verrier.\nThe rotational period of the interior of Uranus is 17\u00a0hours, 14\u00a0minutes, and 52\u00a0seconds which was determined by tracking the rotational motion of Uranus's aurorae. As on all giant planets, its upper atmosphere experiences strong winds in the direction of rotation. At some latitudes, such as about 60 degrees south, visible features of the atmosphere move much faster, making a full rotation in as little as 14 hours.\nAxial tilt.\nThe Uranian axis of rotation is approximately parallel to the plane of the Solar System, with an axial tilt that can be described either as 82.23\u00b0 or as 97.77\u00b0, depending on which pole is considered north. The former follows the International Astronomical Union definition that the north pole is the pole which lies on Earth's North's side of the invariable plane of the Solar System. Uranus has retrograde rotation when defined this way. Alternatively, the convention in which a body's north and south poles are defined according to the right-hand rule in relation to the direction of rotation, Uranus's axial tilt may be given instead as 97.77\u00b0, which reverses which pole is considered north and which is considered south and giving the planet prograde rotation. This gives it seasonal changes completely unlike those of the other planets. Pluto and asteroid 2 Pallas also have extreme axial tilts. Near the solstice, one pole faces the Sun continuously and the other faces away, with only a narrow strip around the equator experiencing a rapid day\u2013night cycle, with the Sun low over the horizon. On the other side of Uranus's orbit, the orientation of the poles towards the Sun is reversed. Each pole gets around 42\u00a0years of continuous sunlight, followed by 42\u00a0years of darkness. Near the time of the equinoxes, the Sun faces the equator of Uranus, giving a period of day\u2013night cycles similar to those seen on most of the other planets.\nOne result of this axis orientation is that, averaged over the Uranian year, the near-polar regions of Uranus receive a greater energy input from the Sun than its equatorial regions. Nevertheless, Uranus is hotter at its equator than at its poles. The underlying mechanism that causes this is unknown. The cause of Uranus's unusual axial tilt is also not known with certainty, but the usual speculation is that during the formation of the Solar System, an Earth-sized protoplanet collided with Uranus, causing the skewed orientation. Research by Jacob Kegerreis of Durham University suggests that the tilt resulted from a protoplanet larger than Earth crashing into the planet 3 to 4\u00a0billion years ago. Uranus's south pole was pointed almost directly at the Sun at the time of \"Voyager\u00a02\"'s flyby in 1986.\nUranus's unusual axis of rotation had been surmised by astronomers since Herschel's discovery of Titania and Oberon, with Laplace calculating the inclination of the moons' orbits to the planet's equatorial plane in 1805.\nVisibility from Earth.\nThe mean apparent magnitude of Uranus is 5.68 with a standard deviation of 0.17, while the extremes are 5.38 and 6.03. This range of brightness is near the limit of naked eye visibility. Much of the variability is dependent upon the planetary latitudes being illuminated from the Sun and viewed from the Earth. Its angular diameter is between 3.4 and 3.7\u00a0arcseconds, compared with 16 to 20\u00a0arcseconds for Saturn and 32 to 45\u00a0arcseconds for Jupiter. At opposition, Uranus is visible to the naked eye in dark skies, and becomes an easy target even in urban conditions with binoculars. On larger amateur telescopes with an objective diameter of between 15 and 23\u00a0cm, Uranus appears as a pale cyan disk with distinct limb darkening. With a large telescope of 25\u00a0cm or wider, cloud patterns, as well as some of the larger satellites, such as Titania and Oberon, may be visible.\nInternal structure.\nUranus's mass is roughly 14.5 times that of Earth, making it the least massive of the giant planets. Its diameter is slightly larger than Neptune's at roughly four times that of Earth. A resulting density of 1.27\u00a0g/cm3 makes Uranus the second least dense planet, after Saturn. This value indicates that it is made primarily of various ices, such as water, ammonia, and methane. The total mass of ice in Uranus's interior is not precisely known, because different figures emerge depending on the model chosen; it must be between 9.3\u00a0and 13.5\u00a0Earth masses. Hydrogen and helium constitute only a small part of the total, with between 0.5 and 1.5\u00a0Earth masses. The remainder of the non-ice mass (0.5 to 3.7\u00a0Earth masses) is accounted for by rocky material.\nThe standard model of Uranus's structure is that it consists of three layers: a rocky (silicate/iron\u2013nickel) core in the centre, an icy mantle in the middle, and an outer gaseous hydrogen/helium envelope. The core is relatively small, with a mass of only 0.55\u00a0Earth masses and a radius less than 20% of the planet; the mantle comprises its bulk, with around 13.4\u00a0Earth masses, and the upper atmosphere is relatively insubstantial, weighing about 0.5\u00a0Earth masses and extending for the last 20% of Uranus's radius. Uranus's core density is around 9\u00a0g/cm3, with a pressure in the centre of 8\u00a0million\u00a0bars (800 GPa) and a temperature of about 5000\u00a0K. The ice mantle is not in fact composed of ice in the conventional sense, but of a hot and dense fluid consisting of water, ammonia and other volatiles. This fluid, which has a high electrical conductivity, is sometimes called a water\u2013ammonia ocean.\nThe extreme pressure and temperature deep within Uranus may break up the methane molecules, with the carbon atoms condensing into crystals of diamond that rain down through the mantle like hailstones. This phenomenon is similar to diamond rains that are theorised by scientists to exist on Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune. Very-high-pressure experiments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory suggest that an ocean of metallic liquid carbon, perhaps with floating solid 'diamond-bergs', may comprise the base of the mantle.\nThe bulk compositions of Uranus and Neptune are different from those of Jupiter and Saturn, with ice dominating over gases, hence justifying their separate classification as ice giants. There may be a layer of ionic water where the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions, and deeper down superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions move freely within the oxygen lattice.\nAlthough the model considered above is reasonably standard, it is not unique; other models also satisfy observations. For instance, if substantial amounts of hydrogen and rocky material are mixed in the ice mantle, the total mass of ices in the interior will be lower, and, correspondingly, the total mass of rocks and hydrogen will be higher. Presently available data does not allow a scientific determination of which model is correct. The fluid interior structure of Uranus means that it has no solid surface. The gaseous atmosphere gradually transitions into the internal liquid layers. For the sake of convenience, a revolving oblate spheroid set at the point at which atmospheric pressure equals 1\u00a0bar (100\u00a0kPa) is conditionally designated as a \"surface\". It has equatorial and polar radii of and , respectively. This surface is used throughout this article as a zero point for altitudes.\nInternal heat.\nUranus's internal heat appears markedly lower than that of the other giant planets; in astronomical terms, it has a low thermal flux. Why Uranus's internal temperature is so low is still not understood. Neptune, which is Uranus's near twin in size and composition, radiates 2.61 times as much energy into space as it receives from the Sun, but Uranus radiates hardly any excess heat at all. The total power radiated by Uranus in the far infrared (i.e. heat) part of the spectrum is times the solar energy absorbed in its atmosphere. Uranus's heat flux is only , which is lower than the internal heat flux of Earth of about . The lowest temperature recorded in Uranus's tropopause is , making Uranus the coldest planet in the Solar System.\nOne of the hypotheses for this discrepancy suggests the Earth-sized impactor theorised to be behind Uranus's axial tilt left the planet with a depleted core temperature, as the impact caused Uranus to expel most of its primordial heat. Another hypothesis is that some form of barrier exists in Uranus's upper layers that prevents the core's heat from reaching the surface. For example, convection may take place in a set of compositionally different layers, which may inhibit upward heat transport; perhaps double diffusive convection is a limiting factor.\nIn a 2021 study, the ice giants' interior conditions were mimicked by compressing water that contained minerals such as olivine and ferropericlase, thus showing that large amounts of magnesium could be dissolved in the liquid interiors of Uranus and Neptune. If Uranus has more of this magnesium than Neptune, it could form a thermal insulation layer, thus potentially explaining the planet's low temperature.\nAtmosphere.\nAlthough there is no well-defined solid surface within Uranus's interior, the outermost part of Uranus's gaseous envelope that is accessible to remote sensing is called its atmosphere. Remote-sensing capability extends down to roughly 300\u00a0km below the level, with a corresponding pressure around and temperature of . The tenuous thermosphere extends over two planetary radii from the nominal surface, which is defined to lie at a pressure of 1 bar. The Uranian atmosphere can be divided into three layers: the troposphere, between altitudes of and pressures from 100 to 0.1\u00a0bar (10\u00a0MPa to 10\u00a0kPa); the stratosphere, spanning altitudes between and pressures of between 0.1 and 10\u221210\u00a0bar (10\u00a0kPa to 10\u00a0\u03bcPa); and the thermosphere extending from 4,000\u00a0km to as high as 50,000\u00a0km from the surface. There is no mesosphere.\nComposition.\nThe composition of Uranus's atmosphere is different from its bulk, consisting mainly of molecular hydrogen and helium. The helium molar fraction, i.e. the number of helium atoms per molecule of gas, is in the upper troposphere, which corresponds to a mass fraction . This value is close to the protosolar helium mass fraction of , indicating that helium has not settled in its centre as it has in the gas giants. The third-most-abundant component of Uranus's atmosphere is methane (). Methane has prominent absorption bands in the visible and near-infrared (IR), making Uranus aquamarine or cyan in colour. Methane molecules account for 2.3% of the atmosphere by molar fraction below the methane cloud deck at the pressure level of ; this represents about 20 to 30\u00a0times the carbon abundance found in the Sun.\nThe mixing ratio is much lower in the upper atmosphere due to its extremely low temperature, which lowers the saturation level and causes excess methane to freeze out. The abundances of less volatile compounds such as ammonia, water, and hydrogen sulfide in the deep atmosphere are poorly known. They are probably also higher than solar values. Along with methane, trace amounts of various hydrocarbons are found in the stratosphere of Uranus, which are thought to be produced from methane by photolysis induced by the solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation. They include ethane (), acetylene (), methylacetylene (), and diacetylene (). Spectroscopy has also uncovered traces of water vapour, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide in the upper atmosphere, which can only originate from an external source such as infalling dust and comets.\nTroposphere.\nThe troposphere is the lowest and densest part of the atmosphere and is characterised by a decrease in temperature with altitude. The temperature falls from about at the base of the nominal troposphere at \u2212300\u00a0km to at 50\u00a0km. The temperatures in the coldest upper region of the troposphere (the tropopause) actually vary in the range between depending on planetary latitude. The tropopause region is responsible for the vast majority of Uranus's thermal far infrared emissions, thus determining its effective temperature of .\nThe troposphere is thought to have a highly complex cloud structure; water clouds are hypothesised to lie in the pressure range of , ammonium hydrosulfide clouds in the range of , ammonia or hydrogen sulfide clouds at between and finally directly detected thin methane clouds at . The troposphere is a dynamic part of the atmosphere, exhibiting strong winds, bright clouds, and seasonal changes.\nUpper atmosphere.\nThe middle layer of the Uranian atmosphere is the stratosphere, where temperature generally increases with altitude from in the tropopause to between at the base of the thermosphere. The heating of the stratosphere is caused by absorption of solar UV and IR radiation by methane and other hydrocarbons, which form in this part of the atmosphere as a result of methane photolysis. Heat is also conducted from the hot thermosphere. The hydrocarbons occupy a relatively narrow layer at altitudes of between 100 and 300\u00a0km corresponding to a pressure range of 1,000 to 10\u00a0Pa and temperatures of between .\nThe most abundant hydrocarbons are methane, acetylene, and ethane with mixing ratios of around 10-7 relative to hydrogen. The mixing ratio of carbon monoxide is similar at these altitudes. Heavier hydrocarbons and carbon dioxide have mixing ratios three orders of magnitude lower. The abundance ratio of water is around 7\u00d710-9. Ethane and acetylene tend to condense in the colder lower part of the stratosphere and tropopause (below 10\u00a0mBar level) forming haze layers, which may be partly responsible for the bland appearance of Uranus. The concentration of hydrocarbons in the Uranian stratosphere above the haze is significantly lower than in the stratospheres of the other giant planets.\nThe outermost layer of the Uranian atmosphere is the thermosphere and corona, which has a uniform temperature of around to . The heat sources necessary to sustain such a high level are not understood, as neither the solar UV nor the auroral activity can provide the necessary energy to maintain these temperatures. The weak cooling efficiency due to the lack of hydrocarbons in the stratosphere above 0.1\u00a0mBar pressure levels may contribute too. In addition to molecular hydrogen, the thermosphere-corona contains many free hydrogen atoms. Their small mass and high temperatures explain why the corona extends as far as , or two Uranian radii, from its surface.\nThis extended corona is a unique feature of Uranus. Its effects include a drag on small particles orbiting Uranus, causing a general depletion of dust in the Uranian rings. The Uranian thermosphere, together with the upper part of the stratosphere, corresponds to the ionosphere of Uranus. Observations show that the ionosphere occupies altitudes from . The Uranian ionosphere is denser than that of either Saturn or Neptune, which may arise from the low concentration of hydrocarbons in the stratosphere. The ionosphere is mainly sustained by solar UV radiation and its density depends on the solar activity. Auroral activity is insignificant as compared to Jupiter and Saturn.\nClimate.\nAt ultraviolet and visible wavelengths, Uranus's atmosphere is bland in comparison to the other giant planets, even to Neptune, which it otherwise closely resembles. When \"Voyager\u00a02\" flew by Uranus in 1986, it observed a total of 10 cloud features across the entire planet. One proposed explanation for this dearth of features is that Uranus's internal heat is markedly lower than that of the other giant planets, being the coldest planet in the Solar System.\nBanded structure, winds and clouds.\nIn 1986, \"Voyager\u00a02\" found that the visible southern hemisphere of Uranus can be subdivided into two regions: a bright polar cap and dark equatorial bands. Their boundary is located at about \u221245\u00b0 of latitude. A narrow band straddling the latitudinal range from \u221245 to \u221250\u00b0 is the brightest large feature on its visible surface. It is called a southern \"collar\". The cap and collar are thought to be a dense region of methane clouds located within the pressure range of 1.3 to 2\u00a0bar. Besides the large-scale banded structure, \"Voyager\u00a02\" observed ten small bright clouds, most lying several degrees to the north from the collar. In all other respects, Uranus looked like a dynamically dead planet in 1986.\n\"Voyager\u00a02\" arrived during the height of Uranus's southern summer and could not observe the northern hemisphere. At the beginning of the 21st century, when the northern polar region came into view, the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) and Keck telescope initially observed neither a collar nor a polar cap in the northern hemisphere. So Uranus appeared to be asymmetric: bright near the south pole and uniformly dark in the region north of the southern collar. In 2007, when Uranus passed its equinox, the southern collar almost disappeared, and a faint northern collar emerged near 45\u00b0 of latitude. In 2023, a team employing the Very Large Array observed a dark collar at 80\u00b0 latitude, and a bright spot at the north pole, indicating the presence of a polar vortex.\nIn the 1990s, the number of the observed bright cloud features grew considerably, partly because new high-resolution imaging techniques became available. Most were found in the northern hemisphere as it started to become visible. An early explanation\u2014that bright clouds are easier to identify in its dark part, whereas in the southern hemisphere the bright collar masks them\u2014was shown to be incorrect. Nevertheless, there are differences between the clouds of each hemisphere. The northern clouds are smaller, sharper and brighter. They appear to lie at a higher altitude. The lifetime of clouds spans several orders of magnitude. Some small clouds live for hours; at least one southern cloud may have persisted since the \"Voyager\u00a02\" flyby. Recent observation also discovered that cloud features on Uranus have a lot in common with those on Neptune. For example, the dark spots common on Neptune had never been observed on Uranus before 2006, when the first such feature dubbed Uranus Dark Spot was imaged. The speculation is that Uranus is becoming more Neptune-like during its equinoctial season.\nThe tracking of numerous cloud features allowed determination of zonal winds blowing in the upper troposphere of Uranus. At the equator winds are retrograde, which means that they blow in the reverse direction to the planetary rotation. Their speeds are from . Wind speeds increase with the distance from the equator, reaching zero values near \u00b120\u00b0 latitude, where the troposphere's temperature minimum is located. Closer to the poles, the winds shift to a prograde direction, flowing with Uranus's rotation. Wind speeds continue to increase reaching maxima at \u00b160\u00b0 latitude before falling to zero at the poles. Wind speeds at \u221240\u00b0 latitude range from . Because the collar obscures all clouds below that parallel, speeds between it and the southern pole are impossible to measure. In contrast, in the northern hemisphere maximum speeds as high as are observed near +50\u00b0 latitude.\nIn 1986, the \"Voyager 2\" Planetary Radio Astronomy (PRA) experiment observed 140 lightning flashes, or Uranian electrostatic discharges with a frequency of 0.9-40\u00a0MHz. The UEDs were detected from 600,000\u00a0km of Uranus over 24 hours, most of which were not visible . However, microphysical modelling suggests that Uranian lightning occurs in convective storms occurring in deep troposphere water clouds. If this is the case, lightning will not be visible due to the thick cloud layers above the troposphere. Uranian lightning has a power of around 108 W, emits 1\u00d710^7 J - 2\u00d710^7 J of energy, and lasts an average of 120 ms. There is a possibility that the power of Uranian lightning varies greatly with the seasons caused by changes in convection rates in the clouds Uranian lightning is much more powerful than lightning on Earth and comparable to Jovian lightning. During the Ice Giant flybys, \"Voyager 2\" detected lightning more clearly on Uranus than on Neptune due to the planet's lower gravity and possible warmer deep atmosphere.\nSeasonal variation.\nFor a short period from March to May 2004, large clouds appeared in the Uranian atmosphere, giving it a Neptune-like appearance. Observations included record-breaking wind speeds of and a persistent thunderstorm referred to as \"Fourth of July fireworks\". On 23 August 2006, researchers at the Space Science Institute (Boulder, Colorado) and the University of Wisconsin observed a dark spot on Uranus's surface, giving scientists more insight into Uranus atmospheric activity. Why this sudden upsurge in activity occurred is not fully known, but it appears that Uranus's extreme axial tilt results in extreme seasonal variations in its weather. Determining the nature of this seasonal variation is difficult because good data on Uranus's atmosphere has existed for less than 84 years, or one full Uranian year. Photometry over the course of half a Uranian year (beginning in the 1950s) has shown regular variation in the brightness in two spectral bands, with maxima occurring at the solstices and minima occurring at the equinoxes. A similar periodic variation, with maxima at the solstices, has been noted in microwave measurements of the deep troposphere begun in the 1960s. Stratospheric temperature measurements beginning in the 1970s also showed maximum values near the 1986 solstice. The majority of this variability is thought to occur owing to changes in viewing geometry.\nThere are some indications that physical seasonal changes are happening in Uranus. Although Uranus is known to have a bright south polar region, the north pole is fairly dim, which is incompatible with the model of the seasonal change outlined above. During its previous northern solstice in 1944, Uranus displayed elevated levels of brightness, which suggests that the north pole was not always so dim. This information implies that the visible pole brightens some time before the solstice and darkens after the equinox. Detailed analysis of the visible and microwave data revealed that the periodical changes in brightness are not completely symmetrical around the solstices, which also indicates a change in the meridional albedo patterns.\nIn the 1990s, as Uranus moved away from its solstice, Hubble and ground-based telescopes revealed that the south polar cap darkened noticeably (except the southern collar, which remained bright), whereas the northern hemisphere demonstrated increasing activity, such as cloud formations and stronger winds, bolstering expectations that it should brighten soon. This indeed happened in 2007 when it passed an equinox: a faint northern polar collar arose, and the southern collar became nearly invisible, although the zonal wind profile remained slightly asymmetric, with northern winds being somewhat slower than southern.\nThe mechanism of these physical changes is still not clear. Near the summer and winter solstices, Uranus's hemispheres lie alternately either in full glare of the Sun's rays or facing deep space. The brightening of the sunlit hemisphere is thought to result from the local thickening of the methane clouds and haze layers located in the troposphere. The bright collar at \u221245\u00b0 latitude is also connected with methane clouds. Other changes in the southern polar region can be explained by changes in the lower cloud layers. The variation of the microwave emission from Uranus is probably caused by changes in the deep tropospheric circulation, because thick polar clouds and haze may inhibit convection. Now that the spring and autumn equinoxes are arriving on Uranus, the dynamics are changing and convection can occur again.\nMagnetosphere.\nBefore the arrival of \"Voyager\u00a02\", no measurements of the Uranian magnetosphere had been taken, so its nature remained a mystery. Before 1986, scientists had expected the magnetic field of Uranus to be in line with the solar wind, because it would then align with Uranus's poles that lie in the ecliptic.\n\"Voyager\"'s observations revealed that Uranus's magnetic field is peculiar, both because it does not originate from its geometric centre, and because it is tilted at 59\u00b0 from the axis of rotation. In fact, the magnetic dipole is shifted from Uranus's centre towards the south rotational pole by as much as one-third of the planetary radius. This unusual geometry results in a highly asymmetric magnetosphere, where the magnetic field strength on the surface in the southern hemisphere can be as low as 0.1\u00a0gauss (10\u00a0\u03bcT), whereas in the northern hemisphere it can be as high as 1.1\u00a0gauss (110\u00a0\u03bcT). The average field at the surface is 0.23\u00a0gauss (23\u00a0\u03bcT).\nStudies of \"Voyager\u00a02\" data in 2017 suggest that this asymmetry causes Uranus's magnetosphere to connect with the solar wind once a Uranian day, opening the planet to the Sun's particles. In comparison, the magnetic field of Earth is roughly as strong at either pole, and its \"magnetic equator\" is roughly parallel with its geographical equator. The dipole moment of Uranus is 50\u00a0times that of Earth. Neptune has a similarly displaced and tilted magnetic field, suggesting that this may be a common feature of ice giants. One hypothesis is that, unlike the magnetic fields of the terrestrial and gas giants, which are generated within their cores, the ice giants' magnetic fields are generated by motion at relatively shallow depths, for instance, in the water\u2013ammonia ocean. Another possible explanation for the magnetosphere's alignment is that there are oceans of liquid diamond in Uranus's interior that would deter the magnetic field.\nIt is, however, unclear whether the observed asymmetry of Uranus's magnetic field represents the typical state of the magnetosphere, or a coincidence of observing it during unusual space weather conditions. A post-analysis of Voyager data from 2024 suggests that the strongly asymmetric shape of the magnetosphere observed during the fly-by represents an anomalous state, as the measured values of solar wind density at the time were unusually high, which could have compressed Uranus's magnetosphere. The interaction with the solar wind event could also explain the apparent paradox of presence of strong electron radiation belts despite the otherwise low magnetospheric plasma density measured. Such conditions are estimated to occur less than 5% of the time.\nDespite its curious alignment, in other respects the Uranian magnetosphere is like those of other planets: it has a bow shock at about 23 Uranian radii ahead of it, a magnetopause at 18 Uranian radii, a fully developed magnetotail, and radiation belts. Overall, the structure of Uranus's magnetosphere is different from Jupiter's and more similar to Saturn's. Uranus's magnetotail trails behind it into space for millions of kilometres and is twisted by its sideways rotation into a long corkscrew.Uranus's magnetosphere contains charged particles: mainly protons and electrons, with a small amount of H2+ ions. Many of these particles probably derive from the thermosphere. The ion and electron energies can be as high as 4 and 1.2\u00a0megaelectronvolts, respectively. The density of low-energy (below 1\u00a0kiloelectronvolt) ions in the inner magnetosphere is about 2\u00a0cm\u22123. The particle population is strongly affected by the Uranian moons, which sweep through the magnetosphere, leaving noticeable gaps. The particle flux is high enough to cause darkening or space weathering of their surfaces on an astronomically rapid timescale of 100,000\u00a0years. This may be the cause of the uniformly dark colouration of the Uranian satellites and rings.\nUranus has relatively well developed aurorae, which are seen as bright arcs around both magnetic poles. Unlike Jupiter's, Uranus's aurorae seem to be insignificant for the energy balance of the planetary thermosphere. They, or rather their trihydrogen cations' infrared spectral emissions, have been studied in-depth as of late 2023.\nIn March 2020, NASA astronomers reported the detection of a large atmospheric magnetic bubble, also known as a plasmoid, released into outer space from the planet Uranus, after reevaluating old data recorded by the \"Voyager\u00a02\" space probe during a flyby of the planet in 1986.\nMoons.\nUranus has 29 known natural satellites. The names of these satellites are chosen from characters in the works of William Shakespeare and Alexander Pope. The five main satellites are Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania, and Oberon. The Uranian satellite system is the least massive among those of the giant planets; the combined mass of the five major satellites would be less than half that of Triton (largest moon of Neptune) alone. The largest of Uranus's satellites, Titania, has a radius of only , or less than half that of the Moon, but slightly more than Rhea, the second-largest satellite of Saturn, making Titania the eighth-largest moon in the Solar System. Uranus's satellites have relatively low albedos; ranging from 0.20 for Umbriel to 0.35 for Ariel (in green light). They are ice\u2013rock conglomerates composed of roughly 50% ice and 50% rock. The ice may include ammonia and carbon dioxide.\nAmong the Uranian satellites, Ariel appears to have the youngest surface, with the fewest impact craters, and Umbriel the oldest. Miranda has fault canyons deep, terraced layers, and a chaotic variation in surface ages and features. Miranda's past geologic activity is thought to have been driven by tidal heating at a time when its orbit was more eccentric than currently, probably as a result of a former 3:1 orbital resonance with Umbriel. Extensional processes associated with upwelling diapirs are the likely origin of Miranda's 'racetrack'-like coronae. Ariel is thought to have once been held in a 4:1 resonance with Titania.\nUranus has at least one horseshoe orbiter occupying the Sun\u2013Uranus L3 Lagrangian point\u2014a gravitationally unstable region at 180\u00b0 in its orbit, 83982 Crantor. Crantor moves inside Uranus's co-orbital region on a complex, temporary horseshoe orbit. is also a promising Uranus horseshoe librator candidate.\nRings.\nThe Uranian rings are composed of extremely dark particles, which vary in size from micrometres to a fraction of a metre. Thirteen distinct rings are presently known, the brightest being the \u03b5 ring. All except the two rings of Uranus are extremely narrow\u2014they are usually a few kilometres wide. The rings are probably quite young; the dynamics considerations indicate that they did not form with Uranus. The matter in the rings may once have been part of a moon (or moons) that was shattered by high-speed impacts. From numerous pieces of debris that formed as a result of those impacts, only a few particles survived, in stable zones corresponding to the locations of the present rings.\nWilliam Herschel described a possible ring around Uranus in 1789. This sighting is generally considered doubtful, because the rings are quite faint, and in the two following centuries none were noted by other observers. Still, Herschel made an accurate description of the epsilon ring's size, its angle relative to Earth, its red colour, and its apparent changes as Uranus travelled around the Sun. The ring system was definitively discovered on 10 March 1977 by James L. Elliot, Edward W. Dunham, and Jessica Mink using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. The discovery was serendipitous; they planned to use the occultation of the star SAO 158687 (also known as HD 128598) by Uranus to study its atmosphere. When their observations were analysed, they found that the star had disappeared briefly from view five times both before and after it disappeared behind Uranus. They concluded that there must be a ring system around Uranus. Later, they detected four additional rings. The rings were directly imaged when \"Voyager\u00a02\" passed Uranus in 1986. \"Voyager\u00a02\" also discovered two additional faint rings, bringing the total number to eleven.\nIn December 2005, the Hubble Space Telescope detected a pair of previously unknown rings. The largest is located twice as far from Uranus as the previously known rings. These new rings are so far from Uranus that they are called the \"outer\" ring system. Hubble also spotted two small satellites, one of which, Mab, shares its orbit with the outermost newly discovered ring. The new rings bring the total number of Uranian rings to 13. In April 2006, images of the new rings from the Keck Observatory yielded the colours of the outer rings: the outermost is blue and the other one red. One hypothesis concerning the outer ring's blue colour is that it is composed of minute particles of water ice from the surface of Mab that are small enough to scatter blue light. In contrast, Uranus's inner rings appear grey.\nAlthough the Uranian rings are very difficult to directly observe from Earth, advances in digital imaging have allowed several amateur astronomers to successfully photograph the rings with red or infrared filters; telescopes with apertures as small as may be able to detect the rings with proper imaging equipment.\nExploration.\nLaunched in 1977, \"Voyager\u00a02\" made its closest approach to Uranus on 24 January 1986, coming within of the cloudtops, before continuing its journey to Neptune. The spacecraft studied the structure and chemical composition of Uranus's atmosphere, including its unique weather, caused by its extreme axial tilt. It made the first detailed investigations of its five largest moons and discovered 10 new ones. \"Voyager 2\" examined all nine of the system's known rings and discovered two more. It also studied the magnetic field, its irregular structure, its tilt and its unique corkscrew magnetotail caused by Uranus's sideways orientation.\nNo other spacecraft has flown by Uranus since then, though there have been many proposed missions to revisit the Uranus system. The possibility of sending the \"Cassini\" spacecraft from Saturn to Uranus was evaluated during a mission extension planning phase in 2009, but was ultimately rejected in favour of destroying it in the Saturnian atmosphere, as it would have taken about twenty years to get to the Uranian system after departing Saturn. A Uranus entry probe could use Pioneer Venus Multiprobe heritage and descend to 1\u20135 atmospheres. The Uranus Orbiter and Probe was recommended by the 2013\u20132022 Planetary Science Decadal Survey published in 2011; the proposal envisaged launch during 2020\u20132023 and a 13-year cruise to Uranus. The committee's opinion was reaffirmed in 2022, when a Uranus probe/orbiter mission was placed at the highest priority, due to the lack of knowledge about ice giants. Most recently, the CNSA's \"Tianwen-4\" Jupiter orbiter, launching in 2029, is planned to have a subprobe that will detach and get a gravity assist instead of entering orbit, flying by Uranus in March 2045 before heading to interstellar space. China also has plans for a potential \"Tianwen-5\" that may orbit either Uranus or Neptune that have yet to come to fruition.\nIn culture.\nAs well as being a popular subject in fiction, Uranus has inspired artistic works including Lydia Sigourney's 1827 poem and a movement in Gustav Holst's orchestral suite \"The Planets\", written between 1914 and 1916. Herschel's discovery of the planet is also referenced in the lines \"Then felt I like some watcher of the skies/When a new planet swims into his ken\", from John Keats's poem \"On First Looking into Chapman's Homer\". The planet's discovery also inspired the naming of the chemical element uranium, itself discovered in 1789 by the German chemist Martin Heinrich Klaproth.\nIn modern astrology, the planet Uranus (symbol ) is the ruling planet of Aquarius; prior to the discovery of Uranus, the ruling planet of Aquarius was Saturn. Because Uranus is cyan and Uranus is associated with electricity, the colour electric blue, which is close to cyan, is associated with the sign Aquarius.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44477", "revid": "14891654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44477", "title": "Battle of Ad Decimum", "text": "Battle of the Vandalic War in 533 AD\nThe Battle of Ad Decimum took place on September 13, 533 between the armies of the Vandals, commanded by King Gelimer, and the Byzantine Empire, under the command of General Belisarius. This event and events in the following year are sometimes jointly referred to as the Battle of Carthage, one of several battles to bear that name. The Byzantine victory marked the beginning of the end for the Vandals and began the reconquest of the west under the Emperor Justinian I.\nBattle.\nPrelude.\nThe Vandal Kingdom in North Africa was ruled by King Hilderic. His reign was noteworthy for the kingdom's excellent relations with the Byzantine Empire ruled by Emperor Justinian I. Procopius writes that he was \"a very particular friend and guest-friend of Justinian, who had not yet come to the throne\", noting that Hilderic and Justinian exchanged large presents of money to each other. Hilderic allowed a new Chalcedonian bishop to take office in the Vandal capital of Carthage, and many Vandals began to convert to the Chalcedonians, to the alarm of the Vandal nobility. Hilderic rejected the Arian Christianity that most Vandals followed. However, in 531, Hilderic was overthrown by his cousin Gelimer, a popular military commander who had commanded successfully against the Moors. Gelimer began persecuting the non-Arian population, and many fled to the Byzantine Empire. Justinian sent Byzantine general Belisarius to reconquer the former Roman province of North Africa. On Midsummer Day 533 the expedition set off. It consisted of 5,000 Byzantine cavalry and twice as many infantry and some additional units but their number and composition is not named by the primary sources. They travelled in a fleet of 500 transports, escorted by ninety-two dromons. Once the fleet arrived safely in North Africa, the Byzantine army disembarked and marched up the coast to Carthage, the Vandal capital, the ships keeping pace with the army offshore. Contact with the fleet was lost however when it had to sail round Cape Bon.\nPreparation.\nAd Decimum (Latin for \"at the tenth [mile post]\"), was a marker along the Mediterranean coast road ten Roman miles () south of Carthage. Hearing of the Byzantine landing, Gelimer marched north from his position towards Ad Decimum. He divided his forces, sending 2,000 men under his nephew Gibamund to block one of the three roads to Carthage, the other two converging at Ad Decimum.\nGelimer retained 5,000\u20136,000 men under his own command while his brother Ammatus approached from the north with 6,000\u20137,000 troops, Ammatus scouting ahead of his troops in person. At Ad Decimum there was a narrow defile where the Byzantines could be trapped. The Byzantines did not know the layout of the road network and would probably be surprised if an army appeared behind them. When the Byzantines advanced towards Carthage they would most likely try to go through the path blocked by Gibamund who was ordered to charge them. This was supposed to push the Byzantines back into the valley and disorganise them. Gelimer would advance into the valley and attack them from behind.\nWhen Belisarius landed in North Africa he knew the Vandals would move against him before he could reach Carthage. However he did not know the Vandal dispositions so he wanted to gain intelligence about them before giving battle. At the time when Ammatus was scouting the location of the battle, Belisarius found a good spot for a fortified camp roughly four miles from Ad Decimum, leaving his infantry there while he advanced with his cavalry. Belisarius had not ordered the 300-strong contingent of scouts under John the Armenian, or the 600 Huns guarding his left flank to stop so they kept advancing while Belisarius was still with his encamping infantry.\nBattle.\nThe battle started with two roughly simultaneous engagements between smaller Vandal and Byzantine units.\nOne of these was between the Byzantine Hun mercenaries and the Vandals of Gibamundus. One of the roughly 600 Huns rode out in front of the rest when encountering the Vandals. Upon seeing this the Vandals stopped in their tracks allowing the Huns to charge and disperse them. They possibly did this because of fear of a trap, being stunned at the bravery of this Hun or being surprised upon seeing Byzantines so far away from the main road. They were also possibly scared of the Huns due to their reputation as great warriors. Thus the 600 Hun mercenaries defeated 2,000 Vandals and killed Gibamundus in combat.\nAt roughly the same time Ammatus made an error that would cost him his life. Ammatus was scouting the battlefield with just a few men when he encountered the much stronger Byzantine vanguard under John, and was killed in the ensuing combat. The rest of Ammatus' forces moved out of Carthage in small bands of at most thirty men, thinly stretching themselves over the road between Carthage and the battlefield. As these small groups in turn encountered the Byzantines they were quickly defeated and fled.\nBy now a Byzantine contingent under a man called Solomon, sent to contact John, reached the scene where battle had taken place. They questioned local inhabitants to what took place there. Soon after Gelimer's main force came into sight, Solomon promptly informed Belisarius of the situation. Seeing the importance of a nearby hill, an ideal location for a camp, some of Gelimer's and Solomon's troops began to skirmish. The Byzantines had to attack uphill and against superior numbers quickly leading to defeat. The retreating Byzantines encountered 800 more Byzantine troops and reformed. Upon being informed of the current situation however, these 800 retreated to the safety of Belisarius\u2019 main force. Reforming these troops and listening to their reports, Belisarius noticed that many Vandals had already been routed while the rest had halted. Rightly believing he outnumbered the Vandals, Belisarius moved rapidly on Ad Decimum. Procopius believed that if Gelimer had pursued the fleeing Byzantines he would have completely overrun Belisarius' unsuspecting contingent, while if he had moved towards Carthage he would have cut the Byzantine army off from John's advance guard. The second option would have put Gelimer in a position to attack the weaker and unsuspecting Byzantine fleet from Carthage, and either outcome could have been disastrous for the Byzantines. Seeing only a few dead troops around the body of his brother Ammatas, Gelimer became convinced that the Byzantine troops led by Solomon had been only a small rear guard, and that an overwhelming attack by a much larger force earlier in the battle had forced Ammatas' troops to abandon their fallen commander. In the clear space around Carthage the Vandals would not have had surprise on their side and the outcome of engagement would be more in doubt, and as such he did not try to pursue the \u201coverwhelming\u201d Byzantine force. Instead, Gelimer elected to set up camp at the favorable position he had captured, gather intelligence, and wait for reinforcements from Sardinia to arrive rather than engage Belisarius (at this point still extremely vulnerable), who moved towards Carthage.\nWhen Belisarius attacked the unprepared Vandals from an unexpected direction, he quickly routed the Vandals who had fled away from Carthage in order to avoid being trapped between Belisarius and a potential other Byzantine force (one under John indeed being present on that road).\nAfter this battle Carthage was left relatively lightly defended and was captured by the Byzantines.\nAftermath.\nBelisarius camped near the site of the battle, not wanting to be too close to the city at night. The next day he marched on the city, with his wife \nAntonina at his side, ordering his men not to kill or enslave the population (as was normal practice at the time) because he stated the people were actually Roman citizens under Vandal rule. They found the gates to the city open, and the army was generally welcomed. Belisarius went straight to the palace and sat on the throne of the Vandal King. He then set about rebuilding the fortifications of the city, and his fleet sought shelter in the Lake of Tunis, five miles (8\u00a0km) south of Carthage.\nAfter a second defeat at the Battle of Tricamarum later in the year, the Vandal Kingdom was all but ended.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44479", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44479", "title": "Respirometer", "text": "Device for measuring the rate of respiration\nA respirometer is a device used to measure the rate of respiration of a living organism by measuring its rate of exchange of oxygen and/or carbon dioxide. They allow investigation into how factors such as age, or chemicals affect the rate of respiration. Respirometers are designed to measure respiration either on the level of a whole animal or plant or on the cellular level. These fields are covered by whole animal and cellular (or mitochondrial) respirometry, respectively.\nA simple whole plant respirometer designed to measure oxygen uptake or CO2 release consists of a sealed container with the living specimen together with a substance to absorb the carbon dioxide given off during respiration, such as soda lime pellets or cotton wads soaked with potassium hydroxide. The oxygen uptake is detected by manometry. Typically, a U-tube manometer is used, which directly shows the pressure difference between the container and the atmosphere. As an organism takes up O2, it generates a proportionate quantity of CO2 (see respiratory quotient), but all the CO2 is absorbed by the soda lime. Therefore, all of the drop of pressure in the chamber can be attributed to the drop of O2 partial pressure in the container. The rate of change gives a direct and reasonably accurate reading for the organism's rate of respiration.\nAs changes in temperature or pressure can also affect the displacement of the manometric fluid, a second respirometer identical to the first except with a dead specimen (or something with the same mass as the specimen in place of the organism) is sometimes set up. Subtracting the displacement of the second respirometer from the first allows for control of these factors.\nThe set up of modern respirometers is described in more detail under respirometry. A respirometer may also be called an oxygraph. Suppliers for whole animal respirometers are e.g. Sable Systems, Respirometer Systems and Applications, Qubit Systems, Eco-environment, Bio-technology, or Challenge Technology; for mitochondrial respirometers, Oroboros Instruments, Hansatech Instruments, or YSI.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44481", "revid": "10939449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44481", "title": "Tuff", "text": "Rock consolidated from volcanic ash\nTuff is a type of rock made of volcanic ash ejected from a vent during a volcanic eruption. Following ejection and deposition, the ash lithifies into solid rock. Rock that contains greater than 75% ash is considered tuff, while rock containing 25% to 75% ash is described as tuffaceous (for example, \"tuffaceous sandstone\"). A pyroclastic rock containing 25\u201375% volcanic bombs or volcanic blocks is called tuff breccia. Tuff composed of sandy volcanic material can be referred to as volcanic sandstone.\nTuff is a relatively soft rock, so it has been used for construction since ancient times. Because it is common in Italy, the Romans used it often for construction. The Rapa Nui people used it to make most of the \"moai\" statues on Easter Island.\nTuff can be classified as either igneous or sedimentary rock. It is usually studied in the context of igneous petrology, although it is sometimes described using sedimentological terms.\nTuff is often erroneously called tufa in guidebooks and in television programs, but tufa is a form of travertine.\nVolcanic ash.\nThe material that is expelled in a volcanic eruption can be classified into three types:\nTephra is made when magma inside the volcano is blown apart by the rapid expansion of hot volcanic gases. Magma commonly explodes as the gas dissolved in it comes out of solution as the pressure decreases when it flows to the surface. These violent explosions produce particles of material that can then fly from the volcano. Solid particles smaller than 2\u00a0mm in diameter (sand-sized or smaller) are called volcanic ash.\nVolcanic ash is further divided into fine ash, with particle sizes smaller than 0.0625\u00a0mm in diameter, and coarse ash, with particle sizes between 0.0625\u00a0mm and 2\u00a0mm in diameter. Tuff is correspondingly divided into coarse tuff (coarse ash tuff) and fine tuff (fine ash tuff or dust tuff). Consolidated tephra composed mostly of coarser particles is called lapillistone (particles 2\u00a0mm to 64\u00a0mm in diameter) or agglomerate or pyroclastic breccia (particles over 64\u00a0mm in diameter) rather than tuff.\nVolcanic ash can vary greatly in composition, and so tuffs are further classified by the composition of the ash from which they formed. Ash from high-silica volcanism, particularly in ash flows, consists mainly of shards of volcanic glass, and tuff formed predominantly from glass shards is described as vitric tuff. The glass shards are typically either irregular in shape or are roughly triangular with convex sides. They are the shattered walls of countless small bubbles that formed in the magma as dissolved gases rapidly came out of solution.\nTuffs formed from ash consisting predominantly of individual crystals are described as crystal tuffs, while those formed from ash consisting predominantly of pulverized rock fragments are described as lithic tuffs. \nThe chemical composition of volcanic ash reflects the entire range of volcanic rock chemistry, from high-silica rhyolitic ash to low-silica basaltic ash, and tuffs are likewise described as rhyolitic, andesitic, basaltic, and so on.\nTransport and lithification.\nThe most straightforward way for volcanic ash to move away from the vent is as ash clouds that are part of an eruption column. These fall to the surface as \"fallout\" deposits that are characteristically well-sorted and tend to form a blanket of uniform thickness across terrain. Column collapse results in a more spectacular and destructive form of transport, which takes the form of pyroclastic flows and surges that characteristically are poorly sorted and pool in low terrain. Surge deposits sometimes show sedimentary structures typical of high-velocity flow, such as dunes and antidunes. Volcanic ash already deposited on the surface can be transported as mud flows (lahars) when mingled with water from rainfall or through eruption into a body of water or ice.\nParticles of volcanic ash that are sufficiently hot will weld together after settling to the surface, producing a welded tuff. Welding requires temperatures in excess of . If the rock contains scattered, pea-sized fragments or fiamme in it, it is called a welded lapilli tuff. Welded tuffs (and welded lapilli tuffs) can be of fallout origin, or deposited from ash flows, as in the case of ignimbrites. During welding, the glass shards and pumice fragments adhere together (necking at point contacts), deform, and compact together, resulting in a eutaxitic fabric. Welded tuff is commonly rhyolitic in composition, but examples of all compositions are known.\nA sequence of ash flows may consist of multiple \"cooling units\". These can be distinguished by the degree of welding. The base of a cooling unit is typically unwelded due to chilling from the underlying cold surface, and the degree of welding and of secondary reactions from fluids in the flow increases upwards towards the center of the flow. Welding decreases towards the top of the cooling unit, where the unit cools more rapidly. The intensity of welding may also decrease towards areas in which the deposit is thinner, and with distance from source.\nCooler pyroclastic flows are unwelded and the ash sheets deposited by them are relatively unconsolidated. However, cooled volcanic ash can quickly become lithified because it usually has a high content of volcanic glass. This is a thermodynamically unstable material that reacts rapidly with groundwater or seawater, which leaches alkali metals and calcium from the glass. New minerals, such as zeolites, clays, and calcite, crystallize from the dissolved substances and cement the tuff.\nTuffs are further classified by their depositional environment, such as lacustrine tuff, subaerial tuff, or submarine tuff, or by the mechanism by which the ash was transported, such as fallout tuff or ash flow tuff. Reworked tuffs, formed by erosion and redeposition of ash deposits, are usually described by the transport agent, such as aeolian tuff or fluvial tuff.\nOccurrences.\nTuffs have the potential to be deposited wherever explosive volcanism takes place, and so have a wide distribution in location and age.\nHigh-silica volcanism.\nRhyolite tuffs contain pumiceous, glassy fragments and small scoriae with quartz, alkali feldspar, biotite, etc. Iceland, Lipari, Hungary, the Basin and Range of the American southwest, and New Zealand are among the areas where such tuffs are prominent. In the ancient rocks of Wales, Charnwood, etc., similar tuffs are known, but in all cases, they are greatly changed by silicification (which has filled them with opal, chalcedony, and quartz) and by devitrification. The frequent presence of rounded corroded quartz crystals, such as occur in rhyolitic lavas, helps to demonstrate their real nature.\nWelded ignimbrites can be highly voluminous, such as the Lava Creek Tuff erupted from Yellowstone Caldera in Wyoming 631,000 years ago. This tuff had an original volume of at least . Lava Creek tuff is known to be at least 1,000 times as large as the deposits of the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, and it had a Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) of 8, greater than any eruption known in the last 10,000 years. Ash flow tuffs cover of the North Island of New Zealand and about of Nevada. Ash flow tuffs are the only volcanic product with volumes rivaling those of flood basalts.\nThe Tioga Bentonite of the northeastern United States varies in composition from crystal tuff to tuffaceous shale. It was deposited as ash carried by wind that fell out over the sea and settled to the bottom. It is Devonian in age and likely came from a vent in central Virginia, where the tuff reaches its maximum thickness of about .\nAlkaline volcanism.\nTrachyte tuffs contain little or no quartz, but much sanidine or anorthoclase and sometimes oligoclase feldspar, with occasional biotite, augite, and hornblende. In weathering, they often change to soft red or yellow claystones, rich in kaolin with secondary quartz. Recent trachyte tuffs are found on the Rhine (at Siebengebirge), in Ischia and near Naples. Trachyte-carbonatite tuffs have been identified in the East African Rift. Alkaline crystal tuffs have been reported from Rio de Janeiro.\nIntermediate volcanism.\nAndesitic tuffs are exceedingly common. They occur along the whole chain of the Cordilleras and Andes, in the West Indies, New Zealand, Japan, etc. In the Lake District, North Wales, Lorne, the Pentland Hills, the Cheviots, and many other districts of Great Britain, ancient rocks of exactly similar nature are abundant. In color, they are red or brown; their scoriae fragments are of all sizes from huge blocks down to minute granular dust. The cavities are filled with many secondary minerals, such as calcite, chlorite, quartz, epidote, or chalcedony; in microscopic sections, though, the nature of the original lava can nearly always be made out from the shapes and properties of the little crystals which occur in the decomposed glassy base. Even in the smallest details, these ancient tuffs have a complete resemblance to the modern ash beds of Cotopaxi, Krakatoa, and Mont Pel\u00e9.\nMafic volcanism.\nMafic volcanism typically takes the form of Hawaiian eruptions that are nonexplosive and produce little ash. However, interaction between basaltic magma and groundwater or seawater results in hydromagmatic explosions that produce abundant ash. These deposit ash cones that subsequently can become cemented into tuff cones. Diamond Head, Hawaii, is an example of a tuff cone, as is the island of Ka'ula. The glassy basaltic ash produced in such eruptions rapidly alters to palagonite as part of the process of lithification. \nAlthough conventional mafic volcanism produce little ash, such ash as is formed may accumulate locally as significant deposits. An example is the Pahala ash of Hawaii island, which locally is as thick as . These deposits also rapidly alter to palagonite, and eventually weather to laterite. \nBasaltic tuffs are also found in County Antrim, Skye, Mull, and other places, where Paleogene volcanic rocks are found; in Scotland, Derbyshire, and Ireland among the Carboniferous strata, and among the still older rocks of the Lake District, the southern uplands of Scotland, and Wales. They are black, dark green, or red in colour; vary greatly in coarseness, some being full of round spongy bombs a foot or more in diameter; and being often submarine, may contain shale, sandstone, grit, and other sedimentary material, and are occasionally fossiliferous. Recent basaltic tuffs are found in Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Jan Mayen, Sicily, the Hawaiian Islands, Samoa, etc. When weathered, they are filled with calcite, chlorite, serpentine, and especially where the lavas contain nepheline or leucite, are often rich in zeolites, such as analcite, prehnite, natrolite, scolecite, chabazite, heulandite, etc.\nUltramafic volcanism.\nUltramafic tuffs are extremely rare; their characteristic is the abundance of olivine or serpentine and the scarcity or absence of feldspar and quartz.\nKimberlites.\nOccurrences of ultramafic tuff include surface deposits of kimberlite at maars in the diamond-fields of southern Africa and other regions. The principal variety of kimberlite is a dark bluish-green, serpentine-rich breccia (blue-ground) which, when thoroughly oxidized and weathered, becomes a friable brown or yellow mass (the \"yellow-ground\"). These breccias were emplaced as gas\u2013solid mixtures and are typically preserved and mined in diatremes that form intrusive pipe-like structures. At depth, some kimberlite breccias grade into root zones of dikes made of unfragmented rock. At the surface, ultramafic tuffs may occur in maar deposits. Because kimberlites are the most common igneous source of diamonds, the transitions from maar to diatreme to root-zone dikes have been studied in detail. Diatreme-facies kimberlite is more properly called an ultramafic breccia rather than a tuff.\nKomatiites.\nKomatiite tuffs are found, for example, in the greenstone belts of Canada and South Africa.\nFolding and metamorphism.\nIn course of time, changes other than weathering may overtake tuff deposits. Sometimes, they are involved in folding and become sheared and cleaved. Many of the green slates of the English Lake District are finely cleaved ashes. In Charnwood Forest also, the tuffs are slaty and cleaved. The green color is due to the large development of chlorite. Among the crystalline schists of many regions, green beds or green schists occur, which consist of quartz, hornblende, chlorite or biotite, iron oxides, feldspar, etc., and are probably recrystallized or metamorphosed tuffs. They often accompany masses of epidiorite and hornblende \u2013 schists which are the corresponding lavas and sills. Some chlorite-schists also are probably altered beds of volcanic tuff. The \"Schalsteins\" of Devon and Germany include many cleaved and partly recrystallized ash-beds, some of which still retain their fragmental structure, though their lapilli are flattened and drawn out. Their steam cavities are usually filled with calcite, but sometimes with quartz. The more completely altered forms of these rocks are platy, green chloritic schists; in these, however, structures indicating their original volcanic nature only sparingly occur. These are intermediate stages between cleaved tuffs and crystalline schists.\nImportance.\nThe primary economic value of tuff is as a building material. In the ancient world, tuff's relative softness meant that it was commonly used for construction where it was available. \nItaly.\nTuff is common in Italy, and the Romans used it for many buildings and bridges. For example, the whole port of the island of Ventotene (still in use), was carved from tuff. The Servian Wall, built to defend the city of Rome in the fourth century BC, is also built almost entirely from tuff. The Romans also cut tuff into small, rectangular stones that they used to create walls in a pattern known as \"opus reticulatum\".\nPeperino has been used in Rome and Naples as a building stone, is a trachyte tuff. Pozzolana also is a decomposed tuff, but of basic character, originally obtained near Naples and used as a cement, but this name is now applied to a number of substances not always of identical character. In the historical architecture of Naples, Neapolitan yellow tuff is the most used building material. Piperno ignimbrite tuff was also used widely in Naples and Campania.\nGermany.\nIn the Eifel region of Germany, a trachytic, pumiceous tuff called trass has been extensively worked as a hydraulic mortar. Tuff of the Eifel region of Germany has been widely used for construction of railroad stations and other buildings in Frankfurt, Hamburg, and other large cities. Construction using the \"Rochlitz Porphyr\", can be seen in the Mannerist-style sculpted portal outside the chapel entrance in Colditz Castle. The trade name \"Rochlitz Porphyr\" is the traditional designation for a dimension stone of Saxony with an architectural history over 1,000 years in Germany. The quarries are located near Rochlitz.\nUnited States.\nYucca Mountain nuclear waste repository, a U.S. Department of Energy terminal storage facility for spent nuclear reactor and other radioactive waste, is in tuff and ignimbrite in the Basin and Range Province in Nevada. In Napa Valley and Sonoma Valley, California, areas made of tuff are routinely excavated for storage of wine barrels.\nRapa Nui.\nTuff from Rano Raraku was used by the Rapa Nui people of Easter Island to make the vast majority of their famous moai statues.\nArmenia.\nTuff is used extensively in Armenia and Armenian architecture. It is the dominant type of stone used in construction in Armenia's capital Yerevan, Gyumri, Armenia's second largest city, and Ani, the country's medieval capital, now in Turkey. A small village in Armenia was renamed Tufashen (literally \"built of tuff\") in 1946.\nTephrochronology.\nTuffs are deposited geologically instantaneously and often over a large region. This makes them highly useful as time-stratigraphic markers. The use of tuffs and other tephra deposits in this manner is known as tephrochronology and is particularly useful for Quaternary chronostratigraphy. Individual tuff beds can be \"fingerprinted\" by their chemical composition and phenocryst assemblages. Absolute ages for tuff beds can be determined by K-Ar, Ar-Ar, or carbon-14 dating. Zircon grains found in many tuffs are highly durable and can survive even metamorphism of the host tuff to schist, allowing absolute ages to be assigned to ancient metamorphic rocks. For example, dating of zircons in a metamorphosed tuff bed in the Pilar Formation provided some of the first evidence for the Picuris orogeny.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"tuff\" is derived from the Italian \"tufo\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44482", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44482", "title": "Niven numbers", "text": ""}
{"id": "44483", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44483", "title": "David Fabricius", "text": "German pastor and astronomer\nDavid Fabricius (9 March 1564 \u2013 7 May 1617) was a Frisian pastor who made two major discoveries in the early days of telescopic astronomy, jointly with his eldest son, Johannes Fabricius (1587\u20131615).\nDavid Fabricius (Latinization of his proper name \"David Faber\", or \"David Goldschmidt\"; possibly Hebrew) was born at Esens, studied at the University of Helmstedt starting in 1583 and served as pastor for small towns near his birthplace in Frisia (now northwest Germany and northeast Netherlands), at Resterhafe near Dornum in 1584 and at Osteel in 1603. As was common for Protestant ministers of the day, he dabbled in science: his particular interest was astronomy. Fabricius corresponded with astronomer Johannes Kepler.\nScientific work.\nFabricius discovered the first known periodic variable star (as opposed to cataclysmic variables, such as novas and supernovas), Mira, in August 1596. At first he believed it to be \"just\" another nova, as the whole concept of a recurring variable did not exist at the time. When he saw Mira brighten again in 1609, however, it became clear that a new kind of object had been discovered in the sky.\nTwo years later, his son Johannes Fabricius (1587\u20131615) returned from university in the Netherlands with telescopes that they turned on the Sun. Despite the difficulties of observing the Sun directly, they noted the existence of sunspots, the first confirmed instance of their observation (though unclear statements in East Asian annals suggest that Chinese astronomers may have discovered them with the naked eye previously, and Fabricius may have noticed them himself without a telescope a few years before). The pair soon invented camera obscura telescopy so as to save their eyes and get a better view of the solar disk, and observed that the spots moved. They would appear on the eastern edge of the disk, steadily move to the western edge, disappear, then reappear at the east again after the passage of the same amount of time that it had taken for it to cross the disk in the first place. This suggested that the Sun rotated on its axis, which had been postulated before but never backed up with evidence. Johannes then published \"Maculis in Sole Observatis, et Apparente earum cum Sole Conversione Narratio\" (\"Narration on Spots Observed on the Sun and their Apparent Rotation with the Sun\") in June 1611. Unfortunately, after Johannes Fabricius's early death at the age of 29, the book remained obscure and was eclipsed by the independent discoveries of and publications about sunspots by Christoph Scheiner and Galileo Galilei, few months later.\nDeath.\nAfter Fabricius denounced a local goose thief from the pulpit at Osteel in 1617, the accused man struck him on the head with a shovel and killed him.\nLegacy.\nCopies of a map he made of Frisia in 1589 are also still extant. He is also name-checked in Jules Verne's 1865 novel \"From the Earth to the Moon\" as someone who claimed to have seen lunar inhabitants through his telescope, though that particular fact is merely part of Verne's fiction. The large (79-kilometer) crater Fabricius in the Moon's southern hemisphere is named after David Fabricius. In 1895 a monument was erected to his memory in the churchyard at Osteel where he was pastor from 1603 until 1617.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44484", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44484", "title": "Archimedian spiral/image credits", "text": ""}
{"id": "44486", "revid": "2602832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44486", "title": "Melvin Defleur", "text": "American academic (1923\u20132017)\nMelvin Lawrence DeFleur (April 27, 1923 \u2013 February 13, 2017) was a professor and scholar in the field of communications. His initial field of study was social sciences.\nBiography.\nMelvin Lawrence DeFleur was born in Portland, Oregon on April 27, 1923. DeFleur received his Ph.D. in social psychology from the University of Washington in 1954. His thesis, \"Experimental studies of stimulus response relationships in leaflet communication\", drew from sociology, psychology, and communication, to study how information diffused through American communities.\nHe has taught at Indiana University (1954\u20131963), the University of Kentucky (1963\u20131967), Washington State University (1967\u20131976), the University of New Mexico (1976\u20131980), the University of Miami (1981\u20131985), Syracuse University (1987\u20131994) and the University of Washington before taking his last position as professor of communication at Boston University's Department of Mass Communication, Advertising and Public Relations. In addition, he was a Fulbright Professor to Argentina twice: and was affiliated with the Argentine Sociological Society and the Ibero-Interamerican Sociological Society, for which he served as secretary general.\nDeFleur was married to Margaret DeFleur, Associate Dean for Graduate Studies and Research.\nDeFleur died on February 13, 2017, aged 93.\nAcademic work.\nHis early work owes a debt to Stuart C. Dodd and George A. Lundberg, sociologists and psychologists. This group applied quantitative measure, statistical data analyses, and descriptive mathematical models used in the physical sciences to the development of sociology.\nAnother force affected his work: He began his career when the memories of World War II were fresh, and entered into the academic world when the Cold War played a critical role in shaping the United States' political, economic and social atmosphere. Social psychology research added to the knowledge that the United States government and military felt they needed for operating in a new world dynamic (East v. West). For example, the leafleting processes studied by Project Revere were an obvious way to communicate information to a displaced, captive, or isolated population.\nHe maintained a sociological focus during the early 1970s, co-writing an introductory sociology textbook that went into several editions. He co-authored a study of discrimination in university hiring practices, particularly in sociology departments (Wolfe et al., 1973), again with a strong emphasis on statistics and survey methods. However, his focus shifted. With the spread of television, he began to study the mass media. Specifically, he researched the effect of television on children's knowledge of occupational roles, and on the factors that influence the content and output of the American broadcasting systems. He and others established a formal definition of social expectations theory, applied to a model to predict that watching television attunes a viewer to social organization patterns of various groups, even if they \"have never been members or never will be\". Other works examined the potential relationships forged by mass media between the perception of social problems and their portrayal by the media. He wrote of his suggestion of a cultural norms theory in 1970, an idea that, in his estimation, \"provided the foundation for the more comprehensive social expectations theory\".\nIn the 1970s and 1980s he continued studies on news diffusion. In reviewing some major studies (DeFleur, 1988), he found that despite emerging technology, word of mouth is still important, and major events that concern a broader population will travel further and faster. His research lead to the creation of the Media Systems Dependency Theory with Sandra Ball-Rokeach in 1976.\nDeFleur cites his idea (formed with Timothy Plax) of the language-shaping function of the media as one of four theories on how media shape messages, and what that means for social conduct (DeFleur &amp; Ball-Rokeach, 1989). The other three are the meaning-construction function of the press; cultivation theory; the agenda setting function of the press. His transition from \"pure\" social psychology to mass communication mirrors the growth of this field. His theories, are widely cited in mass communication studies and in general theoretical surveys.\nHe is on the executive board of the Center for Global Media Studies at Washington State University, an organization whose motto, \"Global Media Cover the World ... We Cover Global Media,\" connects with the focus of his recent work studying the accuracy of audience recall of news media in a cross-cultural vein (Faccoro &amp; DeFleur, 1993).\nSelected bibliography.\nDennis, E. E. &amp; DeFleur, M. L. (2010). Understanding Media in the Digital Age. Allyn &amp; Bacon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44488", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44488", "title": "Indymedia", "text": "Global open publishing network of activist journalist collectives\nThe Independent Media Center, better known as Indymedia, is an open publishing network of activist journalist collectives that report on political and social issues. Following beginnings during the 1999 Carnival Against Capital and 1999 Seattle WTO protests, Indymedia became closely associated with the global justice movement. The Indymedia network extended internationally in the early 2000s with volunteer-run centers that shared software and a common format with a newswire and columns. Police raided several centers and seized computer equipment. The centers declined in the 2010s with the waning of the global justice movement.\nContent and distribution.\nIndymedia is a website for citizen journalism that promotes activism and counters mainstream media news and commentary perspectives. Indymedia originated from protests against the concentrated ownership and perceived biases in corporate media reporting. The first Indymedia node, attached to the Seattle anti-corporate globalization protests, was seen by activists as an alternative news source to that of the corporate media, which they accused of only showing violence and confrontation, and portraying all protesters negatively. Indymedia initially covered protests between 1999 and 2001. As protests began to wane, Indymedia covered global social justice movements, such as opposition to the war in Iraq. Indymedia was purported to be the first network on-the-scene in reporting the 2008 Greek riots and the resistance towards the 2009 Honduran coup. The network also has a focus in covering the social justice campaigns of students, Indigenous people, immigrants, and peace activists. A slogan was \"Don't Hate the Media, Become the Media!\"254\nActive, the software used as the basis for the first Indymedia center websites, was written by activists in Sydney. It went live in January 1999 and featured open publishing, calendars, events and contacts. Indymedia also ran a global radio project which aggregated audio RSS feeds from around the world.\nHistory.\nThe origins of Indymedia can be traced to the global justice protest Carnival Against Capital, which took place in over forty countries on June 18, 1999. In late November 1999, the first dedicated Indymedia project was ready to cover the 1999 Seattle WTO protests. The first post was made on November 24. It read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The resistance is global ... The web dramatically alters the balance between multinational and activist media. With just a bit of coding and some cheap equipment, we can set up a live automated website that rivals the corporates'. Prepare to be swamped by the tide of activist media makers on the ground in Seattle and around the world, telling the real story behind the World Trade Agreement.\u2014\u200a \nWhen the protests began, a hundred videographers were on the streets filming, joined by photographers and journalists, all working as volunteers.251\nAfter Seattle, local, autonomous collectives formed. Local sociopolitical context determined each individual center's focus. However, it was a core theme that centers would have both an open publishing structure to which anyone could contribute and an open archive.252 Centers tended to be set up in response to meetings of groups such as the World Bank or G8, to world forum events, or to party conventions, such as Democrat or Republican meetings in the US.243 By 2002, there were 90 Indymedia websites, mainly in the US, Canada and Western Europe but also Australia, New Zealand and Latin America.243 The number of centers continued growing, especially in Europe, reaching 142 in 2004 and 175 by 2010.426\nThe Indymedia movement reached its peak in the mid-2000s.423 Centers in the United States began to atrophy around 2008, and by 2014, the global network had declined significantly, with the number of active sites down to 68.426 A number of reasons for the decline have been put forward. In February 2013, Ceasefire magazine had noted a decline in the use of Nottingham Indymedia, stating that activist usage of commercial social media had increased. The poverty of activist collectives to invest in resources was contrasted with the massive investments made by corporations such as Facebook and Twitter. In an article published by the journal \"Convergence\" Eva Giraud summarised some of the different arguments that had been made by academics and activists, which included informal hierarchy, bureaucracy, security issues including IP address logging, lack of regional engagement, lack of class politics, increase in web 2.0 social media use, website underdevelopment, decline in volunteers and decline in the global justice movement. Corporate Watch saw the rise of social media sites and the normalization of 'open publishing' as recommodifying Indymedia's key innovations for the cultural industry.\nIn a 2019 article published on occasion of Indymedia's 20th anniversary, April Glaser suggested that factors such as volunteer burnout, lack of resources, lack of centralized accountability, lack of leadership development, and the waning of the anti-globalization movement all contributed to the decline of Indymedia.\nBy region.\nUnited Kingdom.\nPolice seized servers in the UK in June 2005. An anonymous post on the Bristol Indymedia server came to police attention for suggesting an \"action\" against a freight train carrying new cars as part of a protest against cars and climate change in the run up to that year's Gleneagles G8 summit. A member of the Bristol Indymedia group was arrested. Indymedia was supported in this matter by the National Union of Journalists and Liberty.\nIn August 2014, Bristol Indymedia's servers were again seized by police after a string of attacks in the Bristol area were claimed on the Indymedia service, including a communique signed by Informal Anarchist Federation claiming the successful arson of a police firearms training centre. Bristol Indymedia stated that they would not cooperate with the authorities and that they \"do not intend to voluntarily hand over information to the police as they have requested\".\nUnited States.\nOn October 7, 2004, the Federal Bureau Investigation took possession of several server hard drives used by a number of IMCs and hosted by U.S.-based Rackspace Managed Hosting. The servers in question were located in the United Kingdom and managed by the British arm of Rackspace, but some 20 mainly European IMC websites were affected, and several unrelated websites were affected, including the website of a Linux distribution. Some, but not all, of the legal documents relating to the confiscation of the servers were unsealed by a Texas district court in August 2005, following legal action by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The documents revealed that the only action requested by the government was to surrender server log files.\nThe move was condemned by the International Federation of Journalists, who stated that, \"The way this has been done smacks more of intimidation of legitimate journalistic inquiry than crime-busting\" and called for an investigation. European civil liberties organization Statewatch and the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC) also voiced criticism. EFF attorney Kurt Opsahl compared the case with \"Steve Jackson Games, Inc. v. United States Secret Service\".\nNew York\u2013based journalist and Indymedia volunteer Bradley Roland Will was killed in October 2006 along with two Mexican protesters in the city of Oaxaca. People had been demonstrating in the city since May as part of an uprising prompted by a teachers strike. Reporters Without Borders condemned the actions of the Mexican government in allowing the accused gunmen to go free.\nOn January 30, 2009, one of the system administrators of the server that hosts indymedia.us received a grand jury subpoena from the Southern District of Indiana federal court. The subpoena asked the administrator to provide all \"IP addresses, times, and any other identifying information\" for every visitor to the site on June 25, 2008. The subpoena also included a gag order that stated that the recipient is \"not to disclose the existence of this request unless authorized by the Assistant U.S. Attorney.\" The administrator of indymedia.us could not have provided the information because Indymedia sites generally do not keep IP address logs. The Electronic Frontier Foundation determined that there was no legal basis for the gag order, and that the subpoena request \"violated the SCA's restrictions on what types of data the government could obtain using a subpoena.\" Under Justice Department guidelines, subpoenas to news media must have the authorization of the attorney general. According to a CBS News blog, the subpoena of indymedia.us was never submitted to the Attorney General for review. On February 25, 2009, a United States Attorney sent a letter to an attorney with the Electronic Frontier Foundation stating that the subpoena had been withdrawn.\nEurope.\nAt the 2001 G8 summit in Genoa, Italian police assaulted Indymedia journalists at the Armando Diaz School where Indymedia had set up a temporary office and radio station. Twenty-nine police officers were indicted for beating people, planting evidence and wrongful arrest during the night-time raid. Thirteen were convicted.\nIn the aftermath of the 2017 G20 Hamburg summit protests, the German Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community banned a chapter of the network called Linksunten. This had been set up in 2008, in southwestern Germany. The ministry described the network as \"the central communications platform among far-left extremists prone to violence\" and stated that it was used to spread information about violent protest tactics. German internet service providers were ordered to block communication to the website, on which police were referred to as \"pigs\" and \"murderers\" and instructions for making Molotov cocktails could be found. The German police also raided the home addresses of several activists in the Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg region, seizing computers and weapons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44490", "revid": "49509309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44490", "title": "Charles Fort", "text": "American writer (1874\u20131932)\nCharles Hoy Fort (August 6, 1874 \u2013 May 3, 1932) was an American writer and researcher who specialized in anomalous phenomena. The terms \"Fortean\" and \"Forteana\" are sometimes used to characterize various such phenomena. Fort's books sold well and are still in print. His work continues to inspire admirers, who refer to themselves as \"Forteans\", and has influenced some aspects of science fiction.\nFort's collections of scientific anomalies, including \"The Book of the Damned\" (1919), influenced numerous science-fiction writers with their skepticism and as sources of ideas. \"Fortean\" phenomena are events which seem to challenge the boundaries of accepted scientific knowledge, and the \"Fortean Times\" (founded as \"The News\" in 1973 and renamed in 1976) investigates such phenomena.\nBiography.\nFort was born in Albany, New York, in 1874, of Dutch ancestry. His father, a grocer, was an authoritarian, and in his unpublished autobiography \"Many Parts,\" Fort mentions the physical abuse he endured from his father. Fort's biographer, Damon Knight, suggested that his distrust of authority began in his treatment as a child. Fort developed a strong sense of independence during his early years.\nAs a young adult, Fort wanted to be a naturalist, collecting sea shells, minerals, and birds. Although Fort was described as curious and intelligent, he was not a good student. An autodidact, his considerable knowledge of the world was mainly due to his extensive personal reading.\nAt age 18, Fort left New York to embark on a world tour to \"put some capital in the bank of experience\". He travelled through the western United States, Scotland, and England, until becoming ill in Southern Africa. When he returned home, he was nursed by Anna Filing, whom he had known since childhood. They were married on October 26, 1896, at an Episcopal church. For a few years, the newly married couple lived in poverty in the Bronx while Fort tried to earn a living writing stories for newspapers and magazines. In 1906, he began to collect accounts of anomalies.\nCareer as a full-time writer.\nHis uncle Frank A. Fort died in 1916, and a modest inheritance gave Fort enough money to quit his various day jobs and to write full-time. In 1917, Fort's brother Clarence died; his portion of the same inheritance was divided between Fort and his other brother, Raymond.\nFort's experience as a journalist, coupled with his wit and contrarian nature, prepared him for his real-life work, ridiculing the pretensions of scientific positivism and the tendency of journalists and editors of newspapers and scientific journals to rationalize.\nFort wrote 10 novels, although only one, \"The Outcast Manufacturers\" (1909), a tenement tale, was published. Reviews were mostly positive, but it was unsuccessful commercially. During 1915, Fort began to write two books, titled \"X\" and \"Y\", the first dealing with the idea that beings on Mars were controlling events on Earth, and the second with the postulation of a sinister civilization extant at the South Pole. These books caught the attention of writer Theodore Dreiser, who tried to get them published, but to no avail. Discouraged, Fort burnt the manuscripts, but soon began work on the book that would change the course of his life, \"The Book of the Damned\" (1919), which Dreiser helped to get published. The title referred to \"damned\" data that Fort collected, phenomena for which science could not account, and that was thus rejected or ignored.\nFort and Anna lived intermittently in London between 1920 and 1928, so Fort could carry out research in the Reading Room of the British Museum. Fort lived most of his life in the Bronx. He was, like his wife, fond of movies, and often took her from their Ryer Avenue apartment to a movie theater nearby, stopping at an adjacent newsstand for an arm full of various newspapers. Fort frequented the parks near the Bronx, where he sifted through piles of clippings. He often rode the subway down to the main Public Library on Fifth Avenue, where he spent many hours reading scientific journals, newspapers, and periodicals from around the world. Fort also had literary friends who gathered at various apartments, including his own, to drink and talk.\nFollowing.\nFort was pleasantly surprised to find himself the subject of a cult following. Talk arose of the formation of a formal organization to study the type of odd events related by his books. Jerome Clark writes, \"Fort himself, who did nothing to encourage any of this, found the idea hilarious. Yet he faithfully corresponded with his readers, some of whom had taken to investigating reports of anomalous phenomena and sending their findings to Fort\". Historian Mitch Horowitz has compared the trajectory of Fort's literary career to Edgar Allan Poe's: \"Through his pioneering of paranormal reportage, Fort did for weird facts (or alleged ones) what Edgar Allan Poe did for horror literature: created a genre where none was recognized. The two authors led strangely similar lives of near-penury, uneven but notable literary praise during otherwise struggling careers, and elevation to iconic status after death.\"\nDeath.\nSuffering from poor health and failing eyesight, Fort distrusted doctors and did not seek medical help for his worsening health. Rather, he emphasized completing \"Wild Talents\".\nAfter he collapsed on May 3, 1932, Fort was rushed to Royal Hospital. Later that same day, Fort's publisher visited him to show him the advance copies of \"Wild Talents\". Fort died only hours afterward, probably of leukemia. He was interred in the Fort family plot in Albany, New York.\nFort and the unexplained.\nOverview.\nFor more than 30 years, Fort visited libraries in New York City and London, assiduously reading scientific journals, newspapers, and magazines, collecting notes on phenomena that were not explained well by the accepted theories and beliefs of the time.\nFort took thousands of notes during his lifetime. In his undated short story \"The Giant, the Insect and The Philanthropic-looking Old Gentleman\" (first published by the International Fortean Organization in issue No. 70 of the \"INFO Journal: Science and the Unknown\"), Fort spoke of having often toyed with the idea of burning a collection of some 48,000 notes, and of one day letting \"several\" notes be blown away by the wind because he couldn't be bothered to save them (they were supposedly returned to him by a gentleman on a neighboring park bench). The notes were kept on cards and scraps of paper in shoeboxes, in Fort's cramped handwriting. More than once, depressed and discouraged, Fort destroyed his work, but began anew. Some notes were published by the Fortean Society magazine \"Doubt\", and upon the death of its editor Tiffany Thayer in 1959, most were donated to the New York Public Library, where they are still available to researchers. Material created by Fort has also survived as part of the papers of Theodore Dreiser, held at the University of Pennsylvania.\nFrom this research, Fort wrote four books: \"The Book of the Damned\" (1919), \"New Lands\" (1923), \"Lo!\" (1931), and \"Wild Talents\" (1932). One book was written between \"New Lands\" and \"Lo!\" but it was abandoned and absorbed into \"Lo!.\"\nFort's writing style.\nFort suggested that a Super-Sargasso Sea exists, into which all lost things go, and justified his theories by noting that they fit the data as well as the conventional explanations. As to whether Fort \"believed\" this theory, or any of his other proposals, he himself noted, \"I believe nothing of my own that I have ever written\".\nNotable literary contemporaries of Fort's openly admired his writing style and befriended him. Among these were: Ben Hecht, John Cowper Powys, Sherwood Anderson, Clarence Darrow, and Booth Tarkington, who wrote the foreword to \"New Lands.\"\nAfter Fort's death, the writer Colin Wilson said that he suspected that Fort took few if any of his \"explanations\" seriously, and noted that Fort made \"no attempt to present a coherent argument\". He described Fort as \"a patron saint of cranks\" while at the same time he compared Fort to Robert Ripley, a popular contemporary cartoonist and writer who found major success publishing similar oddities in a syndicated newspaper panel series named \"Ripley's Believe It or Not!\"\nWilson called Fort's writing style \"atrocious\" and \"almost unreadable\", yet despite his objections to Fort's prose, he allowed that \"the facts are certainly astonishing enough.\" In the end, Fort's work gave him \"the feeling that no matter how honest scientists \"think\" they are, they are still influenced by various \"unconscious\" assumptions that prevent them from attaining true objectivity. Expressed in a sentence, Fort's principle goes something like this: People with a psychological need to \"believe\" in marvels are no more prejudiced and gullible than people with a psychological need \"not\" to believe in marvels.\"\nBy contrast, Jerome Clark, wrote that Fort was \"essentially a satirist hugely skeptical of human beings'\u2014especially scientists'\u2014claims to ultimate knowledge\". Clark described Fort's writing style as a \"distinctive blend of mocking humor, penetrating insight, and calculated outrageousness\". Fort was skeptical of sciences and wrote his own mocking explanations to defy scientists who used traditional methods.\nIn a review of \"Lo!\", \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"Reading Fort is a ride on a comet; if the traveler returns to earth after the journey, he will find, after his first dizziness has worn off, a new and exhilarating emotion that will color and correct all his future reading of less heady scientific literature.\"\nFortean phenomena.\nExamples of the odd phenomena in Fort's books include many occurrences of the sort variously referred to as occult, supernatural, and paranormal. Reported events include teleportation (a term Fort is generally credited with inventing), falls of frogs, fishes, and inorganic materials, spontaneous human combustion, ball lightning (a term explicitly used by Fort), poltergeist events, unaccountable noises and explosions, levitation, unidentified flying objects, unexplained disappearances, giant wheels of light in the oceans, and animals found outside their normal ranges (see phantom cat). He offered many reports of out-of-place artifacts (OOPArts), strange items found in unlikely locations. He was also perhaps the first person to explain strange human appearances and disappearances by the hypothesis of alien abduction, and was an early proponent of the extraterrestrial hypothesis, specifically suggesting that strange lights or objects sighted in the skies might be alien spacecraft.\nForteans.\nFort's work has inspired some people to consider themselves \"Forteans\". The first of these was Hecht, a screenwriter, who in a review of \"The Book of the Damned\", declared, \"I am the first disciple of Charles Fort... henceforth, I am a Fortean\".\nPrecisely what is encompassed by the term \"Fortean\" is a matter of great debate; the term is widely applied to people ranging from Fortean purists dedicated to Fort's methods and interests, to those with open and active acceptance of the actuality of paranormal phenomena, a belief with which Fort may not have agreed. Most generally, Forteans have a wide interest in unexplained phenomena, concerned mostly with the natural world, and have a developed \"agnostic skepticism\" regarding the anomalies they note and discuss. For Hecht, as an example, being a Fortean meant hallowing a pronounced distrust of authority in all its forms, whether religious, scientific, political, philosophical, or otherwise. It did not, of course, include an actual belief in the anomalous data enumerated in Fort's works.\nThe Fortean Society was initiated at the Savoy-Plaza Hotel in New York City on January 26, 1931, by some of Fort's friends, including such significant writers as Hecht, Dreiser, and Alexander Woollcott, and organized by fellow American writer Thayer, half in earnest and half in the spirit of great good humor, like the works of Fort himself. The board of founders included Dreiser, Hecht, Tarkington, Powys, Aaron Sussman, former \"Puck\" editor Harry Leon Wilson, Woollcott, and J. David Stern, publisher of \"The Philadelphia Record\". Active members of the Fortean Society included prominent science-fiction writers such as Knight and Eric Frank Russell.\nFort, however, rejected the society and refused the presidency, which went to his friend Dreiser; he was lured to its inaugural meeting by false telegrams. As a strict nonauthoritarian, Fort refused to establish himself as an authority, and further objected on the grounds that those who would be attracted by such a group would be spiritualists, zealots, and those opposed to a science that rejected them; it would attract those who \"believed\" in their chosen phenomena\u2014an attitude exactly contrary to Forteanism. Fort did hold unofficial meetings and had a long history of getting together informally with many of New York City's literati such as Dreiser and Hecht at their apartments, where they would talk, have a meal, and then listen to brief reports.\nThe magazine \"Fortean Times\" (first published in November 1973) is a proponent of Fortean journalism, combining humor, skepticism, and serious research into subjects that scientists and other respectable authorities often disdain. Another such group is the International Fortean Organization (INFO), which was formed during the early 1960s (incorporated in 1965) by brothers and writers Ron and Paul Willis, who acquired much of the material of the Fortean Society, which had largely ceased by 1959 with the death of Thayer. INFO publishes the \"INFO Journal: Science and the Unknown\" and organizes the FortFest, the world's first continuously running conference on anomalous phenomena dedicated to the spirit of Charles Fort. INFO, since the mid-1960s, also provides audio CDs and filmed DVDs of notable conference speakers, including Colin Wilson, John Michell, Graham Hancock, John Anthony West, William Corliss, John Keel, and Joscelyn Godwin. Other notable Fortean societies include the London Fortean Society, Edinburgh Fortean Society, in Edinburgh and the Isle of Wight.\nScholarly evaluation.\nReligious scholars such as Jeffrey J. Kripal and Joseph P. Laycock view Fort as a pioneering theorist who helped define \"paranormal\" as a discursive category and provided insight into its importance in human experience. Consistently critical of how science studied abnormal phenomena in his day, Fort remains a point of reference for those who engage in such studies today.\nLiterary influence.\nMore than a few modern authors of fiction and nonfiction who have written about the influence of Fort are sincere devotees of Fort. One of the most notable is British philosopher John Michell, who wrote the introduction to the edition of \"Lo!\", published by John Brown in 1996. Michell says: \"Fort, of course, made no attempt at defining a world-view, but the evidence he uncovered gave him an 'acceptance' of reality as something far more magical and subtly organized than is considered proper today.\" Stephen King also uses the works of Fort to illuminate his main characters, notably \"It\" and \"Firestarter\". In \"Firestarter\", the parents of a pyrokinetically gifted child are advised to read Fort's \"Wild Talents\" rather than the works of baby doctor Benjamin Spock.\nLoren Coleman is a well-known cryptozoologist, author of \"The Unidentified\" (1975) dedicated to Fort, and \"Mysterious America\", which \"Fortean Times\" termed a Fortean classic. Coleman terms himself the first Vietnam era conscientious objector to base his pacificist ideas on Fortean thoughts. Jerome Clark has described himself as a \"skeptical Fortean\". Mike Dash is another Fortean, bringing his historian's training to bear on all manner of odd reports, while being careful to avoid uncritically accepting \"any\" orthodoxy, be it that of fringe devotees or mainstream science. Science-fiction writers of note including Philip K. Dick, Robert Heinlein, and Robert Anton Wilson were also fans of the work of Fort. Alfred Bester's teleportation-themed novel, \"The Stars My Destination\", pays homage to the coiner of the term by naming the first teleporter \"Charles Fort Jaunte\". Fort's work, of compilation and commentary on anomalous phenomena has been carried on by William R. Corliss, whose self-published books and notes bring Fort's collections up to date.\nIn 1939, Eric Frank Russell first published the novel which became \"Sinister Barrier\", in which he names Fort explicitly as an influence. Russell included some of Fort's data in the story. In chapter 3 of William Gaddis\u2019s 1955 novel \"The Recognitions\", protagonist Wyatt Gwyon twice quotes from Fort\u2019s \"The Book of the Damned\"--\u201cBy the damned, I mean the excluded\u201d; \u201cBy prostitution, I mean usefulness\u201d\u2014and paraphrases him from the same book: \u201cCharles Fort says maybe we\u2019re fished for, by supercelestial beings.\u201d Ivan T. Sanderson, Scottish naturalist and writer, was a devotee of Fort's work, and referenced it heavily in several of his own books on unexplained phenomena, notably \"Things\" (1967), and \"More Things\" (1969). Louis Pauwels and Jacques Bergier's \"The Morning of the Magicians\" was also heavily influenced by Fort's work and mentions it often. Author Donald Jeffries referenced Charles Fort repeatedly in his 2007 novel \"The Unreals\". Joe Milutis writes a short chapter in his book \"Failure, a Writer's Life\" on Charles Fort, characterising Fort's prose as \"well-nigh unreadable, yet strangely exhilarating\".\nNoted UK paranormalist, Fortean, and ordained priest Lionel Fanthorpe presented the \"Fortean TV\" series on Channel 4, between 1997 and 1998. Paul Thomas Anderson's popular movie \"Magnolia\" (1999) has an underlying theme of unexplained events, taken from the 1920s and '30s works of Charles Fort. Fortean author Loren Coleman has written a chapter about this motion picture, entitled \"The Teleporting Animals and \"Magnolia\"\", in one of his recent books. The film has many hidden Fortean themes, notably \"falling frogs\". In one scene, one of Fort's books is visible on a table in a library and an end credit thanks him by name. In the 2011 film \"The Whisperer in Darkness\", Fort is portrayed by Andrew Leman.\nAmerican crime and science-fiction author Fredric Brown included an excerpt from Fort's book \"Wild Talents\" as an epigraph to his novel \"Compliments of a Fiend\". In that quote, Fort speculated about the disappearance of two people named Ambrose and wondered \"was someone collecting Ambroses?\" Brown's novel concerns the disappearance of a character named Ambrose, and the kidnapper calls himself the \"Ambrose collector\" as an obvious \"homage\" to Fort.\nIn Blue Balliett's bestselling children's novel, \"Chasing Vermeer\", Fort is given several mentions throughout the book, such as Fort's \"Lo!\" being found and thoroughly read by one of the book's protagonists, and being an inspiration to the main characters.\nBibliography.\nFort published five books during his lifetime, including one novel. All five are available on-line (see External links section below).\nPosthumous editions:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44492", "revid": "40186056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44492", "title": "List of areas in the United States National Park System", "text": "The National Park System of the United States is the collection of physical properties owned or administered by the National Park Service. The collection includes all national parks and most national monuments, as well as several other types of protected areas of the United States.\nAs of December 2024, there are 433 units of the National Park System. However, this number is somewhat misleading. For example, Denali National Park and Preserve is counted as two units, since the same name applies to a national park and an adjacent national preserve. Yet Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve is counted as one unit, despite its double designation. Counting methodology is typically based on the language of a park's authorizing legislation.\nAlthough the designations generally reflect sites' features, all units of the system are considered administratively equal and with few exceptions the designations themselves do not define their level of protection. Each site has a management plan consistent with its ecological, historic, and recreational resources and its enabling legislation.\nIn addition to areas of the National Park System, the National Park Service also provides technical and financial assistance to several affiliated areas authorized by Congress. Affiliated areas are marked on the lists below.\nNational Park System units are found in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories of Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. The territory of the Northern Mariana Islands has an affiliated area but not an official NPS unit.\nNearly all units managed by the National Park Service participate in the National Park Passport Stamps program.\nNational parks.\nThere are 63 officially designated national parks in the United States and its dependent areas, as of 2021. The national parks are considered the \"crown jewels\" of the system and are typically larger than other areas, including a variety of significant ecological and geological resources.\nNational monuments.\nThere are 138 national monuments, 89 of which are administered by the NPS and are listed below. Of these, 87 (all except Grand Canyon-Parashant and Avi Kwa Ame) are NPS official units.\nThe remaining 49 monuments are administered by five other federal agencies. Three, Grand Canyon\u2013Parashant, Craters of the Moon, and Avi Kwa Ame National Monuments, are jointly administered by the NPS and the Bureau of Land Management, and Tule Lake National Monument is joint with the Fish and Wildlife Service. National monuments are typically smaller and protect just one or few major resources. They include both natural and historical sites and can be established by the president under the Antiquities Act. 34 former national monuments have been redesignated or incorporated into national parks. \nNational preserves.\nThere are 21 national preserves in the United States, 19 of which are counted by the National Park System as official units. Ten are stand-alone official units, while eleven others are designated areas where hunting or grazing is permitted as part of a larger \"national park and preserve\" or \"national monument and preserve\". Nine of those are counted as separate units, while Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve and New River Gorge National Park and Preserve are single units (there is no functional difference). Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve is not officially a national preserve but has similar management policies, while Salt River Bay National Historical Park and Ecological Preserve is unrelated.\nNational historical parks.\nThere are 64 national historical parks.\nNational historic sites.\nThere are 85 national historic sites, of which 75 are NPS units, 9 are affiliated areas, and one, Grey Towers National Historic Site, is managed by the U.S. Forest Service (not listed here).\nNational memorials.\nThere are 31 national memorials that are NPS units and five affiliated national memorials.\nNational recreation areas.\nThere are 18 national recreation areas administered by the National Park Service. Another 22 national recreation areas are administered by the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management.\nNational seashores.\nThere are 10 national seashores.\nNational lakeshores.\nThere are three national lakeshores, located in Michigan and Wisconsin.\nNational rivers and national wild and scenic rivers.\nThere are four national rivers (marked with an asterisk) and ten national wild and scenic rivers administered as distinct units of the National Park System. There are many more national wild and scenic rivers that run through other units.\nNational reserves.\nNational reserves are partnerships between federal, state, and local authorities. Within the boundaries of the three national reserves are combinations of federal land (Park Service or National Wildlife Refuges), state parks and forests, local public lands, and private properties. Two national reserves are currently managed as official units.\nNational parkways.\nTen roadways and surrounding scenic areas are managed by the NPS as parkways, four of which as official units and five as part of other units.\nNational historic and scenic trails.\nThese National Park Service trails are part of the larger National Trails System. Only six of the trails are considered official units of the park system.\nNational cemeteries.\nMost national cemeteries are administered by the Department of Veterans Affairs, although a few are managed by the National Park Service and the U.S. Army. None of the cemeteries are considered official units of the system; they are all affiliated with other parks.\nNational heritage areas.\nThe National Park Service provides limited assistance to national heritage areas, but does not administer them.\nOther NPS protected areas and administrative groups.\nThere are 11 NPS units of other designations, as well as other affiliated areas. The National Mall and National Capital Parks have many sites, some of which are also units of other designations.\nIn addition, there are sites where the NPS is authorized to provide financial and technical assistance to local authorities for interpretive or educational purposes, but do not have the right to acquire land or have a say in land use or zoning. These include the 55 National Heritage Areas, as well as National Commemorative Sites such as Quindaro Townsite or the Kennedy-King National Commemorative Site. There are also various administrative groups of listed parks, such as Manhattan Sites, National Parks of New York Harbor, and Western Arctic National Parklands. The NPS also owns conservation easements (but not the land itself) for part of the area called the Green Springs National Historic Landmark District.\nFormer other areas.\nIn the 1930s and 1940s, the NPS developed dozens of recreational demonstration areas, most of which eventually became national or state parks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44495", "revid": "50360230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44495", "title": "Linear motor", "text": "Electric motor that produces a linear force\nA linear motor is an electric motor that has had its stator and rotor \"unrolled\", thus it produces a linear force along its length, rather than a rotational force (torque). However, linear motors are not necessarily straight. Characteristically, a linear motor's active section has ends, whereas more conventional motors are arranged as a continuous loop.\nLinear motors are used by the millions in high accuracy CNC machining and in industrial robots. In 2024, this market was USD 1.8 billion.\nA typical mode of operation is as a Lorentz-type actuator, in which the applied force is linearly proportional to the current and the magnetic field formula_1.\nMany designs have been put forward for linear motors, falling into two major categories, low-acceleration and high-acceleration linear motors. Low-acceleration linear motors are suitable for maglev trains and other ground-based transportation applications. High-acceleration linear motors are normally rather short, and are designed to accelerate an object to a very high speed; for example, see the coilgun.\nHigh-acceleration linear motors are used in studies of hypervelocity collisions, as weapons, or as mass drivers for spacecraft propulsion. They are usually of the AC linear induction motor (LIM) design with an active three-phase winding on one side of the air-gap and a passive conductor plate on the other side. However, the direct current homopolar linear motor railgun is another high acceleration linear motor design. The low-acceleration, high speed and high power motors are usually of the linear synchronous motor (LSM) design, with an active winding on one side of the air-gap and an array of alternate-pole magnets on the other side. These magnets can be permanent magnets or electromagnets. The motor for the Shanghai maglev train, for instance, is an LSM.\nTypes.\nBrushless.\nBrushless linear motors are members of the Synchronous motor family. They are typically used in standard linear stages or integrated into custom, high performance positioning systems. Invented in the late 1980s by Anwar Chitayat at Anorad Corporation, now Rockwell Automation, and helped improve the throughput and quality of industrial manufacturing processes.\nBrush.\nBrushed linear motors were used in industrial automation applications prior to the invention of Brushless linear motors. Compared with three-phase brushless motors, which are typically being used today, brush motors operate on a single phase. Brush linear motors have a lower cost since they do not need moving cables or three-phase servo drives. However, they require higher maintenance since their brushes wear out.\nSynchronous.\nIn this design the rate of movement of the magnetic field is controlled, usually electronically, to track the motion of the rotor. For cost reasons synchronous linear motors rarely use commutators, so the rotor often contains permanent magnets, or soft iron. Examples include coilguns and the motors used on some maglev systems, as well as many other linear motors. In high precision industrial automation linear motors are typically configured with a magnet stator and a moving coil. A Hall effect sensor is attached to the rotor to track the magnetic flux of the stator. The electric current is typically provided from a stationary servo drive to the moving coil by a moving cable inside a cable carrier.\nInduction.\nIn this design, the force is produced by a moving linear magnetic field acting on conductors in the field. Any conductor, be it a loop, a coil or simply a piece of plate metal, that is placed in this field will have eddy currents induced in it thus creating an opposing magnetic field, in accordance with Lenz's law. The two opposing fields will repel each other, thus creating motion as the magnetic field sweeps through the metal.\nHomopolar.\nIn this design a large current is passed through a metal sabot across sliding contacts that are fed by two rails. The magnetic field this generates causes the metal to be projected along the rails.\nTubular.\nEfficient and compact design applicable to the replacement of pneumatic cylinders.\nPiezoelectric.\nPiezoelectric drive is often used to drive small linear motors.\nHistory.\nLow acceleration.\nThe history of linear electric motors can be traced back at least as far as the 1840s, to the work of Charles Wheatstone at King's College London, but Wheatstone's model was too inefficient to be practical. A feasible linear induction motor is described in https:// (1905 - inventor Alfred Zehden of Frankfurt-am-Main), for driving trains or lifts. The German engineer Hermann Kemper built a working model in 1935. In the late 1940s, Dr. Eric Laithwaite of Manchester University, later Professor of Heavy Electrical Engineering at Imperial College in London developed the first full-size working model.\nIn a single sided version the magnetic repulsion forces the conductor away from the stator, levitating it, and carrying it along in the direction of the moving magnetic field. He called the later versions of it magnetic river. The technologies would later be applied, in the 1984, Air-Rail Link shuttle, between Birmingham's airport and an adjacent train station.\nBecause of these properties, linear motors are often used in maglev propulsion, as in the Japanese Linimo magnetic levitation train line near Nagoya. However, linear motors have been used independently of magnetic levitation, as in the Bombardier Innovia Metro systems worldwide and a number of modern Japanese subways, including Tokyo's Toei \u014cedo Line.\nSimilar technology is also used in some roller coasters with modifications but, at present, is still impractical on street running trams, although this, in theory, could be done by burying it in a slotted conduit.\nOutside of public transportation, vertical linear motors have been proposed as lifting mechanisms in deep mines, and the use of linear motors is growing in motion control applications. They are also often used on sliding doors, such as those of low floor trams such as the Alstom Citadis and the Socimi Eurotram. Dual axis linear motors also exist. These specialized devices have been used to provide direct \"X\"-\"Y\" motion for precision laser cutting of cloth and sheet metal, automated drafting, and cable forming. Most linear motors in use are LIM (linear induction motor), or LSM (linear synchronous motor). Linear DC motors are not used due to their higher cost and linear SRM suffers from poor thrust. So for long runs in traction LIM is mostly preferred and for short runs LSM is mostly preferred.\nHigh acceleration.\nHigh-acceleration linear motors have been suggested for a number of uses. They have been considered for use as weapons, since current armour-piercing ammunition tends to consist of small rounds with very high kinetic energy, for which just such motors are suitable. Many amusement park launched roller coasters now use linear induction motors to propel the train at a high speed, as an alternative to using a lift hill.\nThe United States Navy is also using linear induction motors in the Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System that will replace traditional steam catapults on future aircraft carriers. They have also been suggested for use in spacecraft propulsion. In this context they are usually called mass drivers. The simplest way to use mass drivers for spacecraft propulsion would be to build a large mass driver that can accelerate cargo up to escape velocity, though RLV launch assist like StarTram to low Earth orbit has also been investigated.\nHigh-acceleration linear motors are difficult to design for a number of reasons. They require large amounts of energy in very short periods of time. One rocket launcher design calls for 300 GJ for each launch in the space of less than a second. Normal electrical generators are not designed for this kind of load, but short-term electrical energy storage methods can be used. Capacitors are bulky and expensive but can supply large amounts of energy quickly. Homopolar generators can be used to convert the kinetic energy of a flywheel into electric energy very rapidly. High-acceleration linear motors also require very strong magnetic fields; in fact, the magnetic fields are often too strong to permit the use of superconductors. However, with careful design, this need not be a major problem.\nTwo different basic designs have been invented for high-acceleration linear motors: railguns and coilguns.\nUsage.\nLinear motors are widely used to actuate high-performance industrial automation equipment. Their principal advantage is the ability to deliver any combination of high precision, high velocity, high force, and long travel. Compared to traditional rotary motor and screw-driven systems, linear motors offer direct-drive operation, eliminating backlash and reducing maintenance requirements.\nOne of the earliest industrial applications of linear motors was in looms, where they were used to propel the shuttle rapidly across the weave. In modern settings, linear motors are extensively deployed in CNC machines, pick-and-place systems, semiconductor steppers, and high-speed cartesian coordinate robots.\nLinear motors are also used in consumer and infrastructure applications. These include powering sliding doors, baggage handling systems, and large-scale bulk materials transport systems such as conveyor belts or transfer carts.\nIn large observatory telescopes, such as the European Extremely Large Telescope (ELT), hybrid actuators combining linear motors and piezoelectric elements are employed for precise positioning of mirror segments. These actuators offer high force and nanometer-level precision, essential for maintaining the optical alignment of the telescope's segmented primary mirror.\nLinear motors may also be used as an alternative to conventional chain-run lift hills for roller coasters. The coaster Maverick at Cedar Point uses one such linear motor in place of a chain lift.\nA linear motor has been used to accelerate cars for crash tests.\nIndustrial automation.\nThe combination of high precision, high velocity, high force, and long travel makes brushless linear motors attractive for driving industrial automations equipment. They serve industries and applications such as semiconductor steppers, electronics surface-mount technology, automotive cartesian coordinate robots, aerospace chemical milling, optics electron microscope, healthcare laboratory automation, food and beverage pick and place.\nMachine tools.\nSynchronous linear motor actuators, used in machine tools and industrial automation, provide high force, high velocity, high precision, and high dynamic stiffness. These characteristics enable zero-backlash motion, low settling time, and exceptional smoothness of movement. Modern systems can achieve velocities of 2\u00a0m/s or more, with micron-level positioning accuracy and fast cycle times, contributing to superior surface finishes and throughput.\nSimulation and training devices.\nhttps:// uses electromagnetic linear motors in a proprietary application for https:// that provides high-fidelity &amp; cost-effective instruction to soldiers. https:// provide realistic recoil and other haptic feedback to the training devices which enhance the experience while offering precise simulation for training purposes. For their use in military training, these products are the only viable electronic solution that does not force users to adapt to the training device.\nTrain propulsion.\nConventional rails.\nAll of the following applications are in rapid transit and have the active part of the motor in the cars.\nBombardier Innovia Metro.\nOriginally developed in the late 1970s by UTDC in Canada as the Intermediate Capacity Transit System (ICTS). A test track was constructed in Millhaven, Ontario, for extensive testing of prototype cars, after which three lines were constructed:\nICTS was sold to Bombardier Transportation in 1991 and later known as Advanced Rapid Transit (ART) before adopting its current branding in 2011. Since then, several more installations have been made:\nAll Innovia Metro systems use third rail electrification.\nJapanese linear metro.\nOne of the biggest challenges faced by Japanese railway engineers in the 1970s to the 1980s was the ever increasing construction costs of subways. In response, the Japan Subway Association began studying on the feasibility of the \"mini-metro\" for meeting urban traffic demand in 1979. In 1981, the Japan Railway Engineering Association studied on the use of linear induction motors for such small-profile subways and by 1984 was investigating on the practical applications of linear motors for urban rail with the Japanese Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. In 1988, a successful demonstration was made with the Limtrain at Saitama and influenced the eventual adoption of the linear motor for the Nagahori Tsurumi-ryokuchi Line in Osaka and Toei Line 12 (present-day Toei Oedo Line) in Tokyo.\nTo date, the following subway lines in Japan use linear motors and use overhead lines for power collection:\nIn addition, Kawasaki Heavy Industries has also exported the Linear Metro to the Guangzhou Metro in China; all of the Linear Metro lines in Guangzhou use third rail electrification:\nAmusement rides.\nThere are many roller coasters throughout the world that use LIMs to accelerate the ride vehicles. The first being \"Flight of Fear\" at Kings Island and Kings Dominion, both opening in 1996. Battlestar Galactica: Human VS Cylon &amp; Revenge of the Mummy at Universal Studios Singapore opened in 2010. They both use LIMs to accelerate from certain point in the rides.\nRevenge of the Mummy (located at both Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Florida), Hagrid's Magical Creatures Motorbike Adventure, and VelociCoaster at Universal Islands of Adventure use linear motors. At Walt Disney World, Rock 'n' Roller Coaster Starring Aerosmith at Disney's Hollywood Studios and at Epcot both use LSM to launch their ride vehicles into their indoor ride enclosures.\nIn 2023 a hydraulic launch roller coaster, Top Thrill Dragster at Cedar Point in Ohio, USA, was renovated and the hydraulic launch replaced with a weaker multi-launch system using LSM, that creates less g-force.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44498", "revid": "17311078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44498", "title": "State Council of China", "text": "Chief administrative authority of China\nThe State Council of the People's Republic of China, synonymous with Central People's Government, is the supreme administrative organ of China's unified state apparatus and the executive organ of the National People's Congress, the supreme organ of state power. It is composed of a premier, vice-premiers, state councilors, ministers, chairpersons of commissions, an auditor-general, the governor of the People's Bank of China, and a secretary-general.\nThe premier of the State Council is responsible for the State Council and exercises overall leadership of its work. The secretary-general of the State Council, under the leadership of the premier, is responsible for handling the daily work of the State Council and heads the General Office of the State Council. The executive meeting of the State Council, consisting of the premier, vice-premiers, state councilors, and the secretary-general, is held two to three times a month, while the plenary meeting, consisting of all members of the State Council, is held every six months.\nThe State Council directly oversees provincial-level People's Governments, and in practice maintains membership with top levels of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). The State Council is legally required to implement the policies of the CCP. Aside from a few, members of the State Council are also members of the CCP's Central Committee.\nOrganization.\nThe State Council is described by the Chinese constitution as the executive organ of the National People's Congress (NPC), as well as the \"highest state administrative organ\". Constitutionally, the main functions of the State Council are to formulate administrative measures, issue decisions and orders, and monitor their implementation; draft legislative bills for submission to the NPC or its Standing Committee; and prepare the economic plan and the state budget for deliberation and approval by the NPC. The State Council has flexibility in decision-making, especially with regard to economic matters, but the Politburo has ultimate authority. According to the \"Organic Law of the State Council\", the CCP Central Committee exercises leadership over the State Council. The law also stipulates the State Council must follow the CCP's ideology and policies.\nComposition.\nThe State Council is composed of the premier, several vice premiers, several state councillors, ministers of ministries, directors of committees, the auditor general, and the secretary-general. The premier leads the State Council58 and is appointed by the NPC upon the nomination by the president, though in practice the premier is chosen within the CCP leadership, including the Politburo Standing Committee. The vice premiers (one executive and generally three others), state councillors, and a secretary-general (who normally also serves as a state councillor) all assist the premier. The premier leads the Leading Party Members Group, which responsible for overseeing the implementation of CCP Central Committee policies in the State Council.\nEach vice premier oversees certain areas of administration in support of the premier. In practice, the vice premiers and State Councillors assume responsibility for one or more sectors or issues, and remain in contact with the various bodies responsible for policy related to that area. This allows the Standing Committee to oversee a wide range of government functions. Each State Councillor performs duties as designated by the Premier. The secretary-general heads the General Office which handles the day-to-day work of the State Council.\nThe State Council includes 26 constituent departments, and oversees the province-level governments throughout China. Each ministry supervises one sector. Commissions outrank ministries and set policies for and coordinate the related activities of different administrative organs. Offices deal with matters of ongoing concern. The establishment, dissolution, or merger of the constituent departments are proposed by the premier and decided by the NPC or its Standing Committee. Bureaus and administrations rank below ministries. In addition to the ministries, there are 38 centrally administered government organizations that report directly to the state council. The heads of these organizations attend full meetings of the state committee on an irregular basis.\nThe State Council controls the Ministry for National Defense but does not control the People's Liberation Army, which is instead controlled by the Central Military Commission (CMC). The State Council previously had joint command over the People's Armed Police (PAP) together with the CMC, principally through the Ministry of Public Security, though 2018 reforms placed the PAP solely under CMC command.\nMeetings.\nThe plenary meeting of the State Council meets every six months, composed of all members of the State Council. Between meetings it is guided by an executive meeting of the State Council which is held two to three times a month, and can be called at the discretion of the premier. The Executive Meeting is composed of the premier, vice premiers, state councilors, and the secretary-general.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44501", "revid": "43818365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44501", "title": "Cast Away", "text": "2000 American survival drama film directed by Robert Zemeckis\nCast Away is a 2000 American survival drama film directed and produced by Robert Zemeckis, written by William Broyles Jr. and starring Tom Hanks, Helen Hunt, and Nick Searcy. Hanks plays a FedEx troubleshooter who is stranded on a deserted island after his plane crashes in the South Pacific, and the plot focuses on his desperate attempts to survive and return home. Filming took place from January to March 1999, and April to May 2000.\n\"Cast Away\" was released on December 22, 2000, by 20th Century Fox in the United States and Canada and by DreamWorks Pictures in other territories. It grossed $429.6\u00a0million worldwide, making it the third-highest-grossing film of 2000. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised the screenplay and Hanks's performance. Hanks won Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Drama at the 58th Golden Globe Awards and was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role at the 73rd Academy Awards for \"Cast Away.\"\nPlot.\nIn December 1995, Chuck Noland is a FedEx systems analyst who travels the world resolving productivity problems. He lives with his girlfriend, Kelly Frears in Memphis, Tennessee. The two talk of getting married but keep experiencing setbacks because Chuck is constantly called away to work, which starts to put a strain on their relationship. During a Christmas dinner, Chuck experiences pain due to an infected tooth, just before he is summoned to resolve a FedEx problem in Malaysia. Before leaving, Kelly gives Chuck her grandfather's pocket watch with a photo of her in it. He gives her a small box, saying she can wait to open it on New Year's Eve when he returns, implying it is an engagement ring.\nThe FedEx cargo plane Chuck boards crashes into the Pacific Ocean during a violent storm, leaving him as the only survivor. Washing ashore on a deserted island, Chuck explores the area, discovering several FedEx packages washing up on the coast, as well as the body of one of the pilots, Albert Miller, which he buries. In the following days, Chuck struggles to locate food and water. After seeing a ship on the horizon, he unsuccessfully tries to escape the island on a life raft, but is prevented by the tide and injures his leg. Realizing it is unlikely he will be rescued, Chuck opens most of the packages, finding items he uses to improve his living conditions. However, he does not open a package with golden angel wings painted on it, thinking the wings have symbolic meaning. While attempting to start a fire, Chuck cuts his hand and furiously throws several objects including a Wilson volleyball, leaving a bloodstained hand print. He draws a face into the blood, names the ball Wilson and begins talking to it. Chuck realizes the chances of his rescue are low because of the wide search area. Due to severe pain from his infected tooth, he performs his own tooth extraction using a rock and an ice skate. The extraction is successful, but he passes out from the pain.\nFour years later, Chuck, now bearded and disheveled, has adapted to life alone on the island. After a section of a portable toilet enclosure washes up, he begins constructing a raft, which he successfully launches past the surf with Wilson, the unopened FedEx package and his belongings in tow. Chuck survives a storm, but afterward, Wilson falls off the raft and floats away. He unsuccessfully attempts to rescue Wilson and is left to grieve his loss. Soon after, he is rescued by a passing cargo ship.\nFour weeks later, Chuck returns to the mainland, where he learns he was presumed dead by his family and friends. As he is given a hero's welcome at the FedEx headquarters in Memphis, he meets his dentist Jerry Lovett, whom he discovers has married and had a daughter with Kelly. At a homecoming party in Chuck's hotel room, Kelly is emotionally unable to greet him. Later that night, Chuck visits Kelly, where they bond for the last time; the two share a passionate kiss and confess their love for each other. Both realize she cannot leave her family and they part ways. Chuck returns the pocket watch Kelly gave him and she returns his Jeep Cherokee, which she had kept after his disappearance.\nChuck drives to Texas to return the angel-winged package to the address of the sender. Finding no one home, he leaves it at the door with a note saying the package saved his life. He departs in his vehicle and stops at a crossroads. A woman in a pickup truck, headed in the direction of the house, stops and gives information about where each road leads. As she drives away, Chuck notices the same angel wings painted on the tailgate of her truck. He looks down each road, trying to decide which way to go, and smiles when he faces the road taken by the truck.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Tom Hanks as Chuck Noland, a FedEx systems analyst\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn a 2017 Actor Roundtable with \"The Hollywood Reporter\", Tom Hanks stated\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I made \"Cast Away\" because I wanted to examine the concept of four years of hopelessness, in which you have none of the requirements for living\u2014food, water, shelter, fire and company. But it took us six years to put together the alliance that would actually examine that. I only had a third of it, and Bill Broyles only had a third of it, until Bob Zemeckis comes along and provided that other third. I had that original idea. I was reading an article about FedEx, and I realized that 747s filled with packages fly across the Pacific three times a day. And I just thought, \"What happens if that goes down?\"\nFilming.\nThe film was not shot chronologically. It began on January 18, 1999, before halting two months later. Filming resumed on April 3, 2000, and finished the following month. Hanks gained during pre-production to make his physical transformation more dramatic. After most of the film was shot, production was paused so he could lose the weight and grow his hair and beard to look like he had been living on the island for years. Another four-month production halt preceded the filming of the return scenes. During the year-long hiatus, Zemeckis used the same film crew to make another film, \"What Lies Beneath\". While the film was in production, Hanks nearly died when he suffered an infected cut on his leg. He was rushed to a local hospital to undergo surgery and stayed there for three days. Filming of \"Cast Away\" was suspended for three weeks to allow Hanks to recover from the injury. Filming lasted for sixteen months.\n\"Cast Away\" was filmed on Monuriki, one of the Mamanuca Islands in Fiji. It is in a subgroup of the Mamanuca archipelago, which is sited off the coast of Viti Levu, Fiji's largest island. The island became a tourist attraction after the film's release. After Chuck's return, it is identified by Kelly as being \"about south of the Cook Islands,\" but there is no land between the southernmost Cook Islands of Mangaia and Antarctica.\nThe film begins and ends in the same location, on the Arrington Ranch in the Texas Panhandle south of the city of Canadian, Texas.\nMusic.\nThe film's minimal score was composed and conducted by Alan Silvestri for which he won a Grammy Award in 2002. The film's soundtrack is most notable for its lack of score and creature sound effects (such as bird song or insect sounds) while Chuck is on the island, which is intended to reinforce the feeling of isolation. \"Cast Away\" contains no original musical score until Chuck escapes the island. However, there is a Russian choral piece heard near the start of the film that was not composed or even recorded by Silvestri, so it does not appear on the film's soundtrack list. It is a traditional Russian song written by Lev Knipper called \"Oh, My Field\" (\"Polyushko, Polye\") and it is available on various collections of Red Army hymns.\nThe official soundtrack CD is an anthology of musical pieces from all the films up to that point that were directed by Zemeckis and scored by Silvestri. The only track from \"Cast Away\" itself is the theme from the end credits. The album was released in 2001 by soundtrack specialty label Var\u00e8se Sarabande, rather than by Fox Music or DreamWorks Records, which were the in-house labels of 20th Century Fox and DreamWorks Pictures.\nThe soundtrack featured in \"Cast Away\" consists of 10 tracks, with performers including Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry, and Charles Brown.\nFedEx.\nFedEx provided access to their facilities (Memphis, Los Angeles, and Moscow) as well as airplanes, trucks, uniforms, and logistical support. A team of FedEx marketers oversaw production through more than two years of filming. FedEx CEO Fred Smith made an appearance as himself for the scene where Chuck is welcomed back, which was filmed on location at FedEx's home facilities in Memphis, Tennessee. The idea of a story based on a FedEx plane crashing gave the company \"a heart attack at first\", but the overall story was seen as positive. FedEx, which paid no money for product placement in the film, saw an increase in brand awareness in Asia and Europe following the film's release.\nWilson the volleyball.\nIn the film, Wilson the volleyball serves as Chuck Noland's personified friend and only companion during the four years that Noland spends alone on a deserted island. Named after the volleyball's manufacturer, Wilson Sporting Goods, the character was created by screenwriter William Broyles Jr. While researching for the film, he consulted with professional survival experts, and then chose to deliberately strand himself for one week on an isolated beach in the Gulf of California, to force himself to search for water and food, and obtain his own shelter. During this time, a Wilson-branded soccer ball washed up on shore, providing the inspiration for the film's inanimate companion. When the idea was presented to Tom Hanks, he happily agreed on the volleyball as a memento to his wife, Rita Wilson, knowing he would be away from home for a long period for filming. From a screenwriting point of view, Wilson also serves to realistically allow dialogue to take place in a solitary scenario.\nIt is rumored, but not confirmed, that one of the original volleyball props was sold at auction for $18,500 to the ex-CEO of FedEx Office, Ken May. At the time of the film's release, Wilson launched its own joint promotion centered on its products \"co-starring\" with Tom Hanks. Wilson manufactured a volleyball with a reproduction of the bloodied handprint face on one side. It was sold for a limited time during the film's initial release and continues to be offered on the company's website. An original Wilson the volleyball prop sold via Heritage Auctions on December 7, 2024, for $162,500.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Cast Away\" opened in 2,774 theaters in North America and grossed $28.9\u00a0million (an average of $10,412 per theater) in its opening weekend. For the four-day Christmas long holiday weekend, it took in a total of $39.9\u00a0million. At that point, it had the highest Christmas opening weekend of any film, surpassing \"Patch Adams\". Upon opening, \"Cast Away\" reached the number one spot at the box office, beating another Helen Hunt film, \"What Women Want\". It would also compete against \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas\", which was released the previous month. With a total gross of $8.5 million, \"Cast Away\" held the record for having the biggest New Year's Eve gross until \"Meet the Fockers\" took it in 2004. The film remained at the top of the box office for three weeks until it was overtaken by \"Save the Last Dance\". \"Cast Away\" kept performing well and ended up earning $233.6\u00a0million domestically and $196\u00a0million internationally, for a total of $429.6\u00a0million, against its production budget of $90\u00a0million. It became the third-highest-grossing film of 2000, behind \"\" and \"Gladiator\".\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, \"Cast Away\" holds an approval rating of 88% based on 156 reviews, with an average rating of 7.40/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Flawed but fascinating, \"Cast Away\" offers an intelligent script, some of Robert Zemeckis' most mature directing, and a showcase performance from Tom Hanks.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 73 out of 100 based on reviews from 32 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film three stars out of four. In his review, he praised Hanks for doing \"a superb job of carrying \"Cast Away\" all by himself for about two-thirds of its running time\" by \"never straining for effect, always persuasive even in this unlikely situation, winning our sympathy with his eyes and his body language when there's no one else on the screen.\" However, he also mentioned how he felt that the film is \"a strong and simple story surrounded by needless complications, and flawed by a last act that disappoints us and then ends on a note of forced whimsy.\"\nIn an article on its website, Rotten Tomatoes ranked \"Cast Away\" as the 23rd best film of 2000, based on its audience and critic scores. In 2024, \"CBR\" ranked it fifth on a list of the \"10 Best Live-Action DreamWorks Movies of All Time\". In 2025, it was one of the films voted for the \"Readers' Choice\" edition of \"The New York Times\"' list of \"The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century,\" finishing at number 291.\nHome media.\nIn North America (Region 1), \"Cast Away\" was released on VHS and DVD on June 12, 2001, by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. The DVD version of the film is a THX certified two-disc Special Edition release that features a DTS 6.1 ES audio track and several bonus features, including galleries, special effects vignettes, audio commentary, trailers, TV spots, behind-the-scenes footage, interviews, featurettes and more. It became the fastest-selling DVD release in 20th Century Fox history, selling 1.8 million copies and surpassing \"X-Men\". Additionally, the film generated $5.5 million in rentals, which broke \"Traffic\"'s record for having the highest DVD rentals. \"Cast Away\" went on to hold this record until 2002 when it was taken by \"The Fast and the Furious\". In total, the film made $57 million in home video sales and $20.6 million in home video rentals during its first week of release. It had the second-highest first week home video rentals of any film, behind \"Meet the Parents\", as well as third-highest rentals overall, after the latter film and \"The Sixth Sense\". In Region 2 and Region 4 areas such as Australia, the United Kingdom and Europe, the initial home video releases were handled by DreamWorks Home Entertainment rather than 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. The international prints also featured the 1997 DreamWorks Pictures opening logo, while North American prints featured the 1994 20th Century Fox opening logo. In South Korea (Region 3), the film was released on DVD on April 20, 2002, by CJ Entertainment. CJ Entertainment had also handled the South Korean theatrical distribution for \"Cast Away\" and other DreamWorks films such as \"American Beauty\" and \"Gladiator\".\nIn North America, a single-disc DVD version of the film was released alongside the Fox film \"Independence Day\" on May 21, 2002.\n20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on Blu-ray in North America on December 4, 2007.\nRights and streaming.\nIn February 2006, Viacom (now known as Paramount Skydance) acquired the international rights to \"Cast Away\", along with the rights to all other 58 live-action films DreamWorks had released since 1997, following its $1.6 billion acquisition of the company's live-action assets. During this period, DreamWorks' live-action studio functioned as a semi-autonomous label of Viacom's Paramount Pictures, with Paramount handling distribution for the studio's new releases. In March 2006, shortly after the acquisition, Viacom sold the DreamWorks live-action film library, including the international rights of \"Cast Away\", to Soros Strategic Partners (led by investor George Soros) and Dune Capital Management. This was done to help Viacom finance the acquisition of DreamWorks' live-action studio, as the film library alone was valued at $900 million. Soros and his associates temporarily took a majority 51% ownership stake in the library, while Viacom retained a minority 49% stake, with Paramount Pictures being given exclusive distribution rights under a five-year agreement, which could renew if Soros continued to hold a majority stake in the assets. In 2008, DreamWorks separated from Viacom to become independent again, partnering with Reliance Anil Dhirubhai Ambani Group, but Paramount Pictures retained distribution rights to the live-action DreamWorks library, including \"Cast Away\"'s international components, which was still technically controlled by Soros. In February 2010, Viacom exercised its option to buy back Soros's 51% stake in the library for $400 million, regaining full control over the assets. Paramount Pictures continues to hold the rights to the Soros/Dune-acquired films, including ongoing distribution. Paramount Home Entertainment did not release \"Cast Away\" on Blu-ray internationally until 2012, possibly due to complications with Soros and Fox. Prior to regaining full control of the DreamWorks library in 2010, Paramount had already released other live-action DreamWorks films on home video.\nIn March 2019, the film's domestic rights transferred to The Walt Disney Company, after Rupert Murdoch sold most of 21st Century Fox's film and television assets to Disney. The film has since been made available to stream on Paramount+ in international markets such as Scandinavia and the British Isles, and was also on the streaming service for the Paramount-owned Australian broadcaster Network 10. In North America, the film has not been made available on Disney+, instead streaming on Hulu (one of the additional assets Disney acquired from Fox in 2019).\nIn 2024, it was reported that Disney were preventing the release of 4K masters for \"Cast Away\" and other Fox catalog titles like \"Die Hard 2\" and \"The French Connection\". However, an international 4K release may still possibly occur through Paramount's joint ownership of the film.\nIn popular culture.\nA FedEx commercial during Super Bowl XXXVII parodied the final scene of the film, in which Chuck Noland returns a package to its sender. In this version, the woman answers the door, and when Noland asks what was in the box, the woman replies, \"Just a satellite phone, GPS locator, fishing rod, water purifier, and some seeds. Just silly stuff.\"\nMedia executive Lloyd Braun of ABC first suggested the idea of a \"Cast Away\"\u2013type television series at a dinner party in 2003. Thom Sherman later pitched the idea for \"Cast Away \u2013 The Series\", but never developed the idea. The concept was later developed and pitched with the title \"Nowhere\", which later turned into the ABC show \"Lost\".\nThe second episode of the seventh season of \"It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia\", \"The Gang Goes to the Jersey Shore\", refers to a \"Cast Away\" scene. When Frank loses his \"rum ham\" while floating on a raft in the Atlantic Ocean, his anguish resembles that of Tom Hanks' character losing Wilson the volleyball.\nOn December 31, 2002, at Madison Square Garden, Phish played a clip from the film on the jumbotron to introduce their song \"Wilson\" during their concert. They later introduced \"Tom Hanks\" during the song onstage, but it was later revealed to be keyboardist Page McConnell's brother Steve.\nOn April 15, 2022, at Progressive Field, Tom Hanks threw the ceremonial first pitch at the Cleveland Guardians home opener, accompanied by a replica of Wilson from the movie.\nDale Earnhardt Jr. raced with a Wilson replica in his car to two victories in fall 2001 at Dover and Talladega. This was due to a joke on the radio that he felt lonely in the car during a race.\nIn a 2001 episode of The King of Queens, Doug Heffernan (Kevin James) is interviewed for a job at FedEx. He references Cast Away when he sees a model of a FedEx plane on his interviewer's desk and jokingly imitates the crash scene. \nIn the 2005 animated film Madagascar, Alex the Lion (Ben Stiller) reacts to being stranded on the titular island in a similar way to Chuck, including talking to an inanimate basketball that he refers to as \"Spalding.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44502", "revid": "15972111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44502", "title": "Allegro (software library)", "text": "Software library for video game development\nAllegro is a software library for video game development. The functionality of the library includes support for basic 2D graphics, image manipulation, text output, audio output, MIDI music, input and timers, as well as additional routines for fixed-point and floating-point matrix arithmetic, Unicode strings, file system access, file manipulation, data files, and 3D graphics. The library is written in the C programming language and designed to be used with C, C++, or Objective-C, with bindings available for Python, Lua, Scheme, D, Go, and other languages. Allegro comes with extensive documentation and many examples.\nAllegro supports Windows, macOS, Unix-like systems, Android, and iOS, abstracting their application programming interfaces (APIs) into one portable interface. It can run also on top of Simple DirectMedia Layer which is used to run Allegro programs in web browser using Emscripten.\nReleased under the terms of the zlib license, Allegro is free and open source software.\nHistory.\nInitially standing for \"Atari Low-Level Game Routines\", Allegro was originally created by Shawn Hargreaves for the Atari ST in the early 1990s. When Hargreaves realized the platform was dying, he abandoned the Atari version, and reimplemented his work for the Borland C++ and DJGPP compilers in 1995. Support for Borland C++ was dropped in version 2.0, and DJGPP was the only supported compiler. As DJGPP was an MS-DOS compiler, all games which used Allegro therefore used DOS, attracting the enthusiast scene for that legacy system. Around 1998, Allegro branched out into several versions. A port to Windows, WinAllegro, was created, and also during this time, a Unix port of Allegro, XwinAllegro, was created. These various ports were brought together during the Allegro 3.9 WIP versions, with Allegro 4.0 being the first stable version of Allegro to support multiple platforms.\nAllegro 5.\nCurrent development is focused on the Allegro 5 branch, a complete redesign of both the API and much of the library's internal operation. Effort was made to make the API more consistent and multi-thread safe. By default, the library is now hardware-accelerated using OpenGL or DirectX rendering backends where appropriate. Many of the addons that existed as separate projects for Allegro 4 now interface seamlessly with Allegro proper and are bundled with the default installation. Allegro 5 is event driven.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44506", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44506", "title": "Relief of Mafeking", "text": ""}
{"id": "44507", "revid": "367949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44507", "title": "Chatti", "text": "Ancient Germanic tribe\nThe Chatti were a Roman era Germanic people that lived in a region approximately corresponding to the modern German federal state of Hesse. The Chatti were among the most important opponents of the Roman empire during the Roman campaigns in Germania which were pursued under the emperor Augustus and his heirs. They were among the defeated opponents of Drusus the Elder, during his Germanic campaigns from 12 BC until his death in 9 BC. They also appear to have been involved in the revolt against Rome which was led by Arminius of the Cherusci, although there is no record of them being present at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 AD which initiated these wars. The Chatti and Cherusci nobility were connected by marriage during this period.\nLike many of the peoples of their region, archaeological evidence shows that before the Roman invasions the Chatti region shared in the La T\u00e8ne material culture, similar to the Celtic-speaking Gauls in what is now France. A new regional \"Rhine-Weser\" material culture developed during the first century AD, which was influenced by both the Romans, and the Elbe Germanic peoples including the Suebi who lived to their east, near the Elbe river. This period of change is believed to have also involved a switch from Celtic to Germanic languages, which also originated near the Elbe. The first surviving Roman reports of the region were made during the Gallic Wars of Julius Caesar in 58-52 BC, do not mention the Chatti, but they do mention the entry of Suebi into the area. He reported them to be mobile and militarized, and creating major disruptions as far away as present day France and Switzerland, even forcing populations to move from their homelands.\nRoman sources mentioned that before their entry into the written historical record in about 11 BC the Chatti experienced internal conflicts, which caused groups to leave who went on to found the Rome-allied polities of the Batavi and Cananefates in the Rhine delta. It is speculated that this conflict was influenced by the arrival of both the Romans to the west, and the Suebi to the east. The Batavi and Cananefates were known for their soldiers, who became important within the Roman military. It is likely that the Mattiaci, neighbours of the Chatti who, like the Batavi lived under Roman jurisdiction, were also originally a part of the Chatti. Some modern scholars also propose that name of the Chattuarii, who lived east of the Rhine delta, indicates they lived, or had previously lived, in a land once inhabited by the Chatti, but the Chattuari, like the Suebi, were probably Germanic speakers from the Elbe. \nThe Chatti are occasionally mentioned in Roman literature in the second century, and during the chaotic third century they apparently continued to exist. Like several of the neighbouring peoples, the Chatti may have eventually become part of the Franks, who were first mentioned in the third century. The Franks, in any case, eventually came to dominate the Chatti homeland.\nName and language.\nThe name of the Chatti was written in many ways by classical authors using Latin or Greek, and there is no clear consensus about what it meant, or which language it originally derived from. The language of the Chatti is unclear, and there is very little evidence. Archaeological evidence shows that the region of Hesse, where they may have already lived before the Romans, indicates that the people there used La T\u00e8ne material goods, which were also used throughout Gaul, and are strongly associated with Celtic languages. From the second half of the 1st century AD archaeologists classify the Chatti as Rhine-Weser Germanic peoples, implying a connection to Germanic languages.\nWhile linguists typically seek to explain names from this period and region as either Celtic or Germanic, the significant spelling variations in the Chatti name are seen by scholars as showing patterns known from both language families in this period. However, neither of these explain on their own how the name evolved to become medieval or modern German \"Hesse(n)\". It has therefore been argued that the name as it came to Roman era authors was originally Celtic, although most of the Chatti had recently become Germanic speakers when they came into contact with Rome. The name could have evolved further in two different ways, among Celtic and Germanic speakers.\nIn the 21st century, the broader proposal that the Chatti were Germanised Celts has been the subject of more detailed proposals by Wagner and Toorians to explain how the medieval and modern name of Hesse apparently evolved from an originally Celtic name of the Chatti. Toorians derives it from Proto-Celtic *kassis from earlier \"*katsi-\", meaning \"hate\". Wagner derives it instead from an adjective \"*cad-ti-\" coming from *katus, meaning \"battle\". \nHowever, many other proposals including derivations from Germanic also exist, beginning with Jakob Grimm who proposed that the name is related to English \"hat\".\nRelationships to other Germanic peoples.\nAccording to Tacitus, writing in about 100 AD reported that the Batavi were originally been a part of the Chatti. Domestic strife () forced the Batavi to move away from the other Chatti and settle in the Rhine delta as special military allies of Rome, before their first clear appearance of the Chatti or Batavi in Roman records.\nTacitus also described the Canninefates, who lived in the delta, sharing the same large island with the Batavi, as being the same as the Batavi in origin, language, and valour, but smaller in numbers.\nThe Chattuarii were not connected to the Chatti by any classical authors but modern scholars note that their name transparently means something like \"Chatti dwellers\". The second element in the name is common among Germanic peoples, especially in this region, such as Chasuarii \"dwellers on the river Hase\", Ampsivarii \"dwellers on the river Ems\", and the Angrivarii. Scholars generally believe the name of the Chattuari can be interpreted as \"inhabitants of the Chatti-\"lands\"\", in parallel with the post-Roman names of the \"Baiuvarii\", which is typically interpreted as a name indicating that this people had once been inhabitants of the old homeland of the Boii, and the Boructuarii, who are believed to have been living where the Bructeri once lived. The Chattuarii lived to the east of the Rhine delta, outside the Roman empire, but close to the Batavi and Canninefates. Wagner and R\u00fcbekeil note that this name has a Germanic ending, and is always spelled with \"-tt-\", not \"-tth-\", unlike the name of the Chatti. They therefore propose that these were Germanic speaking newcomers to the region, probably Suebi, and without the same Celtic heritage. Petrikovits sees this name as evidence that Chatti had originally lived in this more northerly region, east of the Rhine delta. He noted how Dio Cassius described how the Chatti, like their offshoots the Batavi, Cananefates and Mattiaci, were assigned land by the Romans shortly before they first appear in the historical records.\nTacitus did not explicitly describe the Mattiaci as an offshoot of the Chatti, but he emphasized their similarity with the Batavi not only in terms of their special military alliance with Rome, but also in other ways (). Modern scholars also note that their name shows an obvious connection to the Chatti stronghold called Mattium. The Mattiaci were furthermore neighbours of the Chatti, but closer to the Rhine. Petrikovits suggested for example that they represent a branch of the Chatti who decided to remain in the lands near the Rhine which the Romans had assigned to them in the time of Augustus.\nLocation.\nThe accounts of Julius Caesar's Gallic wars in 58-52 BC discussed the region in some detail, but never directly mention the Chatti, Batavi, Canninefates, Mattiaci or Chattuarii. On the eastern side of the Rhine lived the Sugambri to the north and the Ubii to the south. However, to the north of what is now Hesse, the Germanic Suebi had established themselves. These were a mobile and militarized people, threatening the area from a position east of the Ubii. Caesar reported that the Suebi had forced other peoples to move and leave an empty area around them. Further east was a dense forest, the \"Silva Bacenis\" (possibly the Harz), and then the Cherusci.\nCaesar described the Tencteri and Usipetes as two Germanic peoples who had been forced to leave their homeland under pressure from the Suebi. Their homeland was apparently east of the Rhine delta, in the vicinity of the Sugambri, with whom they were able to seek refuge when attacked by Caesar.\nDuring the time of the Germanic wars of Augustus, when the Chatti began to appear in the historical record, the core of the Chatti lands is believed to have lain in the low basin stretching through the centre of Hesse. The Sugambri still lived between the Chatti and the Rhine, and their area of control now stretched further south, now including the region which the Rome-allied Ubii had left vacant after moving, like the Batavi and Canninefates, to the western side of the Rhine, under Roman control. \nCassius Dio, writing centuries later, but using sources now lost, mentioned that the Romans assigned land to the Chatti near the Rhine. The Sugambri, being hostile to Rome, attacked the Chatti in 11 or 10 BC, at which time the Roman prince Drusus the Elder attacked the Sugambri while distracted, and then built forts confronting the Sugambri, including a fort in Chattian territory. After these events the Chatti abandoned the land which the Romans had given, and joined the Sugambri, becoming enemies of Rome. This abandoned area which the Romans initially allocated to the Chatti may have previously belonged to the Ubii, whose lands were otherwise taken over by the Sugambri in this period. Alternatively, Petrikovits suggested this area near the Rhine represented the country of the Mattiaci, who he sees as a part of the Chatti who decided to remain allies of Rome.\nThe Sugambri and the Suebi group mentioned by Caesar as living between the Ubii and Cherusci were defeated by the Drusus in 9 BC, and ceased to exist in this region. Many were subsequently moved west of the Rhine, and many Suebi apparently joined the Marcomanni in their move to Bohemia.\nAt the end of the 1st century AD, Tacitus described the situation which had developed in the preceding generations of Roman hegemony:\nRoman sources identify the Chatti capital of Mattium as being beyond (north of) the Eder. Destroyed by Germanicus, its location is not known today, but generally it is assumed to be in the wider neighbourhood of Fritzlar north of the river Eder.\nHistory.\nThe first clearly recorded event involving the Chatti was the Sugambri attack upon the Chatti in 11 or 10 BC, during the time of Drusus the Elder. They were angry at the Chatti for not joining their anti-Roman alliance. The Chatti were at that time allied to Rome, and holding land near the Rhine which had been assigned to them by Rome. Both the Sugambri and the Chatti were therefore occupying lands which had once been Ubian, before the Ubii moved west of the Rhine, within the empire. After Drusus built a fort in their territory, the Chatti abandoned that region and joined the Sugambri. \nDrusus defeated the Chatti again in one or more campaigns in 10-9 BC. From the several sources which report the sequence of battles, it seems that he had first defeated the Usipetes, before overrunning the territory of the Tencteri and Chatti, who were apparently allies, and already neighbours. In 9 BC, in this same campaign Drusus also defeated the Marcomanni, and an alliance of the Sugambri, Cherusci and Suevi. These victories led to the disappearance of the Marcomanni, Sugambri, and Suebi from the region of the Chatti, while the Tencteri, Usipetes and Cherusci remained, though now pacified, and under Roman hegemony.\nVelleius Paterculus mentioned the Chatti in 6 AD, involving a planned invasion of the Marcomanni and other Suebi who had settled deep within the Hercynian forest in what is now the Czech Republic: \"Sentius Saturninus received the order to march with his legions \"through the area of the Chatti\" to Boiohaemum, which is the name of the area occupied by Maroboduus, cutting a passage through the Hercynian forest which bounded the region.\" The attack never happened, but the record gives an indication of how far south the Chatti lived, as this Roman campaign was probably intended to depart from Roman Mainz and travel via their base in Marktbreit.\nIn 9 AD the Chatti are believed to have joined the Cherusci rebellion against Rome, which began when Arminius annihilated the forces of Varus in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. There is no record connecting to the battle itself, but the Chatti involved in the subsequent battles against Germanicus and others, and 40 years later they were still holding slaves captured at the battle: \nIn 58 AD the Chatti were defeated by the Hermunduri in a dispute over a religiously significant river, which had saline springs and which defined a boundary between the two peoples. \"The war was a success for the Hermunduri, and the more disastrous to the Chatti because they had devoted, in the event of victory, the enemy's army to Mars and Mercury, a vow which consigns horses, men, everything indeed on the vanquished side to destruction.\"\nDuring 69 AD, the Year of the Four Emperors, and the Revolt of the Batavi, which was initiated by Germanic and Gaulish peoples inside the empire, the Chatti, Usipetes and Mattiaci attempted to take advantage of the situation and besieged Mainz. Gaius Dillius Vocula relieved the city with three legions.\nThe Chatti were opponents of the emperor Domitian, who celebrated a triumph over them in late 83 or early 84, although fighting continued until 85. They were allies of Lucius Antonius Saturninus the governor of Germania Superior in his revolt of 89 AD, but drifting ice on the Rhine prevented them, and they were subsequently attached by the loyal governor of Germania Inferior.\nWhen the Cherusci elected Chariomerus, a king who was friendly to Domitian, the Chatti supported his overthrow.\nThe Chatti appear again during the build up to the Marcomannic wars, attacking southwards towards Germania superior and Raetia in what is now southern Germany, in 162. They were defeated by the governor of Germania Superior. A few years later, once the bigger battles were being fought, they were repulsed together with the Hermunduri from the Rhine by Didius Julianus in 175.\nLater history and mentions.\nIn the third century, the empire went through a major crisis \u2014 the so called crisis of the third century \u2014 and had weak control of its frontiers for long periods. Barbarian raids were frequent, but the identities of the raiders are not always clear. New names such as the Franks and Alemanni also eventually began to appear, which apparently included peoples with their own older names.\nIn an entry concerning 213 AD, Dio Cassius was possibly the first author to mention the Alamanni. In the same unclear passage, the Chatti also appear to be mentioned. Writing about the Germanic war of Caracalla, he described the emperor fighting \"\u039a\u03ad\u03bd\u03bd\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2, K\u03b5\u03bb\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u00f2\u03bd \u1f14\u03b8\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2\" (\"the Kenni, a Celtic people\"). (Dio Cassius normally called Germani a type of Celt.) This is taken from an excerpt of Dio in the writings of Joannes Xiphilinus. However, a parallel fragment from the continuation of this passage in \"Fragmenta Valesiana\" seems to refer to the same people as \"Chattoi\".\nThe \"Cati\" are mentioned between the Bructeri and Burgundians in the Laterculus Veronensis which was made in about 314 AD, in a list of people who had been under imperial domination in the third century. This matches their traditional position, and argues for their continued existence.\nIn 392/3 AD, during the winter campaign of Arbogast against the Franks east of the Rhine, he observed Chatti and Ampsivarii forces on heights at some distance from the Roman force. They were under the leadership of the Frankish \"dux\", Marcomer. It has been suggested by some scholars that this must be an error for the Chattuari. However, not all scholars agree. This quotation is one of the only pieces of evidence that the Chatti may have become Franks.\nClassical ethnography and literature.\nPliny the Elder, in his \"Natural History\" (written 77\u201379 &lt;AD) distinguished the Chatti and Suebi but grouped them together with the Hermunduri and the Cherusci, calling this group the Hermiones, which is a nation of Germanic tribes also mentioned by Tacitus as living in inland Germany.\nStrabo, some time after 16 AD, included the Chatti in a listing of conquered Germanic tribes who were more settled and agricultural, but also poorer, than the nomadic tribes such as the Suebi. They were poor because they had fought the Romans, and had been defeated and plundered. \nIn his second book of \"Epigrams\", Martial credited the emperor Domitian (51\u201396 AD) as having overcome the Chatti:\nTacitus described the Chatti. Scholars have noted that Tacitus described them as having no cavalry, despite the famous reputation of their supposed kinsmen the Batavi and Cannanefates, or their western neighbours the Tencteri and Ubii:\nHardy frames, close-knit limbs, fierce countenances, and a peculiarly vigorous courage, mark the tribe. For Germans, they have much intelligence and sagacity; they promote their picked men to power, and obey those whom they promote; they keep their ranks, note their opportunities, check their impulses, portion out the day, intrench themselves by night, regard fortune as a doubtful, valour as an unfailing, resource; and what is most unusual, and only given to systematic discipline, they rely more on the general than on the army. Their whole strength is in their infantry, which, in addition to its arms, is laden with iron tools and provisions. Other tribes you see going to battle, the Chatti to a campaign. Seldom do they engage in mere raids and casual encounters. It is indeed the peculiarity of a cavalry force quickly to win and as quickly to yield a victory. Fleetness and timidity go together; deliberateness is more akin to steady courage.\nTacitus also notes that like other Germanic tribes such as the Suebi, the Chatti took an interest in traditions concerning haircuts and beards.\nA practice, rare among the other German tribes, and simply characteristic of individual prowess, has become general among the Chatti, of letting the hair and beard grow as soon as they have attained manhood, and not till they have slain a foe laying aside that peculiar aspect which devotes and pledges them to valour. Over the spoiled and bleeding enemy they show their faces once more; then, and not till then, proclaiming that they have discharged the obligations of their birth, and proved themselves worthy of their country and of their parents. The coward and the unwarlike remain unshorn. The bravest of them also wear an iron ring (which otherwise is a mark of disgrace among the people) until they have released themselves by the slaughter of a foe. Most of the Chatti delight in these fashions. Even hoary-headed men are distinguished by them, and are thus conspicuous alike to enemies and to fellow-countrymen. To begin the battle always rests with them; they form the first line, an unusual spectacle. Nor even in peace do they assume a more civilised aspect. They have no home or land or occupation; they are supported by whomsoever they visit, as lavish of the property of others as they are regardless of their own, till at length the feebleness of age makes them unequal to so stern a valour.\nA Chattian appears among ethnic stereotypes in a panegyric written in honour of the emperor Avitus by Sidonius Apollinaris in the late fifth century: \"the Alaman sent envoys to crave pardon for their frenzy, the Saxon's raiding abated and the marshy water of Elbe confined the Chattian\".\n19th Century usage.\nAt the Congress of Vienna the Elector of Hesse, restored with the fall of Napoleon, unsuccessfully attempted to get recognized as \"King of the Chatti\" - though by then the Chatti had long since ceased to exist as a distinct ethnic group \nPlaces named after the Chatti.\nApart from the modern regional name Hesse or Hessen, other placenames have been associated with the Chatti.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44508", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44508", "title": "Warren Sturgis McCulloch", "text": "American neurophysiologist and cybernetician\nWarren Sturgis McCulloch (November 16, 1898 \u2013 September 24, 1969) was an American neurophysiologist and cybernetician known for his work on the foundation for certain brain theories and his contribution to the cybernetics movement. Along with Walter Pitts, McCulloch created computational models based on mathematical algorithms called threshold logic which split the inquiry into two distinct approaches, one approach focused on biological processes in the brain and the other focused on the application of neural networks to artificial intelligence.\nBiography.\nWarren Sturgis McCulloch was born in Orange, New Jersey, in 1898. His brother was a chemical engineer and Warren was originally planning to join the Christian ministry. As a teenager he was associated with the theologians Henry Sloane Coffin, Harry Emerson Fosdick, Herman Karl Wilhelm Kumm and Julian F. Hecker. He was also mentored by the Quaker Rufus Jones. He attended Haverford College then studied philosophy and psychology at Yale University, where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1921. He continued to study psychology at Columbia and received a Master of Arts degree in 1923. Receiving his MD in 1927 from the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York, he undertook an internship at Bellevue Hospital, New York. Then he worked under Eilhard von Domarus at the Rockland State Hospital for the Insane. He returned to academia in 1934. He worked at the Laboratory for Neurophysiology at Yale University from 1934 to 1941.\nIn 1941 he moved to Chicago and joined the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Illinois at Chicago, where he was a professor of psychiatry, as well as the director of the Illinois Neuropsychiatric Institute until 1951. From 1952 he worked at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts with Norbert Wiener. He was a founding member of the American Society for Cybernetics and its second president during 1967\u20131968. He was a mentor to the British operations research pioneer Stafford Beer.\nMcCulloch had a range of interests and talents. In addition to his scientific contributions he wrote poetry (sonnets), and he designed and engineered buildings and a dam at his farm in Old Lyme, Connecticut.\nMcCulloch married Ruth Metzger, known as 'Rook', in 1924 and they had three children. He died in Cambridge in 1969.\nWork.\nHe is remembered for his work with Joannes Gregorius Dusser de Barenne from Yale and later with Walter Pitts from the University of Chicago. He provided the foundation for certain brain theories in a number of classic papers, including \"\"A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity\" (1943) and \"How We Know Universals: The Perception of Auditory and Visual Forms\"\" (1947), both published in the \"Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics\". The former is \"widely credited with being a seminal contribution to neural network theory, the theory of automata, the theory of computation, and cybernetics\".\nMcCulloch was the chair of the set of Macy conferences dedicated to Cybernetics. These, greatly due to the diversity of the backgrounds of the participants McCulloch brought in, became the foundation for the field.\nIn (1948), he recounted an event in the spring of 1947, when McCulloch designed a machine to allow the blind to read, by converting printed letters to tones. He designed it so that the tone is invariant for the same letter viewed under different angles. Gerhardt von Bonin saw the design, and immediately asked, \" Is this a diagram of the fourth layer of the visual cortex of the brain?\".\nIn his last days in 1960s, he worked on loops, oscillations and triadic relations with Moreno-D\u00edaz; the reticular formation with Kilmer and dynamic models of memory with Da Fonseca. His work in the 1960s was summarized in a 1968 paper.\nNeuroscience.\nHe studied the excitation of the brain by strychnine neuronography, which was a method to map brain connections. Applying strychnine in one point of the brain causes excitations in different points of the brain. Bailey, Bonin, and McCulloch conducted a series of studies in the 1940s that identified connections in the brains of macaque and chimpanzee that are consistent with modern understanding of VOF.\nMathematical logic.\nIn 1919 he began to work mainly on mathematical logic, and by 1923 he attempted to make a logic of transitive verbs. His goal in psychology is to invent a \"psychon\" or \"least psychic event\" that are binary atomic events with necessary causes, such that they can be combined to create complex logical propositions concerning their antecedents. He noticed in 1929 that these may correspond to the all-or-nothing firings of neurons in the brain.\nIn the 1943 paper, they described how memories can be formed by a neural network with loops in it, or alterable synapses. These then encodes for sentences like \"There was some x such that x was a \u03c8\" or formula_1, and showed that looped neural networks can encode all first-order logic with equality and conversely, any looped neural networks is equivalent to a sentence in first-order logic with equality, thus showing that they are equivalent in logical expressiveness.\nThe 1943 paper describes neural networks operating over time, and logical universals -- \"there exists\" and \"for all\"\u2014for spatial objects, such as geometric figures, was further developed in their 1947 paper.\nHe worked with Manuel Blum in studying how a neural network can be \"logically stable\", that is, can implement a boolean function even if the activation thresholds of individual neurons are varied.64 They were inspired by the problem of how the brain can perform the same functions, such as breathing, under influence of caffeine or alcohol, which shifts the activation threshold over the entire brain.\nHe worked on triadic relations, an extension of the calculus of relations to handle relations that relates 3 objects, such as \"A gives B to C\" or \"A perceives B to be C\". He was convinced that such a logic is necessary for understanding brain activity.\nHow we know universals.\nIn the 1947 paper \"How we know universals\", they studied the problem of recognizing objects despite changes in representation. For example, recognizing a square under different viewing angles and lighting conditions, or recognizing a phoneme under different loudness and tones. That is, recognizing objects invariant under the action of some symmetry group. This problem was partly inspired by a practical problem in designing a machine for the blind to read (recounted in Wiener's \"Cybernetics\", see before).\nThe paper proposed two solutions. The first is in computing an invariant by averaging over the symmetry group. Let the symmetry group be formula_2 and the object to be recognized be formula_3. Let a neural network implement a function formula_4. Then, the group-invariant representation would be formula_5, the group-action average. The second solution is in a negative feedback circuit that drives a canonical representation. Consider the problem of recognizing whether an object is a square. The circuit moves the eye so that the \"center of gravity of brightness\" of the object is moved to the middle of the visual field. This then effectively converts each object into a canonical representation, which can then be compared with a representation in the brain.\nNeural network modelling.\nIn the 1943 paper McCulloch and Pitts attempted to demonstrate that a Turing machine program could be implemented in a finite network of \"formal\" neurons (in the event, the Turing Machine contains their model of the brain, but the converse is not true), that the neuron was the base logic unit of the brain. In the 1947 paper they offered approaches to designing \"nervous nets\" to recognize visual inputs despite changes in orientation or size.\nFrom 1952 McCulloch worked at the Research Laboratory of Electronics at MIT, working primarily on neural network modelling. His team examined the visual system of the frog in consideration of McCulloch's 1947 paper, discovering that the eye provides the brain with information that is already, to a degree, organized and interpreted, instead of simply transmitting an image.\nWith Roberto Moreno-D\u00edaz, he studied a formalized problem of memory. Given that neural networks can store memory by a pattern of oscillations in a circle, they studied the number of possible oscillation patterns that can be sustained by some neural network with formula_6 neurons. This came out to be formula_7 (Schnabel, 1966). Also, they proved a universality theorem, in that for each formula_6, there exists a neural network (possibly with more than formula_6 neurons) with formula_10 binary inputs, such that, for any oscillation pattern realizable by some neural network with formula_6 neurons, there exists a binary input for this universal network such that it exhibits the same pattern.\nControl.\nMcCulloch considered the problem of contradictory information and motives, which he called a \"heterarchy\" of motives, meaning that the motives are not linearly ordered, but can be ordered like formula_12. He posited the concept of \"poker chip\" reticular formations as to how the brain deals with contradictory information in a democratic, somatotopical neural network. Specifically, how the brain can commit the animal to a single course of action when the situation is ambiguous.\nThey designed a prototypic example neural network \"RETIC\", with \"12 anastomatically coupled modules stacked in columnar array\", which can switch between unambiguous stable modes based on ambiguous inputs.\nHis principle of \"Redundancy of Potential Command\" was developed by von Foerster and Pask in their study of self-organization and by Pask in his Conversation Theory and Interactions of Actors Theory.\nPublications.\nMcCulloch wrote a book and several articles:\nArticles, a selection:\nPapers published by the Chicago Literary Club:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44510", "revid": "22868608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44510", "title": "Childeric I", "text": "Frankish king\nChilderic I (died 481 AD) was a Frankish leader in the northern part of imperial Roman Gaul, and an ancestor of the Merovingian dynasty. He is described as a king (\"rex\"), both on his Roman-style seal ring, which was buried with him, and in fragmentary later records of his life. Childeric served as a military leader of Frankish forces under the Roman emperor Majorian, and after his fall, also under the Gallo-Roman military leader Aegidius. He was the father of Clovis I, who acquired effective control over all or most Frankish kingdoms, and a significant part of Roman Gaul.\nBiography.\nMost of early Merovingian history is based on the account of the 6th-century Gregory of Tours. The date of Childeric's accession is not given in the text, but it was after emperor Avitus' death in December 456 (https://). The only certain date is the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 in 507 in the Franco\u2013Gothic War; most of Gregory's other statements are contradictory.\nChilderic's father is recorded by several sources to have been Merovech, after whom the dynasty is named. Gregory (II.9) says that Merovech was reputed by some to be a descendant of Chlodio, an earlier Frankish king who had conquered Gaulish areas first in the Silva Carbonaria, then in Tournai, Cambrai and as far south as the Somme. This is roughly the definition of the Roman province of \"Belgica Secunda\" (approximately the \"Belgium\" defined by Julius Caesar centuries earlier, the region stretching from north of Paris to the Flemish coast); later, a letter of Saint Remigius to Childeric's son Clovis I implies that Childeric had been its administrative chief.\nChilderic himself is mainly associated with Roman military actions around the Loire River involving the Gallo-Roman general Aegidius. According to Gregory (II.12), Childeric was exiled to \"Thuringia\" for eight years due to Frankish distaste for his debauchery and his seduction of his subjects' daughters. In the meantime, according to Gregory, Aegidius himself took up the title of king of the Franks. Upon his return from exile, Childeric joined his host's wife, Queen Basina, who bore their son Clovis.\nGuy Halsall connects the story to Roman politics, Aegidius being an appointee of Majorian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although this is only one interpretation of the fragmentary sources, an eight-year period ending with Aegidius' death would allow us to associate Childeric's expulsion with Majorian's accession and appointment of Aegidius. ...\nMajorian's commander on the Loire, Aegidius, refused to accept Severus as emperor. It is possible that, to legitimise his position, he took the title king of the Franks.\nHalsall (p.\u00a0269) speculates that Childeric probably began a Roman military career in the service of Flavius Aetius who defeated Attila in Gaul, and he points out that much of his military career appears to have played out far from the Frankish homelands. Ulrich Nonn (map p.\u00a037, and pp.\u00a099\u2013100), following his teacher Eugen Ewig, believes that the exile story reflects a real sequence of events whereby Childeric was a leader of \"Salian\" or \"Belgian\" Franks based in the Romanized areas conquered by Chlodio, who were allies under the lordship of Aegidius, but eventually able to take over his power when he and his imperial patron died. (Childeric's son Clovis I later fought Aegidius' son Syagrius who was remembered as a King of Romans, and who had control of Soissons in the south of \"Belgica Secunda\".)\nIn a passage normally considered to have come from a lost collection of annals, Gregory (II.18) gives a sequence of events which are very difficult to interpret. In the Gothic war against Aegidius Childeric and Aegidius successfully repelled the Aquitanian Goths of Theodoric II from Orl\u00e9ans on the Loire in 463. After the death of Aegidius soon after, Childeric and a \"comes\" (\"count\") Paul are recorded defending the Loire region from Saxon raiders, who were possibly coordinating with the Goths now under Euric. Childeric and Paul fought Saxons under the command of a leader named \"Adovacrius\" (sometimes given by modern authors in either an Anglo-Saxon spelling form, Eadwacer, or in a spelling the same as used for his contemporary the future King of Italy Odoacer, with whom he is sometimes equated). The origin of these \"Saxons\" is however unclear, and they are described as being based upon islands somewhere in the Loire region.\nSoon after this passage, Gregory of Tours (II.19) reports that Childeric coordinated with \"Odovacrius\", this time normally assumed to be the King of Italy, against Alemanni who had entered Italy. Some authors interpret these Alemanni to be Alans, a people established in the Loire region in this period. There is no consensus on this, however, because the reference in this case is not apparently to events near the Loire.\nMarriage, children, and death.\nGregory of Tours, in his \"History of the Franks\", mentions several siblings of Clovis within his narrative, apparently thus children of Childeric:\nChilderic is generally considered to have died in 481 or 482 based on Gregory's reports that his son Clovis died in 511 and had ruled 30 years.\nTomb.\nChilderic's tomb was discovered in 1653 not far from the 12th-century church of Saint-Brice in Tournai, now in Belgium. Numerous precious objects were found, including jewels of gold and garnet cloisonn\u00e9, gold coins, a gold bull's head, and a ring with the king's name inscribed. Also present were some 300 golden winged insects (usually viewed as bees or cicadas), which had been placed on the king's cloak. Archduke Leopold William, governor of the Southern Netherlands (today's Belgium), had the find published in Latin. The treasure went first to the Habsburgs in Vienna, then as a gift to King Louis XIV, who was not impressed with the treasure and stored it in the royal library, which became the Biblioth\u00e8que Nationale de France during the Revolution.\nOn the night of November 5\u20136, 1831, the treasure of Childeric was among 80\u00a0kg of treasure stolen from the Library and melted down for the gold. A few pieces were retrieved from where they had been hidden in the Seine, including two of the bees. The record of the treasure, however, now exists only in the fine engravings made at the time of its discovery and in some reproductions made for the Habsburgs.\nOrigin of Napoleonic bees.\nWhen Napoleon was looking for a heraldic symbol to trump the Capetian fleur-de-lys, he settled on Childeric's bees as symbols of the French Empire. The minutes of a meeting of the \"Conseil d'\u00c9tat\" held at Saint-Cloud in June 1804 suggest that it approved the symbolism of the bees on a suggestion by Cambac\u00e9r\u00e8s. The design was made by Vivant Denon, Director of the Louvre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44511", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44511", "title": "437", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 437 (CDXXXVII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aetius and Sigisvultus (or, less frequently, year 1190 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 437 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44512", "revid": "1298657218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44512", "title": "National Parks of Poland", "text": "There are 23 national parks in Poland. These were formerly run by the Polish Board of National Parks (Polish: \"Krajowy Zarz\u0105d Park\u00f3w Narodowych\"), but in 2004 responsibility for their management was transferred to what is now the Ministry of Climate and the Environment. Most national parks are divided into strictly and partially protected zones. They currently encompass around 186000 hectares of forest, or around 2% of all the country's woodlands.\nPolish national parks have carried out numerous research programs and they play an important role in the ecological education. The national parks can be visited as they provide a well-developed tourism infrastructure, though visitors typically need to keep to designated areas such as trails. Many parks furthermore offer thematic trails, educational centres and natural history museums.\nLegal basis and governance of Poland's national parks.\nIn order to become a national park, an area needs to be at least 1000 hectares in size and have outstanding environmental and cultural value. The ecosystems in the park need to be in their natural state\u2014or close to it. National parks usually play host to several \"valuable\" species; usually rare or protected ones.\nThe area of a national park is divided into different zones using separate methods of conservation. There are strict protection zones, as well as active and landscape-related ones. Additionally, they are usually surrounded by a protective buffer zone called \"otulina\". Human activity is also heavily restricted within the park itself, with strict conservation rules in place. There are also significant restrictions on what can be done within the buffer zones.\nPoland's national parks are governed by the Nature Conservation Act, last amended in 2004, and they are funded from the central state budget. Each park is managed by a director, who works closely with an oversight board. They are further supervised by the Ministry of Climate and Environment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nLegal documents.\nOrdinances issued by the Polish Council of Ministers, establishing individual national parks (all in Polish, in PDF format).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites.\nOfficial websites of individual national parks"}
{"id": "44513", "revid": "1010519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44513", "title": "Chow Chow", "text": "The Chow Chow is a spitz-type of dog breed originally from Northern China. The Chow Chow is a sturdily built dog, square in profile, with a broad skull and small, triangular, erect ears with rounded tips. The breed is known for a very dense double coat that is either smooth or rough. The fur is particularly thick in the neck area, giving it a distinctive ruff or mane appearance. The coat may be shaded/self-red, black, blue, cinnamon/fawn, or cream.\nHistory.\nThe Chow Chow has been identified as a basal breed that predates the emergence of the modern breeds in the 19th century. A research study has concluded that the Chow Chow dog breed originated from other indigenous dogs in central China about 8,300 years ago. The ancient breed evolved and manifests both morphological and physiological features, including its dark tongue, coat of fur, and stronger build.\nOne Chinese legend mentions large war dogs from Central Asia that resembled black-tongued lions. One Chinese ruler was said to own 5,000 Chows. The Chinese also used Chows to pull dog sleds through swampy terrain, and this was remarked upon by Marco Polo.\nToday, the American Kennel Club registers approximately 10,000 Chow Chows a year. The Canadian Kennel Club registers approximately 350.\nThe English name \"Chow Chow\" is unlinked to any Chinese name such as the modern \u9b06\u7345\u72ac/\u677e\u72ee\u72ac (\"s\u014dng sh\u012b qu\u01cen\", lit. \"loose lion dog\") for the same breed, and hence of uncertain origin - possible and folk etymologies refer to Pidgin English.\nAppearance.\nThe Chow Chow is a sturdily built dog, square in profile, with a broad skull and small, triangular, erect ears with rounded tips. The breed is known for a very dense double coat that is either smooth or rough. The fur is particularly thick in the neck area, giving it a distinctive ruff or mane appearance. The coat may be shaded/self-red, black, blue, cinnamon/fawn, or cream.\nNot all these color varieties are recognized as valid in all countries. Individuals with patchy or multicolored coats are considered to be outside the breed standard.\nChow Chow eyes are typically deep set and almond shaped. The tongue is purple or blue-black; this color extends to the lips. The Chow Chow is the only dog breed with this distinctive bluish color in its lips and oral cavity; other dogs have black or a piebald pattern skin in their mouths. The hind legs are very straight, resulting in a rather stilted gait. Another distinctive feature is the curly tail. It has thick hair and lies curled on its back. The nose should be black, but blue-coated Chow Chow can have a solid blue or slate-colored nose. According to the American Kennel Club breed standards, any other tone is not acceptable for contests. FCI countries, however, do allow a self-colored nose in the cream.\nThe blue-black/purple tongue gene appears to be dominant, as most mixed breed dogs that come from a Chow Chow retain that tongue color. However, the blue-black/purple tongue can also be found on the Shar Pei. This is not to say that every mixed breed dog with spots of purple on the tongue is descended from Chow Chow, as purple spots on the tongue can be found on other purebred dogs.\nTemperament.\nOwning a Chow Chow can raise the cost of homeowners' insurance in the US because some companies consider them high-risk dogs. In a study in the \"Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association\", Chow Chow were responsible for 8 out of 238 fatalities related to dog bites from 1979 to 1998.\nColors.\nChow Chows can come in a variety of coat colors. The American Kennel Club (AKC) has classified Chow Chow colors as either standard or non-standard (rare colors). The standard colors for Chow Chows are black, blue, red, cream, and cinnamon. However, colors such as fawn, white, and merle are not considered standard for this breed.\nDifferent canine clubs worldwide may acknowledge different coat colors or even use alternative names for the colors mentioned above.\nHealth.\nA UK study found the life expectancy of the Chow Chow to be 12.1 years, just higher than the 12 year average for crossbreeds and lower than the 12.7 years average for purebreeds.\nSkeletal conditions.\nA North American study looking at more than a million records of dogs found 6.44% of Chow Chow dogs to have hip dysplasia compared with 3.52% overall. The study also found 4.3% of Chow Chow dogs to have cranial cruciate ligament deficiency compared to 2.52% overall.\nAnother North American study looking at more than 250,000 elbow scans found the Chow Chow to have the highest prevalence of elbow dysplasia, with 48.6% of dogs over the age of 2 having elbow dysplasia.\nOphthalmological conditions.\nA North American study looking at glaucoma in dog breeds found the Chow Chow to have the third highest prevalence with 4.7% of Chow Chow dogs having glaucoma compared to 0.89% overall.\nDermatological conditions.\nA study looking at records from a small animal clinic at the University of Montreal found the Chow Chow to be predisposed to alopecia X.\nA review of studies in Australia found the Chow Chow to be prediposed to atopic dermatitis with a 7.1 odds ratio.\nA US case study found a predisposition to pemphigus foliaceus with an odds ratio of 12.3.\nA breed specific mutation causing tyrosinase deficiency which results in leukotrichia exists in the Chow Chow.\nGastrointestinal conditions.\nA UK study looking at exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in breeds found the Chow Chow to be predisposed to the condition.\nNeoplastic conditions.\nAn Austrian case series found an odds ratio of 23.53 for contracting stomach cancer.\nA US study looking at cases of oral melanoma found the breed to be over-represented with an odds ratio of 7.89.\nReproductive conditions.\nIn a Belgian study Chow Chow bitches made up 6.4% of cases of pyometra despite the breed making up 1.6% of the population. Pyometra was found to be more extreme in the breed with anaemia and endotoxaemia reported.\nOther conditions.\nThe Chow Chow can suffer from diabetes mellitus, and gastric cancer. Chow Chows are a high risk breed for autoimmune disease.\nNotable dogs.\nSigmund Freud had a Chow Chow named Jo-Fi Ling who attended all of his therapy sessions because he felt that dogs had a special sense that allows them to judge a person's character accurately, and admitted he depended on Jo-Fi for an assessment of a patient's mental state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44514", "revid": "50524176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44514", "title": "Mafikeng", "text": "Capital city of the North-West Province, South Africa\nMahikeng (Tswana for \"Place of Rocks\"), formerly known as Mafikeng and alternatively known as Mafeking (, ), is the capital city of the North West province of South Africa.\nClose to South Africa's border with Botswana, Mafikeng is northeast of Cape Town and west of Johannesburg. In 2001 it had a population of 49,300. In 2007 Mafikeng was reported to have a population of 250,000, of which the CBD constituted between 69,000 and 75,000. It is built on the open veld at an elevation of , by the banks of the Upper Molopo River. The Madibi goldfields are some south of the town.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nMolema's town was founded by Molema Tawana (c. 1822 \u2013 January 1882).\nIn 1857 Molema led an advance guard to scout out the area along the Molopo River. This was a familiar area as they had previously lived in nearby Khunwana. Molema settled a town known in its early years as \"Molema's town\", while the main body of the Barolong under Montshiwa followed. But Montshiwa did not feel safe at Mafikeng due to the close presence and encroachment of the Boers in the Transvaal. He led his followers to Moshaneng in the territory of the Bangwaketse in present-day Botswana.\nMolema remained at Mafikeng to ensure that the Barolong retained a presence there. Several of Montshiwa's other brothers were also stationed at crucial sites in the proximity of the Molopo. Molema had to use all his diplomatic skills on several occasions to prevent Boer incursion and settlement near Mafikeng. He has been described as a man of \"strong personality and exceptional gifts...and Montshiwa's chief counsellor in vital matters\". (S.M Molema: 35) After negotiations with Molema, Montshiwa decided to return to Mafikeng in 1876.\nMolema was a firm believer in Western education, having attended Healdtown; he opened a school for the Barolong once they had settled in the district. Molema became a farmer and businessman, as well as advising his brother Montshiwa. He died in 1882. One of his sons, Silas Molema, became a Doctor and historian of the Barolong. (see S.M. Molema). Later British settlers spelled the name as \"Mafeking\". The Jameson Raid started from Pitsani Pothlugo (or Potlogo) north of Mafeking on December 29, 1895.\nFor most of the 19th century (1800s), Mafeking appeared in Southern African maps as a part of Bechuanaland, a territory consisting of Tswana tribal territories, stretching from the Bangwato of Khama in present-day Botswana to the Batlhaping in present-day South Africa's Northern Cape and North West provinces.\nBechuanaland was ruled by Paramount Chiefs of the Tswana groups such as the Barolong, Bakwena, Bangwaketse, Bahurutshe, Batlhaping and the Bangwato who under Sekgoma I and Khama III stretched Tswana lands further north to close to present day Zimbabwe and Zambia territories.\nThe Tswana chieftains had ruled Bechuanaland on the advice of Congregational missionaries of the London Missionary Society, including Robert Moffat who was stationed at Kuruman among the Batlhaping and David Livingstone who was based among Sechele's Bakwena at Kolobeng close to present day Gaborone, Botswana; the Methodist missionaries of the Wesleyan Missionary Society among the Barolong; and the Lutheran Hermannsburg Missionary Society among the Bakwena ba ga Mogopa.\nIn 1852, the Boers of the Transvaal invaded Bechuanaland but were defeated by a Tswana army led by Sechele I (Setshele) of the Bakwena ba ga Sechele at Dimawe in present-day Botswana during the Battle of Dimawe of 1852.\nThe Boers of the Transvaal would successfully invade Bechuanaland 30 years later in 1882 establishing the Republic of Stellaland and State of Goshen around present day Vryburg and surrounding areas in 1882 to 1883. Stellaland and Goshen unified as the United States of Stellaland in 1883 to 1885.\nIn response, British Congregational missionary John MacKenzie of the London Missionary Society stationed among the Bangwato at Shoshong advised Tswana Paramount Chiefs to seek British protection.\nThis led to the Warren expedition of December 1884 to mid 1885, where the British sent 4000 troops from the Cape Colony led by Major General Charles Warren, repelling Boer and German encroachment into Bechuanaland and dissolving Stellaland and Goshen.\nBechuanaland was proclaimed a British protectorate, with Mafeking as the capital. But Bechuanaland was later divided into two; separating Tswana lands along the Molopo and Nossob rivers-those to the north, Bechuanaland Protectorate, remained a British protectorate, eventually gaining independence in 1966 as the republic of Botswana.\nThose lands to the south of the Molopo, now part of present-day South Africa's North-West and Northern Cape provinces, including Mafikeng, became British Bechuanaland, a short-lived colony later handed to the Cape Colony. In 1910, the Cape Colony unified with Natal, the Transvaal and Orange Free State to found the Union of South Africa.\nEven after the division of Bechuanaland which placed Mafeking outside of the Bechuanaland Protectorate, Mafeking remained the capital of Bechuanaland Protectorate (present day Botswana) until Gaborone was established in 1965.\nSiege of Mafeking.\nAt the outbreak of the Second Boer War in 1899, the town was besieged by the Boers. The Siege of Mafeking lasted 217 days from October 1899 to May 1900, and turned Robert Baden-Powell into a national hero. In 1900, the British built a concentration camp in Mafeking to house Boer women and children. In September 1904, Lord Roberts unveiled an obelisk at Mafeking bearing the names of those who fell in defence of the town. British losses during the siege were 212 people killed, soldiers and civilians, and more than 600 wounded. Boer losses were significantly higher.\nIncorporation into Bophuthatswana.\nAlthough it was outside the protectorate's borders, Mafeking served as capital of the Bechuanaland Protectorate from 1894 until 1965, when Gaborone was made the capital of what was to become Botswana. Mafeking also briefly served as capital of the Bantustan of Bophuthatswana in the 1970s, before the adjoining town of Mmabatho was established as capital when Bophuthatswana became nominally independent in 1977.\nFollowing a local referendum, Mafeking joined Bophuthatswana in 1980 and was renamed \"Mafikeng\". The town was treated as a suburb of Mmabatho.\nCapital of North-West Province.\nFollowing the end of apartheid in 1994, Bophuthatswana was formally reincorporated into South Africa. With that, the merged Mafikeng and Mmabatho became capital of the new North-West Province under the name Mafikeng. In February 2010, Lulu Xingwana, the Minister of Arts and Culture changed the town's name to Mahikeng.\nName.\nThe name Mahikeng means \"the place of rocks\" in the classic Setswana language of the people of the North West province of South Africa and the surrounding country of Botswana. However, the city is commonly pronounced as Mafikeng, in the vernacular of the Batswana people of Mmabatho. Historically it was also known as Mafeking, and is still referred to as such historiographically in the context of the Siege of Mafeking and Relief of Mafeking during the Boer War.\nIn February 2010, Lulu Xingwana, the Minister of Arts and Culture, approved the town's name to be changed again to \"Mahikeng\". Despite this the town's ANC-run local government and most local residents still refer to the town as Mafikeng both informally and formally.&lt;ref name=\"http://mg.co.za/article/2011-08-09-old-south-africa-collides-with-new-in-city-names\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMahikeng literally means \u201cplace among rocks\u201d. It refers to volcanic rocks that provided temporary shelter for Stone Age humans in order to more easily hunt animals drinking water in the Molopo River.\nNotable people.\nNotable people from Mafikeng include:\nClimate.\nMafikeng has a warm semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\") with hot summers and mild, dry winters with cool nights. Mafikeng experiences a significant amount of sunshine throughout the year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44515", "revid": "40727880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44515", "title": "Acadians", "text": "Descendants of French settlers in Acadia\nThe Acadians (; , ) are an ethnic group descended from the French who settled in the New France colony of Acadia during the 17th and 18th centuries. Today, most descendants of Acadians live in either the Northern American region of Acadia, where descendants of Acadians who escaped the Expulsion of the Acadians (known as \"The Great Upheaval\", ) re-settled, or in Louisiana, where thousands of Acadians moved in the late 1700s. Descendants of the Louisiana Acadians are most commonly known as Cajuns, the anglicized term of \"Acadian\". \nAcadia was one of the five regions of New France, located in what is now Eastern Canada's Maritime provinces, as well as parts of Quebec and present-day Maine to the Kennebec River. It was ethnically, geographically and administratively different from the other French colonies such as the French colony of Canada. As a result, the Acadians developed a distinct history and culture. The settlers whose descendants became Acadians primarily came from the west-central region of France, such as the rural areas of Poitou-Charentes. During the French and Indian War (known in Canada as The Seven Years' War), British colonial officers suspected that Acadians were aligned with France, after finding some Acadians fighting alongside French troops at Fort Beaus\u00e9jour. Though most Acadians remained neutral during the war, the British, together with New England legislators and militia, carried out the Great Expulsion () of the Acadians between 1755 and 1764. They forcefully deported approximately 11,500 Acadians from the maritime region. Approximately one-third perished from disease and drowning. \nIn retrospect, the result has been described as an ethnic cleansing of the Acadians from Maritime Canada.\nAcadians speak a variety of French called Acadian French, which has a few regional accents (for example, Chiac in the southeast of New Brunswick, or Brayon in the northwest of New Brunswick). Most can also speak English. The Louisiana Cajun descendants tend to speak English, including Cajun English, or Louisiana French, a relative of Acadian French from Canada, though most have been primarily anglophone since the mid-20th century. Most Acadians in Canada continue to live in majority French-speaking communities, notably those in New Brunswick, where Acadians and Francophones are granted autonomy in areas such as education and health. In some cases, Acadians intermarried with Indigenous peoples, in particular, the Mi'kmaq.\nEstimates of contemporary Acadian populations vary widely. The Canadian census of 2006 reported only 96,145 Acadians in Canada, based on self-declared ethnic identity. However, the Canadian Encyclopedia estimates that there are at least 500,000 people of Acadian ancestry in Canada, which would include many who declared their ethnic identity for the census as French or as Canadian.\nPre-deportation history.\nDuring the early 17th century, about 60 French families were established in Acadia. They developed relations with the peoples of the Wabanaki Confederacy (particularly the regional Mi'kmaq). The Acadians lived mainly in the coastal regions of the Bay of Fundy; they reclaimed farming land from the sea by building dikes to control water and drain certain wetlands.\nLiving in a contested borderland region between French Canada and the British territories on New England and the coast, the Acadians often became entangled in the conflict between the powers. Their competition in Europe played out in North America as well. Over a period of 74 years, six wars (the four French and Indian Wars, Father Rale's War, and Father Le Loutre's War) took place in Acadia and Nova Scotia, in which the Wabanaki Confederacy and some Acadians fought to keep the British from taking over the region. While France lost political control of Acadia in 1713, the M\u00ed'kmaq did not concede land to the British. Along with Acadians, the Mi'kmaq used military force to resist the British. That was particularly evident in the early 1720s during Dummer's War.\nThe British had conquered Acadia in 1710. Over the next 45 years, the Acadians refused to sign an unconditional oath of allegiance to Britain. Many were influenced by Father Jean-Louis Le Loutre, who from his arrival in 1738 until his capture in 1755, preached against the \"English devils\". \nFather Le Loutre led the Acadian people during the Acadian Exodus, as an act of defiance towards British demands and oppression. Acadians took part in various militia operations against the British and maintained vital supply lines to the French Fortress of Louisbourg and Fort Beausejour. \nDuring the French and Indian War, the British sought to neutralize any military threat posed by the Acadians and to interrupt the vital supply lines which they provided to Louisbourg by making them sign an oath of allegiance to the crown.\nThe British founded the town of Halifax and fortified it in 1749 in order to establish a base against the French. The Mi'kmaq resisted the increased number of British (Protestant) settlements by making numerous raids on Halifax, Dartmouth, Lawrencetown, and Lunenburg. During the French and Indian War, the Mi'kmaq assisted the Acadians in resisting the British during the Expulsion of the Acadians.\nMany Acadians might have signed an unconditional oath to the British monarchy had the circumstances been better, while other Acadians would not sign because it was religious oath which denied the Catholic faith because the British Monarch was head of the Church of England. \nAcadians had numerous reasons against signing an oath of loyalty to the British Crown. Acadian men feared that signing the oath would commit them to fighting against France during wartime. They also worried about whether their Mi'kmaq neighbours might perceive an oath as acknowledging the British claim to Acadia rather than that of the indigenous Mi'kmaq. Acadians believed that if they signed the oath, they might put their villages at risk of attack by the Mi'kmaq.\nGeographical distribution.\nData from this section from Statistics Canada, 2021.\nProvinces and territories.\nToday about one third of the population of the officially bilingual province of New Brunswick speaks French as their mother tongue. About half of these are of Acadian ancestry, and there are also many Acadian institutions, organizations and cultural events.\nDeportation.\nIn the Great Expulsion (known by French speakers as \"le Grand D\u00e9rangement\"), after the Battle of Fort Beaus\u00e9jour beginning in August 1755 under Lieutenant Governor Lawrence, approximately 11,500 Acadians (three-quarters of the Acadian population in Nova Scotia) were expelled, families were separated, their lands and property confiscated, and in some cases their homes were burned. The Acadians were deported to separated locations throughout the British eastern seaboard colonies, from New England to Georgia, where many were put into forced labour, imprisoned, or put into servitude.\nSecond wave.\nThe British conducted a second and smaller expulsion of Acadians after taking control of the north shore of what is now New Brunswick. After the fall of Quebec and defeat of the French, the British lost interest in such relocations.\nSome Acadians were deported to England, some to the Caribbean, and some to France. After being expelled to France, many Acadians were eventually recruited by the Spanish government to migrate to \"Luisiana\" (present-day Louisiana). These Acadians settled into or alongside the existing Louisiana Creole settlements, sometimes intermarrying with Creoles, and gradually developed what became known as Cajun culture.\nLouisiana Acadians.\nAfter 1758, thousands were transported to France. Most of the Acadians who later went to Louisiana sailed there from France on five Spanish ships. These had been provided by the Spanish Crown, which was eager to populate their Louisiana colony with Catholic settlers who might provide farmers to supply the needs of New Orleans residents. The Spanish had hired agents to seek out the dispossessed Acadians in Brittany and kept this effort secret in order to avoid angering the French king. These new arrivals from France joined the earlier wave expelled from Acadia, and gradually their descendants developed the Cajun population (which included multiracial unions and children) and culture. They continued to be attached to French culture and language, and Catholicism.\nThe Spanish offered the Acadians lowlands along the Mississippi River in order to block British expansion from the east. Some would have preferred Western Louisiana, where many of their families and friends had settled. In addition, that land was more suitable to mixed crops of agriculture. Rebels among them marched to New Orleans and ousted the Spanish governor. The Spanish later sent infantry from other colonies to put down the rebellion and execute the leaders. After the rebellion in December 1769, Spanish Governor O'Reilly permitted the Acadians who had settled across the river from Natchez to resettle along the Iberville or Amite rivers closer to New Orleans.\nReturnees.\nIn time, some Acadians returned to the Maritime provinces of Canada, mainly to New Brunswick and coastal villages that were not occupied by colonists from New England.\nThe British prohibited them from resettling their lands and villages in what became Nova Scotia. A few of the Acadians in this area had evaded the British for several years, but the brutal winter weather eventually forced them to surrender. Some returnees settled in the region of Fort Sainte-Anne, now Fredericton, but were later displaced when the Crown awarded land grants to numerous United Empire Loyalists from the Thirteen Colonies after the victory of the United States in the American Revolution. Most of the descendants of Acadian returnees now live primarily on the eastern coast of New Brunswick, Canada.\nIn 2003, at the request of Acadian representatives, Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada issued a Royal Proclamation acknowledging the deportation. She established 28 July as an annual day of commemoration, beginning in 2005. The day is called the \"Great Upheaval\" on some English-language calendars.\nBefore the American Revolutionary War, the Crown settled Protestant European immigrants and New England Planters in former Acadian communities and farmland. After the war, it made land grants in Nova Scotia to Loyalists. British policy was to establish a majority culture of Protestant religions and to assimilate Acadians with the local populations where they resettled.\nGeography.\nThe Acadians today live predominantly in the Canadian Maritime provinces (New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia), as well as parts of Quebec, Canada, and in Louisiana and Maine, United States.\nIn New Brunswick, Acadians inhabit the northern and eastern shores of New Brunswick. Other groups of Acadians can be found in the Magdalen Islands and the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula. Ethnic Acadian descendants still live in and around the area of Madawaska, Maine, where some of the Acadians first landed and settled in what is now known as the St. John Valley. There are also Acadians in Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia, at Ch\u00e9ticamp, Isle Madame, and Clare. East and West Pubnico, located at the end of the province, are the oldest regions that are predominantly ethnic Acadian.\nOther ethnic Acadians can be found in the southern regions of New Brunswick, Western Newfoundland and in New England. Many of these communities have assimilated to varying degrees into the majority culture of English speakers. For many families in predominantly Anglophone communities, French-language attrition has occurred, particularly in younger generations.\nThe Acadians who settled in Louisiana after 1764 became known as Cajuns for the culture they developed. They have had a dominant cultural influence in many parishes, particularly in the southwestern area of the state, which is known as Acadiana.\nCulture.\nAcadians are a vibrant minority, particularly in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, Canada, and in Louisiana (Cajuns) and northern Maine, United States. Since 1994, \"Le Congr\u00e8s Mondial Acadien\" has worked as an organization to unite these disparate communities and help preserve the culture.\nIn 1881, Acadians at the First Acadian National Convention, held in Memramcook, New Brunswick, designated 15 August, the Christian feast of the Assumption of Mary, as the national feast day of their community. On that day, the Acadians celebrate by having a \"tintamarre,\" a big parade and procession for which people dress up with the colors of Acadia and make a lot of noise and music.\nThe national anthem of the Acadians is \"Ave Maris Stella\", adopted in 1884 at Miscouche, Prince Edward Island. The anthem was revised at the 1992 meeting of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale de l'Acadie. The second, third and fourth verses were translated into French, with the first and last kept in the original Latin.\nThe Federation des Associations de Familles Acadiennes of New Brunswick and the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Saint-Thomas d'Aquin of Prince Edward Island have resolved to commemorate 13 December annually as \"Acadian Remembrance Day\", in memory of the sinking of the \"Duke William\" and of the nearly 2,000 Acadians deported from Ile-Saint Jean who died in 1758 while being deported across the North Atlantic: from hunger, disease and drowning. The event has been commemorated annually since 2004; participants mark the day by wearing a black star.\nLegacy.\nAmerican writer Henry Wadsworth Longfellow published \"Evangeline\", an epic poem loosely based on the 1755 deportation. The poem became an American classic. Activists used it as a catalyst in reviving a distinct Acadian identity in both Maritime Canada and in Louisiana. Antonine Maillet's novel \"P\u00e9lagie-la-charette\" concerns the return voyage to Acadia of several deported families, starting 15 years after the Great Expulsion.\nIn the early 20th century, two statues were made of the fictional figure of \"Evangeline\" to commemorate the Expulsion: one was installed in St. Martinville, Louisiana and the other in Grand-Pr\u00e9, Nova Scotia. The Acadian Memorial (Monument Acadien) has an eternal flame; it honors the 3,000 Acadians who settled in Louisiana after the Expulsion. Monuments to the Acadian Expulsion have been erected at several sites in the Maritime Provinces, such as at Georges Island, Nova Scotia, and at Beaubears Island.\nFlags.\nThe flag of the Acadians is the French tricolour, with the addition of a golden star in the blue field (see top of article). This symbolizes Saint Mary, Our Lady of the Assumption, patron saint of the Acadians and widely known as the \"Star of the Sea\". This flag was proposed by Father Marcel-Fran\u00e7ois Richard and adopted in 1884 at the Second Acadian National Convention, held in Miscouche, Prince Edward Island.\nAcadians in the diaspora have adopted other symbols. The flag of Acadians in Louisiana, known as Cajuns, was designed by Thomas J. Arceneaux of the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. In 1974 it was adopted by the Louisiana legislature as the official emblem of the Acadiana region. The state has supported the culture, in part because it has attracted cultural and heritage tourism.\nIn 2004 New England Acadians, who were attending Le Congr\u00e8s Mondial Acadien in Nova Scotia, endorsed a design by William Cork for a New England Acadian flag.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44516", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44516", "title": "Selfish Gene", "text": ""}
{"id": "44517", "revid": "18835097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44517", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois Boucher", "text": "French painter (1703\u20131770)\nFran\u00e7ois Boucher ( , ; ; 29 September 1703\u00a0\u2013 30 May 1770) was a French painter, draughtsman and etcher, who worked in the Rococo style. Boucher is known for his idyllic and voluptuous paintings on classical themes, decorative allegories, and pastoral scenes. He was perhaps the most celebrated painter and decorative artist of the 18th century.\nLife.\nA native of Paris, Boucher was the son of a lesser known painter Nicolas Boucher, who gave him his first artistic training. At the age of seventeen, a painting by Boucher was admired by the painter Fran\u00e7ois Lemoyne. Lemoyne later appointed Boucher as his apprentice, but after only three months, he went to work for the engraver Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Cars.\nIn 1720, he won the elite Grand Prix de Rome for painting, but did not take up the consequential opportunity to study in Italy until five years later, due to financial problems at the Acad\u00e9mie royale de peinture et de sculpture. On his return from studying in Italy he was admitted to the refounded Acad\u00e9mie de peinture et de sculpture on 24 November 1731. His \"morceau de r\u00e9ception\" (reception piece) was his \"Rinaldo and Armida\" of 1734.\nBoucher married Marie-Jeanne Buzeau in 1733. The couple had three children together. Boucher became a faculty member in 1734 and his career accelerated from this point as he was promoted Professor then Rector of the academy, becoming inspector at the Royal Gobelins Manufactory and finally \"Premier Peintre du Roi\" (First Painter of the King) in 1765.\nBoucher died on 30 May 1770 in his native Paris. His name, along with that of his patron Madame de Pompadour, had become synonymous with the French Rococo style, leading the Goncourt brothers to write: \"Boucher is one of those men who represent the taste of a century, who express, personify and embody it.\"\nBoucher is famous for saying that nature is \"trop verte et mal \u00e9clair\u00e9e\" (too green and badly lit).\nBoucher was associated with the gemstone engraver Jacques Guay, whom he taught to draw. He also mentored the Moravian-Austrian painter Martin Ferdinand Quadal as well as the neoclassical painter Jacques-Louis David in 1767. Later, Boucher made a series of drawings of works by Guay which Madame de Pompadour then engraved and distributed as a handsomely bound volume to favored courtiers.\nPainting.\nBoucher took inspiration from artists such as Peter Paul Rubens and Antoine Watteau. Boucher's early works celebrate the idyllic and tranquil portrayal of nature and landscape with great elan. However, his art typically forgoes traditional rural innocence to portray scenes with a definitive style of eroticism as his mythological scenes are passionate and intimately amorous rather than traditionally epic. Boucher's paintings of a flirtatious shepherd and shepherdess in a woodland setting, featured in \"The Enjoyable Lesson\" (\"The Flute Players\") of 1748 and \"An Autumn Pastoral\" (\"The Grape Eaters\") of 1749, were based upon characters in a 1745 play by Boucher's close friend Charles-Simon Favart. Boucher's characters in those paintings later inspired a pair of figurines created by the S\u00e8vres Porcelain Manufactory, c.\u20091757\u201366. Marquise de Pompadour (mistress of King Louis XV), whose name became synonymous with Rococo art, was a great admirer of his work. Marquise de Pompadour is often referred to as the \"godmother of Rococo\" and Boucher's portraits were central to her self-presentation and cultivation of her image. For instance, Boucher's 'Sketch for a Portrait of Madame de Pompadour', displayed in the Starhemburg room at Waddesdon Manor, acts as a surviving example of the oil preparation prior to the, now lost, portrait. In one hand she holds her hat, in the other she picks up a pearl bracelet with a portrait of the king \u2013 symbolising the relationship upon which her status depends.\nBoucher's paintings such as \"The Breakfast\" (1739), a familial scene, show how he was as a master of the genre scene, where he regularly used his own wife and children as models. These intimate family scenes are contrasting to the licentious style seen in his \"Odalisque\" portraits.\nThe dark-haired version of the \"Odalisque\" portraits prompted claims by the art critic Denis Diderot that Boucher was \"prostituting his own wife\", and the \"Blonde Odalisque\" was a portrait that illustrated the extramarital relationships of the King. Boucher gained lasting notoriety through such private commissions for wealthy collectors and, after Diderot expressed his disapproval, his reputation came under increasing critical attack during the last years of his career.\nTheatrical and tapestry designs.\nAlong with his painting, Boucher also designed theater costumes and sets, and the ardent intrigues of the comic operas of Charles Simon Favart closely paralleled his own style of painting. Tapestry design was also a concern. For the Beauvais tapestry workshops he first designed a series of \"F\u00eates italiennes\" (\"Italian festivals\") in 1736, which proved to be very successful and often rewoven over the years, and then, commissioned in 1737, a suite of the story of Cupid and Psyche. During two decades' involvement with the Beauvais tapestry workshops Boucher produced designs for six series of hangings in all, like .\nBoucher was also called upon for designs for court festivities organized by that section of the King's household called the Menus-Plaisirs du Roi and for the opera and for royal ch\u00e2teaux Versailles, Fontainebleau and Choisy. His designs for all of the aforementioned augmented his earlier reputation, resulting in many engravings from his work and even reproduction of his designs on porcelain and biscuit-ware at the Vincennes and S\u00e8vres factories. The death of Oudry in 1755 put an end to its contribution to Beauvais but his collaboration with the Gobelins lasted until 1765, when he stepped down from his position as an inspector.\nDrawings and prints.\nBoucher was a very prolific and varied draftsman. His drawings served not only as preparatory studies for his paintings and as designs for printmakers but also as finished works of art for which there was a great demand by collectors. Boucher followed standard studio practices of the time, by first working out the overall composition of his major canvases, and then making chalk studies for individual figures, or groups of figures. He also relied on oil and gouache sketches in the preparation of major commissions.\nGradually he made more and more sketches as independent works for the market. The (Metropolitan Museum of Art), a free and painterly sketch in gouache, was long considered a preparatory sketch for Madame de Pompadour's private altarpiece \"La lumi\u00e8re du monde\" (ca. 1750, Mus\u00e9e des Beaux-Arts, Lyon). Recent scholarship suggests, however, that it was made at least 10 years later as an autonomous work. In the last decade of his career the artist began to favor brown chalk, a fabricated medium.\nBoucher was also a gifted engraver and etcher. Boucher etched some 180 original copperplates. He made many etchings after Watteau. He thus helped propagate a taste for reproductions of drawings. When his own drawings began to sell, 266 of them were etched in stipple substitutes by Gilles Demarteau. These were printed in red ink so they resembled red chalk drawings which could be framed as little pictures. They could then be hung in the small blank spaces of the elaborately decorated paneling of luxury dwellings.\nBoucher's most original inventions were decorative, and he contributed to the fashionable style of chinoiserie, after having etched 12 'Figures Chinoises' (Chinese figures) by Watteau.\nWorks by Fran\u00e7ois Boucher.\nThis is an incomplete list of works by Fran\u00e7ois Boucher.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdapted from a following source: "}
{"id": "44518", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44518", "title": "Ossip Zadkine", "text": "Russian and French artist (1888\u20131967)\nOssip Alexeevich Zadkine (; 28 January 1888 \u2013 25 November 1967) was a Russian and French artist of the School of Paris. He is best known as a sculptor, but also produced paintings and lithographs.\nEarly years and education.\nZadkine was born on 28 January 1888 as Yossel Aronovich Tsadkin () in the city of Vitebsk, in the Russian Empire (now Belarus). He was born to a baptized Jewish father and a mother named Zippa-Dvoyra, who he claimed to be of Scottish origin. Archival materials state that Iosel-Shmuila Aronovich Tsadkin was of Jewish faith and studied in the Vitebsk City Technical School between 1900 and 1904. He also studied in the Yury Pen's art school with would-be artists Marc Chagall (then Movsha Shagal) and Victor Mekler (then Avigdor Mekler). Archival materials contradict Zadkine himself and states that his father did not convert to the Russian Orthodox religion and his mother was not of a Scottish extraction. He had 5 siblings: sisters Mira, Roza and Fania and brothers Mark and Moses.\nZadkine claimed in his memoir that at the age of fifteen he had been sent by his father to Sunderland in the north of England, to stay with distant Scottish relatives and learn some \"good manners\". However, recent research has discovered that he ran away from home with a younger brother, and ended up living in Sunderland with the family of his paternal uncle, Joseph Zadkin, who had himself emigrated from Belarus a few years previously. In Sunderland he took art classes in Sunderland Town Hall and was taught to use a chisel by his uncle who was a cabinetmaker. He then moved to London and attended lessons at the Regent Street Polytechnic where he won a prize for modelling in 1908 but considered the teachers to be too conservative.\nZadkine settled in Paris in 1910. He studied at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts for six months. In 1911 he lived and worked in La Ruche. While in Paris he joined the Cubist movement, working in a Cubist idiom from 1914 to 1925. He later developed his own style, one that was strongly influenced by African and Greek art.\nCareer.\nIn 1921 he obtained French citizenship. Zadkine served as a stretcher-bearer in the French Army during World War I, and was wounded in action. He spent World War II in the US. His best-known work is probably the sculpture \"The Destroyed City\" (1951\u20131953), representing a man without a heart, a memorial to the destruction of the center of the Dutch city of Rotterdam in 1940 by the Nazi-German Luftwaffe.\nHe taught sculpture classes at Acad\u00e9mie de la Grande Chaumi\u00e8re until 1958, students of his included artists Geula Dagan (1925\u20132008), Gunnar Aagaard Andersen and Genevieve Pezet.\nDeath and legacy.\nZadkine died in Paris in 1967 at the age of 79 after undergoing abdominal surgery and was interred in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse.\nMuseums.\nHis former home and studio in Montparnasse is now the Mus\u00e9e Zadkine. When his former wife Prax died, she donated the house and art studio to the City of Paris for the formation of Mus\u00e9e Zadkine.\nThere is also a Mus\u00e9e Zadkine in the village of Les Arques in the Midi-Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es region of France. Zadkine lived in Les Arques for a number of years, and while there, carved an enormous Christ on the Cross and Pieta that are featured in the 12th-century church which stands opposite the museum.\nPersonal life.\nIn August 1920, Zadkine married Valentine Prax (1897\u20131981), an Algerian-born painter of Sicilian and French-Catalan descent. Prax and Zadkine had no children.\nZadkine was a neighbor in Montparnasse and a friend of Henry Miller and was represented by the character \"Borowski\" in Miller's novel, \"Tropic of Cancer\" (1934). His other neighbors there included Cha\u00efm Soutine, and Tsuguharu Foujita.\nWhile living in Manhattan during wartime from 1942 to 1945, Zadkine had a relationship with American artist Carol Janeway and created several portraits of her.\nThe artist's only child, Nicolas Hasle (born 1960), was born after an affair with a Danish woman, Annelise Hasle. Since 2009, Hasle, a psychiatrist, who had been acknowledged by the artist and had his parentage legally established in France in the 1980s, has been party to a lawsuit with the City of Paris to establish his claim to his father's estate.\nPublic collections.\nAmong the public collections holding works by Ossip Zadkine are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44519", "revid": "50575055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44519", "title": "List of national parks of Canada", "text": "Parks in Canada's provinces and territories\nCanada's national parks are protected areas under the \"Canada National Parks Act\", owned by the Government of Canada and administered for the benefit, education, and enjoyment of the people of Canada and its future generations. National parks are administered by Parks Canada, a Crown agency operating under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change. The goal of the national parks system is to set aside lands representing the country's 39 distinct natural regions described in the \"National Parks System Plan\", primarily to protect the ecological integrity of the land, and secondarily to allow the public to explore, learn about and enjoy Canada's natural spaces.\nCanada's first national park was created in 1885 through an Order-in-Council to reserve over the Cave and Basin Hot Springs to prevent the land from being sold for private development despite claims being made for it. Modelled after the American experience with Yellowstone National Park, the \"Rocky Mountains Park Act\", adopted in 1887, established the Rocky Mountains Park (now Banff National Park). The idea of a national park was popular and led to numerous proposals for the Ministry of the Interior to consider, including additional sites along the Canadian Pacific Railway (e.g. Yoho and Glacier and an expansion of Banff) and the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway (e.g. Jasper). In 1911 the \"Rocky Mountains Park Act\" was replaced by the \"Dominion Forest Reserves and Parks Act\" which created the world's first National Park Service, the Dominion Parks Branch, to administer national parks in Canada. These early national parks, including those established under the leadership of JB Harkin who was the first commissioner of the Dominion Parks Branch, were set aside to reserve lands principally for tourism and conservation but also had an exclusionary policy prohibiting First Nations peoples from using their traditional lands within the new parks. In 1922, Wood Buffalo National Park was the first to allow traditional indigenous activities to continue. In 1972, Parks Canada defined national park reserves as lands administered by the agency intended to become national parks pending settlement of indigenous land rights and agreements for continued traditional use of the lands.\nAs of July\u00a02024[ [update]], there are 37 national parks and 11 national park reserves, covering an area of approximately , or about 3.3% of the total land area of Canada, and representing 31 of its 39 natural regions. There is at least one park located in every one of the nation's 13 provinces and territories. Parks Canada reported attendance of 15,449,249 at all national parks and reserves in 2016\u201317, including over four million visits to the busiest park (Banff) and only two persons at the least-visited park (Tuktut Nogait). Parks Canada additionally manages three National Marine Conservation Areas (NMCAs), a single NMCA Reserve, and the country's lone National Landmark. The \"Canada National Parks Act\" also allows for recognition of National Historic Sites that commemorate events, landmarks, or objects of national importance, and which may include similar levels of protection and administration as national parks. Feasibility studies are underway to establish further national parks in unrepresented regions.\nNational parks and national park reserves.\nNational park reserves are indicated by \"(Reserve)\" after the park name. The national urban park is indicated by \"(Urban)\" after the park name.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0* UNESCO World Heritage Site\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 UNESCO Biosphere Reserve\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2021 Parks designated in both UNESCO programs\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt; \nProposed National Parks, Urban Parks, and Park Reserves.\nThe following are areas which Parks Canada is in the process of evaluating as potential parks. While they may be reserved from alienation or have federal-provincial/territorial agreements, they have not been formally established through legislation as parks.\nThere remain six Natural Regions unrepresented by either current or proposed parks. As Parks Canada has a long-term goal of preserving representative areas of all Natural Regions, future parks will likely be established in these areas. These regions are:\nNational Marine Conservation Areas.\nNational Marine Conservation Areas (NMCAs) is a program established in 2002 with the goal of preserving marine ecosystems representing the 29 marine regions of Canada. They are designed for sustainable use, although they usually also contain areas designed to protect ecological integrity. National Marine Conservation Area Reserves are protected areas proposed to be added to the NMCA system pending settlement of indigenous land and water rights. In the interim, they are administered under park rules.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], established NMCAs and NMCA Reserves protect of waters, wetlands, and coastlines, representing five of the 29 identified marine regions with studies underway for protected areas in three additional regions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 UNESCO Biosphere Reserve\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt; \nNational Landmarks.\nThe National Landmarks program was established in 1978 to protect specific natural features considered \"outstanding, exceptional, unique, or rare to this country. These natural features would typically be isolated entities and of scientific interest.\" The enabling legislation expired 10 years later, and was not renewed. Pingo National Landmark was the only such unit established in that time.\nProvincial parks categorized as national parks.\nProvincial and territorial parks are administered and funded by their respective governments. The province of Quebec's \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des \u00e9tablissements de plein air du Qu\u00e9bec\" (S\u00e9paq) names its protected areas \"national parks\" (). These are not part of the National Parks System administered by Parks Canada, other than Saguenay\u2013St. Lawrence Marine Park which is co-managed by both agencies.\nSome sub-national parks are categorized by the IUCN under the umbrella term \"national parks\" (Category II) in its global Protected Area Management Categories. As of 2011, there were more than 1500 Category II-listed areas across the country, including nearly 700 in B.C., and at least 500 in Ontario. Only Quebec uses the term \u201cnational park\u201d for such provincial areas, using the IUCN's category name as justification.\nIn addition to the national park system, several federal agencies manage natural, scientific, and recreational areas. In the National Capital Region, a number of parklands come under the jurisdiction of the National Capital Commission, including Gatineau Park in Quebec. None of these are part of the national park system.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44522", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44522", "title": "Transformational-Generative Grammar", "text": ""}
{"id": "44524", "revid": "383280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44524", "title": "Mutiny on the Bounty (novel)", "text": "1932 book by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall\nMutiny on the Bounty is a 1932 novel by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall, based on the mutiny against Lieutenant William Bligh, commanding officer of the \"Bounty\" in 1789. It has been made into several films and a musical. It was the first of what became \"The Bounty Trilogy\", which continues with \"Men Against the Sea\" (1933), and concludes with \"Pitcairn's Island\" (1934).\nPlot introduction.\nThe novel tells the story through a fictional first-person narrator by the name of Roger Byam, based on a crew member Peter Heywood. Byam, although not one of the mutineers, remains with the \"Bounty\" after the mutiny. He subsequently returns to Tahiti and is eventually arrested and taken back to England to face a court-martial. He and several other members of the crew are eventually acquitted.\nOther.\nAn earlier work, \"Les R\u00e9volt\u00e9s de la Bounty\" (\"The Mutineers of the Bounty\"), was published by Jules Verne in 1879.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44525", "revid": "2563820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44525", "title": "Raphael", "text": "Italian painter and architect (1483\u20131520)\nRaffaello Sanzio da Urbino (; March 28 or April 6, 1483\u00a0\u2013 April 6, 1520), now generally known in English as Raphael ( , ), was an Italian painter and architect of the High Renaissance. His work is admired for its clarity of form, ease of composition, and visual achievement of the Neoplatonic ideal of human grandeur. Together with Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, he forms the traditional trinity of great masters of that period.\nHis father Giovanni Santi was court painter to the ruler of the small but highly cultured city of Urbino. He died when Raphael was eleven, and Raphael seems to have played a role in managing the family workshop from this point. He probably trained in the workshop of Pietro Perugino, and was described as a fully trained \"master\" by 1500. He worked in or for several cities in north Italy until in 1508 he moved to Rome at the invitation of Pope Julius II, to work on the Apostolic Palace at the Vatican. He was given a series of important commissions there and elsewhere in the city, and began to work as an architect. He was still at the height of his powers at his death in 1520.\nRaphael was enormously productive, running an unusually large workshop and, despite his early death at 37, leaving a large body of work. His career falls naturally into three phases and three styles, first described by Giorgio Vasari: his early years in Umbria, then a period of about four years (1504\u20131508) absorbing the artistic traditions of Florence, followed by his last hectic and triumphant twelve years in Rome, working for two popes and their close associates. Many of his works are found in the Vatican Palace, where the frescoed Raphael Rooms were the central, and the largest, work of his career. The best known work is \"The School of Athens\" in the Vatican Stanza della Segnatura. After his early years in Rome, much of his work was executed by his workshop from his drawings, with considerable loss of quality. He was extremely influential in his lifetime, though outside Rome his work was mostly known from his collaborative printmaking.\nAfter his death, the influence of his great rival Michelangelo exceeded his until the 18th and 19th centuries, when Raphael's more serene and harmonious qualities were again regarded as the highest models. Thanks to the influence of art historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann, his work became a formative influence on Neoclassical painting, but his techniques would later be explicitly and emphatically rejected by groups such as the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.\nBackground.\nRaphael was born in the small but artistically significant central Italian city of Urbino in the Marches region, where his father Giovanni Santi was court painter to the Duke. The reputation of the court had been established by Federico da Montefeltro, a highly successful condottiere who had been created Duke of Urbino by Pope Sixtus IV \u2013 Urbino formed part of the Papal States \u2013 and who died the year before Raphael was born. The emphasis of Federico's court was more literary than artistic, but Giovanni Santi was a poet of sorts as well as a painter, and had written a rhymed chronicle of the life of Federico, and both wrote the texts and produced the decor for masque-like court entertainments. His poem to Federico shows him as keen to demonstrate awareness of the most advanced North Italian painters, and Early Netherlandish artists as well. In the very small court of Urbino he was probably more integrated into the central circle of the ruling family than most court painters.\nFederico was succeeded by his son Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, who married Elisabetta Gonzaga, daughter of the ruler of Mantua, the most brilliant of the smaller Italian courts for both music and the visual arts. Under them, the court continued as a centre for literary culture. Growing up in the circle of this small court gave Raphael the excellent manners and social skills stressed by Vasari. Court life in Urbino at just after this period was to become set as the model of the virtues of the Italian humanist court through Baldassare Castiglione's depiction of it in his classic work \"The Book of the Courtier\", published in 1528. Castiglione moved to Urbino in 1504, when Raphael was no longer based there but frequently visited, and they became good friends. Raphael became close to other regular visitors to the court: Pietro Bibbiena and Pietro Bembo, both later cardinals, were already becoming well known as writers, and would later be in Rome during Raphael's period there. Raphael mixed easily in the highest circles throughout his life, one of the factors that tended to give a misleading impression of effortlessness to his career. He did not receive a full humanistic education however; it is unclear how easily he read Latin.\nEarly life and work.\nRaphael's mother M\u00e0gia died in 1491 when he was eight, followed on August 1, 1494, by his father, who had already remarried. Raphael was thus orphaned at eleven; his formal guardian became his only paternal uncle, Bartolomeo, a priest, who subsequently engaged in litigation with his stepmother. The boy probably continued to live with his stepmother when not staying as an apprentice with a master. He had already shown talent, according to Vasari, who says that Raphael had been \"a great help to his father\". A self-portrait drawing from his teenage years shows his precocity. His father's workshop continued and, probably together with his stepmother, Raphael evidently played a part in managing it from a very early age. In Urbino, he came into contact with the works of Paolo Uccello, previously the court painter (d. 1475), and Luca Signorelli, who until 1498 was based in nearby Citt\u00e0 di Castello.\nAccording to Vasari, Raphael's father placed him in the workshop of the Umbrian master Pietro Perugino as an apprentice \"despite the tears of his mother\". The evidence of an apprenticeship comes only from Vasari and another source, and has been disputed; eight was very early for an apprenticeship to begin. An alternative theory is that the boy received at least some training from Timoteo Viti, who acted as court painter in Urbino from 1495. Most modern historians agree that Raphael at least worked as an assistant to Perugino from around 1500; the influence of Perugino on Raphael's early work is very clear: \"probably no other pupil of genius has ever absorbed so much of his master's teaching as Raphael did\", according to W\u00f6lfflin. Vasari wrote that it was impossible to distinguish between their hands at this period, but many modern art historians claim to do better and detect his hand in specific areas of works by Perugino or his workshop. Apart from stylistic closeness, their techniques are very similar as well, for example having paint applied thickly, using an oil varnish medium, in shadows and darker garments, but very thinly on flesh areas. An excess of resin in the varnish often causes cracking of areas of paint in the works of both masters. The Perugino workshop was active in both Perugia and Florence, perhaps maintaining two permanent branches. Raphael is described as a \"master\", that is to say fully trained, in December 1500.\nHis first documented work was the \"Baronci Altarpiece\" for the church of Saint Nicholas of Tolentino in Citt\u00e0 di Castello, a town halfway between Perugia and Urbino. Evangelista da Pian di Meleto, who had worked for his father, was also named in the commission. It was commissioned in 1500 and finished in 1501; now only some cut sections and a preparatory drawing remain. In the following years he painted works for other churches there, including the \"Mond Crucifixion\" (about 1503) and the Brera \"Wedding of the Virgin\" (1504), and for Perugia, such as the \"Oddi Altarpiece\". He very probably also visited Florence in this period. These are large works, some in fresco, where Raphael confidently marshals his compositions in the somewhat static style of Perugino. He also painted many small and exquisite cabinet paintings in these years, probably mostly for the connoisseurs in the Urbino court, like the \"Three Graces\" and \"St. Michael\", and he began to paint Madonnas and portraits. In 1502 he went to Siena at the invitation of another pupil of Perugino, Pinturicchio, \"being a friend of Raphael and knowing him to be a draughtsman of the highest quality\" to help with the cartoons, and very likely the designs, for a fresco series in the Piccolomini Library in Siena Cathedral. He was evidently already much in demand even at this early stage in his career.\nInfluence of Florence.\nRaphael led a \"nomadic\" life, working in various centres in Northern Italy, but spent a good deal of time in Florence, perhaps from about 1504. Although there is traditional reference to a \"Florentine period\" of about 1504\u20131508, he was possibly never a continuous resident there. He may have needed to visit the city to secure materials in any case. There is a letter of recommendation of Raphael, dated October 1504, from the mother of the next Duke of Urbino to the Gonfaloniere of Florence: \"The bearer of this will be found to be Raphael, painter of Urbino, who, being greatly gifted in his profession has determined to spend some time in Florence to study. And because his father was most worthy and I was very attached to him, and the son is a sensible and well-mannered young man, on both accounts, I bear him great love...\"\nAs earlier with Perugino and others, Raphael was able to assimilate the influence of Florentine art, whilst keeping his own developing style. Frescos in Perugia of about 1505 show a new monumental quality in the figures which may represent the influence of Fra Bartolomeo, who Vasari says was a friend of Raphael. But the most striking influence in the work of these years is Leonardo da Vinci, who returned to the city from 1500 to 1506. Raphael's figures begin to take more dynamic and complex positions, and though as yet his painted subjects are still mostly tranquil, he made drawn studies of fighting nude men, one of the obsessions of the period in Florence. Another drawing is a portrait of a young woman that uses the three-quarter length pyramidal composition of the just-completed \"Mona Lisa\", but still looks completely Raphaelesque. Another of Leonardo's compositional inventions, the pyramidal \"Holy Family\", was repeated in a series of works that remain among his most famous easel paintings. There is a drawing by Raphael in the Royal Collection of Leonardo's lost \"Leda and the Swan\", from which he adapted the contrapposto pose of his own \"Saint Catherine of Alexandria\". He also perfects his own version of Leonardo's sfumato modelling, to give subtlety to his painting of flesh, and develops the interplay of glances between his groups, which are much less enigmatic than those of Leonardo. But he keeps the soft clear light of Perugino in his paintings.\nLeonardo was more than thirty years older than Raphael, but Michelangelo, who was in Rome for this period, was just eight years his senior. Michelangelo already disliked Leonardo, and in Rome came to dislike Raphael even more, attributing conspiracies against him to the younger man. Raphael would have been aware of his works in Florence, but in his most original work of these years, he strikes out in a different direction. His \"Deposition of Christ\" draws on classical sarcophagi to spread the figures across the front of the picture space in a complex and not wholly successful arrangement. W\u00f6llflin detects in the kneeling figure on the right the influence of the Madonna in Michelangelo's \"Doni Tondo\", but the rest of the composition is far removed from his style, or that of Leonardo. Though highly regarded at the time, and much later forcibly removed from Perugia by the Borghese, it stands rather alone in Raphael's work. His classicism would later take a less literal direction.\nRoman period.\nVatican \"Stanze\".\nIn 1508, Raphael moved to Rome, where he resided for the rest of his life. He was invited by the new pope, Julius\u00a0II, perhaps at the suggestion of his architect Donato Bramante, then engaged on St. Peter's Basilica, who came from just outside Urbino and was distantly related to Raphael. Unlike Michelangelo, who had been kept lingering in Rome for several months after his first summons, Raphael was immediately commissioned by Julius to fresco what was intended to become the Pope's private library at the Vatican Palace. This was a much larger and more important commission than any he had received before; he had only painted one altarpiece in Florence itself. Several other artists and their teams of assistants were already at work on different rooms, many painting over recently completed paintings commissioned by Julius's loathed predecessor, Alexander VI, whose contributions, and arms, Julius was determined to efface from the palace. Michelangelo, meanwhile, had been commissioned to paint the Sistine Chapel ceiling.\nThis first of the famous \"Stanze\" or \"Raphael Rooms\" to be painted, now known as the \"Stanza della Segnatura\" after its use in Vasari's time, was to make a stunning impact on Roman art, and remains generally regarded as his greatest masterpiece, containing \"The School of Athens\", \"The Parnassus\" and the \"Disputa\". Raphael was then given further rooms to paint, displacing other artists including Perugino and Signorelli. He completed a sequence of three rooms, each with paintings on each wall and often the ceilings too, increasingly leaving the work of painting from his detailed drawings to the large and skilled workshop team he had acquired, who added a fourth room, probably only including some elements designed by Raphael, after his early death in 1520. The death of Julius in 1513 did not interrupt the work at all, as he was succeeded by Raphael's last pope, the Medici Pope Leo X, with whom Raphael formed an even closer relationship, and who continued to commission him. Raphael's friend Cardinal Bibbiena was also one of Leo's old tutors, and a close friend and advisor.\nIn the course of painting the room, Raphael was clearly influenced by Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel ceiling. Vasari said Bramante let him into the chapel secretly. Raphael completed the first section of his work in 1511 and the reaction of other artists to the daunting force of Michelangelo was the dominating question in Italian art for the following few decades. Raphael, who had already shown his gift for absorbing influences into his own personal style, rose to the challenge perhaps better than any other artist. One of the first and clearest instances was the portrait in \"The School of Athens\" of Michelangelo himself, as Heraclitus, which seems to draw clearly from the Sybils and \"ignudi\" of the Sistine ceiling. Other figures in that and later paintings in the room show the same influences, but as still cohesive with a development of Raphael's own style. Michelangelo accused Raphael of plagiarism and years after Raphael's death, complained in a letter that \"everything he knew about art he got from me\", although other quotations show more generous reactions.\nThese very large and complex compositions have been regarded ever since as among the supreme works of the grand manner of the High Renaissance, and the \"classic art\" of the post-antique West. They give a highly idealised depiction of the forms represented, and the compositions, though very carefully conceived in drawings, achieve \"sprezzatura\", a term invented by his friend Castiglione, who defined it as \"a certain nonchalance which conceals all artistry and makes whatever one says or does seem uncontrived and effortless ...\". According to Michael Levey, \"Raphael gives his [figures] a superhuman clarity and grace in a universe of Euclidian certainties\". The painting is nearly all of the highest quality in the first two rooms, but the later compositions in the Stanze, especially those involving dramatic action, are not entirely as successful either in conception or their execution by the workshop.\nArchitecture.\nAfter Bramante's death in 1514, Raphael was named architect of the new St Peter's. Most of his work there was altered or demolished after his death and the acceptance of Michelangelo's design, but a few drawings have survived. It appears his designs would have made the church a good deal gloomier than the final design, with massive piers all the way down the nave, \"like an alley\" according to a critical posthumous analysis by Antonio da Sangallo the Younger. It would perhaps have resembled the temple in the background of \"The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple\".\nHe designed several other buildings, and for a short time was the most important architect in Rome, working for a small circle around the Papacy. Julius had made changes to the street plan of Rome, creating several new thoroughfares, and he wanted them filled with splendid palaces.\nAn important building, the Palazzo Branconio dell'Aquila for Leo's Papal Chamberlain Giovanni Battista Branconio, was completely destroyed to make way for Bernini's \"piazza\" for St. Peter's, but drawings of the fa\u00e7ade and courtyard remain. The fa\u00e7ade was an unusually richly decorated one for the period, including both painted panels on the top story (of three), and much sculpture on the middle one.\nThe main designs for the Villa Farnesina were not by Raphael, but he did design, and decorate with mosaics, the Chigi Chapel for the same patron, Agostino Chigi, the Papal Treasurer. Another building, for Pope Leo's doctor, the Palazzo Jacopo da Brescia, was moved in the 1930s but survives; this was designed to complement a palace on the same street by Bramante, where Raphael himself lived for a time.\nThe Villa Madama, a lavish hillside retreat for Cardinal Giulio de' Medici, later Pope Clement VII, was never finished, and his full plans have to be reconstructed speculatively. He produced a design from which the final construction plans were completed by Antonio da Sangallo the Younger. Even incomplete, it was the most sophisticated villa design yet seen in Italy, and greatly influenced the later development of the genre; it appears to be the only modern building in Rome of which Palladio made a measured drawing.\nOnly some floor-plans remain for a large palace planned for himself on the new via Giulia in the rione of Regola, for which he was accumulating the land in his last years. It was on an irregular island block near the river Tiber. It seems all fa\u00e7ades were to have a giant order of pilasters rising at least two storeys to the full height of the piano nobile, \"a grandiloquent feature unprecedented in private palace design\".\nRaphael asked Marco Fabio Calvo to translate Vitruvius's \"Four Books of Architecture\" into Italian; this he received around the end of August 1514. It is preserved at the Library in Munich with handwritten margin notes by Raphael.\nAntiquity.\nIn about 1510, Raphael was asked by Bramante to judge contemporary copies of \"Laoco\u00f6n and His Sons\". In 1515, he was given powers as Prefect over all antiquities unearthed within, or a mile outside the city. Anyone excavating antiquities was required to inform Raphael within three days, and stonemasons were not allowed to destroy inscriptions without permission. Raphael wrote a letter to Pope Leo suggesting ways of halting the destruction of ancient monuments, and proposed a visual survey of the city to record all antiquities in an organised fashion. The pope intended to continue to re-use ancient masonry in the building of St Peter's, also wanting to ensure that all ancient inscriptions were recorded, and sculpture preserved, before allowing the stones to be reused.\nAccording to Marino Sanuto the Younger's diary, in 1519 Raphael offered to transport an obelisk from the Mausoleum of August to St. Peter's Square for 90,000 ducats. According to Marcantonio Michiel, Raphael's \"youthful death saddened men of letters because he was not able to furnish the description and the painting of ancient Rome that he was making, which was very beautiful\". Raphael intended to make an archaeological map of ancient Rome but this was never executed. Four archaeological drawings by the artist are preserved.\nOther painting projects.\nThe Vatican projects took most of his time, although he painted several portraits, including those of his two main patrons, the popes Julius II and his successor Leo X, the former considered one of his finest. Other portraits were of his own friends, like Castiglione, or the immediate Papal circle. Other rulers pressed for work, and King Francis I of France was sent two paintings as diplomatic gifts from the Pope. For Agostino Chigi, the hugely rich banker and papal treasurer, he painted the \"Triumph of Galatea\" and designed further decorative frescoes for his Villa Farnesina, a chapel in the church of Santa Maria della Pace and mosaics in the funerary chapel in Santa Maria del Popolo. He also designed some of the decoration for the Villa Madama, the work in both villas being executed by his workshop.\nOne of his most important papal commissions was the Raphael Cartoons (now in the Victoria and Albert Museum), a series of 10 cartoons, of which seven survive, for tapestries with scenes of the lives of Saint Paul and Saint Peter, for the Sistine Chapel. The cartoons were sent to Brussels to be woven in the workshop of Pier van Aelst. It is possible that Raphael saw the finished series before his death\u2014they were probably completed in 1520. He also designed and painted the \"Loggie\" at the Vatican, a long thin gallery then open to a courtyard on one side, decorated with Roman-style grottesche. He produced a number of significant altarpieces, including \"The Ecstasy of St. Cecilia\" and the \"Sistine Madonna\". His last work, on which he was working up to his death, was a large \"Transfiguration\", which together with \"Il Spasimo\" shows the direction his art was taking in his final years\u2014more proto-Baroque than Mannerist.\nPainting materials.\nRaphael painted several of his works on wood support (\"Madonna of the Pinks\") but he also used canvas (\"Sistine Madonna\") and he was known to employ drying oils such as linseed or walnut oils. His palette was rich and he used almost all of the then available pigments such as ultramarine, lead-tin-yellow, carmine, vermilion, madder lake, verdigris and ochres. In several of his paintings (Ansidei Madonna) he even employed the rare brazilwood lake, metallic powdered gold and even less known metallic powdered bismuth.\nWorkshop.\nVasari says that Raphael eventually had a workshop of fifty pupils and assistants, many of whom later became significant artists in their own right. This was arguably the largest workshop team assembled under any single old master painter, and much higher than the norm. They included established masters from other parts of Italy, probably working with their own teams as sub-contractors, as well as pupils and journeymen. We have very little evidence of the internal working arrangements of the workshop, apart from the works of art themselves, which are often very difficult to assign to a particular hand.\nThe most important figures were Giulio Romano, a young pupil from Rome (only about twenty-one at Raphael's death), and Gianfrancesco Penni, already a Florentine master. They were left many of Raphael's drawings and other possessions, and to some extent continued the workshop after Raphael's death. Penni did not achieve a personal reputation equal to Giulio's, as after Raphael's death he became Giulio's less-than-equal collaborator in turn for much of his subsequent career. Perino del Vaga, already a master, and Polidoro da Caravaggio, who was supposedly promoted from a labourer carrying building materials on the site, also became notable painters in their own right. Polidoro's partner, Maturino da Firenze, has, like Penni, been overshadowed in subsequent reputation by his partner. Giovanni da Udine had a more independent status, and was responsible for the decorative stucco work and grotesques surrounding the main frescoes. Most of the artists were later scattered, and some killed, by the violent Sack of Rome in 1527. This did however contribute to the diffusion of versions of Raphael's style around Italy and beyond.\nVasari emphasises that Raphael ran a very harmonious and efficient workshop, and had extraordinary skill in smoothing over troubles and arguments with both patrons and his assistants\u2014a contrast with the stormy pattern of Michelangelo's relationships with both. However though both Penni and Giulio were sufficiently skilled that distinguishing between their hands and that of Raphael himself is still sometimes difficult, there is no doubt that many of Raphael's later wall-paintings, and probably some of his easel paintings, are more notable for their design than their execution. Many of his portraits, if in good condition, show his brilliance in the detailed handling of paint right up to the end of his life.\nOther pupils or assistants include Raffaellino del Colle, Andrea Sabbatini, Bartolommeo Ramenghi, Pellegrino Aretusi, Vincenzo Tamagni, Battista Dossi, Tommaso Vincidor, Timoteo Viti (the Urbino painter), and the sculptor and architect Lorenzetto (Giulio's brother-in-law). The printmakers and architects in Raphael's circle are discussed below. It has been claimed the Flemish Bernard van Orley worked for Raphael for a time, and Luca Penni, brother of Gianfrancesco and later a member of the First School of Fontainebleau, may have been a member of the team.\nDrawings.\nRaphael was one of the finest draftsmen in the history of Western art, and used drawings extensively to plan his compositions. According to a near-contemporary, when beginning to plan a composition, he would lay out a large number of stock drawings of his on the floor, and begin to draw \"rapidly\", borrowing figures from here and there. Over forty sketches survive for the \"Disputa\" in the Stanze, and there may well have been many more originally; over four hundred sheets survive altogether. He used different drawings to refine his poses and compositions, apparently to a greater extent than most other painters, to judge by the number of variants that survive: \"... This is how Raphael himself, who was so rich in inventiveness, used to work, always coming up with four or six ways to show a narrative, each one different from the rest, and all of them full of grace and well done.\" wrote another writer after his death. For John Shearman, Raphael's art marks \"a shift of resources away from production to research and development\".\nWhen a final composition was achieved, scaled-up full-size cartoons were often made, which were then pricked with a pin and \"pounced\" with a bag of soot to leave dotted lines on the surface as a guide. He also made unusually extensive use, on both paper and plaster, of a \"blind stylus\", scratching lines which leave only an indentation, but no mark. These can be seen on the wall in \"The School of Athens\", and in the originals of many drawings. The \"Raphael Cartoons\", as tapestry designs, were fully coloured in a glue distemper medium, as they were sent to Brussels to be followed by the weavers.\nIn later works painted by the workshop, the drawings are often painfully more attractive than the paintings. Most Raphael drawings are rather precise\u2014even initial sketches with naked outline figures are carefully drawn, and later working drawings often have a high degree of finish, with shading and sometimes highlights in white. They lack the freedom and energy of some of Leonardo's and Michelangelo's sketches, but are nearly always aesthetically very satisfying. He was one of the last artists to use metalpoint (literally a sharp pointed piece of silver or another metal) extensively, although he also made superb use of the freer medium of red or black chalk. In his final years he was one of the first artists to use female models for preparatory drawings\u2014male pupils (\"garzoni\") were normally used for studies of both sexes.\nPrintmaking.\nRaphael made no prints himself, but entered into a collaboration with Marcantonio Raimondi to produce engravings to Raphael's designs, which created many of the most famous Italian prints of the century, and was important in the rise of the reproductive print. His interest was unusual in such a major artist; from his contemporaries it was only shared by Titian, who had worked much less successfully with Raimondi. A total of about fifty prints were made; some were copies of Raphael's paintings, but other designs were apparently created by Raphael purely to be turned into prints. Raphael made preparatory drawings, many of which survive, for Raimondi to translate into engraving.\nThe most famous original prints to result from the collaboration were \"Lucretia\", the \"Judgement of Paris\" and \"The Massacre of the Innocents\" (of which two virtually identical versions were engraved). Among prints of the paintings \"The Parnassus\" (with considerable differences) and \"Galatea\" were also especially well known. Outside Italy, reproductive prints by Raimondi and others were the main way that Raphael's art was experienced until the twentieth century. Baviero Carocci, called \"Il Baviera\" by Vasari, an assistant who Raphael evidently trusted with his money, ended up in control of most of the copper plates after Raphael's death, and had a successful career in the new occupation of a publisher of prints.\nPrivate life and death.\nFrom 1517 until his death, Raphael lived in the Palazzo Caprini, lying at the corner between piazza Scossacavalli and via Alessandrina in the Borgo, in rather grand style in a palace designed by Bramante. He never married, but in 1514 became engaged to Maria Bibbiena, Cardinal Bibbiena's niece; he seems to have been talked into this by his friend the cardinal, and his lack of enthusiasm seems to be shown by the marriage not having taken place before she died in 1520. He is said to have had many affairs, but a permanent fixture in his life in Rome was \"La Fornarina\", Margherita Luti, the daughter of a baker (\"fornaro\") named Francesco Luti from Siena who lived at Via del Governo Vecchio.\nHe was made a \"Groom of the Chamber\" of the Pope, which gave him status at court and an additional income, and also a knight of the Papal Order of the Golden Spur. Vasari claims that he had toyed with the ambition of becoming a cardinal, perhaps after some encouragement from Leo, which also may account for his delaying his marriage.\nRaphael died on Good Friday, April 6, 1520, which was possibly his 37th birthday. Vasari says that Raphael had also been born on a Good Friday, which in 1483 fell on March 28, and that the artist died from exhaustion brought on by unceasing romantic interests while he was working on the Loggia. Several other possibilities for his death have been raised by later historians and scientists, such as a combination of an infectious disease and bloodletting. In his acute illness, which lasted fifteen days, Raphael was composed enough to confess his sins, receive the last rites, and put his affairs in order. He dictated his will, in which he left sufficient funds for his mistress's care, entrusted to his loyal servant Baviera, and left most of his studio contents to Giulio Romano and Penni. At his request, Raphael was buried in the Pantheon.\nRaphael's funeral was extremely grand, attended by large crowds. According to a journal by Paris de Grassis, four cardinals dressed in purple carried his body, the hand of which was kissed by the Pope. The inscription on Raphael's marble sarcophagus, an elegiac distich written by Pietro Bembo, reads: \"Here lies that famous Raphael by whom Nature feared to be conquered while he lived, and when he was dying, feared herself to die.\"\nCritical reception.\nRaphael was highly admired by his contemporaries, although his influence on artistic style in his own century was less than that of Michelangelo. Mannerism, beginning at the time of his death, and later the Baroque, took art \"in a direction totally opposed\" to Raphael's qualities; \"with Raphael's death, classic art\u2014the High Renaissance\u2014subsided\", as Walter Friedl\u00e4nder put it. He was soon seen as the ideal model by those disliking the excesses of Mannerism:the opinion ...was generally held in the middle of the sixteenth century that Raphael was the ideal balanced painter, universal in his talent, satisfying all the absolute standards, and obeying all the rules which were supposed to govern the arts, whereas Michelangelo was the eccentric genius, more brilliant than any other artists in his particular field, the drawing of the male nude, but unbalanced and lacking in certain qualities, such as grace and restraint, essential to the great artist. Those, like Dolce and Aretino, who held this view were usually the survivors of Renaissance Humanism, unable to follow Michelangelo as he moved on into Mannerism. Vasari himself, despite his hero remaining Michelangelo, came to see his influence as harmful in some ways, and added passages to the second edition of the \"Lives\" expressing similar views.\nRaphael's compositions were always admired and studied, and became the cornerstone of the training of the Academies of art. His period of greatest influence was from the late 17th to late 19th centuries, when his perfect decorum and balance were greatly admired. He was seen as the best model for the history painting, regarded as the highest in the hierarchy of genres. Sir Joshua Reynolds in his \"Discourses\" praised his \"simple, grave, and majestic dignity\" and said he \"stands in general foremost of the first [i.e., best] painters\", especially for his frescoes (in which he included the \"Raphael Cartoons\"), whereas \"Michael Angelo claims the next attention. He did not possess so many excellences as Raffaelle, but those he had were of the highest kind...\" Echoing the sixteenth-century views above, Reynolds goes on to say of Raphael:\nThe excellency of this extraordinary man lay in the propriety, beauty, and majesty of his characters, his judicious contrivance of his composition, correctness of drawing, purity of taste, and the skilful accommodation of other men's conceptions to his own purpose. Nobody excelled him in that judgment, with which he united to his own observations on nature the energy of Michael Angelo, and the beauty and simplicity of the antique. To the question, therefore, which ought to hold the first rank, Raffaelle or Michael Angelo, it must be answered, that if it is to be given to him who possessed a greater combination of the higher qualities of the art than any other man, there is no doubt but Raffaelle is the first. But if, according to Longinus, the sublime, being the highest excellence that human composition can attain to, abundantly compensates the absence of every other beauty, and atones for all other deficiencies, then Michael Angelo demands the preference. Reynolds was less enthusiastic about Raphael's panel paintings, but the slight sentimentality of these made them enormously popular in the 19th century: \"We have been familiar with them from childhood onwards, through a far greater mass of reproductions than any other artist in the world has ever had...\" wrote W\u00f6lfflin, who was born in 1862, of Raphael's Madonnas.\nIn Germany, Raphael had an immense influence on religious art of the Nazarene movement and D\u00fcsseldorf school of painting in the 19th century. In contrast, in England the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood explicitly reacted against his influence (and that of his admirers such as Joshua Reynolds), seeking to return to styles that pre-dated what they saw as his baneful influence. According to a critic whose ideas greatly influenced them, John Ruskin:\nThe doom of the arts of Europe went forth from that chamber [the Stanza della Segnatura], and it was brought about in great part by the very excellencies of the man who had thus marked the commencement of decline. The perfection of execution and the beauty of feature which were attained in his works, and in those of his great contemporaries, rendered finish of execution and beauty of form the chief objects of all artists; and thenceforward execution was looked for rather than thought, and beauty rather than veracity.\nAnd as I told you, these are the two secondary causes of the decline of art; the first being the loss of moral purpose. Pray note them clearly. In medi\u00e6val art, thought is the first thing, execution the second; in modern art execution is the first thing, and thought the second. And again, in medi\u00e6val art, truth is first, beauty second; in modern art, beauty is first, truth second. The medi\u00e6val principles led up to Raphael, and the modern principles lead down from him.\nBy 1900, Raphael's popularity was surpassed by Michelangelo and Leonardo, perhaps as a reaction against the etiolated Raphaelism of 19th-century academic artists such as Bouguereau. Although art historian Bernard Berenson in 1952 termed Raphael the \"most famous and most loved\" master of the High Renaissance, art historians Leopold and Helen Ettlinger say that Raphael's lesser popularity in the 20th century is made obvious by \"the contents of art library shelves ... In contrast to volume upon volume that reproduce yet again detailed photographs of the Sistine Ceiling or Leonardo's drawings, the literature on Raphael, particularly in English, is limited to only a few books\". They conclude, nonetheless, that \"of all the great Renaissance masters, Raphael's influence is the most continuous.\"\nNotes.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44526", "revid": "1299267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44526", "title": "Notes on Muscovite Affairs", "text": "Book on 16th-century Russian customs\nNotes on Muscovite Affairs (\"Rerum Moscoviticarum Commentarii\") (1549) was a Latin book by Baron Sigismund von Herberstein on the geography, history and customs of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. The book was the main early source of knowledge about Russia in Western Europe.\nBackground.\nHerberstein was an Austrian diplomat who was twice sent to Russia as Austrian ambassador, in 1517 and 1526. Born in Vipava (German \"Wippach\"), Carniola, he was familiar with Slovene, which became important later on his mission in Russia, when he was able to communicate with ordinary Russians as Slovene and Russian are both Slavic languages.\nThese visits occurred at a time when very little was known about Russia outside the region. The few published descriptions of Russia were in some cases wildly inaccurate.\nHistorical note on Muscovy and Russia.\nThe Grand Duchy of Moscow, commonly referred to in the west as \"Muscovy\", in the 16th century was one of the Russian states which emerged after the collapse of Kievan Rus' under pressure from the Golden Horde. Beginning in the early 15th Century, the Princes of Moscow began asserting their claim as the sole inheritor of the legacy of Kievan Rus'. Moscow would annex many of the other Russian principalities and would evolve into the Tsardom of Russia under Ivan the Terrible starting in the middle of the 16th century. Russia was the region, Moscow was the state until it was formally reorganized into the Russian Tsardom in 1547. Moscow was then ruled by the Muscovite monarchy, starting with Daniel of Moscow (1282\u20131303), who founded the Principality of Moscow, which under Ivan III saw rapid expansion, and ending with Ivan IV, who claimed the title \"Tsar of Russia\" and proclaimed the Tsardom of Russia in 1547.\nIn this article, \"Russia\" and \"Muscovy\" are treated as similar entities. In land area there is not much difference between Muscovy and Russia west of the Ural Mountains. Herberstein wrote about \"Muscovy\" (region based on Moscow) because that is what it was known as in the West then. We know the area as \"Russia\", so that is how it is referred to here.\nResearch.\nHerberstein developed a keen interest in all things Russian, and researched in several ways:\nContent.\nAs a result, Herberstein was able to produce the first detailed eyewitness ethnography of Russia, encyclopedic in its scope, providing a view that was very accurate for the time of trade, religion, customs, politics, history and even a theory of Russian political culture.\nThe book contributed greatly to a European view held for several centuries of Russia as a despotic absolute monarchy. That view was not new, but previous writers had presented an idealized view. Herberstein influenced the development of his view in two ways:\nHis investigations made it clear that Muscovy, contrary to the view of fanatical loyalty, had suffered a violent political struggle and that Muscovy had emerged only very recently as the dominant power in the region. Besides the man who achieved the unification of Muscovy, Ivan III was characterized by Herberstein as a cruel tyrant, drunk, and a misogynist, far from being a ruler of great fairness and equity.\nHis description of Ivan's unification campaign was a series of banishments and forced relocations of whole populations to break the power of regional rulers. That culminated in Ivan's \"plan of ejecting all princes and others from the garrisons and fortified places\" and all formerly-independent princes of Russia \"being either moved by the grandeur of his achievements or stricken with fear, became subject to him.\". All was very much at odds with previous-perceived reality but much closer to currently-understood Russian history. Similarly, the previously-touted ideal of the fairness of the Muscovy monarchy was contrasted with Herberstein's depiction of peasants as being in \"a very wretched condition, for their goods are exposed to plunder from the nobility and soldiery\".\nTsar vs Czar.\nOne final thing for which Herberstein and his book was noted, though not widely understood, was his contribution to a spelling confusion which did not emerge until the end of the 19th century and still causes disagreement: he recorded the spelling of \"tsar\" (Russian \"\u0446\u0430\u0440\u044c\", pronounced [t\u0361s\u0251r\u02b2]) as \"czar\". This may cause confusion nowadays because the digraph \u27e8cz\u27e9 is today only used in the Polish language and is there pronounced as [t\u0361\u0283]. However, early modern German (as Herberstain spoke and wrote it) and furthermore also pre-20th century Hungarian or the 'mazurizing' dialects of Polish used \u27e8cz\u27e9 for [t\u0361s]. Contrary to what the \u27e8cz\u27e9 might suggest, all Slavonic languages pronounce the title \"tsar\" with [t\u0361s], which is always written with a simple \u27e8c\u27e9, in Latin-writing Slavic languages as well as in the transliterations of Cyrillic-writing ones. English and French moved from the \u27e8cz\u27e9 spelling to the \u27e8ts\u27e9 spelling in the 19th century.\nEnglish translations.\nMarshall Poe, who has written extensively on Herberstein and Russian history generally, uses the English title \"Notes on the Muscovites\" consistently when translating the Latin title. A slightly more precise English translation of the Latin title would be \"Notes on Muscovite Affairs\", as used for this article. There are one partial and two complete English translations of this work, the most recent one, by J. B. C. Grundy, based itself on a German version.\nExternal links and references.\nOnline editions:\nOthers:"}
{"id": "44529", "revid": "432632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44529", "title": "Notes on the Muscovites", "text": ""}
{"id": "44531", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44531", "title": "History of Portugal", "text": "The history of Portugal can be traced from circa 400,000 years ago, when the region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by \"Homo heidelbergensis\".\nThe Roman conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, which lasted almost two centuries, led to the establishment of the provinces of Lusitania in the south and Gallaecia in the north of what is now Portugal. Following the fall of Rome, Germanic tribes controlled the territory between the 5th and 8th centuries, including the Kingdom of the Suebi centred in Braga and the Visigothic Kingdom in the south.\nThe 711\u2013716 invasion by the Islamic Umayyad Caliphate conquered the Visigoth Kingdom and founded the Islamic State of Al-Andalus, gradually advancing through Iberia. In 1095, Portugal broke away from the Kingdom of Galicia. Afonso Henriques, son of the count Henry of Burgundy, proclaimed himself king of Portugal in 1139. The Algarve (the southernmost province of Portugal) was conquered from the Moors in 1249, and in 1255 Lisbon became the capital. Portugal's land boundaries have remained almost unchanged since then. During the reign of King John I, the Portuguese defeated the Castilians in a war over the throne (1385) and established a political alliance with England (by the Treaty of Windsor in 1386).\nFrom the late Middle Ages, in the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal ascended to the status of a world power during Europe's \"Age of Discovery\" as it built up a vast empire. Signs of military decline began with the Battle of Alc\u00e1cer Quibir in Morocco in 1578; this defeat led to the death of King Sebastian and the imprisonment of much of the high nobility, which had to be ransomed at great cost. This eventually led to a small interruption in Portugal's 800-year-old independence by way of a 60-year dynastic union with Spain between 1580 and the beginning of the Portuguese Restoration War led by John IV in 1640. Spain's disastrous defeat in its attempt to conquer England in 1588 by means of the Invincible Armada was also a factor, as Portugal had to contribute ships for the invasion. Further setbacks included the destruction of much of its capital city in an earthquake in 1755, occupation during the Napoleonic Wars, and the loss of its largest colony, Brazil, in 1822. From the middle of the 19th century to the late 1950s, nearly two million Portuguese left Portugal to live in Brazil and the United States.\nIn 1910, a revolution deposed the monarchy. A military coup in 1926 installed a dictatorship that remained until another coup in 1974. The new government instituted sweeping democratic reforms and granted independence to all of Portugal's African colonies in 1975. Portugal is a founding member of NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries. It entered the European Economic Community (now the European Union) in 1986.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Portugal\" derives from the combined Roman-Celtic place name Portus Cale; a settlement where present-day's conurbation of Porto and Vila Nova de Gaia (or simply, Gaia) stand, along the banks of river Douro in the north of what is now Portugal.\nPorto stems from the Latin word for port or harbour, , with the second element \"Cale\"'s meaning and precise origin being less clear. The mainstream explanation points to an ethnonym derived from the Callaeci also known as the Gallaeci peoples, who occupied the north-west of the Iberian Peninsula. The names \"Cale\" and \"Callaici\" are the origin of today's \"Gaia\" and \"Galicia\". Another theory proposes that \"Cale\" or \"Calle\" is a derivation of the Celtic word for 'port', like the Irish or Scottish Gaelic . These explanations, would require the pre-Roman language of the area to have been a branch of Q-Celtic, which is not generally accepted because the region's pre-Roman language was Gallaecian. However, scholars like Jean Markale and Tranoy propose the Celtic branches all share the same origin, and placenames such as Cale, Gal, Gaia, Calais, Galatia, Galicia, Gaelic, Gael, Gaul (), Wales, Cornwall, Wallonia and others all stem from one linguistic root. Cala is sometimes considered not Celtic, but from Late Latin \"calatum\" &gt; \"calad\" &gt; \"cala\", compare Italian , French , itself from Occitan \"cala\" \"cove, small harbour\" from a Pre-Indo-European root \"*kal\" / \"*cala\" (see \"calanque\" and maybe Galici-a &lt; \"Callaeci\" or \"Calaeci\"). Another theory claims it derives from the word \"Caladunum\", in fact an unattested compound \"*Caladunum\", that may explain the toponym Calezun in Gascony.\nA further explanation proposes \"Gatelo\" as having been the origin of present-day Braga, Santiago de Compostela, and consequently the wider regions of Northern Portugal and Galicia. A different theory has it that \"Cala\" was the name of a Celtic goddess (drawing a comparison with the Gaelic \"Cailleach\", a supernatural hag). Some French scholars believe the name may have come from , the port of the Gauls or Celts.\nAround 200 BC, the Romans took the Iberian Peninsula from the Carthaginians during the Second Punic War. In the process they conquered Cale, renaming it ('Port of Cale') and incorporating it in the province of Gaellicia with its capital in Bracara Augusta (modern day Braga, Portugal). During the Middle Ages, the region around Portus Cale became known by the Suebi and Visigoths as \"Portucale\". The name \"Portucale\" changed into \"Portugale\" during the 7th and 8th centuries. By the 9th century, \"Portugale\" was used extensively to refer to the region between the rivers Douro and Minho, the Minho flowing along what would become the northern Portugal\u2013Spain border. By the 11th and 12th centuries, \"Portugale\", \"Portugallia\", \"Portvgallo\" or \"Portvgalliae\" was already referred to as \"Portugal\".\nThe 14th-century Middle French name for the country, , which added an intrusive /n/ sound through the process of excrescence, spread to Middle English. Middle English variant spellings included , , and . The spelling is found in Chaucer's Epilogue to the Nun's Priest's Tale. These variants survive in the \"Torrent of Portyngale\", a Middle English romance composed around 1400, and \"Old Robin of Portingale\", an English Child ballad. and variants were also used in Scots and survive in the Cornish name for the country, \"\".\nEarly history.\nThe early history of Portugal is shared with the rest of the Iberian Peninsula located in southwestern Europe. The name of Portugal derives from the joined Romano-Celtic name Portus Cale. The region was settled by Pre-Celts and Celts, giving origin to peoples like the Gallaeci, Lusitanians, Celtici and Cynetes (also known as Conii). Some coastal areas were visited by Phoenicians-Carthaginians and Ancient Greeks. It was incorporated in the Roman Republic dominions as Lusitania and part of Gallaecia, after 45 BC until 298 AD.\nPrehistory.\nThe region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by humans since circa 400,000 years ago, when Homo heidelbergensis entered the area. The oldest human fossil found in Portugal is the 400,000-year-old \"Aroeira 3\" \"H. Heidelbergensis\" skull discovered in the Cave of Aroeira in 2014. Later Neanderthals roamed the northern Iberian peninsula and a tooth has been found at Nova da Columbeira cave in Estremadura. Homo sapiens sapiens arrived in Portugal around 35,000 years ago, spreading and roaming the border-less region of the northern Iberian peninsula. These were subsistence societies and although they did not establish prosperous settlements, they did form organized societies. Neolithic Portugal experimented with domestication of herding animals, the raising of some cereal crops and fluvial or marine fishing.\nPre-Celtic tribes inhabited Portugal leaving a cultural footprint. The Cynetes developed a written language, leaving many stelae, which are mainly found in the south of Portugal. Early in the first millennium BC, waves of Celts invaded Portugal from Central Europe and inter-married with the local populations, forming different tribes. Another theory suggests that Celts inhabited western Iberia / Portugal well before any large Celtic migrations from Central Europe. A number of linguists expert in ancient Celtic have presented compelling evidence that the Tartessian language, once spoken in parts of SW Spain and SW Portugal, is at least proto-Celtic in structure.\nThe Celtic presence in Portugal is traceable, in broad outline, through archaeological and linguistic evidence. They dominated much of northern and central Portugal; but in the south, they were unable to establish their stronghold, which retained its non-Indo-European character until the Roman conquest. In southern Portugal, some small, semi-permanent commercial coastal settlements were also founded by Phoenician-Carthaginians.\nModern archaeology and research shows a Portuguese root to the Celts in Portugal and elsewhere. During that period and until the Roman invasions, the Castro culture (a variation of the Urnfield culture also known as \"Urnenfelderkultur\") was prolific in Portugal and modern Galicia. This culture, together with the surviving elements of the Atlantic megalithic culture and the contributions that come from the more Western Mediterranean cultures, ended up in what has been called the Cultura Castreja or Castro Culture. This designation refers to the characteristic Celtic populations called 'd\u00f9n', 'd\u00f9in' or 'don' in Gaelic and that the Romans called castrae in their chronicles.\nBased on the Roman chronicles about the Callaeci peoples, along with the Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn narrations and the interpretation of the archaeological remains throughout the northern half of Portugal and Galicia, it is possible to infer that there was a matriarchal society, with a military and religious aristocracy probably of the feudal type.\n The figures of maximum authority were the chieftain (chefe tribal), of military type and with authority in his Castro or clan, and the druid, mainly referring to medical and religious functions that could be common to several castros. The Celtic cosmogony remained homogeneous due to the ability of the druids to meet in councils with the druids of other areas, which ensured the transmission of knowledge and the most significant events.\nThe first documentary references to Castro society are provided by chroniclers of Roman military campaigns such as Strabo, Herodotus and Pliny the Elder among others, about the social organization, and describing the inhabitants of these territories, the Gallaeci of Northern Portugal as: \"A group of barbarians who spend the day fighting and the night eating, drinking and dancing under the moon.\"\nThere were other similar tribes, and chief among them were the Lusitanians; the core area of these people lay in inland central Portugal, while numerous other related tribes existed such as the Celtici of Alentejo, and the Cynetes or Conii of the Algarve. Among the tribes or sub-divisions were the Bracari, Coelerni, Equaesi, Grovii, Interamici, Leuni, Luanqui, Limici, Narbasi, Nemetati, Paesuri, Quaquerni, Seurbi, Tamagani, Tapoli, Turduli, Turduli Veteres, Turduli Oppidani, Turodi, and Zoelae. A few small, semi-permanent, commercial coastal settlements (such as Tavira) were also founded in the Algarve region by Phoenicians\u2013Carthaginians.\nAncient history.\nNumerous pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula inhabited the territory when a Roman invasion occurred in the 3rd century BC. The Romanization of Hispania took several centuries. The Roman provinces that covered present-day Portugal were Lusitania in the south and Gallaecia in the north.\nNumerous Roman sites are scattered around present-day Portugal. Some of the urban remains are quite large, such as Con\u00edmbriga and Mir\u00f3briga. Several works of engineering, such as baths, temples, bridges, roads, circuses, theatres, and layman's homes are preserved throughout the country. Coins, sarcophagi, and ceramics are also numerous.\nFollowing the fall of Rome, the Kingdom of the Suebi and the Visigothic Kingdom controlled the territory between the 5th and 8th centuries.\nRomanization.\nRomanization began with the arrival of the Roman army in the Iberian Peninsula in 218 BC during the Second Punic War against Carthage. The Romans sought to conquer Lusitania, a territory that included all of modern Portugal south of the Douro river and Spanish Extremadura, with its capital at Emerita Augusta (now M\u00e9rida).\nMining was the primary factor that made the Romans interested in conquering the region: one of Rome's strategic objectives was to cut off Carthaginian access to the Iberian copper, tin, gold, and silver mines. The Romans intensely exploited the Aljustrel (Vipasca) and Santo Domingo mines in the Iberian Pyrite Belt which extends to Seville.\nWhile the south of what is now Portugal was relatively easily occupied by the Romans, the conquest of the north was achieved only with difficulty due to resistance from Serra da Estrela by Celts and Lusitanians led by Viriatus, who managed to resist Roman expansion for years. Viriatus, a shepherd from Serra da Estrela who was expert in guerrilla tactics, waged relentless war against the Romans, defeating several successive Roman generals, until he was assassinated in 140 BC by traitors bought by the Romans. Viriatus has long been hailed as the first truly heroic figure in proto-Portuguese history. Nonetheless, he was responsible for raids into the more settled Romanized parts of Southern Portugal and Lusitania that involved the victimization of the inhabitants.\nThe conquest of the Iberian Peninsula was complete two centuries after the Roman arrival, when they defeated the remaining Cantabri, Astures and Gallaeci in the Cantabrian Wars in the time of Emperor Augustus (19 BC). In 74 AD, Vespasian granted Latin Rights to most municipalities of Lusitania. In 212 AD, the Constitutio Antoniniana gave Roman citizenship to all free subjects of the empire and, at the end of the century, the emperor Diocletian founded the province of Gallaecia, which included modern-day northern Portugal, with its capital at Bracara Augusta (now Braga). As well as mining, the Romans also developed agriculture, on some of the best agricultural land in the empire. In what is now Alentejo, vines and cereals were cultivated, and fishing was intensively pursued in the coastal belt of the Algarve, P\u00f3voa de Varzim, Matosinhos, Troia and the coast of Lisbon, for the manufacture of garum that was exported by Roman trade routes to the entire empire. Business transactions were facilitated by coinage and the construction of an extensive road network, bridges and aqueducts, such as Trajan's bridge in Aquae Flaviae (now Chaves).\nRoman rule brought geographical mobility to the inhabitants of Portugal and increased their interaction with the rest of the world as well as internally. Soldiers often served in different regions and eventually settled far from their birthplace, while the development of mining attracted migration into the mining areas. The Romans founded numerous cities, such as Olisipo (Lisbon), Bracara Augusta (Braga), Aeminium (Coimbra) and Pax Julia (Beja), and left important cultural legacies in what is now Portugal. Vulgar Latin (the basis of the Portuguese language) became the dominant language of the region, and Christianity spread throughout Lusitania from the third century.\nGermanic invasions.\nThe Suebi.\nIn 409, with the decline of the Roman Empire, the Iberian Peninsula was occupied by Germanic tribes that the Romans referred to as barbarians. In 411, with a federation contract with Emperor Honorius, many of these people settled in Hispania. An important group was made up of the Suebi and Vandals in Gallaecia, who founded the Kingdom of the Suebi with its capital in Braga. They came to dominate Aeminium (Coimbra) as well, and there were Visigoths to the south. The Suebi and the Visigoths were the Germanic tribes who had the most lasting presence in the territories corresponding to modern Portugal. As elsewhere in Western Europe, there was a decline in urban life during the Dark Ages.\nRoman institutions declined in the wake of the Germanic invasions with the exception of ecclesiastical organizations, which were fostered by the Suebi in the fifth century and adopted by the Visigoths afterwards. Although the Suebi and Visigoths were initially followers of Arianism and Priscillianism, they adopted Catholicism from the local inhabitants. St. Martin of Braga was a particularly influential evangelist at this time.\nThe Kingdom of the Suebi was the Germanic post-Roman kingdom, established in the former Roman provinces of Gallaecia-Lusitania. 5th-century vestiges of Alan settlements were found in Alenquer (from old Germanic \"Alan kerk\", \"temple of the Alans\"), Coimbra and Lisbon.\nKing Hermeric made a peace treaty with the Gallaecians before passing his domains to Rechila, his son. In 429, the Visigoths moved south to expel the Alans and Vandals and founded a kingdom with its capital in Toledo. In 448 Rechila died, leaving the state in expansion to Rechiar. Subsequently, this new king started to print coins under his own name, becoming the first of the Germanic kings to do so, and then was baptised to Nicene Christianity, probably by the Bishop Balconius, also becoming the first of the Germanic kings to do so, even before Clovis, king of the Franks. This bellicose king, almost conquered the whole of Hispania, taking many prisoners and several important cities, but failed to consolidate his conquest over the territory and didn't even come near Tarragona.\nAfter the assassination of the patrician Flavius A\u00ebtius, Rechiar attempted, yet again, to conquer the whole of the peninsula, however his ambitions were derailed by the invading Visigoths under their king and Roman \"foederatus\" Theodoric II acting on the orders of the emperor Avitus. This led to a resounding defeat of the Suebian kingdom, with Rechiar fleeing wounded from Braga, only to be captured at Oporto and executed in December of 456 (d.C.). The realm was then divided, with Frantan and Aguiulfo ruling simultaneously. Both reigned from 456 to 457, the year in which Maldras (457\u2013459) reunified the kingdom. He was assassinated after a failed Roman-Visigothic conspiracy.\nAlthough the conspiracy did not achieve its true purposes, the Suebian Kingdom was again divided between two kings:\nFrumar (Frumario 459\u2013463) and Remismund (Remismundo, son of Maldras) (459\u2013469) who would re-reunify his father's kingdom in 463. He would be forced to adopt Arianism in 465 due to the Visigoth influence. From 470, conflict between the Suebi and Visigoths increased.\nAccording to Dan Stanislawski, the Portuguese way of life in the north, with its predominance of small rural properties, was inherited from the Suebi, unlike the south of Portugal, where large estates dominated. The Suevi are also credited with introducing the square plow to the Iberian Peninsula.\nThe Visigoths.\nBy 500, the Visigothic Kingdom had been installed in Iberia, it was based in Toledo and advancing westwards. They became a threat to the Suebian rule.\nAfter the death of Remismund in 469 a dark period set in, where virtually all written texts and accounts disappear. This period lasted until 550. The only thing known about this period is that Theodemund (Teodemundo) most likely ruled the Suebians.\nThe dark period ended with the reign of Karriarico (550\u2013559) who reinstalled Catholic Christianity in 550. He was succeeded by Theodemar (559\u2013570) during whose reign the 1st Council of Braga (561) was held. After the death of Theodemar, Miro (570\u2013583) was his successor. During his reign, the 2nd Council of Braga (572) was held. The councils represented an advance in the organization of the territory (paroeciam suevorum (Suebian parish) and the Christianization of the pagan population (\"De correctione rusticorum\") under the auspices of Saint Martin of Braga (S\u00e3o Martinho de Braga).\nThe Visigothic civil war began in 577, in which Miro intervened. Later, in 583, he also organized an unsuccessful expedition to reconquer Seville. During the return from this failed campaign Miro died, thereby ending the prominence of the Suebi in Hispanic politics, and in two years the kingdom would be conquered by the Visigoths.\nIn the Suebian Kingdom many internal struggles continued to take place. Eborico (Eurico, 583\u2013584) was dethroned by Andeca (Audeca 584\u2013585), who failed to prevent the Visigothic invasion led by Liuvigild. The Visigothic invasion, completed in 585, turned the once rich and fertile kingdom of the Suebi into the sixth province of the Visigothic kingdom.\nLeovigild was crowned King of Gallaecia, Hispania and Gallia Narbonensis.\nFor the next 300 years and by the year 700, the entire Iberian Peninsula was ruled by the Visigoths. With the Visigoths settled in the newly formed kingdom, a new class emerged that had been unknown in Roman times: a nobility, which played a large social and political role during the Middle Ages. It was under the Visigoths that the Church began to play an important part within the state. Since the Visigoths did not learn Latin from the local people, they had to rely on Catholic bishops to continue the Roman system of governance. The laws established during the Visigothic monarchy were thus made by councils of bishops, and the clergy started to emerge as a high-ranking class.\nUnder the Visigoths, Gallaecia was a well-defined space governed by a doge of its own. Doges at this time were related to the monarchy and acted as princes in all matters. Both 'governors' Wamba and Wittiza (Vitiza) acted as doge (they would later become kings in Toledo). These two became known as the 'vitizians', who headquartered in the northwest and called on the Arab invaders from the South to be their allies in the struggle for power in 711. King Roderic (Rodrigo) was killed while opposing this invasion, thus becoming the last Visigothic king of Iberia. From the various Germanic groups who settled in western Iberia, the Suebi left the strongest lasting cultural legacy in what is today Portugal, Galicia and western fringes of Asturias.\nAccording to Dan Stanislawski, the Portuguese way of living in regions North of the Tagus is mostly inherited from the Suebi, in which small farms prevail, distinct from the large properties of Southern Portugal.\nBracara Augusta, the modern city of Braga and former capital of Gallaecia, became the capital of the Suebi. Apart from cultural and some linguistic traces, the Suebians left the highest Germanic genetic contribution of the Iberian Peninsula in Portugal and Galicia. Orosius, at that time resident in Hispania, shows a rather pacific initial settlement, the newcomers working their lands or serving as bodyguards of the locals.\nAnother Germanic group that accompanied the Suebi and settled in Gallaecia were the Buri. They settled in the region between the rivers \"C\u00e1vado\" and \"Homem\", in the area known as Terras de Bouro (Lands of the Buri).\nAl-Andalus (711\u2013868).\nDuring the caliphate of the Umayyad Caliph Al-Walid I, commander Tariq ibn-Ziyad led a small force that landed at Gibraltar on 30 April 711, ostensibly to intervene in a Visigothic civil war. After a decisive victory over King Roderic at the Battle of Guadalete on 19 July 711, Tariq ibn-Ziyad, joined by the Arab governor Musa ibn Nusayr of Ifriqiya, brought most of the Visigothic kingdom under Muslim occupation in a seven-year campaign. The Visigothic resistance to this invasion was ineffective, though sieges were required to sack a couple of cities. This is in part because the ruling Visigoth population is estimated at a mere 1 to 2% of the total population. On one hand this isolation is said to have been 'a reasonably strong and effective instrument of government'; on the other, it was highly 'centralised to the extent that the defeat of the royal army left the entire land open to the invaders. The resulting power vacuum, which may have indeed caught Tariq completely by surprise, would have aided the Muslim conquest immensely. Indeed, it may have been equally welcome to the Hispano-Roman peasants who\u00a0\u2013 as D.W. Lomax claims\u00a0\u2013 were disillusioned by the prominent legal, linguistic and social divide between them and the 'barbaric' and 'decadent' Visigoth royalty.\nThe Visigothic territories included what is today Spain, Portugal, Andorra, Gibraltar, and the southwestern part of France known in ancient times as Septimania. The invading Moors wanted to conquer and convert all of Europe to Islam, so they crossed the Pyrenees to use Visigothic Septimania as a base of operations. Muslims called their conquests in Iberia 'al-Andalus' and in what was to become Portugal, they mainly consisted of the old Roman province of Lusitania (the central and southern regions of the country), while Gallaecia (the northern regions) remained unsubdued. Until the Berber revolt in the 730s, al-Andalus was treated as a dependency of Umayyad North Africa. Subsequently, links were strained until the caliphate was overthrown in the late 740s. The Medieval Muslim Moors, who conquered and destroyed the Christian Visigothic kingdom in the Iberian Peninsula, were a mix of Berbers from North Africa and Arabs from the Middle East.\nBy 714 \u00c9vora, Santar\u00e9m and Coimbra had been conquered, and two years later Lisbon was in Muslim control. By 718 most of today's Portuguese territory was under Umayyad rule. The Umayyads eventually stopped in Poitiers but Muslim rule in Iberia would last until 1492 with the fall of the Kingdom of Granada. For the next several centuries, much of the Iberian Peninsula remained under Umayyad rule. Much of the populace was allowed to remain Christian, and many of the lesser feudal rulers worked out deals where they would submit to Umayyad rule in order to remain in power. They would pay a jizya tax, kill or turn over rebels, and in return receive support from the central government. But some regions, including Lisbon, Gharb Al-Andalus, and the rest of what would become Portugal, rebelled, succeeded in freeing themselves by the early 10th century\nReconquista.\nIn 718 AD, a Visigothic noble named Pelagius was elected leader by the ousted Visigoth nobles. Pelagius called for the remnant of the Christian Visigothic armies to rebel against the Moors and re-group in the unconquered northern Asturian highlands, better known today as the Cantabrian Mountains, a mountain region in modern northwestern Spain adjacent to the Bay of Biscay. He planned to use the Cantabrian Mountain range as a place of refuge and protection from the invaders and as a springboard to reconquer lands from the Moors. After defeating the Moors in the Battle of Covadonga in 722 AD, Pelagius was proclaimed king to found the Christian Kingdom of Asturias and start the war of reconquest known in Portuguese (and Spanish) as the \"Reconquista\".\nCurrently, historians and archaeologists generally agree that northern Portugal between the Minho and the Douro rivers kept a significant share of its population, a social and political Christian area that until the late 9th century had no acting state powers. However, in the late 9th century, the region became part of a complex of powers, the Galician-Asturian, Leonese and Portuguese power structures.\nThe coastal regions in the North were also attacked by Norman and Viking raiders mainly from 844. The last great invasion, through the Minho (river), ended with the defeat of Olaf II Haraldsson in 1014 against the Galician nobility who also stopped further advances into the County of Portugal.\nCreation of the County of Portugal.\nAt the end of the 9th century, a small minor county based in the area of Portus Cale was established by V\u00edmara Peres on the orders of King Alfonso III of Le\u00f3n, Galicia and Asturias. After annexing the County of Portugal into one of the several counties that made up its realms, King Alfonso III named V\u00edmara Peres as its first count. Since the rule of Count Diogo Fernandes, the county increased in size and importance and, from the 10th century onward, with Count Gon\u00e7alo Mendes as \"Magnus Dux Portucalensium\" (Grand Duke of the Portuguese), the Portuguese counts started using the title of duke, indicating even larger importance and territory. The region became known simultaneously as \"Portucale\", \"Portugale\", and \"Portugalia\"\u00a0\u2013 the County of Portugal. The Kingdom of Asturias was later divided as a result of dynastic disputes; the northern region of Portugal became part of the Kingdom of Galicia and later part of the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n.\nSuebi-Visigothic arts and architecture, in particular sculpture, had shown a natural continuity with the Roman period. With the Reconquista, new artistic trends took hold, with Galician-Asturian influences more visible than the Leonese. The Portuguese group was characterized by a general return to classicism. The county courts of Viseu and Coimbra played a very important role in this process. Mozarabic architecture was found in the south, in Lisbon and beyond, while in the Christian realms Galician-Portuguese and Asturian architecture prevailed.\nAs a vassal of the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n, Portugal grew in power and territory and occasionally gained \"de facto\" independence during weak Leonese reigns; Count Mendo Gon\u00e7alves even became regent of the Kingdom of Leon between 999 and 1008. In 1070, the Portuguese Count Nuno Mendes desired the Portuguese title and fought the Battle of Pedroso on 18 February 1071 with Garcia II of Galicia, who gained the Galician title, which included Portugal, after the 1065 partition of the Leonese realms. The battle resulted in Nuno Mendes' death and the declaration of Garcia as King of Portugal, the first person to claim this title. Garcia styled himself as \"King of Portugal and Galicia\" (\"Garcia Rex Portugallie et Galleciae\"). Garcia's brothers, Sancho II of Castile and Alfonso VI of Leon, united and annexed Garcia's kingdom in 1071 as well. They agreed to split it among themselves; however, Sancho was killed by a noble the next year. Alfonso took Castile for himself and Garcia recovered his kingdom of Portugal and Galicia. In 1073, Alfonso VI gathered all power, and beginning in 1077, styled himself \"Imperator totius Hispani\u00e6\" (Emperor of All Hispania). When the emperor died, the Crown was left to his daughter Urraca, while his illegitimate daughter Teresa inherited the County of Portugal; in 1095, Portugal broke away from the Kingdom of Galicia. Its territories, consisting largely of mountains, moorland and forests, were bounded on the north by the Minho River, and on the south by the Mondego River.\nFoundation of the Kingdom of Portugal.\nAt the end of the 11th century, the Burgundian knight Henry became count of Portugal and defended its independence by merging the County of Portugal and the County of Coimbra. His efforts were assisted by a civil war that raged between Le\u00f3n and Castile and distracted his enemies. Henry's son Afonso Henriques took control of the county upon his death. The city of Braga, the unofficial Catholic centre of the Iberian Peninsula, faced new competition from other regions. Lords of the cities of Coimbra and Porto fought with Braga's clergy and demanded the independence of the reconstituted county.\nPortugal traces its national origin to 24 June 1128, the date of the Battle of S\u00e3o Mamede. Afonso proclaimed himself \"Prince of Portugal\" after this battle and in 1139, he assumed the title \"King of Portugal\". In 1143, the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n recognised him as King of Portugal by the Treaty of Zamora. In 1179, the papal bull Manifestis Probatum of Pope Alexander III officially recognised Afonso I as king. After the Battle of S\u00e3o Mamede, the first capital of Portugal was Guimar\u00e3es, from which the first king ruled. Later, when Portugal was already officially independent, he ruled from Coimbra.\nAffirmation of Portugal.\nThe Algarve, the southernmost region of Portugal, was finally conquered from the Moors in 1249, and in 1255 the capital shifted to Lisbon. Spain finally completed its \"Reconquista\" until 1492, almost 250 years later. Portugal's land boundaries have been notably stable for the rest of the country's history. The border with Spain has remained almost unchanged since the 13th century. The Treaty of Windsor (1386) created an alliance between Portugal and England that remains in effect to this day. Since early times, fishing and overseas commerce have been the main economic activities.\nIn 1383, John I of Castile, husband of Beatrice of Portugal and son-in-law of Ferdinand I of Portugal, claimed the throne of Portugal. A faction of petty noblemen and commoners, led by John of Aviz (later King John I of Portugal) and commanded by General Nuno \u00c1lvares Pereira defeated the Castilians in the Battle of Aljubarrota. With this battle, the House of Aviz became the ruling house of Portugal.\nThe new ruling dynasty would proceed to push Portugal to the limelight of European politics and culture, creating and sponsoring works of literature, like the \"Cr\u00f3nicas d'el Rei D. Jo\u00e3o I\" by Fern\u00e3o Lopes, the first riding and hunting manual \"Livro da ensinan\u00e7a de bem cavalgar toda sela\" and \"O Leal Conselheiro\" both by King Edward of Portugal and the Portuguese translations of Cicero's \"De Oficiis\" and Seneca's \"De Beneficiis\" by the well traveled Prince Peter of Coimbra, as well as his magnum opus \"Tratado da Vertuosa Benfeytoria\". In an effort of solidification and centralization of royal power the monarchs of this dynasty also ordered the compilation, organization and publication of the first three compilations of laws in Portugal: the \"Ordena\u00e7\u00f5es d'el Rei D. Duarte\", which was never enforced; the \"Ordena\u00e7\u00f5es Afonsinas,\" whose application and enforcement was not uniform across the realm; and the \"Ordena\u00e7\u00f5es Manuelinas\", which took advantage of the printing press to reach every corner of the kingdom. The Avis Dynasty also sponsored works of architecture like the \"Mosteiro da Batalha\" (literally, the Monastery of the Battle) and led to the creation of the manueline style of architecture in the 16th century.\nNaval exploration and Portuguese Empire (15th\u201316th centuries).\nDuring the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal became a leading European power that ranked with England, France and Spain in terms of economic, political and cultural influence. Though not dominant in European affairs, Portugal did have an extensive colonial trading empire throughout the world backed by a powerful thalassocracy. Portugal was a pioneer in, and major beneficiary of, the Atlantic slave trade, leading to nearly four centuries of Slavery in Portugal. \nThe beginnings of the Portuguese Empire can be traced to 25 July 1415, when the Portuguese Armada set sail for the rich Islamic trading center of Ceuta in North Africa. The Armada was accompanied by King John I, his sons Prince Duarte (a future king), Prince Pedro, and Prince Henry the Navigator, and the legendary Portuguese hero Nuno \u00c1lvares Pereira. On 21 August 1415, Ceuta was conquered by Portugal, and the long-lived Portuguese Empire was founded.\nThe conquest of Ceuta was facilitated by a major civil war that had been engaging the Muslims of the Maghreb (North Africa) since 1411. This civil war prevented a re-capture of Ceuta from the Portuguese, when the king of Granada Muhammed IX, the Left-Handed, laid siege to Ceuta and attempted to coordinate forces in Morocco and attract aid and assistance for the effort from Tunis. The Muslim attempt to retake Ceuta was ultimately unsuccessful and Ceuta remained the first part of the new Portuguese Empire. Further steps were taken that soon expanded the Portuguese Empire much further.\nIn 1418, two of Prince Henry the Navigator's captains, Jo\u00e3o Gon\u00e7alves Zarco and Trist\u00e3o Vaz Teixeira, were driven by a storm to an island that they called Porto Santo (\"Holy Port\") in gratitude for their rescue from the shipwreck. In 1419, Jo\u00e3o Gon\u00e7alves Zarco disembarked on the Island of Madeira. Uninhabited Madeira was colonized by the Portuguese in 1420.\nBetween 1427 and 1431, most of the Azores were discovered and these uninhabited islands were colonized by the Portuguese in 1445. Portuguese expeditions may have attempted to colonize the Canary Islands as early as 1336, but the Crown of Castile objected to any Portuguese claim to them. Castile began its own conquest of the Canaries in 1402. Castile expelled the last Portuguese from the Canary islands in 1459, and they eventually became part of the Spanish Empire.\nIn 1434, Gil Eanes passed Cape Bojador, south of Morocco. The trip marked the beginning of the Portuguese exploration of Africa. Before this event, very little was known in Europe about what lay beyond the cape. At the end of the 13th century and the beginning of the 14th, those who tried to venture there became lost, which gave birth to legends of sea monsters. Some setbacks occurred: in 1436 the Canaries were officially recognized as Castilian by the pope\u00a0\u2013 earlier they had been recognized as Portuguese; in 1438, the Portuguese were defeated in a military expedition to Tangier.\nThese setbacks did not deter the Portuguese from pursuing their exploratory efforts. In 1448, on the small island of Arguim off the coast of Mauritania, an important castle was built to function as a \"feitoria\", or trading post, for commerce with inland Africa. Some years before, the first African gold was brought to Portugal that circumvented the Arab caravans that crossed the Sahara. Some time later, the caravels explored the Gulf of Guinea, which led to the discovery of several uninhabited islands: Cape Verde, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9, Pr\u00edncipe and Annob\u00f3n.\nOn 13 November 1460, Prince Henry the Navigator died. He had been the leading patron of maritime exploration by Portugal and immediately following his death, exploration lapsed. Henry's patronage had shown that profits could be made from the trade that followed the discovery of new lands. Accordingly, when exploration commenced again, private merchants led the way in attempting to stretch trade routes further down the African coast.\nIn the 1470s, Portuguese trading ships reached the Gold Coast. In 1471, the Portuguese captured Tangier, after years of attempts. Eleven years later, the fortress of S\u00e3o Jorge da Mina in the town of Elmina on the Gold Coast in the Gulf of Guinea was built. Christopher Columbus set sail aboard the fleet of ships taking materials and building crews to Elmina in December 1481. In 1483, Diogo C\u00e3o reached and explored the Congo River.\nDiscovery of the sea route to India and the Treaty of Tordesillas.\nIn 1484, Portugal officially rejected Columbus' idea of reaching India from the west, because it was seen as unfeasible. Some historians have claimed that the Portuguese had already performed fairly accurate calculations concerning the size of the world and therefore knew that sailing west to reach the Indies would require a far longer journey than navigating to the east. However, this continues to be debated. Thus began a long-lasting dispute that eventually resulted in the signing of the Treaty of Tordesillas with Castile in 1494. The treaty divided the (largely undiscovered) New World equally between the Portuguese and the Castilians, along a north\u2013south meridian line 370 leagues (1770\u00a0km/1100 miles) west of the Cape Verde islands, with all lands to the east belonging to Portugal and all lands to the west to Castile.\nWith the expedition beyond the Cape of Good Hope by Bartolomeu Dias in 1487, the richness of India was now accessible. Indeed, the cape takes its name from the promise of rich trade with the east. Between 1498 and 1501, Pero de Barcelos and Jo\u00e3o Fernandes Lavrador explored North America. At the same time, Pero da Covilh\u00e3 reached Ethiopia by land. Vasco da Gama sailed for India and arrived at Calicut on 20 May 1498, returning in glory to Portugal the next year. The Monastery of Jer\u00f3nimos was built, dedicated to the discovery of the route to India.\nIn 1492, after the expulsion of Jews from Spain, many sought refuge in Portugal, which allowed their entry for a high ransom, with the condition they leave by April 1493. In 1495, King Manuel I of Portugal, aiming to strengthen ties with Spain, agreed to expel the Jews as part of his marriage negotiations with Isabella of Aragon. Having preferred that the Jews remain due to their wealth and skills, he ultimately decided on forced conversions after most Jews chose exile. In March 1497, he ordered the abduction of Jewish children under 14 to be raised by Christian families. By October 1497, most adult Jews were forcibly baptized in Lisbon. Some Jews chose suicide, while others fled to North Africa, with those outside Lisbon also baptized by force in other cities. Despite knowing the conversions were insincere, Manuel hoped the Jews would eventually become true Christians. Nevertheless, Many Jews remained secretly Jewish, in danger of persecution by the Portuguese Inquisition. In 1506, 3,000 New Christians were massacred in Lisbon.\nIn early 1500, Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral set sail from Cape Verde with 13 ships and crews and nobles such as Nicolau Coelho; the explorer Bartolomeu Dias and his brother Diogo; Duarte Pacheco Pereira (author of the \"Esmeraldo\"); nine chaplains; and some 1,200 men. From Cape Verde, they sailed southwest across the Atlantic. On 22 April 1500, they caught sight of land in the distance. They disembarked and claimed this new land for Portugal. This was the coast of what later became the Portuguese colony of Brazil.\nThe real goal of the expedition was to open sea trade to the empires of the east. Trade with the east had effectively been cut off since the Conquest of Constantinople in 1453. Accordingly, Cabral turned away from exploring the coast of the new land of Brazil and sailed southeast, back across the Atlantic and around the Cape of Good Hope. Cabral reached Sofala on the east coast of Africa in July 1500. In 1505, a Portuguese fort was established here and the land around the fort later formed the Portuguese colony of Mozambique.\nCabral's fleet then sailed east and landed in Calicut in India in September 1500. Here they traded for pepper and opened European sea trade with the empires of the east. No longer would the Muslim Ottoman occupation of Constantinople form a barrier between Europe and the east. Ten years later, in 1510, Afonso de Albuquerque, after attempting and failing to capture and occupy Zamorin's Calicut militarily, conquered Goa on the west coast of India.\nJo\u00e3o da Nova discovered Ascension Island in 1501 and Saint Helena in 1502; Trist\u00e3o da Cunha was the first to sight the archipelago still known by his name in 1506. In 1505, Francisco de Almeida was engaged to improve Portuguese trade with the far east. Accordingly, he sailed to East Africa. Several small Islamic states along the coast of Mozambique\u00a0\u2013 Kilwa, Brava and Mombasa\u00a0\u2013 were destroyed or became subjects or allies of Portugal. Almeida then sailed on to Cochin, made peace with the ruler and built a stone fort there.\nPortuguese Empire.\nBy the 16th century, the two million people who lived in the original Portuguese lands ruled a vast empire with many millions of inhabitants in the Americas, Africa, the Middle East and Asia. From 1514, the Portuguese had reached China and Japan. In the Indian Ocean and Arabian Sea, one of Cabral's ships discovered Madagascar (1501), which was partly explored by Trist\u00e3o da Cunha (1507); Mauritius was discovered in 1507, Socotra occupied in 1506, and in the same year, Louren\u00e7o de Almeida visited Ceylon.\nIn the Red Sea, Massawa was the most northerly point frequented by the Portuguese until 1541, when a fleet under Estev\u00e3o da Gama penetrated as far as Suez. Hormuz, in the Persian Gulf, was seized by Afonso de Albuquerque in 1515, who also entered into diplomatic relations with Persia. In 1521, a force under Antonio Correia conquered Bahrain and ushered in a period of almost 80 years of Portuguese rule of the Persian Gulf archipelago\nOn the Asiatic mainland, the first trading stations were established by Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral at Cochin and Calicut (1501). More important were the conquests of Goa (1510) and Malacca (1511) by Afonso de Albuquerque, and the acquisition of Diu (1535) by Martim Afonso de Sousa. East of Malacca, Albuquerque sent Duarte Fernandes as envoy to Siam (now Thailand) in 1511 and dispatched to the Moluccas two expeditions (1512, 1514), which founded the Portuguese dominion in Maritime Southeast Asia. The Portuguese established their base in the Spice Islands on the island of Ambon. Fern\u00e3o Pires de Andrade visited Canton in 1517 and opened up trade with China, where, in 1557, the Portuguese were permitted to occupy Macau. Japan, accidentally reached by three Portuguese traders in 1542, soon attracted large numbers of merchants and missionaries. In 1522, one of the ships in the expedition that Ferdinand Magellan organized in the Spanish service completed the first circumnavigation of the globe.\n1580 succession crisis, Iberian Union and decline of the Empire.\nOn 4 August 1578, while fighting in Morocco, young King Sebastian died in the Battle of Alc\u00e1cer Quibir without an heir. The late king's elderly great-uncle, Cardinal Henry, then became king. Henry I died a mere two years later, on 31 January 1580. The death of the latter, without any appointed heirs, led to the Portuguese succession crisis of 1580. Portugal was worried about the maintenance of its independence and sought help to find a new king.\nOne of the claimants to the throne, Ant\u00f3nio, Prior of Crato, a bastard son of Infante Louis, Duke of Beja, and only grandson through the male line of king Manuel I of Portugal, lacked support from the clergy and most of the nobility, but was acclaimed as king in Santar\u00e9m and in some other towns in June 1580.\nPhilip II of Spain, through his mother Isabella of Portugal, also a grandson of Manuel I, claimed the Portuguese throne and did not recognize Ant\u00f3nio as king of Portugal. The king appointed Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba, as captain general of his army. The duke was 73 years old and ill at the time, but Fernando mustered his forces, estimated at 20,000 men, in Badajoz, and in June 1580 crossed the Spanish-Portuguese border and moved towards Lisbon.\nThe Duke of Alba met little resistance and in July set up his forces at Cascais, west of Lisbon. By mid-August, the Duke was only 10 kilometers from the city. West of the small brook Alc\u00e2ntara, the Spanish encountered a Portuguese force on the eastern side of it, commanded by Ant\u00f3nio, and his lieutenant Francisco de Portugal, 3rd Count of Vimioso. In late August, the Duke of Alba defeated Ant\u00f3nio's force, a ragtag army assembled in a hurry and composed mainly of local peasants, and freed slaves at the Battle of Alc\u00e2ntara. This battle ended in a decisive victory for the Spanish army, both on land and sea. Two days later, the Duke of Alba captured Lisbon, and on 25 March 1581, Philip II of Spain was crowned King of Portugal in Tomar as Philip I. This cleared the way for Philip to create an Iberian Union spanning all of Iberia under the Spanish crown.\nPhilip rewarded the Duke of Alba with the titles of 1st Viceroy of Portugal on 18 July 1580 and Constable of Portugal in 1581. With these titles, the Duke of Alba represented the Spanish monarch in Portugal and was second in hierarchy only after King Philip in Portugal. He held both titles until his death in 1582. The Portuguese and Spanish Empires came under a single rule, but resistance to Spanish rule in Portugal did not come to an end. The Prior of Crato held out in the Azores until 1583, and he continued to seek to recover the throne actively until his death in 1595. Impostors claimed to be King Sebastian in 1584, 1585, 1595 and 1598. \"Sebastianism\", the myth that the young king will return to Portugal on a foggy day, has prevailed until modern times.\nDecline of the Portuguese Empire under the Philippine Dynasty.\nAfter the 16th century, Portugal gradually saw its wealth and influence decrease. Portugal was officially an autonomous state, but in actuality, the country was in a personal union with the Spanish crown from 1580 to 1640. The \"Council of Portugal\" remained independent inasmuch as it was one of the key administrative units of the Castilian monarchy, legally on equal terms with the Council of the Indies. The joining of the two crowns deprived Portugal of a separate foreign policy, and the enemies of Spain became the enemies of Portugal. England had been an ally of Portugal since the Treaty of Windsor in 1386, but war between Spain and England led to a deterioration of the relations with Portugal's oldest ally and the loss of Hormuz in 1622. From 1595 to 1663, the Dutch\u2013Portuguese War led to invasions of many countries in Asia and competition for commercial interests in Japan, Africa and South America. In 1624, the Dutch seized Salvador, the capital of Brazil; in 1630, they seized Pernambuco in northern Brazil. A treaty of 1654 returned Pernambuco to Portuguese control, however. Both the English and the Dutch continued to aspire to dominate both the Atlantic slave trade and the spice trade with the Far East.\nThe Dutch intrusion into Brazil was long-lasting and troublesome to Portugal. The Dutch captured the entire coast except that of Bahia and much of the interior of the contemporary Northeastern Brazilian states of Bahia, Sergipe, Alagoas, Pernambuco, Para\u00edba, Rio Grande do Norte and Cear\u00e1, while Dutch privateers sacked Portuguese ships in both the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Beginning with a major Spanish\u2013Portuguese military operation in 1625, this trend was reversed, and it laid the foundations for the recovery of remaining Dutch-controlled areas. The other smaller, less developed areas were recovered in stages and relieved of Dutch piracy in the next two decades by local resistance and Portuguese expeditions. After the dissolution of the Iberian Union in 1640, Portugal would re-establish its authority over some lost territories of the Portuguese Empire.\nPortuguese Restoration War (1640\u20131668).\nAt home, there was peace under the first two Spanish kings, Philip II and Philip III. They maintained Portugal's status, gave positions to Portuguese nobles in the Spanish courts, and Portugal maintained an independent law, currency and government. It was proposed to move the Spanish capital to Lisbon. Later, Philip IV tried to make Portugal a Spanish province, and Portuguese nobles lost power.\nBecause of this, as well as the general strain on the finances of the Spanish throne as a result of the Thirty Years' War, the Duke of Braganza, one of the native noblemen and a descendant of King Manuel I, was proclaimed King of Portugal as John IV on 1 December 1640, and a war of independence against Spain was launched. The governors of Ceuta did not accept the new king; rather, they maintained their allegiance to Philip IV and Spain. The Portuguese Restoration War ended the sixty-year period of the Iberian Union under the House of Habsburg. This was the beginning of the House of Braganza, which reigned in Portugal until 1910.\nKing John IV's eldest son came to reign as Afonso VI, however his physical and mental disabilities left him overpowered by Lu\u00eds de Vasconcelos e Sousa, 3rd Count of Castelo Melhor. In a palace coup organized by the King's wife, Maria Francisca of Savoy, and his brother, Pedro, Duke of Beja, King Afonso VI was declared mentally incompetent and exiled first to the Azores, and then to the Royal Palace of Sintra, outside Lisbon. After Afonso's death, Pedro came to the throne as King Pedro II. Pedro's reign saw the consolidation of national independence, imperial expansion, and investment in domestic production.\nPedro II's son, John V, saw a reign characterized by the influx of gold into the coffers of the royal treasury, supplied largely by the royal fifth (a tax on precious metals), that was received from the Portuguese colonies of Brazil and Maranh\u00e3o. Disregarding traditional Portuguese institutions of governance, John V acted as an absolute monarch, nearly depleting the country's tax revenues on ambitious architectural works, most notably Mafra Palace, and on commissions and additions for his sizeable art and literary collections.\nOwing to his craving for international diplomatic recognition, John also spent large sums on the embassies he sent to the courts of Europe, the most famous being those he sent to Paris in 1715 and Rome in 1716.\nOfficial estimates\u00a0\u2013 and most estimates made so far\u00a0\u2013 place the number of Portuguese migrants to Colonial Brazil during the gold rush of the 18th century at 600,000. This represented one of the largest movements of European populations to their colonies in the Americas during colonial times. From 1709, John V prohibited emigration, since Portugal had lost a sizable proportion of its population. Brazil was elevated to a vice-kingdom.\nPombaline era.\nIn 1738, Sebasti\u00e3o de Melo, the talented son of a Lisbon squire, began a diplomatic career as the Portuguese Ambassador in London and later in Vienna. The Queen regent of Portugal, Maria Anna of Austria, was fond of De Melo; and after his first wife died, she arranged the widowed de Melo's second marriage to the daughter of the Austrian field marshal Leopold Josef, Count von Daun. King John V of Portugal however, was not pleased and recalled Melo to Portugal in 1749. John V died the following year, and his son Joseph I of Portugal was crowned. In contrast to his father, Joseph I was fond of de Melo, and with the Maria Anna's approval, he appointed Melo as Minister of Foreign Affairs. As the king's confidence in de Melo increased, he entrusted him with more control of the state.\nBy 1755, Sebasti\u00e3o de Melo was made prime-minister. Impressed by British economic success he had witnessed while ambassador, he successfully implemented similar economic policies in Portugal. He abolished slavery in Portugal and in the Portuguese colonies in India; reorganized the army and the navy; restructured the University of Coimbra; and ended discrimination against different Christian sects in Portugal.\nBut Sebasti\u00e3o de Melo's greatest reforms were economic and financial, with the creation of several companies and guilds to regulate every commercial activity. He demarcated the region for production of port to ensure the wine's quality, and this was the first attempt to control wine quality and production in Europe. He ruled with a strong hand by imposing strict law on all classes of Portuguese society, from the high nobility to the poorest working class, along with a widespread review of the country's tax system. These reforms gained him enemies in the upper classes, especially among the high nobility, who despised him as a social upstart.\nDisaster fell upon Portugal in the morning of 1 November 1755, when Lisbon was struck by a violent earthquake with an estimated Richter scale magnitude of 9. The city was razed to the ground by the earthquake and the subsequent tsunami and fires. De Melo survived by a stroke of luck and immediately embarked on rebuilding the city, with his famous quote: \"What now? We bury the dead and feed the living.\"\nDespite the natural disaster, Lisbon's population suffered no epidemics and within less than one year the city was being rebuilt. The new Lisbon downtown was designed to resist subsequent earthquakes. Architectural models were built for tests, and the effects of an earthquake were simulated by marching troops around the models. The buildings and big squares of the Pombaline Downtown of Lisbon still remain as one of Lisbon's tourist attractions: they represent the world's first Earthquake-resistant structures. Sebasti\u00e3o de Melo also made an important contribution to the study of seismology by designing an inquiry that was sent to every parish in the country.\nFollowing the earthquake, Joseph I gave his prime minister even more power, and Sebasti\u00e3o de Melo became a powerful, progressive dictator. As his power grew, his enemies increased in number, and bitter disputes with the high nobility became frequent. In 1758, Joseph I was wounded in an attempted assassination. The T\u00e1vora family and the Duke of Aveiro were implicated and executed after a quick trial. The Jesuits were expelled from the country and their assets confiscated by the crown. Sebasti\u00e3o de Melo showed no mercy and prosecuted every person involved, even women and children. This was the final stroke that broke the power of the aristocracy and ensured the victory of the minister against his enemies. Based upon his swift resolve, Joseph I made his loyal minister Count of Oeiras in 1759.\nFollowing the T\u00e1vora affair, the new Count of Oeiras knew no opposition. Made \"Marquis of Pombal\" in 1770, he effectively ruled Portugal until Joseph I's death in 1779. However, historians also argue that Pombal's \"enlightenment\" and economic progress, while far-reaching, was primarily a mechanism for enhancing autocracy at the expense of individual liberty and an apparatus for crushing opposition, suppressing criticism, furthering colonial exploitation, intensifying book censorship and consolidating personal control and profit.\nThe new ruler, Queen Maria I of Portugal, disliked the Marquis (See \"T\u00e1vora affair\"), and forbade him from coming within 20 miles of her, thus curtailing his influence.\nPortuguese-led invasion of Spain in 1707.\nIn 1707, as part of the War of the Spanish Succession, a joint Portuguese, Dutch, and British army, led by the Marquis of Minas, Ant\u00f3nio Lu\u00eds de Sousa, conquered Madrid and acclaimed the Archduke Charles of Austria as King Charles III of Spain. Along the route to Madrid, the army led by the Marquis of Minas was successful in conquering Ciudad Rodrigo and Salamanca. Later in the following year, Madrid was reconquered by Spanish troops loyal to the Bourbons.\n\"The Ghost War\".\nIn 1762, France and Spain tried to urge Portugal to join the Bourbon Family Compact by claiming that Great Britain had become too powerful due to its successes in the Seven Years' War. Joseph refused to accept and maintained that his 1704 alliance with Britain was no threat.\nIn spring 1762, Spanish and French troops invaded Portugal from the north as far as the Douro, while a second column sponsored the Siege of Almeida, captured the city, and threatened to advance on Lisbon. The arrival of a force of British troops helped the Portuguese army commanded by the Count of Lippe by blocking the Franco-Spanish advance and driving them back across the border following the Battle of Valencia de Alc\u00e1ntara. At the Treaty of Paris in 1763, Spain agreed to hand Almeida back to Portugal.\nCrises of the nineteenth century.\nNapoleonic era.\nWith the invasions by Napoleon, Portugal began a decline that lasted until the 20th century, it was hastened by the independence of Brazil in 1822, the country's largest colonial possession.\nIn 1807, Portugal refused Napoleon Bonaparte's demand to accede to the Continental System of embargo against the United Kingdom; a French invasion under General Junot followed, and Lisbon was captured on 8 December 1807. British intervention in the Peninsular War helped in maintaining Portuguese independence. During the war, Jo\u00e3o VI of Portugal, the prince regent, transferred his court, including Maria I, to the Portuguese territory of Brazil, and established Rio de Janeiro as the capital of the Portuguese Empire. This episode is known as the Transfer of the Portuguese Court to Brazil. The last French troops were expelled in 1812. The war cost Portugal the town of Oliven\u00e7a, now governed by Spain. In 1815, Brazil was declared a Kingdom and the Kingdom of Portugal was united with it, forming a pluricontinental state, the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves.\nAs a result of the change in its status and arrival of the Portuguese royal family, Brazilian administrative, civic, economical, military, educational, and scientific apparatus were expanded and highly modernized. By 1815 the situation in Europe had cooled down sufficiently that Jo\u00e3o VI would have been able to return safely to Lisbon. However, the King of Portugal remained in Brazil until the Liberal Revolution of 1820, which started in Porto, demanded his return to Lisbon in 1821.\nThus he returned to Portugal but left his son Pedro in charge of Brazil. When the Portuguese Government attempted the following year to return the Kingdom of Brazil to subordinate status, his son Pedro, with the overwhelming support of the Brazilian elites, declared Brazil's independence from Portugal. Cisplatina (today's sovereign state of Uruguay), in the south, was one of the last additions to the territory of Brazil under Portuguese rule.\nBrazilian independence was recognized in 1825, whereby Emperor Pedro I granted to his father the titular honour of \"Emperor of Brazil\". John VI's death in 1826 caused serious questions in his succession. Though Pedro was his heir, and reigned briefly as Pedro IV, his status as a Brazilian monarch was seen as an impediment to holding the Portuguese throne by both nations. Pedro abdicated in favour of his daughter, Maria II. However, Pedro's brother, Infante Miguel, claimed the throne in protest. After a proposal for Miguel and Maria to marry failed, Miguel seized power as King Miguel I, in 1828. In order to defend his daughter's rights to the throne, Pedro launched the Liberal Wars to reinstall his daughter and establish a constitutional monarchy in Portugal. The war ended in 1834, with Miguel's defeat, the promulgation of a constitution, and the reinstatement of Queen Maria II.\nAfter 1815, the Portuguese expanded their trading ports along the African coast, moving inland to take control of Angola and Mozambique. The slave trade was abolished in 1836, in part because many foreign slave ships were flying the Portuguese flag. In Portuguese India, trade flourished in the colony of Goa, with its subsidiary colonies of Macau, near Hong Kong on the China coast, and Timor, north of Australia. The Portuguese successfully introduced Catholicism and the Portuguese language into their colonies, while most settlers continued to head to Brazil.\nConstitutional monarchy.\nQueen Maria II (Mary II) and King Ferdinand II's son, King Pedro V (Peter V) modernized the country during his short reign (1853\u20131861). Under his reign, roads, telegraphs, and railways were constructed and improvements in public health advanced. His popularity increased when, during the cholera outbreak of 1853\u20131856, he visited hospitals handing out gifts and comforting the sick. Pedro's reign was short, as he died of cholera in 1861, after a series of deaths in the royal family, including his two brothers Infante Fernando and Infante Jo\u00e3o, Duke of Beja, and his wife, Stephanie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. Pedro not having children, his brother, Lu\u00eds I of Portugal (Louis I) ascended the throne and continued his modernization.\nAt the height of European colonialism in the 19th century, Portugal had already lost its territory in South America and all but a few bases in Asia. Luanda, Benguela, Bissau, Louren\u00e7o Marques, Porto Amboim and the Island of Mozambique were among the oldest Portuguese-founded port cities in its African territories. During this phase, Portuguese colonialism focused on expanding its outposts in Africa into nation-sized territories to compete with other European powers there.\nWith the Conference of Berlin of 1884, Portuguese territories in Africa had their borders formally established on request of Portugal in order to protect the centuries-long Portuguese interests in the continent from rivalries enticed by the Scramble for Africa. Portuguese towns and cities in Africa like Nova Lisboa, S\u00e1 da Bandeira, Silva Porto, Malanje, Tete, Vila Junqueiro, Vila Pery and Vila Cabral were founded or redeveloped inland during this period and beyond. New coastal towns like Beira, Mo\u00e7\u00e2medes, Lobito, Jo\u00e3o Belo, Nacala and Porto Am\u00e9lia were also founded. Even before the turn of the 20th century, railway tracks as the Benguela railway in Angola, and the Beira railway in Mozambique, started to be built to link coastal areas and selected inland regions.\nOn 11 January 1890, the British government delivered an ultimatum to Portugal, demanding the withdrawal of Portuguese forces from the area between Portugal's colonies of Mozambique and Angola. The area had been claimed by Portugal as part of its colonialist Pink Map project, but Britain disputed these claims, mostly due to Cecil Rhodes' aspirations to create a Cape to Cairo Railway, which was intended to link all British colonies via a single railway. The government of Portugal quietly accepted the ultimatum and withdrew their forces from the disputed area, leading to a widespread backlash among the Portuguese public, who viewed acceptance of the British demands as a humiliation. It is considered directly responsible for the 31 January 1891 revolt, an attempted Republican coup that took place in Porto.\nThe Portuguese territories in Africa were Cape Verde, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, Portuguese Guinea, Angola, and Mozambique. The tiny fortress of S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o Baptista de Ajud\u00e1 on the coast of Dahomey, was also under Portuguese rule. In addition, Portugal still ruled the Asian territories of Portuguese India, Portuguese Timor and Portuguese Macau.\nOn 1 February 1908, King Dom Carlos I of Portugal and his heir apparent and his eldest son, Prince Royal Dom Lu\u00eds Filipe, Duke of Braganza, were assassinated in Lisbon in the Terreiro do Pa\u00e7o by two Portuguese republican activist revolutionaries, Alfredo Lu\u00eds da Costa and Manuel Bu\u00ed\u00e7a. Under his rule, Portugal had been declared bankrupt\u00a0twice \u2013 first on 14 June 1892, and then again on 10 May 1902\u00a0\u2013 causing social turmoil, economic disturbances, angry protests, revolts and criticism of the monarchy. His second and youngest son, Manuel II of Portugal, became the new king, but was eventually overthrown by the 5 October 1910 Portuguese republican revolution, which abolished the monarchy and installed a republican government in Portugal, causing him and his royal family to flee into exile in London, England.\nThe First Republic (1910\u20131926).\nThe First Republic has, over the course of the recent past, been neglected by many historians in favor of the \"Estado Novo\". As a result, it is difficult to attempt a global synthesis of the republican period in view of the important gaps that still persist in our knowledge of its political history. As far as the 5 October 1910 Revolution is concerned, a number of valuable studies have been made, first among which ranks Vasco Pulido Valente's polemical thesis. This historian posited the Jacobin and urban nature of the revolution carried out by the Portuguese Republican Party (PRP) and claimed that the PRP had turned the republican regime into a de facto dictatorship. This vision clashes with an older interpretation of the First Republic as a progressive and increasingly democratic regime that presented a clear contrast to Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar's ensuing dictatorship.\nReligion.\nThe First Republic was intensely anti-clerical. It was secularist and followed the liberal tradition of disestablishing the powerful role that the Catholic Church once held. Historian Stanley Payne points out, \"The majority of Republicans took the position that Catholicism was the number one enemy of individualistic middle-class radicalism and must be completely broken as a source of influence in Portugal.\" Under the leadership of Afonso Costa, the justice minister, the revolution immediately targeted the Catholic Church: churches were plundered, convents were attacked and clergy were harassed. Scarcely had the provisional government been installed when it began devoting its entire attention to an anti-religious policy, in spite of the disastrous economic situation. On 10 October\u00a0\u2013 five days after the inauguration of the Republic\u00a0\u2013 the new government decreed that all convents, monasteries and religious orders were to be suppressed. All residents of religious institutions were expelled and their goods confiscated. The Jesuits were forced to forfeit their Portuguese citizenship.\nA series of anti-Catholic laws and decrees followed each other in rapid succession. On 3 November, a law legalizing divorce was passed and then there were laws to recognize the legitimacy of children born outside wedlock, authorize cremation, secularize cemeteries, suppress religious teaching in the schools and prohibit the wearing of the cassock. In addition, the ringing of church bells to signal times of worship was subjected to certain restraints, and the public celebration of religious feasts was suppressed. The government also interfered in the running of seminaries, reserving the right to appoint professors and determine curricula. This whole series of laws authored by Afonso Costa culminated in the law of Separation of Church and State, which was passed on 20 April 1911.\nConstitution.\nA republican constitution was approved in 1911, inaugurating a parliamentary regime with reduced presidential powers and two chambers of parliament. The Republic provoked important fractures within Portuguese society, notably among the essentially monarchist rural population, in the trade unions, and in the Church. Even the PRP had to endure the secession of its more moderate elements, who formed conservative republican parties like the Evolutionist Party and the Republican Union. In spite of these splits, the PRP, led by Afonso Costa, preserved its dominance, largely due to a brand of clientelist politics inherited from the monarchy. In view of these tactics, a number of opposition forces were forced to resort to violence in order to enjoy the fruits of power. There are few recent studies of this period of the Republic's existence, known as the 'old' Republic. Nevertheless, an essay by Vasco Pulido Valente should be consulted (1997a), as should the attempt to establish the political, social, and economic context made by M. Villaverde Cabral (1988).\nThe PRP viewed the outbreak of the First World War as a unique opportunity to achieve a number of goals: putting an end to the twin threats of a Spanish invasion of Portugal and of foreign occupation of the African colonies and, at the internal level, creating a national consensus around the regime and even around the party. These domestic objectives were not met, since participation in the conflict was not the subject of a national consensus and since it did not therefore serve to mobilise the population. Quite the opposite occurred: existing lines of political and ideological fracture were deepened by Portugal's intervention in the First World War. The lack of consensus around Portugal's intervention in turn made possible the appearance of two dictatorships, led by General Pimenta de Castro (January\u2013May 1915) and Sid\u00f3nio Pais (December 1917 \u2013 December 1918).\n\"Sidonismo\", also known as \"Dezembrismo\" (\"Decemberism\"), aroused a strong interest among historians, largely as a result of the elements of modernity that it contained. Ant\u00f3nio Jos\u00e9 Telo has made clear the way in which this regime predated some of the political solutions invented by the totalitarian and fascist dictatorships of the 1920s and 1930s. Sid\u00f3nio Pais undertook the rescue of traditional values, notably the \"P\u00e1tria\" (\"Homeland\"), and attempted to rule in a charismatic fashion.\nA move was made to abolish traditional political parties and to alter the existing mode of national representation in parliament (which, it was claimed, exacerbated divisions within the \"P\u00e1tria\") through the creation of a corporative Senate, the founding of a single-party (the National Republican Party), and the attribution of a mobilising function to the leader. The state carved out an economically interventionist role for itself while, at the same time, repressing working-class movements and leftist republicans. Sid\u00f3nio Pais also attempted to restore public order and to overcome some of the rifts of the recent past, making the republic more acceptable to monarchists and Catholics.\nPolitical instability.\nThe vacuum of power created by Sid\u00f3nio Pais's murder on 14 December 1918 led the country to a brief civil war. The monarchy's restoration was proclaimed in the north of Portugal (known as the Monarchy of the North) on 19 January 1919, and four days later a monarchist insurrection broke out in Lisbon. A republican coalition government, led by Jos\u00e9 Relvas, coordinated the struggle against the monarchists by loyal army units and armed civilians. After a series of clashes the monarchists were definitively chased from Oporto on 13 February 1919. This military victory allowed the PRP to return to government and to emerge triumphant from the elections held later that year, having won the usual absolute majority.\nIt was during this restoration of the 'old' republic that an attempted reform was carried out in order to provide the regime with greater stability. In August 1919 a conservative president was elected\u00a0\u2013 Ant\u00f3nio Jos\u00e9 de Almeida (whose Evolutionist party had come together in wartime with the PRP to form a flawed, because incomplete, Sacred Union)\u00a0\u2013 and his office was given the power to dissolve parliament. Relations with the Holy See, restored by Sid\u00f3nio Pais, were preserved. The president used his new power to resolve a crisis of government in May 1921, naming a Liberal government (the Liberal party being the result of the postwar fusion of Evolutionists and Unionists) to prepare the forthcoming elections.\nThese were held on 10 July 1921, with victory going, as was usually the case, to the party in power. However, Liberal government did not last long. On 19 October a military \"pronunciamento\" was carried out during which\u00a0\u2013 and apparently against the wishes of the coup's leaders\u00a0\u2013 a number of prominent conservative figures, including Prime Minister Ant\u00f3nio Granjo, were assassinated. This event, known as the 'night of blood' left a deep wound among political elites and public opinion. There could be no greater demonstration of the essential fragility of the Republic's institutions and proof that the regime was democratic in name only, since it did not even admit the possibility of the rotation in power characteristic of the elitist regimes of the nineteenth century.\nA new round of elections on 29 January 1922 inaugurated a fresh period of stability: the PRP once again emerged from the contest with an absolute majority. Discontent with this situation had not, however, disappeared. Numerous accusations of corruption, and the manifest failure to resolve pressing social concerns wore down the more visible PRP leaders while making the opposition's attacks more deadly. At the same time, moreover, all political parties suffered from growing internal factionalism, especially the PRP itself. The party system was fractured and discredited.\nThis is clearly shown by the fact that regular PRP victories at the ballot box did not lead to stable government. Between 1910 and 1926, there were forty-five governments. The opposition of presidents to single-party governments, internal dissent within the PRP, the party's almost non-existent internal discipline, and its desire to group together and lead all republican forces made any government's task practically impossible. Many different formulas were attempted, including single-party governments, coalitions, and presidential executives, but none succeeded. Force was clearly the sole means open to the opposition if the PRP wanted to enjoy the fruits of power.\nEvaluation of the republican experiment.\nHistorians have emphasized the failure and collapse of the republican dream by the 1920s. Sardica summarizes the consensus of historians:\nwithin a few years, large parts of the key economic forces, intellectuals, opinion-makers and middle classes changed from left to right, trading the unfulfilled utopia of a developing and civic republicanism for notions of \"order,\" \"stability\" and \"security\". For many who had helped, supported or simply cheered the Republic in 1910, hoping that the new political situation would repair the monarchy's flaws (government instability, financial crisis, economic backwardness and civic anomie), the conclusion to be drawn, in the 1920s, was that the remedy for national maladies called for much more than the simple removal of the king...The First Republic collapsed and died as a result of the confrontation between raised hopes and meager deeds.\nSardica, however, also points out the permanent impact of the republican experiment:\nDespite its overall failure, the First Republic endowed twentieth-century Portugal with an insurpassable and enduring legacy\u00a0\u2013 a renewed civil law, the basis for an educational revolution, the principle of separation between State and Church, the overseas empire (only brought to an end in 1975), and a strong symbolic culture whose materializations (the national flag, the national anthem and the naming of streets) nobody has dared to alter and which still define the present-day collective identity of the Portuguese. The Republic's prime legacy was indeed that of memory.\n28 May 1926 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nBy the mid-1920s the domestic and international scenes began to favour another authoritarian solution, wherein a strengthened executive might restore political and social order. Since the opposition's constitutional route to power was blocked by the various means deployed by the PRP to protect itself, it turned to the army for support. The political awareness of the armed forces had grown during the war, and many of their leaders had not forgiven the PRP for sending them to a war they did not want to fight.\nThey seemed to represent, to conservative forces, the last bastion of 'order' against the 'chaos' that was taking over the country. Links were established between conservative figures and military officers, who added their own political and corporative demands to the already complex equation. The 28 May 1926 coup d'\u00e9tat enjoyed the support of most army units and even of most political parties. As had been the case in December 1917, the population of Lisbon did not rise to defend the Republic, leaving it at the mercy of the army.\nThere are few global and up-to-date studies of this turbulent third phase of the Republic's existence. Nevertheless, much has been written about the crisis and fall of the regime and the 28 May movement. The First Republic continues to be the subject of an intense debate. A historiographical balance sheet by Armando Malheiro da Silva (2000) identifies three main interpretations. For some historians the First Republic was a progressive and increasingly democratic regime. For others it was essentially a prolongation of the liberal and elitist regimes of the 19th century. A third group chooses to highlight the regime's revolutionary, Jacobin and dictatorial nature.\nEstado Novo (1933\u20131974).\nSalazar dictatorship.\nPolitical chaos, several strikes, harsh relations with the Church, and considerable economic problems aggravated by a disastrous military intervention in the First World War led to the military 28 May 1926 coup d'\u00e9tat. This coup installed the \"Second Republic\", which started as the \"Ditadura Nacional\" (National Dictatorship) and became the \"Estado Novo\" (New State) in 1933, led by economist Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar. He transformed Portugal into a sort of Fascist regime that evolved into a single-party corporative regime. Portugal, although neutral, informally aided the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War (1936\u201339).\nSalazar's policy after the war was to provide a certain level of liberalization in politics, in terms of organized opposition with more freedom of the press. Opposition parties were tolerated to an extent, but they were also controlled, limited, and manipulated, with the result that they split into factions and never formed a united opposition.\nWorld War II.\nPortugal was officially neutral in World War II, but in practice Salazar collaborated with the British and sold them rubber and tungsten. In late 1943, he allowed the Allies to establish air bases in the Azores to fight German U-boats. Moreover, Salazar helped Spain avoid German control. However, as tungsten was a major product of Portugal, it was also sold to Germany until June 1944, when the threat of a German attack on Portugal was minimal. Salazar worked to regain control of East Timor after the Japanese had seized it. Also, he admitted several thousand Jewish refugees during the war. Lisbon, maintaining air connections with Britain and the U.S., became a hotbed of spies of several war parties and served as the base for the International Red Cross in its distribution of relief supplies to POWs.\nColonies.\nIn 1961, the Portuguese army was involved in armed action in its colony in Goa against an Indian invasion (see Operation Vijay). The operations resulted in a Portuguese defeat and the loss of the colonies in India. Independence movements also became active in Portuguese Angola, Portuguese Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea; the Portuguese Colonial War started. Some 122,000 Africans died in the conflict. Portugal, during this period, was never an outcast, and was a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).\nAfter the death of Salazar in 1970, his replacement by Marcelo Caetano offered a certain hope that the regime would open up, the \"primavera marcelista\" (Marcelist spring). However the colonial wars in Africa continued, political prisoners remained incarcerated, freedom of association was not restored, censorship was only slightly eased and the elections remained tightly controlled.\nThe regime retained its characteristic traits: censorship, corporateness, with a market economy dominated by a handful of economical groups, continuous surveillance and intimidation of several sectors of society through the use of a political police and techniques instilling fear (such as arbitrary imprisonment, systematic political persecution and even assassination of anti-regime insurgents).\nThe Third Republic (1974\u2013present).\nThe Carnation Revolution of April 25, 1974, an effectively bloodless left-wing military coup, installed the \"Third Republic\" and implemented broad democratic reforms.\nThird Portuguese Republic.\nThe \"Processo Revolucion\u00e1rio Em Curso\" (\"Ongoing Revolutionary Process\") was the tumultuous period during the Portuguese transition to democracy. It started after a failed right-wing coup d'\u00e9tat on March 11, 1975, and ended after a failed left-wing coup d'\u00e9tat on November 25, 1975. This period was marked by political turmoil, violence, and instability, and the nationalization of industries. Portugal was polarized between the conservative north, with its many independent small farmers, and the radical south, where communists helped peasants seize control of large estates. Finally, in the 1976 legislative election, the Socialist Party came in first in elections and its leader M\u00e1rio Soares formed Portugal's first democratically elected government in nearly a half century.\nThe Social Democratic Party and its center-right allies under Prime Minister An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva gained control of parliament in 1987 and 1991 while the Socialist Party and its allies succeeded in the 1991 presidential election to retain the presidency for its popular leader Mario Soares.\nViolent decolonisation.\nIn 1975, Portugal granted independence to its Overseas Provinces (\"Prov\u00edncias Ultramarinas\" in Portuguese) in Africa (Portuguese Mozambique, Portuguese Angola, Portuguese Guinea, Portuguese Cape Verde and Portuguese S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe). Nearly 1 million Portuguese or persons of Portuguese descent left these former colonies as refugees. In 1975 Indonesia invaded and annexed the Portuguese province of Portuguese Timor (Timor-Leste) in Asia before independence could be granted. The massive exodus of the Portuguese military and citizens from Angola and Mozambique, would prompt an era of chaos and severe destruction in those territories after independence from Portugal in 1975. From May 1974 to the end of the 1970s, over a million Portuguese citizens from Portugal's African territories (mostly from Portuguese Angola and Mozambique) left those territories as destitute refugees\u00a0\u2013 the \"retornados\".\nThe newly independent countries were ravaged by brutal civil wars in the following decades\u00a0\u2013 the Angolan Civil War (1975\u20132002) and Mozambican Civil War (1977\u20131992)\u00a0\u2013 responsible for millions of deaths and refugees. The Asian dependency of Macau, after an agreement in 1986, was returned to Chinese sovereignty in 1999. Portugal applied international pressure to secure East Timor's independence from Indonesia, as East Timor was still legally a Portuguese dependency, and recognized as such by the United Nations. After a referendum in 1999, East Timor voted for independence, which Portugal recognized in 2002.\nWith the 1975\u20131976 independence of its colonies (apart from Macau), the 560-year-old Portuguese Empire effectively ended. Simultaneously, 15 years of war effort also came to an end; many Portuguese returned from the colonies (the \"retornados\") and came to comprise a sizeable proportion of the population: approximately 580,000 of Portugal's 9.8 million citizens in 1981. This opened new paths for the country's future just as others closed. In 1986, Portugal entered the European Economic Community and left the European Free Trade Association which had been founded by Portugal and its partners in 1960. The country joined the euro in 1999. The Portuguese Empire ended \"de facto\" in 1999 when Macau was returned to China, and \"de jure\" in 2002 when East Timor became independent.\nSocio-economic evolution.\nEconomic development was one of the major objectives of the Carnation Revolution and it was widely perceived that the new democracy would have the same unfortunate fate of the previous democratic regimes in Portugal (Constitutional Monarchy and First Republic) if, like them, it failed to provide economic development and decent standards of living to its citizens. Relative to Western Europe, Portugal remained stagnant (and thus poor and underdeveloped) for most of the \"Estado Novo\" regime (particularly in the first 30 years), but the modernization of the economy and development of the country still started in the last years of the regime, with a period of strong growth from 1961 to 1973. However, the gap between Portugal and most of Western Europe was still abysmal by the mid-1970s. Overall, the Third Republic gave continuity to the growth started in the 1960s and was marked by a major socio-economic development (particularly until the early 2000s). GDP per capita rose from 50% of EC-12 average in 1970 to 70% in 2000, which nonetheless represented an approach to the Western European standards of living without precedents in the previous centuries. Concurrent with the economic development, the Third Republic also witnessed major improvements in health, education, infrastructure, housing and welfare. However, as of 2019, Portugal still has not converged with the most advanced economies of Central and Northern Europe, as the economy has been stagnant since the early 2000s.\nThe Portuguese economy declined in the centuries following the end of the Age of Discoveries and neither the Constitutional Monarchy (1834\u20131910) nor the First Republic (1910\u20131926) were able to put the country in the path to industrialization and development. While Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar managed to discipline the Portuguese public finances in the 1930s, the first three decades of the \"Estado Novo\" regime were also marked by a relative stagnation and underdevelopment. While Western world enjoyed strong economic growth, Portugal remained behind. As such, by 1960 the Portuguese GDP per capita was only 38% of the EC-12 average, and Portugal was one of the most backward countries in Europe. However, things started to change in the late \"Estado Novo\": starting in the early 1960s, Portugal entered in a period of robust economic growth and structural modernization, owing to a liberalization of the economy and the rise of a new elite (which was developmental, technocratic and politically liberal). As an expression of such economic opening, in 1960 Portugal was one of the EFTA founding member states. Such remarkable growth period allowed the Portuguese GDP per capita to reach 56% of the EC-12 average by 1973.\nIn the early 1970s, the government of Marcelo Caetano paved some foundations for a welfare state (which actually was only built after the April 25, 1974, revolution), with reforms in health (Gon\u00e7alves Ferreira reform) and education ( reform). However, the new wealth acquired from the 1960\u201373 growth was unevenly distributed, and the 1960s were also marked by mass emigration. The April 25, 1974, revolution happened when this growth period was fading, owing to the 1973 oil crisis. However, the political turmoil following the April 25, 1974, coup (mainly from March to November 1975) definitively led to the end of such economic growth period. Portugal lost suddenly and chaotically its African possessions and from May 1974 to the end of the 1970s, over a million Portuguese citizens from Portugal's African territories (mostly from Portuguese Angola and Mozambique) left those territories and arrived at metropolitan Portugal as destitute refugees\u00a0\u2013 the \"retornados\".The first 10 years of the Third Republic, in the context of the transition to democracy, were years of economic troubles, during which Portugal received two IMF-monitored bailouts (from 1977\u20131979 and from 1983\u20131985). However, despite an overall crisis from 1973 to 1985, there were some years of very high economic growth, and reforms were enacted that allowed to improve standards of living and level of development, such as the construction of a true Social Security scheme, universal health coverage and the continuation of the process of increasing access to education. In 1985 Portugal left the second IMF bailout and in 1986 the country entered the European Economic Community (and left the EFTA). Strong economic growth resumed. The growth of many of Portugal's main exporting companies and the European Union's structural and cohesion funds were leading forces in a new period of robust economic growth and socio-economic development which would last (though with a short crisis around 1992\u20131994) to the early 2000s. In 1991, GDP per capita surpassed the 1973 level (relative to EEC) and by 2000 it had achieved 70% of the EU-12 average, which nonetheless constituted an approach to the Western European standards of living without precedents in the centuries before. However, the economy has been stagnant since the early 2000s (around the accession to Euro) and was hit hard by the effects of the Great Recession: public debt (historically below or in average to that of Europe and Germany) shot up from 68% of GDP in 2007 to 126% in 2012, which was one of the factors that led to a 78-billion-euro IMF/EU-monitored bailout from 2011 to 2014. Economic growth has resumed in the mid-2010s.\nSome indicators can be provided to illustrate the major socio-economic development Portugal endured in the Third Republic. Portuguese GDP per capita was at 54% of the average of Northern and Central European countries in 1975 (up from 38% in 1960, owing to the remarkable growth in the 1960s and early 1970s) more or less the same level it was 10 years later (owing to the crisis), from when it rose from 55% in 1985 to a virtually unprecedented 70% in 2000. In 1970, there were 94 physicians by 100,000 inhabitants, while in 1990 there were 281, and in 2011 there were 405. In 1970, infant mortality rate in Portugal was 55.5 per 1,000 live births (in France it was 18.2). Infant mortality rate declined to 10.9 in 1990 and 2.5 in 2010 (by which time, it was one of lowest in the world). In 1970, only 37% of deliveries were held in official health facilities, while by 1985 such number had risen to 96% and by 2000 it was close to 100%. According to a political analyst, \"almost all health data transport Portugal from the Third World to the First in two decades\". In 1970, only 3.8% of teenagers were enrolled in high school; such number rose to 28% in 1990, 59% in 2000 and 71% in 2010. The illiteracy rate was 26% in 1970 (by comparison, in Spain it was 9%s) and declined to 11% in 1990 and 5% in 2010. In housing, major improvements happened: in 1970 only 47% of households had piped water supply and 68% had access to electricity. Historical data shows that in 1991, 86% of households had piped water supply and 98% had access to electricity.\nBy 2021, Portugal had the 4th lowest GDP per capita (PPP) of the eurozone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44532", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44532", "title": "History of Portugal (1139\u20131279)", "text": ""}
{"id": "44533", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44533", "title": "Li Peng", "text": "Premier of China from 1987 to 1998\nLi Peng (; 20 October 1928 \u2013 22 July 2019) was a Chinese politician who served as the premier of China from 1987 to 1998, and as the chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, China's top legislative body, from 1998 to 2003. For much of the 1990s Li was ranked second in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) hierarchy behind then CCP General Secretary Jiang Zemin. He retained his seat on the CCP Politburo Standing Committee until his retirement in 2002.\nLi was the son of an early Communist revolutionary, Li Shuoxun, who was executed by the Kuomintang. After meeting Zhou Enlai in Sichuan, Li was raised by Zhou and his wife, Deng Yingchao. Li trained to be an engineer in the Soviet Union and worked at an important national power company after returning to China. He escaped the political turmoil of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s due to his political connections and his employment in the company. After Deng Xiaoping became China's leader in the late 1970s, Li took a number of increasingly important and powerful political positions, first becoming Vice Minister and later Minister of Power. In 1983, he became a vice premier. In 1985, he became the minister of the State Education Commission as well as a member of the Politburo and the Party Secretariat. He was elected to the Politburo Standing Committee in 1987.\nIn 1987, following the appointment of Premier Zhao Ziyang as the CCP General Secretary, Li became the acting premier, before being fully appointed in 1988. As Premier, Li became the most visible representative of China's government who backed the use of force to quell the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. During the demonstrations, Li used his authority as premier to declare martial law and, in cooperation with Deng, who was the Chairman of the Central Military Commission, declared military law and the suppression of the 1989 Tiananmen square protestors, ultimately resulting in a massacre. Li advocated a largely conservative approach to reform and opening up, which placed him at odds with General Secretary Zhao Ziyang, who fell out of favour in 1989. After Zhao was removed from office, Li promoted a conservative socialist economic agenda but lost influence to incoming vice premier Zhu Rongji, and was unable to prevent the increasing market liberalization of the Chinese economy.\nIn 1998, Li was succeeded by Zhu Rongji as premier and became the chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. During his time in office, he helmed the controversial Three Gorges Dam project. He and his family managed a large Chinese power monopoly, the State Power Corporation of China, which the Chinese government broke up after his term as premier expired. Li died at the age of 90 in Beijing.\nChildhood.\nLi was born as Li Yuanpeng () at his family house in Shanghai French Concession, now in 545 Yanan Road, Huangpu District in Shanghai. His family has ancestral roots in Chengdu, Sichuan. He was the son of Li Shuoxun, one of the earliest CCP revolutionaries, who was the political commissar of the Twentieth Division during the Nanchang uprising, and Zhao Juntao, also an early Communist operative. In 1931, Li's father, then working undercover in Hainan, was captured and executed by the Kuomintang. Li was believed to have met Deng Yingchao, wife of senior Communist leader Zhou Enlai, in Chengdu in 1939, who then took him to Chongqing to meet Zhou, though Zhou was in the Communist base of Yan'an, and they did not meet until late 1940. In 1941, when Li was twelve, Zhou sent Li to Yan'an, where Li studied until 1945. As a seventeen-year-old, in 1945, Li joined the Chinese Communist Party.\nEarly career.\nIn 1941, Li Peng began studying at the Yan'an Institute of Natural Science (a predecessor of the Beijing Institute of Technology). In July 1946, Li was sent to work in Zhangjiakou. According to his own recollection, in 1947, he journeyed through Shandong and North Korea, eventually ending up in Harbin where he began managing some work for a lard processing plant. In 1948, Li Peng was sent to study at the Moscow Power Engineering Institute, majoring in hydroelectric engineering. A year later, in 1949, Zhou Enlai became Premier of the newly declared People's Republic of China. Li graduated in 1954. During his time in the Soviet Union, Li was the head of the Chinese Students Association in the Soviet Union.\nWhen Li returned to China in 1955, the country was firmly under the control of the Communist Party. Li took part in technical, then management work in the power industry, beginning his career in Northeast China. At the outset of the Cultural Revolution, Li was sent to Beijing to head up the municipal power bureau. He played a leading role in the construction of the Tuhe Powerplant in Tangshan and the Gaojing Powerplant in Beijing. During his time at Gaojing, he worked three days and three nights supervising the construction of the site. On 4 October 1974, he was struck by a vehicle while riding his bicycle home from work. In 1976, Li was dispatched to affected regions of the Tangshan earthquake as head of the power restoration efforts.\nLi advanced politically after the ascent of Deng Xiaoping, and served as the Vice Minister and later Minister of Power, the Communist Party secretary of the North China Electric Power Administration Bureau between 1979 and 1983, as well as the vice minister of Water Conservancy and Power between 1982 and 1983. Much of Li's rapid political promotion was due to the support of Party elder Chen Yun.\nLi joined the Central Committee at the 12th Party National Congress in 1982. In 1984, he was put in charge of the newly established State Council Leading Small Group on the Electronics Industry. In 1985 he was named minister of the State Education Commission, and was elected to the Politburo and the Party Secretariat. In 1987, after the 13th Party National Congress, Li became a member of the powerful Politburo Standing Committee.\nPremiership (1988\u20131998).\nIn November 1987, after Premier Zhao Ziyang was promoted to CCP General Secretary, Li became acting Premier. He was formally elected Premier in March 1988. At the time of his promotion, Li seemed like an unusual choice for Premier because he did not seem to share Deng's enthusiasm for introducing market reforms. Li was raised to the position of Premier thanks partially to the departure of Hu Yaobang, who was forced to resign as General Secretary after the Party blamed him for a series of student-led protests in 1987.\nThroughout the 1980s, political dissent and social problems, including inflation, urban migration, and school overcrowding, became great problems in China. Despite these acute challenges, Li shifted his focus away from the day-to-day concerns of energy, communications, and raw materials allocation, and took a more active role in the ongoing intra-party debate on the pace of market reforms. Politically, Li opposed the modern economic reforms pioneered by Zhao Ziyang throughout Zhao's years of public service. In 1988, he downgraded the role of the System Reform Commission, a State Council body created by Zhao Ziyang. While students and intellectuals urged greater reforms, some party elders increasingly feared that the instability opened up by any significant reforms would threaten to undermine the authority of the Communist Party, which Li had spent his career attempting to strengthen.\nAfter Zhao became General Secretary, his proposals in May 1988 to expand free enterprise led to popular complaints (which some suggest were politically inspired) about inflation fears. Public fears about the negative effects of market reforms gave conservatives (including Li Peng) the opening to call for greater centralization of economic controls and stricter prohibitions against Western influences, especially opposing further expansion of Zhao's more free enterprise-oriented approach. This precipitated a political debate, which grew more heated through the winter of 1988\u20131989.\n1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre.\nThe 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre began with the mass mourning over the death of former General secretary Hu Yaobang, widely perceived to have been purged for his support of political liberalization. On the eve of Hu's funeral, 100,000 people gathered at Tiananmen Square. Beijing students began the demonstrations to encourage continued economic reform and liberalization, and these demonstrations soon evolved into a mass movement for political reform. From Tiananmen Square, the protesters later expanded into the surrounding streets. Non-violent protests also occurred in cities throughout China, including Shanghai and Wuhan. Rioting occurred in Xi'an and Changsha.\nThe Tiananmen protests were partially protests against the affluence of the children of high-ranking Communist Party officials, and the perception that second-generation officials had received their fortunes through exploiting their parents' influence. Li, whose family has often been at the center of corruption allegations within the Chinese power industry, was vulnerable to these charges.\nAn editorial published in the \"People's Daily\" on 26 April and bearing the name of Deng Xiaoping, denounced the demonstrations as \"premeditated and organized turmoil with anti-Party and anti-socialist motives\". The article had the effect of worsening the demonstrations by angering its leaders, who then made their demands more extreme. Zhao Ziyang later wrote in his autobiography that although Deng had stated many of those sentiments in a private conversation with Li Peng shortly before the editorial was written, Li had the comments disseminated to Party members and published as the editorial without Deng's knowledge or consent.\nLi strictly refused to negotiate with the Tiananmen protesters out of principle, and became one of the officials most objected to by protesters. One of the protest's key leaders, Wu'erkaixi, during a hunger strike, publicly scolded Li on National Television, saying he was ignoring the needs of the people. Some observers say that Wang's statements insulted Li personally, hardening his resolve to end the protest by violent means. Among the other senior members of the central government, Li became the one who most strongly favored violence and known as the \"Butcher of Beijing\" for his role in the crackdown. After winning the support of most of his colleagues, apparently including Deng Xiaoping, Li officially declared martial law in Beijing on 20 May 1989 and promised \"resolute and decisive measures to put an end to the turmoil\". The protests were crushed by the military on 3\u20134 June. Most estimates of the dead range from several hundred to several thousand people. Li later described the crackdown as a historic victory for communism, and wrote that he feared the protests would be as potentially damaging to China as the Cultural Revolution had been. The martial law was lifted by Li on 10 January 1990.\nPost-Tiananmen.\nAlthough the Tiananmen crackdown was an \"international public relations disaster for China,\" it ensured that Li would have a long and productive career. He remained powerful even though he had been one of the main targets of protesters, partly because the leadership believed that limiting Li's career would be the same as admitting that they had made mistakes by suppressing the 1989 protests. By keeping Li at the upper levels of the Party, China's leaders communicated to the world that the country remained stable and united. Because of Li's role in the crackdown, he was viewed as politically repellent in most Western capitals and Western delegations traveling to China often had to debate whether they could be seen meeting with Li.\nIn the immediate aftermath of the Tiananmen protests, Li took a leading role in a national austerity program, intended to slow economic growth and inflation and re-centralize the economy. Li worked to increase taxes on agriculture and export-industries and increased salaries to less efficient industries owned by the government. Li directed a tight monetary policy, implementing price controls on many commodities, supporting higher interest rates, and cutting off state loans to private and cooperative sectors in attempts to reduce inflation. After the fifth plenum of the 13th Central Committee in November 1989, Li established a State Council Production Commission to better coordinate the implementation of the plans.\nOn 18 April 1990, Li spoke at a celebration for the fifth anniversary of the Shanghai Volkswagen Corporation.23 During his speech, Li stated that \"some policies of the economic and technological zones and Special Economic Zones can be implemented in the Pudong area\".23 Li stated that future investors from Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan were welcomed and that China would provide preferential conditions for cooperation and improve the investment environment.23 The occasion is often described as Pudong's \"birthday\".23\nIn January 1992, at the same time as Deng Xiaoping's southern tour, Li attended the annual gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. At the summit, Li told the audience, \"We must further accelerate the pace of reform and opening\", and encouraged them to invest in China. In 1992, Li attended the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The meeting was the beginning of China's shift to a more active role in international environmental policy.8 At the conference, Li stated that the pursuit of environmental protection should not cause neglect of economic development and that international environmental cooperation should not infringe on national sovereignty.52\nLi suffered a heart attack in 1993 and began to lose influence within the Party to first-ranking vice premier Zhu Rongji, a strong advocate for economic liberalization. In that year, when Li made his annual work report to the Politburo, he was forced to make over seventy changes to make the plans acceptable to Deng. Perhaps realizing that opposition to the market reforms would be poorly received by Deng and other Party elders, Li publicly supported Deng's economic reforms. Li was reappointed Premier in 1993, despite a large protest vote for Zhu. Li was eventually succeeded by Zhu Rongji after the former's second term expired in 1998.\nLi began two megaprojects when he was the Premier. He initiated the construction of the Three Gorges Dam on 14 December 1994, and later began preparations for the Shenzhou Manned Space Program. Both programs were subject to much controversy within China and abroad. The Shenzhou program was especially criticized for its extraordinary cost (tens of billions of dollars). Many economists and humanitarians suggested that those billions in capital might be better invested in helping the Chinese population deal with economic hardships and improvement in China's education, health services, and legal system.\nIn 1996, Li started one of the earliest controls of the Chinese government over the Internet when he signed State Council Order No. 195, issuing the \"Interim Regulations on the Management of International Networking of Computer Information Networks\". Article 6 of the Regulations states: \"Computer information networks that directly connect to the international network must use the international entry and exit channels provided by the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications\u2019 national public telecommunications network. No unit or individual may establish or use other channels to connect to the international network on their own.\" This regulation was later widely used to punish \"climbing over the firewall\".\nChairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (1998\u20132003).\nLi remained premier until 1998, when he was constitutionally limited to two terms. After his second term expired, he became the chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Support for Li for the position was low, as he received less than 90% of the vote at the first session of the 9th National People's Congress, where he was the only candidate. He spent much of his time monitoring what he considered his life's work to have been, the Three Gorges Dam. Li's interest in the Dam reflected his earlier career as a hydraulic engineer, and he spent much of his career in office in presiding over a vast and growing power industry. At this time Li Peng considered himself to be a builder and a modernizer. As the NPCSC chair, Li pursued the CCP's efforts in \"forming a socialist system of laws with Chinese characteristics\", which he said required \"legislation covering all areas of law\", \"fundamental and primary\" laws within each area, and \"corresponding administrative and local regulations to complement national legislation\".\nLi spent much of the 1990s expanding and managing an energy monopoly, State Power Corporation of China. Because the company was staffed by Li's relatives, Li was accused of turning China's energy industry into a \"family fiefdom\". At its height, Li's power company controlled 72% of all energy-producing assets in China, and was ranked as the sixtieth-largest company in the world by \"Fortune\" magazine. After Li's departure from government, Li's energy monopoly was split into five smaller companies by the Chinese government.\nOn 22 August 2000, Li was in New York for a UN meeting. At the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, a licensed private investigator served him with a legal summons in connection with human rights litigation involving the Tiananmen square crackdown. A \"New York Times\" reporter and photographer accompanied the process server and documented the event. Li was outraged, having viewed the U.S. government as complicit because the summons had been transmitted through his U.S. security detail.\nRetirement and death.\nAfter retiring in 2003, Li retained some influence in the Politburo Standing Committee. Luo Gan, who presided over law enforcement and national security between 2002 and 2007, was considered Li's prot\u00e9g\u00e9. After the retirement of Luo Gan during 17th Party Congress, Li's influence waned considerably. He was subject to frequent speculation over corruption issues that plague him and his family. In addition, perhaps more than any other leader, Li's public image had become inextricably associated with memory of the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown, and as a result he continued to be a widely despised figure among a substantial segment of the Chinese population well into the 21st century. He was generally unpopular in China, where he had \"long been a figure of scorn and suspicion\".\nIn 2010, Li's autobiographical work, \"The Critical Moment \u2013 Li Peng Diaries\", was published by New Century Press. \"The Critical Moment\" covered Li's activities during the period of the Tiananmen Square protests, and was published on the protests' twenty-first anniversary. \"The Critical Moment\" was characterized by reviewers as largely an attempt to minimize Li's culpability during the most egregious stages of the crackdown; some also say he attempted to shift blame to Deng. He reappeared at the 19th Party Congress on 18 October 2017, marking his last public appearance prior to his death.\nLi died on 22 July 2019 at the age of 90. He had been receiving medical treatment in a hospital in Beijing at the time of his death. His funeral was held on 29 July 2019. Attendees of the funeral included CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping, Premier Li Keqiang, and former General Secretary Jiang Zemin.\nFamily.\nLi Peng was married to Zhu Lin (), a deputy manager in \"a large firm in the south of China\". Li and Zhu had 3 children: Li's elder son, Li Xiaopeng; Li's daughter, Li Xiaolin; and, Li's younger son, Li Xiaoyong. Li Xiaoyong is married to Ye Xiaoyan, the daughter of Communist veteran Ye Ting's second son, Ye Zhengming.\nLi's family benefited from Li's high position during the 1980s and 1990s. Two of Li's children, Li Xiaopeng and Li Xiaolin, inherited and ran two of China's electrical monopolies. State-run Chinese media have publicly questioned whether it is in China's long-term interest to preserve the \"new class of monopoly state capitalists\" that Li's family represents. Li Xiaopeng entered politics in Shanxi and became its governor in 2012 and then in 2016, he became Minister of Transport. Li Xiaolin served as chief executive of China Power International Development, before being transferred out in 2016 to a minor executive post at a different power company.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44534", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44534", "title": "1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre", "text": "Student-led demonstrations in China\nThe Tiananmen Square protests, known within China as the June Fourth Incident, were student-led demonstrations held in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, China, lasting from 15 April to 4 June 1989. After weeks of unsuccessful attempts between the demonstrators and the Chinese government to find a peaceful resolution, the Chinese government deployed troops to occupy the square on the night of 3 June in what is referred to as the Tiananmen Square massacre. The events are sometimes called the '89 Democracy Movement, the Tiananmen Square Incident, or the Tiananmen uprising.\nThe protests were precipitated by the death of pro-reform Chinese Communist Party (CCP) general secretary Hu Yaobang in April 1989 amid the backdrop of rapid economic development and social change in post-Mao China, reflecting anxieties among the people and political elite about the country's future. Common grievances at the time included inflation, corruption, limited preparedness of graduates for the new economy, and restrictions on political participation. Although they were highly disorganised and their goals varied, the students called for things like rollback of the removal of iron rice bowl jobs, greater accountability, constitutional due process, democracy, freedom of the press, and freedom of speech. Workers' protests were generally focused on inflation and the erosion of welfare. These groups united around anti-corruption demands, adjusting economic policies, and protecting social security. At the height of the protests, about one million people assembled in the square.\nAs the protests developed, the authorities responded with both conciliatory and hardline tactics, exposing deep divisions within the party leadership. By May, a student-led hunger strike galvanised support around the country for the demonstrators, and the protests spread to some 400 cities. On 20 May, the State Council declared martial law, and as many as 300,000 troops were mobilised to Beijing. After several weeks of standoffs and violent confrontations between the army and demonstrators left many on both sides severely injured, a meeting held among the CCP's top leadership on 1 June concluded with a decision to clear the square. The troops advanced into central parts of Beijing on the city's major thoroughfares in the early morning hours of 4 June and engaged in bloody clashes with demonstrators attempting to block them, in which many people \u2013 demonstrators, bystanders, and soldiers \u2013 were killed. Estimates of the death toll vary from several hundred to several thousand, with thousands more wounded.\nThe event had both short and long term consequences. Western countries imposed arms embargoes on China, and various Western media outlets labeled the crackdown a \"massacre\". In the aftermath of the protests, the Chinese government suppressed other protests around China, carried out mass arrests of protesters which catalysed Operation Yellowbird, strictly controlled coverage of the events in the domestic and foreign affiliated press, and demoted or purged officials it deemed sympathetic to the protests. The government also invested heavily into creating more effective police riot control units. More broadly, the suppression ended the political reforms which began in 1986 as well as the New Enlightenment movement, and halted the policies of liberalisation of the 1980s, which were only partly resumed after Deng Xiaoping's Southern Tour in 1992. Considered a watershed event, reaction to the protests set limits on political expression in China that have lasted up to the present day. The events remain one of the most sensitive and most widely censored topics in China.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNaming.\nThe Chinese government has used numerous names for the event since 1989. As the events unfolded, it was labeled a \"counter revolutionary rebellion\", which was later changed to simply \"riot\", followed by \"political turmoil\" and \"1989 storm\".\nOutside mainland China, and among circles critical of the crackdown within mainland China, the crackdown is commonly referred to in Chinese as \"June Fourth Massacre\" () and \"June Fourth Crackdown\" (). To bypass censorship by the Great Firewall, alternative names have sprung up to describe the events on the Internet, such as May\u00a035th, VIIV (Roman numerals for 6 and 4), Eight Squared (since 82=64) and 8964 (in yymd format).\nIn English, the terms \"Tiananmen Square Massacre\", \"Tiananmen Square Protests\", and \"Tiananmen Square Crackdown\" are often used to describe the series of events. However, much of the violence in Beijing did not actually happen in Tiananmen, but outside the square along a stretch of Chang'an Avenue only a few miles long, and especially near the Muxidi area. The term also gives a misleading impression that demonstrations only happened in Beijing, when in fact, they occurred in many cities throughout China.\nBackground.\n\"Boluan Fanzheng\" and economic reforms.\nThe Cultural Revolution ended with chairman Mao Zedong's death in 1976 and the arrest of the Gang of Four. That movement, spearheaded by Mao, had caused severe damage to the country's initially diverse economic and social fabric. As a result, the country was now mired in poverty as economic production slowed or came to a halt.\nDeng Xiaoping proposed the idea of \"Boluan Fanzheng\" (\"bringing order out of chaos\") to correct the mistakes of the Cultural Revolution. He launched a comprehensive programme to reform the Chinese economy (Reforms and Opening-up). Within several years, the country's focus on ideological purity was replaced by a concerted attempt to achieve material prosperity. To oversee his reform agenda, Deng promoted his allies to top government and party posts. Zhao Ziyang was named Premier, the head of government, in September 1980, and Hu Yaobang became CCP General Secretary in 1982.\nChallenges to Reforms and Opening-up.\nDeng's reforms aimed to decrease the state's role in the economy and gradually allow private production in agriculture and industry. By 1981, roughly 73% of rural farms had been de-collectivized, and 80% of state-owned enterprises were permitted to retain their profits.\nWhile the reforms were generally well received by the public, concerns grew over a series of social problems which the changes brought about, including corruption and nepotism on the part of elite party bureaucrats. The state-mandated pricing system, in place since the 1950s, had long kept prices fixed at low levels. The initial reforms created a two-tier system where some prices were fixed while others were allowed to fluctuate. In a market with chronic shortages, price fluctuation allowed people with powerful connections to buy goods at low prices and sell at market prices. Party bureaucrats in charge of economic management had enormous incentives to engage in such arbitrage. Discontent over corruption reached a fever pitch with the public; and many, particularly intellectuals, began to believe that only democratic reform and the rule of law could cure the country's ills.\nFollowing the 1988 meeting at their summer retreat of Beidaihe, the party leadership under Deng agreed to implement a transition to a market-based pricing system. News of the relaxation of price controls triggered waves of cash withdrawals, buying, and hoarding all over China. The government panicked and rescinded the price reforms in less than two weeks, but there was a pronounced impact for much longer. Inflation soared; official indices reported that the Consumer Price Index increased by 30% in Beijing between 1987 and 1988, leading to panic among salaried workers that they could no longer afford staple goods. Moreover, in the new market economy, unprofitable state-owned enterprises were pressured to cut costs. This threatened a vast proportion of the population that relied on the \"iron rice bowl\", i.e., social benefits such as job security, medical care, and subsidised housing.\nSocial disenfranchisement and legitimacy crisis.\nIn 1978, reformist leaders had envisioned that intellectuals would play a leading role in guiding the country through reforms, but this did not happen as planned. On one hand, the massive New Enlightenment movement led by intellectuals promoted a variety of liberal philosophies and values that challenged the socialist ideology, ranging from democracy, humanism, universal values such as freedom and human rights, to Total Westernisation; in response, since the beginning of the reforms, Deng Xiaoping in 1979 proposed the Four Cardinal Principles to limit the political liberalisation. On the other hand, despite the opening of new universities and increased enrollment, the state-directed education system did not produce enough graduates to meet increased demand in the areas of agriculture, light industry, services, and foreign investment. The job market was especially limited for students specializing in social sciences and the humanities. Moreover, private companies no longer needed to accept students assigned to them by the state, and many high-paying jobs were offered based on nepotism and favoritism. Gaining a good state-assigned placement meant navigating a highly inefficient bureaucracy that gave power to officials who had little expertise in areas under their jurisdiction. Facing a dismal job market and limited chances of going abroad, intellectuals and students had a greater vested interest in political issues. Small study groups, such as the \"Democracy Salon\" () and the \"Lawn Salon\" (), began appearing on Beijing university campuses. These organisations motivated the students to get involved politically.\nSimultaneously, the party's nominally socialist ideology faced a legitimacy crisis as it gradually adopted capitalist practices. Private enterprise gave rise to profiteers who took advantage of lax regulations and who often flaunted their wealth in front of those who were less well off. Popular discontent was brewing over unfair wealth distribution. Greed, not skill, appeared to be the most crucial factor in success. There was widespread public disillusionment concerning the country's future. People wanted change, yet the power to define \"the correct path\" continued to rest solely in the unelected government's hands.\nThe comprehensive and wide-ranging reforms created political differences over the pace of marketisation and the control over the ideology that came with it, opening a deep chasm within the central leadership. The reformers (\"the right\", led by Hu Yaobang) favored political liberalisation and a plurality of ideas as a channel to voice popular discontent and pressed for further reforms. The conservatives (\"the left\", led by Chen Yun) said that the reforms had gone too far and advocated a return to greater state control to ensure social stability and to better align with the party's socialist ideology. Both sides needed the backing of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping to carry out important policy decisions.\n1986 student demonstrations.\nIn mid-1986, astrophysics professor Fang Lizhi returned from a position at Princeton University and began a personal tour of universities in China, speaking about liberty, human rights, and the separation of powers. Fang was part of a wide undercurrent within the elite intellectual community that thought China's poverty and underdevelopment, and the disaster of the Cultural Revolution, were a direct result of China's authoritarian political system and rigid command economy. The view that political reform was the only answer to China's ongoing problems gained widespread appeal among students, as Fang's recorded speeches became widely circulated throughout the country. In response, Deng Xiaoping warned that Fang was blindly worshipping Western lifestyles, capitalism, and multi-party systems while undermining China's socialist ideology, traditional values, and the party's leadership.\nIn December 1986, inspired by Fang and other \"people-power\" movements worldwide, student demonstrators staged protests against the slow pace of reform. The issues were wide-ranging and included demands for economic liberalisation, democracy, and the rule of law. While the protests were initially contained in Hefei, where Fang lived, they quickly spread to Shanghai, Beijing, and other major cities. This alarmed the central leadership, who accused the students of instigating Cultural Revolution-style turmoil.\nGeneral Secretary Hu Yaobang was blamed for showing a \"soft\" attitude and mishandling the protests, thus undermining social stability. He was denounced thoroughly by conservatives and was forced to resign as general secretary on 16 January 1987. The party began the \"Anti-bourgeois liberalisation campaign\", aiming at Hu, political liberalisation, and Western-inspired ideas in general. The campaign stopped student protests and restricted political activity, but Hu remained popular among intellectuals, students, and Communist Party progressives.\nPolitical reforms.\nOn 18 August 1980, Deng Xiaoping gave a speech titled \"On the Reform of the Party and State Leadership System\" (\"\") at a full meeting of the CCP Politburo in Beijing, launching political reforms in China. He called for a systematic revision of China's constitution, criticizing bureaucracy, centralistion of power, and patriarchy, while proposing term limits for the leading positions in China and advocating democratic centralism and collective leadership. In December 1982, the fourth and current Constitution of China, known as the 1982 Constitution, was passed by the 5th National People's Congress.\nIn the first half of 1986, Deng repeatedly called for the revival of political reforms, as further economic reforms were hindered by the original political system with an increasing trend of corruption and economic inequality. A five-man committee to study the feasibility of political reform was established in September 1986; the members included Zhao Ziyang, Hu Qili, Tian Jiyun, Bo Yibo and Peng Chong. Deng's intention was to boost administrative efficiency, further separate responsibilities of the Party and the government, and eliminate bureaucracy. Although he spoke in terms of the rule of law and democracy, Deng delimited the reforms within the one-party system and opposed the implementation of Western-style constitutionalism.\nIn October 1987, at the 13th National Congress of the CCP, Zhao Ziyang gave a report drafted by Bao Tong on the political reforms. In his speech titled \"Advance Along the Road of Socialism with Chinese characteristics\" (\"\"), Zhao argued that socialism in China was still in its primary stage and, taking Deng's speech in 1980 as a guideline, detailed steps to be taken for political reform, including promoting the rule of law and the separation of powers, imposing de-centralisation, and improving the election system. At this Congress, Zhao was elected to be the CCP General Secretary.\nFunding and support.\nDuring the demonstrations, protesters received a significant amount of support from domestic and outside sources. The Chinese University in Hong Kong donated HK$10,000 by early May, and groups such as the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China were founded in support of the protests. Funding also came from the United States, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, and countries across Europe.\nBeginning of the 1989 protests.\nDeath of Hu Yaobang.\nWhen Hu Yaobang suddenly died of a heart attack on 15 April 1989, students reacted strongly, most believing his death was related to his forced resignation. Hu's death provided the initial impetus for students to gather in large numbers. On university campuses, many posters appeared eulogizing Hu, calling for honouring Hu's legacy. Within days, most posters were about broader political issues, such as corruption, democracy, and freedom of the press. Small, spontaneous gatherings to mourn Hu began on 15 April around the Monument to the People's Heroes at Tiananmen Square. On the same day, many students at Peking University (PKU) and Tsinghua University joined the gathering in Tiananmen Square in a piecemeal fashion. Small, organised student gatherings also took place in Xi'an and Shanghai on 16 April. On 17 April, students at the China University of Political Science and Law (CUPL) made a large wreath to commemorate Hu Yaobang. Its wreath-laying ceremony was on 17 April, and a larger-than-expected crowd assembled. At 5\u00a0pm, 500 CUPL students reached the eastern gate of the Great Hall of the People, near Tiananmen Square, to mourn Hu. The gathering featured speakers from various backgrounds who gave public orations commemorating Hu and discussed social problems. However, it was soon deemed obstructive to the Great Hall's operation, so police tried to persuade the students to disperse.\nStarting on the night of 17 April, three thousand PKU students marched from the campus towards Tiananmen Square, and soon nearly a thousand students from Tsinghua joined. Upon arrival, they soon joined forces with those already gathered at the square. As its size grew, the gathering gradually evolved into a protest, as students began to draft a list of pleas and suggestions (the Seven Demands) for the government:\nOn the morning of 18 April, students remained in the square. Some gathered around the Monument to the People's Heroes, singing patriotic songs and listening to student organizers' impromptu speeches. Others gathered at the Great Hall. Meanwhile, a few thousand students gathered at Xinhua Gate, the entrance to Zhongnanhai, the seat of the party leadership, where they demanded dialogue with the administration. After police restrained the students from entering the compound, they staged a sit-in. On 19 April, students held aloft a banner that read \"Freedom &amp; Democracy Enlightenment\" on the Monument, under a giant portrait of Hu Yaobang.\nOn 20 April, most students had been persuaded to leave Xinhua Gate. To disperse about 200 students that remained, police used batons; minor clashes were reported. Many students felt abused by the police, and rumors about police brutality spread quickly. The incident angered students on campus, where those who were not politically active decided to join the protests. Additionally, a group of workers calling themselves the Beijing Workers' Autonomous Federation issued two handbills challenging the central leadership.\nHu's state funeral took place on 22 April. On the evening of 21 April, some 100,000 students marched on Tiananmen Square, ignoring orders from Beijing municipal authorities that the square was to be closed for the funeral. The funeral, which took place inside the Great Hall and was attended by the leadership, was broadcast live to the students. General Secretary Zhao Ziyang delivered the eulogy. The funeral seemed rushed, lasting only 40 minutes, as emotions ran high in the square.\nSecurity cordoned off the east entrance to the Great Hall of the People, but several students pressed forward. A few were allowed to cross the police line. Three of these students, Zhou Yongjun, Guo Haifeng, and Zhang Zhiyong, knelt on the steps of the Great Hall to present a petition and demanded to see Premier Li Peng. Standing beside them, a fourth student (Wu'erkaixi) made a brief, emotional speech begging for Li Peng to come out and speak with them. The larger number of students still in the square but outside the cordon were at times emotional, shouting demands or slogans and rushing toward police. Wu'erkaixi calmed the crowd as they waited for the Premier to emerge. However, no leaders emerged from the Great Hall, leaving the students disappointed and angry; some called for a classroom boycott.\nOn 21 April, students began organizing under the banners of formal organisations. On 23 April, in a meeting of around 40 students from 21 universities, the Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation (also known as the Union) was formed. It elected CUPL student Zhou Yongjun as chair. Wang Dan and Wu'erkaixi also emerged as leaders. The Union then called for a general classroom boycott at all Beijing universities. Such an independent organisation operating outside of party jurisdiction alarmed the leadership.\nRioting on 22 April.\nOn 22 April, near dusk, serious rioting broke out in Changsha and Xi'an. In Xi'an, arson by rioters destroyed cars and houses, and looting occurred in shops near the city's Xihua Gate. In Changsha, 38 stores were ransacked by looters. Over 350 people were arrested in both cities for looting. In Wuhan, university students organised protests against the provincial government. As the situation became more volatile nationally, Zhao Ziyang called numerous meetings of the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). Zhao stressed three points: discourage students from further protests and ask them to go back to class, use all measures necessary to combat rioting, and open forms of dialogue with students at different levels of government. Premier Li Peng called upon Zhao to condemn protestors and recognize the need to take more serious action. Zhao dismissed Li's views. Despite calls for him to remain in Beijing, Zhao left for a scheduled state visit to North Korea on 23 April.\n26 April Editorial.\nZhao's departure to North Korea left Li Peng as the acting executive authority in Beijing. On 24 April, Li Peng and the PSC met with Beijing Party Secretary Li Ximing and mayor Chen Xitong to gauge the situation at the square. The municipal officials wanted a quick resolution to the crisis and framed the protests as a conspiracy to overthrow China's political system and prominent party leaders, including Deng Xiaoping. In Zhao's absence, the PSC agreed to take firm action against the protesters. On the morning of 25 April, President Yang Shangkun and Premier Li Peng met with Deng at the latter's residence. Deng endorsed a hardline stance and said an appropriate warning must be disseminated via mass media to curb further demonstrations. The meeting firmly established the first official evaluation of the protests, and highlighted Deng's having \"final say\" on important issues. Li Peng subsequently ordered Deng's views to be drafted as a communique and issued to all high-level Communist Party officials to mobilize the party apparatus against protesters.\nOn 26 April, the party's official newspaper \"People's Daily\" issued a front-page editorial titled \"It is necessary to take a clear-cut stand against disturbances\". The language in the editorial effectively branded the student movement to be an anti-party, anti-government revolt. The editorial invoked memories of the Cultural Revolution, using similar rhetoric that had been used during the 1976 Tiananmen Incident\u2014an event that was initially branded an anti-government conspiracy but was later rehabilitated as \"patriotic\" under Deng's leadership. The article enraged students, who interpreted it as a direct indictment of the protests and its cause. The editorial backfired: instead of scaring students into submission, it antagonised the students and put them squarely against the government. The editorial's polarizing nature made it a major sticking point for the remainder of the protests.\n27 April demonstrations.\nOrganized by the Union on 27 April, some 50,000\u2013100,000 students from all Beijing universities marched through the streets of the capital to Tiananmen Square, breaking through lines set up by police, and receiving widespread public support along the way, particularly from factory workers. The student leaders, eager to show the patriotic nature of the movement, also toned down anti-Communist slogans, choosing to present a message of \"anti-corruption\" and \"anti-cronyism\", but \"pro-party\". In a twist of irony, student factions who genuinely called for the overthrow of the Communist Party gained traction due to the 26 April editorial.\nThe stunning success of the march forced the government into making concessions and meeting with student representatives. On 29 April, State Council spokesman Yuan Mu met with appointed representatives of government-sanctioned student associations. While the talks discussed a wide range of issues, including the editorial, the Xinhua Gate incident, and freedom of the press, they achieved few substantive results. Independent student leaders such as Wu'erkaixi refused to attend.\nThe government's tone grew increasingly conciliatory when Zhao Ziyang returned from Pyongyang on 30 April and reasserted his authority. In Zhao's view, the hardliner approach was not working, and the concession was the only alternative. Zhao asked that the press be allowed to positively report the movement and delivered two sympathetic speeches on 3\u20134 May. In the speeches, Zhao said that the students' concerns about corruption were legitimate and that the student movement was patriotic in nature. The speeches essentially negated the message presented by 26 April Editorial. While some 100,000 students marched on the streets of Beijing on 4 May to commemorate the May Fourth Movement and repeated demands from earlier marches, many students were satisfied with the government's concessions. On 4 May, all Beijing universities except PKU and BNU announced the end of the classroom boycott. Subsequently, most students began to lose interest in the movement.\nEscalation of the protests.\nPreparing for dialogue.\nThe government was divided on how to respond to the movement as early as mid-April. After Zhao Ziyang's return from North Korea, tensions between the progressive camp and the conservative camp intensified. Those who supported continued dialogue and a soft approach with students rallied behind Zhao Ziyang, while hardliner conservatives opposed the movement rallied behind Premier Li Peng. Zhao and Li clashed at a PSC meeting on 1 May. Li maintained that the need for stability overrode all else, while Zhao said that the party should show support for increased democracy and transparency. Zhao pushed the case for further dialogue.\nIn preparation for dialogue, the Union elected representatives to a formal delegation. However, there was some friction as the Union leaders were reluctant to let the delegation unilaterally take control of the movement. The movement was slowed by a change to a more deliberate approach, fractured by internal discord, and increasingly diluted by declining engagement from the student body at large. In this context, a group of charismatic leaders, including Wang Dan and Wu'erkaixi, desired to regain momentum. They also distrusted the government's offers of dialogue, dismissing them as merely a ploy designed to play for time and pacify the students. To break from the moderate and incremental approach now adopted by other major student leaders, these few began calling for a return to more confrontational tactics. They settled on a plan of mobilizing students for a hunger strike that would begin on 13 May. Early attempts to mobilize others to join them met with only modest success until Chai Ling made an emotional appeal on the night before the strike was scheduled to begin.\nHunger strikes begin.\nStudents began the hunger strike on 13 May, two days before the highly publicised state visit by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Knowing that Gorbachev's welcoming ceremony was scheduled to be held on the square, student leaders wanted to use the hunger strike to force the government into meeting their demands. Moreover, the hunger strike gained widespread sympathy from the population at large and earned the student movement the moral high ground that it sought. By the afternoon of 13 May, some 300,000 were gathered at the square.\nInspired by the events in Beijing, protests and strikes began at universities in other cities, with many students travelling to Beijing to join the demonstration. Generally, the Tiananmen Square demonstration was well ordered, with daily marches of students from various Beijing-area colleges displaying their support of the classroom boycott and the protesters' demands. The students sang \"The Internationale\", the world socialist anthem, on their way to, and while at, the square.\nAfraid that the movement would spin out of control, Deng Xiaoping ordered the square to be cleared for Gorbachev's visit. Executing Deng's request, Zhao again used a soft approach and directed his subordinates to coordinate negotiations with students immediately. Zhao believed he could appeal to the students' patriotism. The students understood that signs of internal turmoil during the Sino-Soviet summit would embarrass the nation and not just the government. On the morning of 13 May, Yan Mingfu, head of the Communist Party's United Front, called an emergency meeting, gathering prominent student leaders and intellectuals, including Liu Xiaobo, Chen Ziming, and Wang Juntao. Yan said that the government was prepared to hold an immediate dialogue with student representatives. The Tiananmen welcoming ceremony for Gorbachev would be canceled whether or not the students withdrew\u2014in effect removing the bargaining power the students thought they possessed. The announcement sent the student leadership into disarray.\nMikhail Gorbachev's visit.\nPress restrictions were loosened significantly from early to mid-May. State media began broadcasting footage sympathetic to protesters and the movement, including the hunger strikers. On 14 May, intellectuals led by Dai Qing gained permission from Hu Qili to bypass government censorship and air the progressive views of the nation's intellectuals in the \"Guangming Daily\". The intellectuals then issued an urgent appeal for the students to leave the square in an attempt to deescalate the conflict. However, many students believed that the intellectuals were speaking for the government and refused to move. That evening, formal negotiations took place between government representatives led by Yan Mingfu and student representatives led by Shen Tong and Xiang Xiaoji. Yan affirmed the student movement's patriotic nature and pleaded for the students to withdraw from the square. While Yan's apparent sincerity for compromise satisfied some students, the meeting grew increasingly chaotic as competing student factions relayed uncoordinated and incoherent demands to the leadership. Shortly after student leaders learned that the event had not been broadcast nationally, as initially promised by the government, the meeting fell apart. Yan then personally went to the square to appeal to the students, even offering himself to be held hostage. Yan also took the student's pleas to Li Peng the next day, asking Li to consider formally retracting the 26 April Editorial and rebranding the movement as \"patriotic and democratic\"; Li refused.\nThe students remained in the square during the Gorbachev visit; his welcoming ceremony was held at the airport. The Sino-Soviet summit, the first of its kind in some 30 years, marked the normalisation of Sino-Soviet relations and was seen as a breakthrough of tremendous historical significance for China's leaders. However, its smooth proceedings were derailed by the student movement; this created a major embarrassment (\"loss of face\") for the leadership on the global stage and drove many moderates in government onto a more hardline path. The summit between Deng and Gorbachev took place at the Great Hall of the People amid the backdrop of commotion and protest in the square. When Gorbachev met with Zhao on 16 May, Zhao told him, and by extension the international press, that Deng was still the \"paramount authority\" in China. Deng felt that this remark was Zhao's attempt to shift blame for mishandling the movement to him. Zhao's defence against this accusation was that privately informing world leaders that Deng was the true centre of power was standard operating procedure; Li Peng had made nearly identical private statements to US president George H. W. Bush in February 1989. Nevertheless, the statement marked a decisive split between the country's two most senior leaders.\nGathering momentum.\nThe hunger strikes galvanised support for the students and aroused sympathy across the country. Around a million Beijing residents from all walks of life demonstrated in solidarity from 17 to 18 May. These included PLA personnel, police officers, and lower party officials. Many grassroots Party and Youth League organisations, as well as government-sponsored labour unions, encouraged their membership to demonstrate. In addition, several of China's non-Communist parties sent a letter to Li Peng to support the students. The Chinese Red Cross issued a special notice and sent in many personnel to provide medical services to the hunger strikers on the square. After the departure of Mikhail Gorbachev, many foreign journalists remained in the Chinese capital to cover the protests, shining an international spotlight on the movement. Western governments urged Beijing to exercise restraint.\nThe movement, on the wane at the end of April, now regained momentum. By 17 May, as students from across the country poured into the capital to join the movement, protests of various sizes occurred in some 400 Chinese cities. Students demonstrated at provincial party headquarters in Fujian, Hubei, and Xinjiang. Without a clearly articulated official position from the Beijing leadership, local authorities did not know how to respond. Because the demonstrations now included a wide array of social groups, each having its own set of grievances, it became increasingly unclear with whom the government should negotiate and what the demands were. The government, still split on how to deal with the movement, saw its authority and legitimacy gradually erode as the hunger strikers took the limelight and gained widespread sympathy. These combined circumstances put immense pressure on the authorities to act, and martial law was discussed as an appropriate response.\nThe situation seemed intractable, and the weight of taking decisive action fell on paramount leader Deng Xiaoping. Matters came to a head on 17 May during a Politburo Standing Committee meeting at Deng's residence. At the meeting, Zhao Ziyang's concessions-based strategy, which called for the retraction of the 26 April Editorial, was thoroughly criticised. Li Peng, Yao Yilin, and Deng asserted that by making a conciliatory speech to the Asian Development Bank, on 4 May, Zhao had exposed divisions within the top leadership and emboldened the students. Deng warned that \"there is no way to back down now without the situation spiraling out of control\", and so \"the decision is to move troops into Beijing to declare martial law\" as a show of the government's no-tolerance stance. To justify martial law, the demonstrators were described as tools of \"bourgeois liberalism\" advocates who were pulling strings behind the scenes, as well as tools of elements within the party who wished to further their personal ambitions. For the rest of his life, Zhao Ziyang maintained that the decision was ultimately in Deng's hands: among the five PSC members present at the meeting, he and Hu Qili opposed the imposition of martial law, Li Peng and Yao Yilin firmly supported it, and Qiao Shi remained carefully neutral and noncommittal. Deng appointed the latter three to carry out the decision.\nOn the evening of 17 May, the PSC met at Zhongnanhai to finalize plans for martial law. At the meeting, Zhao announced that he was ready to \"take leave\", citing he could not bring himself to carry out martial law. The elders in attendance at the meeting, Bo Yibo and Yang Shangkun, urged the PSC to follow Deng's orders. Zhao did not consider the inconclusive PSC vote to have legally binding implications for martial law; Yang Shangkun, in his capacity as Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission, mobilised the military to move into the capital.\nLi Peng for the first time on 18 May in an attempt to placate public concern over the hunger strike. During the talks, student leaders again demanded that the government rescind the 26 April Editorial and affirm the student movement as \"patriotic\". Li Peng said the government's main concern was sending the hunger strikers to hospitals. The discussions were confrontational and yielded little substantive progress, but gained student leaders prominent airtime on national television. By this point, those calling for the overthrow of the party and Li Peng and Deng became prominent both in Beijing and in other cities.\nIn the early morning of 19 May, Zhao Ziyang went to Tiananmen in what became his political swan song. He was accompanied by Wen Jiabao. Li Peng also went to the square but left shortly thereafter. At 4:50am Zhao made a speech with a bullhorn to a crowd of students, urging them to end the hunger strike. He told the students that they were still young and urged them to stay healthy and not to sacrifice themselves without due concern for their futures. Zhao's emotional speech was applauded by some students. It would be his last public appearance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Students, we came too late. We are sorry. You talk about us, criticize us, it is all necessary. The reason that I came here is not to ask you to forgive us. All I want to say is that students are getting very weak. It is the 7th day since you went on a hunger strike. You can't continue like this. [...] You are still young, there are still many days yet to come, you must live healthily, and see the day when China accomplishes the Four Modernisations. You are not like us. We are already old. It doesn't matter to us anymore.\n \u2014Zhao Ziyang at Tiananmen Square, 19 May 1989\nSurveillance of protesters.\nStudent leaders were put under close surveillance by the authorities; traffic cameras were used to perform surveillance on the square; and nearby restaurants, and wherever students gathered, were wiretapped. This surveillance led to the identification, capture, and punishment of protest participants. After the massacre, the government did thorough interrogations at work units, institutions, and schools to identify who had been at the protest.\nOutside Beijing.\nOn 19 April, the editors of the \"World Economic Herald\", a magazine close to reformists, decided to publish a commemorative section on Hu. Inside was an article by Yan Jiaqi, which commented favorably on the Beijing student protests, and called for a reassessment of Hu's 1987 purge. Sensing the conservative political trends in Beijing, Jiang Zemin demanded that the article be censored, and many newspapers were printed with a blank page. Jiang then suspended lead editor Qin Benli, his decisive action earning the trust of conservative party elders, who praised Jiang's loyalty.\nOn 27 May, over 300,000 people in Hong Kong gathered at Happy Valley Racecourse for a gathering called the Concert for Democracy in China (). Many Hong Kong celebrities sang songs and expressed their support for the students in Beijing. The following day, a procession of 1.5\u00a0million people, one fourth of Hong Kong's population, led by Martin Lee, Szeto Wah, and other organisation leaders, paraded through Hong Kong Island. Across the world, especially where ethnic Chinese lived, people gathered and protested. Many governments, including those of the United States and Japan, issued travel warnings against travelling to China.\nMilitary action.\nMartial law.\nThe Chinese government declared martial law on 20 May and mobilised at least 30 divisions from five of the country's seven military regions. At least 14 of the PLA's 24 army corps contributed troops. Guangzhou's civil aviation authorities suspended civil airline travel to prepare for transporting military units.\nThe army's initial entry into the capital was blocked in the suburbs by throngs of protesters. Seeing no way forward, the authorities ordered the army to withdraw on 24 May. All government forces then retreated to bases outside the city.\nDefying martial law, students entertained themselves with music, drinking, and smoking on the square. At the same time, internal divisions intensified within the student movement itself. By late May, the students became increasingly disorganised with no clear leadership or unified course of action. Moreover, Tiananmen Square was overcrowded and facing serious hygiene problems. Hou Dejian suggested an open election of the student leadership to speak for the movement but was met with opposition. Meanwhile, Wang Dan moderated his position, ostensibly sensing the impending military action and its consequences. He advocated for a temporary withdrawal from Tiananmen Square to re-group on campus, but this was opposed by hardline student factions who wanted to hold the square. The increasing internal friction would lead to struggles for control of the loudspeakers in the middle of the square in a series of \"mini-coups\": whoever controlled the loudspeakers was \"in charge\" of the movement. Some students would wait at the train station to greet arrivals of students from other parts of the country in an attempt to enlist factional support. Student groups began accusing each other of ulterior motives, such as collusion with the government and trying to gain personal fame from the movement. Some students even tried to oust Chai Ling and Feng Congde from their leadership positions in an attempted kidnapping, an action Chai called a \"well-organised and premeditated plot\".\nUnlike more moderate student leaders, Chai seemed willing to allow the student movement to end in a violent confrontation. In an interview given in late May, Chai stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What we actually are hoping for is bloodshed, the moment when the government is ready to brazenly butcher the people. Only when the Square is awash with blood will the people of China open their eyes.\u2014\u200aHowever, she felt that she was unable to convince her fellow students of this. She also claimed that her expectation of a violent crackdown was something she had heard from Li Lu and not an idea of her own.\n1 June.\nLi Peng's Report.\nOn 1 June, Li Peng issued a report titled \"On the True Nature of the Turmoil\", which was circulated to every member of the Politburo. The report concludes that the demonstrators' leadership, referred to as a \"tiny minority\", had \"organised and plotted the turmoil\", and that they were using the square as a base to provoke conflict in order to create an international impact. It also maintains that they had formed connections with criminal elements and used funding from foreign and domestic sources to improve their communications equipment and procure weapons.\nMSS Report.\nOn the same day, another report, issued by Ministry of State Security chief Jia Chunwang, was submitted to the party leadership, and likewise sent to every member of the Politburo, as well as to senior Party elders, including Deng Xiaoping, Li Xiannian and Chen Yun.\nThe report emphasized the danger of infiltration of bourgeois liberalism into China and the negative effect that Western ideological influence, particularly from the United States, had on the students. The MSS had determined that the United States had infiltrated the student movement by various means, including the use of the U.S. government-owned Voice of America radio station as an instrument of psychological warfare, as well as the cultivation of pro-American ideologies among Chinese students studying abroad as a long-term strategy. Furthermore, the report also resolved that U.S. intelligence had made efforts to get close to leaders of several Chinese institutions; according to the report, a CIA agent from the U.S. Embassy had nearly fifty contacts between 1981 and 1988, fifteen of whom were associated with the Economic Restructuring Commission. The report advocated for immediate military action, and was viewed as providing one of the best justifications for it.\n2\u20133 June.\nIn conjunction with the plan to clear the square by force, the Politburo received word from army headquarters stating that troops were ready to help stabilize the capital and that they understood the necessity and legality of martial law to overcome the turmoil.\nOn 2 June, with increasing action on the part of protesters, the government saw that it was time to act. Protests broke out as newspapers published articles that called for the students to leave Tiananmen Square and end the movement. Many of the students in the square were not willing to leave and were outraged by the articles. They were also outraged by the \"Beijing Daily\"'s 1 June article \"Tiananmen, I Cry for You\", which was written by a fellow student who had become disillusioned with the movement, as he thought it was chaotic and disorganised. In response to the articles, thousands of students lined the streets of Beijing to protest against leaving the square.\nThree intellectuals\u2014Liu Xiaobo, Zhou Duo, and Gao Xin\u2014and Taiwanese singer Hou Dejian declared a second hunger strike to revive the movement. After weeks of occupying the square, the students were tired, and internal rifts opened between moderate and hardline student groups. In their declaration speech, the hunger strikers openly criticised the government's suppression of the movement, to remind the students that their cause was worth fighting for and pushing them to continue their occupation of the square.\nOn 2 June, Deng Xiaoping and several party elders met with the three PSC members\u2014Li Peng, Qiao Shi, and Yao Yilin\u2014who remained after Zhao Ziyang and Hu Qili had been ousted. The committee members agreed to clear the square so \"the riot can be halted and order be restored to the Capital\". They also agreed that the square needed to be cleared as peacefully as possible; but if protesters did not cooperate, the troops would be authorised to use force to complete the job. That day, state-run newspapers reported that troops were positioned in ten key areas in the city. Units of the 27th, 65th, and 24th armies were secretly moved into the Great Hall of the People on the west side of the square and the Ministry of Public Security compound east of the square.\nOn the evening of 2 June, an accident occurred in which a PAP jeep ran onto a sidewalk, killing three civilian pedestrians and injuring a fourth. This incident sparked fear that the army and the police were trying to advance into Tiananmen Square. Student leaders issued emergency orders to set up roadblocks at major intersections to prevent the entry of troops into the centre of the city.\nOn the morning of 3 June, students and citizens intercepted and questioned a busload of plainclothed soldiers at Xinjiekou. Isolated pockets of soldiers were similarly surrounded and interrogated.\nThe soldiers were beaten by the crowd, as were Beijing security personnel who attempted to aid the soldiers. Some of the soldiers were kidnapped when they attempted to head for the hospital. Several other buses carrying weapons, gear, and supplies were intercepted and boarded around Tiananmen.\nAt 1 pm, a crowd intercepted one of these buses at Liubukou, and several men raised military helmets on bayonets to show the rest of the crowd. \nAt 2:30 pm, a clash broke out between protesters and police. The police attempted to disperse the crowd with tear gas, but demonstrators counterattacked and threw rocks, forcing them to retreat inside the Zhongnanhai compound through the west gate.\nAt 5:30 pm, several thousand troops awaiting orders began to retreat from the Great Hall of the People. That evening, the government leaders continued to monitor the situation.\n3\u20134 June.\nIn the evening on 3 June, the government issued an emergency announcement urging citizens to \"stay off the streets and away from Tiananmen Square\". Meanwhile, protesters made their own broadcasts across various university campuses in Beijing to call for students and citizens to arm themselves and assemble at intersections and the Square.\nChang'an Avenue.\nOn 3 June, at 8:00\u00a0p.m., the 38th Army, led by interim commander Zhang Meiyuan, began to advance from military office compounds in Shijingshan and Fentai District in western Beijing along the western extension of Chang'an Avenue toward the square to the east. At 9:30 p.m, this army encountered a blockade set up by protesters at Gongzhufen in Haidian District, and made an attempt to break through. Troops armed with anti-riot gear clashed with the protesters and began firing rubber bullets and tear gas, while the protesters in return threw rocks and soda bottles at them. Other troops fired warning shots into the air, which was ineffective. At 10:10 pm, an army officer picked up a megaphone and urged the protesters to disperse.\nAt about 10:30\u00a0p.m., still being pummeled by rocks thrown by protesters, the 38th Army troops opened fire with live ammunition. The crowds were stunned that the army was using live ammunition and fell back towards Muxidi Bridge. The troops used expanding bullets, prohibited by international law for use in warfare between countries but not for other uses.\nThe advance of the army was again halted by another blockade at Muxidi, about 5\u00a0km west of the square. After protesters repelled an attempt by an anti-riot brigade to storm the bridge, regular troops advanced on the crowd and turned their weapons on them. Soldiers alternated between shooting into the air and firing directly at protesters. Soldiers raked apartment buildings with gunfire, and some people inside or on their balconies were shot. As the army advanced, fatalities were recorded along Chang'an Avenue. By far, the largest number occurred in the two-mile stretch of road running from Muxidi to Xidan, where \"65 PLA trucks and 47 APCs ... were totally destroyed, and 485 other military vehicles were damaged.\"\nDemonstrators attacked troops with poles, rocks, and molotov cocktails; Jeff Widener reported witnessing rioters setting fire to military vehicles and beating the soldiers inside them to death. On one avenue in western Beijing, anti-government protestors torched a military convoy of more than 100 trucks and armored vehicles. They also hijacked an armored personnel carrier, taking it on a joy ride. These scenes were captured on camera and broadcast by Chinese state television.\nIn the evening, a firefight broke out between soldiers and demonstrators at Shuangjing.\nOn 5 June 1989, \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported on the fighting: \"As columns of tanks and tens of thousands of soldiers approached Tiananmen, many troops were set on by angry mobs who screamed, 'Fascists'. Dozens of soldiers were pulled from trucks, severely beaten, and left for dead. At an intersection west of the square, the body of a young soldier, who had been beaten to death, was stripped naked and hung from the side of a bus. Another soldier's corpse was strung up at an intersection east of the square.\"\nClearing the square.\nAt the Square, soldiers and students initially attempted to show restraint, but residents refused to follow student orders. Soldiers did not fight back at first after some citizens threw rocks at them.\nIn the early morning on 4 June, the first APC entered Tiananmen Square from Chang'an West Boulevard. Demonstrators attacked the APC with molotov cocktails and immobilised it with a traffic divider, before covering it with gasoline-doused blankets and setting it on fire. Wu Renhua claims that after the three occupants were forced out of the vehicle by the heat, students escorted the three men to a medic station. However, according to an eyewitness account of a Chinese-American reporter, the soldiers were attacked by the crowd: Two soldiers were burned alive inside the APC, and a third was beaten to death in full view of other soldiers. Larry Wortzel, a military intelligence officer at the U.S. Embassy at the time, noted that the demonstrators' swarming tactics were clearly rehearsed and practiced, having been used similarly in other places around the city.\nTroops from the west arrived at the square at about 1:30 am, and troops from other directions gradually arrived as well, blocking main roads to the square to prevent entry. A second emergency announcement from the government was broadcast on loudspeakers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A severe counterrevolutionary riot has broken out in the capital tonight. Rioters have savagely attacked soldiers of the PLA, have stolen their weapons and burned their vehicles, have erected roadblocks, and have kidnapped officers and soldiers [...] Citizens and students must\nevacuate the Square immediately so that martial law troops can successfully carry out their mission. We cannot guarantee the safety of violators, who will be solely responsible for any consequences.\u2014\u200a\nAfter the announcement, most people in the square began to leave, and by 2:00 am, there were only a few thousand demonstrators in the square. North of the square, a dozen students and citizens attempted to torch army trucks with cans of gasoline but were arrested.\nAt 3:00 am, Hou Dejian, Liu Xiaobo, Zhou\nDuo, and Gao Xin decided to convince the students to evacuate the square; Chai Ling, however, insisted that \"those who wish to leave may leave, and those who don't may stay.\" The group asked Chai Ling and other student leaders to negotiate a peaceful evacuation. Hou Dejian addressed the students by loudspeaker, urging them to leave the square and surrender their rifles and other weapons, before leaving with Zhou Duo in an ambulance to meet the government troops.\nBetween 3:30 and 3:45 am, the ambulance arrived at the Museum of Chinese History in the northeast corner of the square, and Hou Dejian and Zhou Duo met with Ji Xinguo, a regimental political commissar. They requested that the army give them time to evacuate, and to open a path for them to leave. Ji Xinguo relayed their request to Martial Law Headquarters, who agreed to the students' request. Ji Xinguo informed them of this and told them to exit to the south. After Hou and Zhou returned to the square, they called for an immediate evacuation, and the Martial Law Headquarters announced, \"Students, we appreciate that you will leave the Square voluntarily. Students, please leave in the southeastern direction.\"\nThere was initial reluctance among the students to leave, but as the deadline approached, Feng Congde asked students for a voice vote on whether to stay or leave. Although the vote's results were inconclusive, Feng said the vote to leave was louder. The demonstrators began to evacuate, with students leaving under their school banners, heading southeast. At about 4:35am, a few minutes after the demonstrators started to retreat, the lights in the square were turned on, and troops began to advance. A squad of commandos charged up the monument and shot out the students' loudspeaker. According to Hou Dejian, tear gas was used during the operation to clear the square.\nAt 5:23am, a Chinese unit crushed the Goddess of Democracy statue, removing its severed torch first as a memento.\nHaving removed the students from the square, soldiers were ordered to relinquish their ammunition, after which they were allowed a short reprieve, from 7am to 9am. The debris left over from the student occupation was either piled and burnt on the square or placed in large plastic bags that were then airlifted away by military helicopters. After the cleanup, the troops stationed at The Great Hall of the People remained confined within for the next nine days. During this time, the soldiers were apparently left to sleep on the floors and were daily supplied a single packet of instant noodles shared between three men.\nIn the city.\nJust past 6am on 4 June, as a convoy of students who had vacated the square were walking westward in the bicycle lane along Chang'an Avenue back to campus, three tanks pursued them from the square, firing tear gas. One tank was said to have driven through the crowd, killing 11 students and injuring scores of others.\nBy dawn, the sky was enveloped with smoke rising from the centre of the city, and the streets were filled with burned-out vehicles. Skirmishes between protesters and troops continued sporadically in the city. Some demonstrators regrouped and attempted to re-enter the square from the northeast on East Chang'an Avenue, but were driven off by gunfire. The square remained closed to the public for two weeks.\nAt 17:00, a sitrep from the U.S. State Department to the U.S. Embassy indicated that the PLA was \"mopping up isolated resistance\".\n5 June and the Tank Man.\nOn June 5, having secured the square, the military began to reassert control over thoroughfares through the city, especially Chang'an Avenue. A column of tanks of the 1st Armored Division left the square and, heading east on Chang'an Avenue, came upon a lone protester standing in the middle of the avenue. The brief standoff between the man and the tanks was captured by Western media atop the Beijing Hotel. After returning to his position in front of the tanks, the man was pulled aside by a group of people. Charlie Cole, who was there for \"Newsweek\", claimed that the men were Chinese government agents, while Jan Wong, who was there for \"The Globe and Mail\", thought that they were concerned bystanders.\nAlthough the fate of Tank Man following the demonstration is not known, paramount Chinese leader Jiang Zemin stated in 1990 that he did not think the man was killed. \"Time\" later named him one of the .\nA stopped convoy of 37 APCs on Changan Boulevard at Muxidi was forced to abandon their vehicles after becoming stuck among an assortment of burned-out buses and military vehicles. In addition to occasional incidents of soldiers opening fire on civilians in Beijing, Western news outlets reported clashes between units of the PLA. Late in the afternoon, 26 tanks, three armored personnel carriers, and supporting infantry took up defensive positions facing east at Jianguomen and Fuxingmen overpasses. Shellfire was heard throughout the night, and the next morning a United States Marine in the eastern part of the city reported spotting a damaged armored vehicle that an armor-piercing shell had disabled. The ongoing turmoil in the capital disrupted everyday life flow. No editions of the \"People's Daily\" were available in Beijing on 5 June, despite assurances that they had been printed. Many shops, offices, and factories were not able to open, as workers remained in their homes, and public transit services were limited to the subway and suburban bus routes.\nBy and large, the government regained control in the week following the square's military seizure. A political purge followed in which officials responsible for organizing or condoning the protests were removed, and protest leaders were jailed.\nProtests outside Beijing.\nAfter order was restored in Beijing on 4 June, protests of various sizes continued in some 80 other Chinese cities outside the international press's spotlight. In the British colony of Hong Kong, people again took to wearing black in solidarity with the demonstrators in Beijing. There were also protests in other countries, where many adopted the wearing of black armbands as well.\nIn Shanghai, students marched on the streets on 5 June and erected roadblocks on major thoroughfares. Public transport including railway traffic was blocked. On 6 June, the municipal government tried to clear the rail blockade, but it was met with fierce resistance from the crowds. Several people were killed from being run over by a train. On 7 June, students from major Shanghai universities stormed various campus facilities to erect biers. Although there were rumors of possible martial law in the city, the situation was gradually brought under control without deadly force. The municipal government gained recognition from the top leadership in Beijing for averting a major upheaval.\nIn the interior cities of Xi'an, Wuhan, Nanjing, and Chengdu, many students continued protests after 4 June, often erecting roadblocks. In Xi'an, students stopped workers from entering factories. In Wuhan, students blocked the Yangtze River Railway bridge and another 4,000 gathered at the railway station. About one thousand students staged a railroad \"sit-in\", and rail traffic on the Beijing-Guangzhou and Wuhan-Dalian lines was interrupted. The students also urged employees of major state-owned enterprises to go on strike. In Wuhan, the situation was so tense that residents reportedly began a bank run and resorted to panic buying.\nGovernment's pronouncements.\nAt a news conference on 6 June, State Council spokesperson Yuan Mu announced that based on \"preliminary statistics\", \"nearly 300 people died ... includ[ing] soldiers\", 23 students, \"bad elements who deserve[d] this because of their crimes, and people who were killed by mistake.\" He said the wounded included \"5,000 [police] officers and [soldiers]\" and over \"2,000 civilians, including the handful of lawless ruffians and the onlooking masses who do understand the situation.\" Military spokesperson Zhang Gong stated that no one was killed in Tiananmen Square and no one was run over by tanks in the square.\nOn 9 June, Deng Xiaoping, appearing in public for the first time since the protests began, delivered a speech praising the \"martyrs\" (PLA soldiers who had died). Deng stated that the goal of the student movement was to overthrow the party and the state. Of the protesters, Deng said: \"Their goal is to establish a totally Western-dependent bourgeois republic.\" Deng argued that protesters had complained about corruption to cover their real motive, replacing the socialist system. He said that \"the entire imperialist Western world plans to make all socialist countries discard the socialist road and then bring them under the monopoly of international capital and onto the capitalist road.\"\nDeath toll.\nFrom the end of the events on, the number of people who died in the square itself has been in dispute. The government actively suppressed discussion of casualty figures immediately after the events, and estimates rely heavily on eyewitness testimony, hospital records, and organised efforts by victims' relatives. As a result, large discrepancies exist among various casualty estimates. Initial estimates ranged from the official figure of a few hundred to several thousand.\nOfficial figures.\nOfficial government announcements shortly after the event put the number who died at around 300. At the State Council press conference on 6 June, spokesman Yuan Mu said that \"preliminary tallies\" by the government showed that about 300 civilians and soldiers died, including 23 students from universities in Beijing, along with some people he described as \"ruffians\". Yuan also said some 5,000 soldiers and police were wounded, along with 2,000 civilians. On 19 June, Beijing Party Secretary Li Ximing reported to the Politburo that the government's confirmed death toll was 241, including 218 civilians (of which 36 were students), 10 PLA soldiers, and 13 People's Armed Police, along with 7,000 wounded. On 30 June, Mayor Chen Xitong said that the number of injured was around 6,000.\nOther estimates.\nOn the morning of 4 June, many estimates of deaths were reported, including from government-affiliated sources. Peking University leaflets circulated on campus suggested a death toll of between two and three thousand. There were rumors that the Chinese Red Cross had given a figure of 2,600 deaths, but the organisation denied having given such a figure. The Swiss Ambassador had estimated 2,700. Nicholas D. Kristof of \"The New York Times\" wrote on 21 June that \"it seems plausible that about a dozen soldiers and policemen were killed, along with 400 to 800 civilians.\" United States ambassador James Lilley said that, based on visits to hospitals around Beijing, a minimum of several hundred had been killed. A declassified National Security Agency cable filed on the same day estimated 180\u2013500 deaths up to the morning of 4 June. Beijing hospital records compiled shortly after the events recorded at least 478 dead and 920 wounded. Amnesty International's estimates put the number of deaths at between several hundred and close to 1,000, while a Western diplomat who compiled estimates put the number at 300 to 1,000.\nIn a disputed cable sent in the aftermath of the events at Tiananmen, British Ambassador Alan Donald initially claimed, based on information from a \"good friend\" in the State Council of China, that a minimum of 10,000 civilians died, claims which were repeated in a speech by Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke, but which is an estimated number much higher than other sources provided. After the declassification, former student protest leader Feng Congde pointed out that Donald later revised his estimate to 2,700\u20133,400 deaths, a number closer to, but still much higher than, other estimates.\nIdentifying the dead.\nThe Tiananmen Mothers, a victims' advocacy group co-founded by Ding Zilin and Zhang Xianling, whose children were killed by the government during the crackdown, have identified 202 victims as of August\u00a02011[ [update]]. In the face of government interference, the group has worked painstakingly to locate victims' families and collect information about the victims. Their tally had grown from 155 in 1999 to 202 in 2011. The list includes four individuals who committed suicide on or after 4 June for reasons related to their involvement in the demonstrations.\nFormer protester Wu Renhua of the Chinese Alliance for Democracy, an overseas group agitating for democratic reform in China, said that he was only able to identify and verify 15 military deaths. Wu asserts that if deaths from events unrelated to demonstrators were removed from the count, only seven deaths among military personnel might be counted as from being \"killed in action\" by rioters.\nDeaths around and in Tiananmen Square itself.\nGovernment officials have long asserted that no one died in the square in the early morning hours of 4 June, during the \"hold-out\" of students' last batch in the south part of the square. Initially, foreign media reports of a \"massacre\" on the square were prevalent, though subsequently, journalists have acknowledged that most of the deaths occurred outside of the square in western Beijing. Several people who were situated around the square that night, including former Beijing bureau chief of \"The Washington Post\" Jay Mathews and CBS correspondent Richard Roth reported that while they had heard sporadic gunfire, they could not find enough evidence to suggest that a massacre took place on the square.\nStudent leader Chai Ling claimed in a speech broadcast on Hong Kong television that she witnessed tanks arrive at the square and crush students who were sleeping in their tents, and added that between 200 and 4000 students died at the square. Ling was joined by fellow student leader Wu'er Kaixi who said he had witnessed 200 students being cut down by gunfire; however, according to Mathews, it was later proven that he had already left the square several hours before the events he claimed to have happened. Taiwan-born Hou Dejian was present in the square to show solidarity with the students and said that he did not see any massacre occurring in the square. He was quoted by Xiaoping Li, a former China dissident to have stated: \"Some people said 200 died in the square, and others claimed that as many as 2,000 died. There were also stories of tanks running over students who were trying to leave. I have to say I did not see any of that. I was in the square until 6:30 in the morning.\"\nIn 2011, three secret cables from the United States embassy in Beijing from the time of the events were leaked and published by WikiLeaks, all of which stated that there was no bloodshed inside Tiananmen Square itself. Instead, they said Chinese soldiers opened fire on protesters in Beijing outside the square, around Muxidi station, as they fought their way from the west towards the centre. A Chilean diplomat who had been positioned next to a Red Cross station inside the square told his US counterparts that he did not observe any mass firing of weapons into the crowds in the square itself, although sporadic gunfire was heard. He said that most of the troops who entered the square were armed only with anti-riot gear.\nImmediate aftermath.\nArrests, punishments, and evacuations.\nOn 13 June 1989, the Beijing Public Security Bureau released an order for the arrest of 21 students they identified as the protest leaders. These 21 most-wanted student leaders were part of the Beijing Students Autonomous Federation, which had been instrumental in the Tiananmen Square protests. Though decades have passed, this most-wanted list has never been retracted by the Chinese government.\nOn 17 June, two individuals were captured after exchanging gunfire with soldiers. The same day, a woman who had been visiting a Western diplomat at Jianguomenwai diplomatic compound was observed being arrested by plainclothes policemen.\nThe 21 most-wanted student leaders' faces and descriptions were often broadcast on television. Photographs with biographies of the leaders followed in this order: Wang Dan,\nWuer Kaixi, Liu Gang, Chai Ling, Zhou Fengsuo, Zhai Weimin, Liang Qingdun, Wang Zhengyun, Zheng Xuguang, Ma Shaofang, Yang Tao, Wang Zhixing, Feng Congde, Wang Chaohua, Wang Youcai, Zhang Zhiqing, Zhang Boli, Li Lu, Zhang Ming, Xiong Wei, and Xiong Yan.\nEach of the 21 students faced diverse experiences after their arrests or escapes; while some remain abroad with no intent to return, others have chosen to stay indefinitely, such as Zhang Ming. Only 7 of the 21 were able to escape. Some student leaders, such as Chai Ling and Wuer Kaixi, were able to escape to the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and other Western nations under Operation Yellowbird, which was organised by Western intelligence agencies such as MI6 and CIA from Hong Kong, a British territory at the time. According to \"The Washington Post\", the operation involved more than 40 people and had its roots in the Alliance in Support of Democratic Movements in China formed in May 1989. After the Beijing protest crackdown, this group drew up an initial list of 40 dissidents they believed could form the nucleus of a \"Chinese democracy movement in exile\".\nThe remaining student leaders were apprehended and incarcerated. Those who escaped, whether in 1989 or after, generally have had difficulty re-entering China up to this day. The Chinese government has preferred to leave the dissidents in exile. Those who attempt to re-enter, such as Wu'er Kaixi, have been simply sent back but not arrested.\nChen Ziming and Wang Juntao were arrested in late 1989 for their involvement in the protests. Chinese authorities alleged they were the \"black hands\" behind the movement. Both Chen and Wang rejected the allegations made against them. They were put on trial in 1990 and sentenced to 13 years in prison. Others, such as Zhang Zhiqing, have essentially disappeared. After his initial arrest in January 1991 and subsequent release, nothing further is known about his situation and where he lives now. Zhang Zhiqing's role and reason for being listed on the 21 most wanted is generally unknown; this is the case for many others on the list, such as Wang Chaohua.\nAccording to the Dui Hua Foundation, citing a provincial government, 1,602 individuals were imprisoned for protest-related activities in early 1989. As of May\u00a02012[ [update]], at least two remain incarcerated in Beijing, and five others remain unaccounted for. In June 2014, it was reported that Miao Deshun was believed to be the last known prisoner incarcerated for their participation in the protests; he was last heard from a decade ago. All are reported to have mental illnesses.\nLeadership changes.\nThe party leadership expelled Zhao Ziyang from the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). Hu Qili, another PSC member who opposed martial law but abstained from voting, was also removed from the committee. However, he was able to retain his party membership, and after \"changing his opinion\", he was reassigned as deputy minister in the Ministry for Machinery and Electronics Industry. Another reform-minded Chinese leader, Wan Li, was also put under house arrest immediately after he stepped out of his plane at Beijing Capital Airport upon returning from a shortened trip abroad; the authorities declared his detention to be on health grounds. When Wan Li was released from his house arrest after he finally \"changed his opinion\", he, like Qiao Shi, was transferred to a different position with equal rank but a mostly ceremonial role. Several Chinese ambassadors abroad claimed political asylum.\nJiang Zemin, the Party Secretary of Shanghai, was promoted to General Secretary of the Communist Party. Jiang's decisive actions in Shanghai involving the \"World Economic Herald\" and his having prevented deadly violence in the city won him support from party elders in Beijing. Having put the new leadership team in place and recognizing his weakened position, Deng Xiaoping himself also bowed out of the party leadership\u2014at least officially\u2014by resigning his last leadership position as Chairman of the Central Military Commission later that year. He kept a low profile until 1992. According to diplomatic cables de-classified by Canada, the Swiss ambassador informed Canadian diplomats in confidence that over several months following the massacre, \"every member of the Politburo Standing Committee has approached him about transferring very significant amounts of money to Swiss bank accounts.\"\nBao Tong, Zhao Ziyang's aide, was the highest-ranking official to be formally charged with a crime connected with 1989 demonstrations. He was convicted in 1992 of \"revealing state secrets and counter-revolutionary propagandizing\" and served seven years in prison. To purge sympathizers of Tiananmen demonstrators from among the party's rank-and-file, the party leadership initiated a one-and-a-half-year-long rectification programme to \"deal strictly with those inside the party with serious tendencies toward bourgeois liberalisation\". Four million people were reportedly investigated for their role in the protests. More than 30,000 Communist officers were deployed to assess the \"political reliability\" of more than one million government officials. The authorities arrested tens if not hundreds of thousands of people across the country. Some were seized in broad daylight while they walked in the street; others were arrested at night. Many were jailed or sent to labour camps. They were often denied access to see their families and often put in cells so crowded that not everyone had space to sleep. Dissidents shared cells with murderers and rapists, and torture was not uncommon.\nMedia coverage.\nOfficial narrative.\nThe official narrative constructed by the Chinese Communist Party on 4 June Incident states that the use of force was necessary to control \"political turmoil\", and this also ensures the stable society that is necessary for successful economic development. Chinese leaders\u2014including Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao, who were general secretaries of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party\u2014consistently reiterated the official narrative of the Chinese Communist Party when being asked about the protests by foreign journalists.\nPrint media were required to be consistent with the Chinese government's account of the 4 June Incident. The Chinese government prepared a white paper to explain the government's views on the protests. Later, anonymous people within the Chinese government shipped the files overseas and published the \"Tiananmen Papers\" in 2001. At the 30th anniversary of the 4 June Incident, Wei Fenghe, a general of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, said in the Shangri-La Dialogue: \"The 4 June Incident was a turmoil and unrest. The Central Government took decisive measures to calm the unrest and stop the turmoil, and it is because of this decision that the stability within the country can be established. For the past three decades, China has undergone tremendous changes under the leadership of the Communist Party.\"\nChinese media.\nThe suppression of 4 June marked the end of a period of relative press freedom in China, and media workers\u2014both foreign and domestic\u2014faced heightened restrictions and punishment in the aftermath of the crackdown. State media reports in the immediate aftermath were sympathetic to the students. As a result, those responsible were all later removed from their posts. Two news anchors, Du Xian and Xue Fei, who reported this event on 4 and 5 June, respectively in the daily \"Xinwen Lianbo\" broadcast on China Central Television, were fired because they openly emoted in sympathy with the protesters. Wu Xiaoyong, the son of the former foreign minister Wu Xueqian, was removed from the English Programme Department of Chinese Radio International, ostensibly for his sympathies towards protesters. Editors and other staff at the \"People's Daily\", including director Qian Liren and Editor-in-Chief Tan Wenrui, were also sacked because of reports in the paper that were sympathetic towards the protesters.\nThe restrictions were loosened after a few years had passed, especially after Deng Xiaoping's southern tour. Privately run print media then again flourished. Private newspapers increased from 250 in the 1980s to over 7,000 by 2003. Provincially-run, satellite TV stations sprang up all over the country and challenged the market share of state-run CCTV. The leadership also stepped away from promoting communism as an all-encompassing belief system. State-approved religious organisations increased their membership significantly, and traditional beliefs suppressed during the Mao era re-appeared. This state-sanctioned plurality also created an environment for unsanctioned forms of spirituality and worship to grow. To reduce the need for controversial methods of state control, Protestants, Buddhists, and Taoists were often used by the state as \"approved\" denominations to \"fight against cults\" such as Falun Gong, playing the sects against each other.\nForeign media.\nWith the imposition of martial law, the Chinese government cut off Western broadcasters' satellite transmissions such as CNN and CBS. Broadcasters tried to defy these orders by reporting via telephone. Video footage was smuggled out of the country, although the only network that was able to record video during the night of 4 June was of Spain (TVE). During the military action, some foreign journalists faced harassment from authorities. CBS correspondent Richard Roth and his cameraman were taken into custody while filing a report from the square via mobile phone.\nSeveral foreign journalists who had covered the crackdown were expelled in the weeks that followed, while others were harassed by authorities or blacklisted from reentering the country. Some were reportedly beaten.\nSome Western outlets withheld certain images from viewers; Graham Earnshaw, a Reuters correspondent at the time, stated that a \"disgusting\" photo depicting the burned body of a soldier hanging from a bus was not sent to subscribers.\nReactions.\nThe Chinese government's response was widely denounced by Western governments and media.\nAccording to Suisheng Zhao, Asian countries generally remained silent throughout the protests. India's government under Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi responded to the massacre by ordering the state television to offer only the absolute minimum coverage of the incident so as not to jeopardize a thawing in relations with China and to empathize with the Chinese government. The Communist Party of India (Marxist) was the only political party in the world to pass a resolution supporting the crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests, calling them \"an imperialist attempt to internally subvert socialism, [which] was successfully thwarted by the CPC and the PLA.\" South Korea was in the midst of efforts to develop relations with the People's Republic of China and President Roh Tae-woo remained quiet in the aftermath of the crackdown.166\nFormer United Nations Secretary-General Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar expressed great sadness over the event. In 1992, he however stated that the crackdown had been exaggerated, and that he received no convincing evidence of widespread killing.\nCuba, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany, under the Soviet sphere of influence at the time, supported the Chinese government and denounced the protests.\nLonger-term impact.\nPolitics.\nAs the party departed from the orthodox communism it was founded upon, much of its attention was focused on the cultivation of nationalism as an alternative ideology. This policy largely succeeded in tying the party's legitimacy to China's \"national pride\", turning domestic public opinion back in its favor.\nSupport of liberal reform and liberal democracy among intellectuals decreased, and support for conservative cultural politics increased.\nThe protests highlighted severe inadequacies in riot-control equipment and training among both the Chinese military and police. The PLA was not trained or equipped to handle riots, and the few PAP riot-control units that were dispatched were insufficient in crowd control. Since 1989, efforts have been made to create effective riot-control units in Chinese cities increased spending on internal security and to an expanded role for the People's Armed Police in handling protests.\nEconomy.\nAfter the Tiananmen Square protests, many business analysts downgraded their outlook for China's economic future. The violent response to the protests was one of the factors that led to a delay in China's acceptance in the World Trade Organization, which was not completed until twelve years later, in 2001. Furthermore, bilateral aid to China decreased from $3.4\u00a0billion in 1988 to $700\u00a0million in 1990. Loans to China were suspended by the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and foreign governments; China's credit rating was lowered; tourism revenue decreased from US$2.2\u00a0billion to US$1.8\u00a0billion; and foreign direct investment commitments were canceled. However, there was a rise in government defence spending from 8.6% in 1986, to 15.5% in 1990, reversing a previous 10-year decline.\nIn the aftermath of the protests, the government sought again to centralize control over the economy, though the changes were short-lived. Sensing that conservative policies had again taken a foothold within the party, Deng, now retired from all of his official positions, launched his southern tour in 1992, visiting various cities in the country's most prosperous regions while advocating for further economic reforms. Partly in response to Deng, by the mid-1990s the country was again pursuing market liberalisation on a scale even greater than those seen in the initial stages of the reforms in the 1980s. Although political liberals were purged from within the party, many of those who were economically liberal remained. The economic shocks caused by the events of 1989, in retrospect, had only a minor and temporary effect on China's economic growth. Indeed, with many previously aggrieved groups now regarding political liberalisation as a lost cause, more of their energy was spent on economic activities. The economy would quickly regain momentum into the 1990s.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, the Tiananmen Square protests led to fears that China would renege on its commitments under one country, two systems, following the impending handover of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom in 1997. In response, Governor Chris Patten tried to expand the franchise for the Legislative Council of Hong Kong, which led to friction with Beijing. For many Hongkongers, Tiananmen served as the turning point when they lost trust in the Beijing government. The event, coupled with general uncertainty about the status of Hong Kong after the transfer of sovereignty, led to a sizable exodus of Hong Kongers to Western countries such as Canada and Australia before 1997.\nThere have been large candlelight vigils attended by tens of thousands in Hong Kong every year since 1989, even after the transfer of power to China in 1997. Despite that, the June 4th Museum closed in July 2016, after only two years in its location. The group that runs the museum, the Hong Kong Alliance, has started to crowdfund money to open the museum in a new location. A virtual version of the museum released online in August 2021 has also been blocked by Chinese telecom companies.\nThe events continue to strongly impact perceptions of China, its government, attitudes towards democracy, and the extent to which Hong Kongers should identify as \"Chinese\". The events of 4 June are seen as representative of the Chinese brand of authoritarianism, and they are often invoked by pro-democracy politicians in Hong Kong, especially in relation to democratic reform in Hong Kong and the territory's relationship with Beijing. Academic studies indicate that those who supported the Tiananmen Square movement's rehabilitation had a tendency to support democratisation in the territory and the election of pro-democracy parties.\nIn memory of the events among other monuments at 1997 \"Pillar of Shame\" with height of 8 meters performed by sculptor Jens Galschi\u00f8t was placed in the University of Hong Kong. On 22 December 2021, it was removed by the university authorities, a move that was condemned by survivors of the massacre.\nChina's image internationally.\nThe Chinese government drew widespread condemnation for its suppression of the protests. In the immediate aftermath, China seemed to be becoming a pariah state, increasingly isolated internationally. This was a significant setback for the leadership, who had courted international investment for much of the 1980s, as the country emerged from the chaos of the Cultural Revolution; however, Deng Xiaoping and the core leadership vowed to continue economic liberalisation policies after 1989. From there on, China would work domestically and internationally to reshape its national image from that of a repressive regime to that of a benign global economic and military partner.\nAlthough the crackdown hurt relations with Western countries, it had relatively little impact on China's relations with its Asian neighbors. Professor Suisheng Zhao, Director of the Centre for China-US Cooperation at the University of Denver, attributes the slight impact to the fact that \"the human rights records in most of these countries were not better than China's. To a certain extent, they were sympathetic to China's struggle against pressures from Western countries.\" Even in the wake of the crackdown, China's foreign relations with its neighbors generally improved.\nThe government signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992, the Convention on Chemical Weapons in 1993, and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996. Whereas China had been a member of only 30 international organisations in 1986, it was a member of over 50 by 1997. China also sought to diversify its external partnerships, establishing good diplomatic relations with post-Soviet Russia, and welcoming Taiwanese business in lieu of Western investment. China expedited negotiations with the World Trade Organisation and established relations with Indonesia, Israel, South Korea, and others in 1992.\nFurthermore, the government has successfully promoted China as an attractive destination for investment by emphasizing its skilled workers, comparatively low wages, established infrastructure, and sizable consumer base. At the same time, the explosion of commercial interest in the country opened the way for multinational corporations to turn a blind eye to politics and human rights in favor of focusing on business interests. Since then, Western leaders who were previously critical of China have sometimes paid lip service to the legacy of Tiananmen in bilateral meetings, but the substance of discussions revolved around business and trade interests.\nEuropean Union and the United States arms embargo.\nThe European Union and United States embargo on armament sales to China, put in place due to the violent suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests, remains in place today. China has been calling for a lift of the ban for years and has had a varying amount of support from European Union members. Since 2004, China has portrayed the ban as \"outdated\" and damaging to China\u2013European Union relations. In early 2004, French President Jacques Chirac spearheaded a movement within the European Union to lift the ban, his efforts being supported by German Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der. However, the passing of the Anti-Secession Law of the People's Republic of China, in March 2005, increased tensions between mainland China and Taiwan, damaging attempts to lift the ban; and several European Union Council members retracted their support for a lift of the ban. Moreover, Schr\u00f6der's successor Angela Merkel opposed lifting the ban. Members of the United States Congress had also proposed restrictions on the transfer of military technology to the European Union if the latter lifted the ban. The United Kingdom also opposed the embargo lifting when it took charge of the European Union presidency in July 2005.\nThe European Parliament has consistently opposed the lifting of the arms embargo to China. Though its agreement is not necessary for lifting the ban, many argue it reflects the will of the European people better as it is the only directly elected European body. The arms embargo has limited China's options in seeking military hardware. Among the sources that were sought included the former Soviet bloc that it had a strained relationship with as a result of the Sino-Soviet split. Other willing suppliers have previously included Israel and South Africa, but American pressure has restricted this co-operation.\nContemporary issues.\nCensorship in China.\nThe Chinese government forbids discussions about the Tiananmen Square protests and has taken measures to block or censor related information, in an attempt to suppress the public's memory of the protests. Textbooks contain little, if any, information about the protests. After the protests, officials banned controversial films and books and shut down many newspapers. Within a year, 12% of all newspapers, 8% of all publishing companies, 13% of all social science periodicals, and more than 150 films were either banned or shut down. The government also announced that it had seized 32\u00a0million contraband books and 2.4\u00a0million video and audio cassettes. Access to media and Internet resources about the subject are either restricted or blocked by censors. Banned literature and films include \"Summer Palace\", \"Forbidden City\", \"The Critical Moment: Li Peng diaries\" and any writings of Zhao Ziyang or his aide Bao Tong, including Zhao's memoirs.\nPrint media that contain references to the protests must be consistent with the government's version of events. Domestic and foreign journalists are detained, harassed, or threatened, as are their Chinese colleagues and any Chinese citizens who they interview. Thus, Chinese citizens are typically reluctant to speak about the protests because of potentially negative repercussions. Many young people who were born after 1980 are unfamiliar with the events and are therefore apathetic about politics. Youth in China are sometimes unaware of the events, the symbols which are associated with them such as the Tank Man, or the significance of the date of the massacre 4 June itself. Some older intellectuals no longer aspire to implement political change. Instead, they focus on economic issues. Some political prisoners have refused to talk to their children about their involvement in the protests out of fear of putting them at risk.\nWhile public discussions about the events have become socially taboo, private discussions about them continue to occur despite frequent interference and harassment by the authorities. Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo remained in China in order to speak out about Tiananmen in the 1990s despite the fact that he received offers of asylum; he faced constant surveillance. Zhang Xianling and Ding Zilin, the mothers of victims who died in 1989, founded the Tiananmen Mothers organisation and were particularly outspoken about the humanitarian aspects of the protests. The authorities mobilize security forces, including members of the People's Armed Police, every year on 4 June in order to prevent public displays of remembrance, with an especially heavy security presence on the anniversaries of major events such as the 20th anniversary of the protests in 2009 and the 25th anniversary of the protests in 2014. On the 30th anniversary of the protests in 2019, the well-known Chinese artist Ai Weiwei wrote that \"autocratic and totalitarian regimes fear facts because they have built their power on unjust foundations\" and he also wrote that memory is important: \"without it there is no such thing as a civilised society or nation\" because \"our past is all we have.\"\nJournalists have frequently been denied entry to the square on the anniversaries of the massacre. Also, the authorities are known to have detained foreign journalists and increase surveillance of prominent human rights activists during this time of year. Internet searches on \"4 June Tiananmen Square\" made within China return censored results or result in temporarily severed server connections. Specific web pages with select keywords are censored while other websites, such as those which support the overseas Chinese democracy movement, are blocked wholesale. The policy is much more stringent with regard to Chinese-language sites than it is with regard to foreign-language ones. Social media censorship is more stringent in the weeks leading up to the anniversaries of the massacre; even oblique references to the protests and seemingly unrelated terms are usually very aggressively patrolled and censored. In January 2006, Google agreed to censor their mainland China site to remove information about Tiananmen and other subjects which are considered sensitive by the authorities. Google withdrew its cooperation on censorship in January 2010.\nCalls for the government to reassess.\nZhang Shijun, a former soldier who was involved in the military crackdown, published an open letter to President Hu Jintao that sought to have the government reevaluate its position on the protests. He was subsequently arrested.\nAlthough the Chinese government never officially acknowledged relevant accusations when it came to the incident, in 2005 a payment was made to one of the victims' mothers, the first publicised case of the government offering redress to a Tiananmen-related victim's family. The payment was termed a \"hardship assistance\" and was given to Tang Deying (), whose son Zhou Guocong () died at age 15 while in police custody in Chengdu on 6 June 1989, two days after the Chinese Army dispersed the Tiananmen protesters. She was reportedly paid CNY70,000 (approximately US$10,250). This has been welcomed by various Chinese activists.\nChinese leaders voicing regret.\nBefore his death in 1998, Yang Shangkun told army doctor Jiang Yanyong that 4 June was the most serious mistake committed by the Communist Party in its history, a mistake that Yang himself could not correct, but one that certainly will eventually be corrected. Zhao Ziyang remained under house arrest until his death in 2005. Zhao's aide Bao Tong has repeatedly called on the government to reverse its verdict on the demonstrations. Chen Xitong, the mayor of Beijing, who read the martial law order and was later disgraced by a political scandal, expressed regret in 2012, a year before his death, for the death of innocent civilians. Premier Wen Jiabao reportedly suggested reversing the government's position on Tiananmen in party meetings before he departed from politics in 2013, only to be rebuffed by his colleagues.\nUnited Nations report.\nIn 2008, the UN Committee Against Torture expressed concern over the lack of investigations into the reports of people \"killed, arrested or disappeared on or following the 4 June 1989 Beijing suppression.\" It stated that the Chinese government had also failed to inform relatives of those individuals' fate, despite relatives' numerous requests. Meanwhile, those responsible for the use of excessive force had not \"faced any sanction, administrative or criminal.\" The Committee recommended that the Chinese government should take all of those steps, plus \"offer apologies and reparation as appropriate and prosecute those found responsible for excessive use of force, torture and other ill-treatment.\"\nIn December 2009, the Chinese government responded to the committee's recommendations by saying that the government had closed the case concerning the \"political turmoil in the spring and summer of 1989\". It also stated that the \"practice of the past 20 years has made it clear that the timely and decisive measures taken by the Chinese Government at the time were necessary and correct\". It said that the labeling of the \"incident as 'the Democracy Movement'\" is a \"distortion in the nature of the incident\". According to the Chinese government, such observations were \"inconsistent with the Committee's responsibilities\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOver 400 black and white photographs taken Dr. Edgar Huang, a faculty member at IUI. He was then a university instructor and a documentary photographer in Beijing."}
{"id": "44538", "revid": "19902075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44538", "title": "The Kids in the Hall", "text": "Canadian comedy group\nThe Kids in the Hall is a Canadian sketch comedy troupe formed in 1984 in Calgary and Toronto, consisting of comedians Dave Foley, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney, and Scott Thompson. Their eponymous television show ran from 1989 to 1995, on CBC, in Canada. It also appeared on CBS, HBO, and Comedy Central in the United States.\nThe Kids made one film, ', which was released in 1996. They reformed for various tours and comedy festivals in 2000. They later reunited for an eight-part miniseries, ', in January 2010. An eight-episode revival season was released on May 13, 2022, on Amazon Prime Video. Their name came from 1950s TV comedian Sid Caesar, who would attribute a joke that did not go over well (or played worse than expected) to \"the kids in the hall\", referring to a group of young writers hanging around the studio.\nEarly history.\nBruce McCulloch and Mark McKinney were working together doing Theatresports in Calgary, performing in a group named \"The Audience\". Norm Hiscock, Garry Campbell and Frank Van Keeken were co-members, and they later became writers on the show. At the same time, Dave Foley and Kevin McDonald were performing around Toronto (along with Luciano Casimiri) as The Kids in the Hall (KitH). In 1984, the two pairs met in Toronto and began performing regularly as KitH, with a rotating band of members, including Paul Bellini for a short time. When McKinney met Scott Thompson, he invited him to join in January 1985 and the group had found its final form. The same year, McCulloch and Foley appeared in \"\", as Diana Barry's husband (McCulloch) and a former classmate of Anne's from the fictional Queen's College (Foley).\nNot long afterwards, the Kids broke up for a short time when scouts for \"Saturday Night Live\" invited McKinney and McCulloch to New York to become writers for that show, and Foley made a poorly received film debut with \"High Stakes\", while Thompson and McDonald worked with the Second City touring group. They were reunited in 1986. After \"SNL\"'s Lorne Michaels saw them perform as a troupe, plans began for a TV show. In 1987, Michaels sent them to New York to what was essentially a \"Comedy Boot Camp\". In 1988, their pilot special aired on CBC Television, and in the United States on HBO, before debuting as a series in 1989.\nTelevision show.\nThe series \"The Kids in the Hall\" debuted as a one-hour pilot special which aired on HBO and CBC Television in 1988 and began airing as a regular weekly series on both services in 1989. The regular series premiered July 21, 1989, on HBO, and September 14 on CBC. In the United States, the first three seasons were on HBO before it moved to CBS in 1993, where it stayed for two more seasons airing late Friday nights. CBC aired the show for the whole duration of its run.\nIn March 2020, it was announced that the series would return with an eight-episode season, on Amazon Prime Video. The series features all five members, bringing back some of the show's classic characters and skits, and is executive-produced by Lorne Michaels. The revived series is billed as \"the first Canadian Amazon Original series\". The revival was released on May 13, 2022.\n\"Brain Candy\".\nAfter the show ended its run, the troupe came together to produce a film, \"\", featuring a few characters from the show and many new ones. Although not a commercial success, the film developed a cult following with their devoted fans.\nTours.\n2000 North American Tour.\nIn 2000, the troupe reformed for a successful North American tour, reprising many sketches from the show. The sketch line-up for the 2000 show was:\nAt some shows:\nThe tour was chronicled in a documentary, \"Kids in the Hall: Same Guys, New Dresses\", which followed the next year. This was then followed by the \"Tour of Duty\", and a DVD based on those performances, released in 2002.\n\"Just for Laughs\" (\"Juste Pour Rire\") Comedy Festival.\nIn July 2007, the Kids reunited to perform at the 25th Annual \"Just for Laughs\" (\"Juste Pour Rire\") Comedy Festival in Montreal.\nThe Just For Laughs show premiered about 90 minutes of new material. While certain characters made reappearances (Buddy Cole, Mr. Tyzik and McKinney and McCulloch's \"smooth-talking\" salesmen), the rest of the show revolved around entirely new material. Typically good-humored, the group poked numerous jokes at their own recent weight gain, and the state of their post-Kids acting careers.\nAmong the sketches:\nThe group also performed on January 26\u201327, 2008, at the SF Sketchfest. On January 26, there was a retrospective and Q&amp;A with the group.\n2008 North American Tour.\nOn April 4, 2008, The Kids in the Hall embarked on their first major national tour in six years. The tour ran through early June 2008, and included more than 30 cities in the US and Canada. The tour featured some material from the 2007 \"Just for Laughs\" performance, along with new material.\nThe 2008 tour closely mirrored the \"Just for Laughs\" performance, excluding the rat catchers, subway fan and Nicole Ritchie sketches. In their stead, Mark McKinney performed the monologue titled \"The Modern Hero\" from Season 1 of the show, and the entire cast performed the sketch \"This Is How I Danced in Tenth Grade.\"\nOther appearances.\nThe cast members have reunited, in whole or in part, in numerous film and television works.\nKevin McDonald guest starred alongside Dave Foley, in a 1997 episode of Foley's sitcom, \"NewsRadio.\"\nDave Foley and Kevin McDonald performed with the Barenaked Ladies on their \"Ships and Dip V\" cruise, along with other bands and comics, on February 1\u20136, 2009.\nAll members of the Kids in the Hall voiced characters in the \"\" episode \"Fibber\", with Kevin McDonald voicing Pleakley and the other members voicing his family.\nDave Foley and Kevin McDonald later appeared as Jonathan Boy / All-American Boy and Professor Medula in the superhero film \"Sky High\".\nIn 2006, three of the members (McDonald, McCulloch and McKinney) appeared in the Christmas comedy \"Unaccompanied Minors\", as The Guards in the Hall.\nThe group appeared on the front cover of \"Naked Eye\"'s summer 2008 edition.\nThe Kids performed at the 2008 Comedy Festival in Las Vegas on November 22.\nOn August 6, 2010, all five Kids made an appearance on \"The Soup\" on E!, to promote their miniseries \"Death Comes to Town\". Four of the members appeared on-screen in drag (as girls), who had grown up as beauty pageant contestants (parodying \"Toddlers &amp; Tiaras\"). McKinney's voice was heard off-screen as their mother.\nFoley was a voice actor on the 2011\u20132013 animated series \"Dan Vs.\", which aired on The Hub. McDonald was a guest voice actor in one episode, \"Dan Vs. Technology\", in which he played technology guru Barry Ditmer (a parody of Steve Jobs).\nIn 2014, the cast reunited on Foley's sitcom \"Spun Out\", appearing as Dave's high school goth friends who had made a suicide pact. That year, Thompson also did a week-long stint as Buddy Cole (a producer Colbert doesn't know is gay) on \"The Colbert Report\", acting as the program's correspondent to the 2014 Winter Olympics who covered LGBT rights protests surrounding the 2014 Winter Olympics. In the same year, the troupe performed a live reading of the screenplay for \"Brain Candy\" at the Toronto Sketch Comedy Festival.\nIn December 2014, McDonald, McKinney and Thompson appeared in an episode of the TVO's children's television series \"Odd Squad\". The episode was entitled \"Crime at Shapely Manor\". McDonald appeared as Lord Rectangle, McKinney as General Pentagon, and Thompson as Professor Square.\nMcDonald, Foley and Thompson appeared on Chris Hardwick's game show \"@midnight\", which aired August 2, 2017 (season 4: episode 139).\n\"\", a documentary film by Reginald Harkema, premiered at the 2022 Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival.\nThe group appeared on \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\" on May 10, 2022. They discussed the revival of their show on Amazon Prime Video.\n\"Death Comes to Town\".\nIn July 2008, Telefilm Canada announced that there would be a new The Kids in the Hall television series, titled \"\". Kevin McDonald stated that it would be an eight-part miniseries, airing first on CBC in Canada, and then on US television. Principal photography took place from August 2009, in Ontario. Several characters from the original \"The Kids in the Hall\" series made an appearance, including the OPP Officers and Chicken Lady. The first episode of the new series aired in Canada, on CBC Television on January 13, 2010. In the United States, the first episode aired on IFC on August 20, 2010.\nAwards and honors.\nThe group's 1988\u20131995 TV series won a number of awards, including the 1993 Rose d'Or and the Gemini Award for Best Comedy Series in 1992 and 1993. It was nominated for various other awards, including the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series in 1993, 1994 and 1995.\nIn 2008, the group received a star on Canada's Walk of Fame.\nThe group won the Canadian Screen Awards Icon Award in 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44539", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44539", "title": "History of Portugal (1279\u20131415)", "text": ""}
{"id": "44541", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44541", "title": "Phoolan Devi", "text": "Indian bandit and politician (1963\u20132001)\nPhoolan Devi (, 10 August 1963 \u2013 25 July 2001), popularly known as the Bandit Queen, was an Indian dacoit (bandit) who became a politician, serving as a member of parliament until her assassination. She was a woman of the Mallah subcaste who grew up in poverty in a village in the state of Uttar Pradesh, where her family was on the losing side of a land dispute which caused them many problems. After being married off at the age of eleven and being sexually abused by various people, she joined a gang of dacoits. Her gang robbed higher-caste villages and held up trains and vehicles. When she punished her rapists and evaded capture by the authorities, she became a heroine to the Other Backward Classes who saw her as a Robin Hood figure. Phoolan Devi was charged \"in absentia\" for the 1981 Behmai massacre, in which twenty Thakur men were killed, allegedly on her command. After this event, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh resigned, and calls to apprehend her were amplified. She surrendered two years later in a carefully negotiated settlement and spent eleven years in Gwalior prison, awaiting trial.\nPhoolan Devi was released in 1994 after her charges were set aside. She subsequently became a politician and was elected as a member of parliament for the Samajwadi Party in 1996. She lost her seat in 1998, but regained it the following year. She was the incumbent at the time of her death in 2001. She was assassinated outside her house by Sher Singh Rana, who was convicted for the murder in 2014. At the time of her death, she was still fighting against the reinstituted criminal charges, having lost a 1996 appeal to the Supreme Court to have the charges dropped. Phoolan Devi's worldwide fame grew after the release of the controversial 1994 film \"Bandit Queen\", which told her life story in a way she did not approve of. Her life has also inspired several biographies and her dictated autobiography was entitled \"I, Phoolan Devi\". There are varying accounts of her life because she told differing versions to suit her changing circumstances.\nEarly life.\nPhoolan Devi was born on 10 August 1963, in the village of Gorha Ka Purwa in Jalaun district, Uttar Pradesh, India. The land is crossed by the Yamuna and Chambal rivers and is filled with gorges and ravines, making it suitable terrain for dacoits (bandits). Her family was poor and from the Mallah subcaste, which lies towards the bottom of the Hindu caste system in India, with Mallahs being Shudras who traditionally work as fishermen. Phoolan Devi and her sisters made dung cakes to burn as fuel, as is common practice in the region; her family grew chickpeas, sunflowers and pearl millet.\nPhoolan Devi's mother was called Moola and her father Devidin; she had four sisters and one brother. Devidin had one brother, Biharilal, who had a son called Maiyadin. Biharilal and Maiyadin stole land from Phoolan Devi's father by bribing the village leader to change the land records. Her family was compelled to live in a small house on the edge of the village; the uncle and his son continued to harass the family and steal their crops, aiming to drive them away from the village. At the age of 10, Phoolan Devi decided to protest against the injustice. With her older sister Rukhmini, she sat in the disputed land and ate the chickpeas growing there, saying the crop belonged to her family. Maiyadin ordered her to leave and when she did not, he beat her into unconsciousness; the village leader then decreed that her parents should also be beaten. In 2018, Phoolan Devi's mother told \"The Asian Age\" that she was still fighting to regain the land which Maiyadin had stolen from the family.\nFollowing these events, Phoolan Devi's parents decided to arrange a marriage for her. She was married to a man called Puttilal, who offered 100 Indian rupees (equivalent to \u20b9400 or \u00a34.20 in 2023), a cow and a bicycle to her parents. According to the version related by her to her biographer Mala Sen, it was agreed that Phoolan Devi would start living with him after three years, but Puttilal came back within three months and took her away. He was three times her age; she refused his sexual advances and fell sick. When her parents came and collected her, they took her to a doctor who diagnosed measles. For a wife to leave her husband was scandalous; preying on Phoolan Devi's parents' fears of disgrace, Maiyadin offered to ensure that Puttilal took her back if they signed a document. The family was illiterate and the parents were warned that it contained a clause giving Maiyadin legal rights to their land, so they refused to sign. Phoolan Devi was sent to stay with a distant relative in the village of Teoga, where she met her recently married cousin Kailash, who ran errands for dacoits (also known locally as bahghis). They became close and had an affair, which resulted in Phoolan Devi being ordered by Kailash's wife to go back to her own village.\nOnce Phoolan Devi was back in Gorha Ka Purwa, the second son of the village leader became infatuated with her and when she did not reciprocate his affections, he attacked her. Again, Phoolan Devi needed to leave the village and Maiyadin pressured the family to ask Puttilal to take her back, which he did. In the meantime, Puttilal had taken another wife who often mistreated Phoolan Devi. After several years, Puttilal abandoned Phoolan Devi beside the Yamuna River and she again returned to the parental home. In January 1979, Maiyadin destroyed the family's crops and began to chop down a neem tree on their land. When Phoolan Devi threw stones at him and wounded his face, she was arrested by the local police and detained for one month. She later told \"The Atlantic\" that she was arrested because Maiyadin accused her of robbing him. Mala Sen asked her if she had been raped at the police station and Phoolan Devi replied: \"They had plenty of fun at my expense and beat the hell out of me too.\" Sen notes that it is common for victims of sexual assault to avoid or repress talking about what happened to them. Sen also observes that from the mid-1970s onwards, Indian feminist groups recorded many instances of women being attacked and murdered by men. The director of the \"Women's Feature Service\" commented regarding the case of Phoolan Devi that \"quite often rape is used as a method of control and punishment to keep women in their place\".\nBanditry.\nBandit Queen.\nIn July 1979, a gang of bandits led by Babu Gujjar kidnapped Phoolan Devi from her family's home, for reasons she explained in multiple ways. Gujjar took her as his property and raped her repeatedly. Vikram Mallah, the second in command, became fond of Phoolan Devi and objected to her mistreatment, so he killed Gujjar and became leader of the gang. He trained Phoolan Devi to use a rifle and the two fell in love. Over the following year, the group robbed vehicles and looted higher caste villages, sometimes disguising themselves using stolen police uniforms. The gang lived in the ravines, constantly moving between places such as Devariya, Kanpur and Orai. They located Puttilal and punished him violently. As news of Phoolan Devi's exploits spread, she became popular with the lower castes, who called her Dasyu Sundari (Beautiful Bandit) and celebrated her as a Robin Hood figure, who robbed from the rich to give to the poor. She was seen as an incarnation of the Hindu goddess Durga and a doll was produced of her in police uniform wearing a bandoleer.\nA former leader of the gang, Sri Ram Singh, was released from prison together with his brother Lalla Ram Singh in 1980; they were Thakur men (Thakurs being a subcaste of the Kshatriya caste) and thus a higher caste than the other members. After they rejoined the bandits, a power struggle ensued and Sri Ram murdered Vikram Mallah. Without the latter's protection, Phoolan Devi was a prisoner of Sri Ram; he took her to the remote village of Behmai where she was repeatedly raped by other Thakurs. In a final indignity, she was forced to collect water for him from the well whilst naked, in front of the villagers.\nBehmai massacre.\nPhoolan Devi managed to escape and met Man Singh, a bandit with whom she formed a new gang. They became lovers, living on wild berries and produce stolen from cultivated fields. She returned to Behmai with her gang on 14 February 1981; speaking through a loudhailer, she demanded that the villagers hand over Sri Ram Singh and his brother, then the bandits went from house to house looting valuables. When the two men could not be found, twenty-two men were lined up at the Yamuna River and shot from behind; twenty died and two survived. Since all the dead were at the time thought to be Thakur, Thakur farmers pressured Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to impose the rule of law. When Phoolan Devi was arrested in 1983, she claimed that she had not been present at the time of the shooting. This was corroborated by the evidence of the two men who survived, who stated that they had not seen her and that a man called Ram Avtar was giving orders. By other accounts, such as that of journalist Khushwant Singh, it was Phoolan Devi who put the men to death. She was celebrated among Dalits (people at the bottom of the caste system) for fighting back against her abuse by men of a higher caste and when she eluded capture by the authorities her fame grew. The killings prompted the resignation of V. P. Singh, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. It was later clarified that the dead men were seventeen Thakurs, one Muslim, one Dalit and one member of Other Backward Classes. Phoolan Devi was charged \"in absentia\" with 48 crimes, which included kidnapping, looting and murder.\nSurrender.\nAfter the massacre, Phoolan Devi remained on the run and was nearly caught by the police on 31 March 1981. Her mother was held for five months in Kalpi prison to pressure Phoolan Devi to give herself up. In 1983, Phoolan Devi surrendered to the authorities in Bhind after long negotiations led by Rajendra Chaturvedi, a local police officer who had gained the trust of local dacoits after arresting Malkhan Singh Rajpoot. Dressed in a police uniform and wearing a red bandanna on her head, she bowed before representations of the goddess Durga and Mahatma Gandhi, then prostrated herself in front of Arjun Singh, the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, with approximately 8,000 people watching. Phoolan Devi had set conditions regarding her surrender, which included: no death penalty for anyone from her gang; a maximum custodial sentence of eight years; no use of handcuffs; being imprisoned as a group; being imprisoned in Madhya Pradesh and not Uttar Pradesh; her family being given land with space for her goat and cow; and her brother getting a government job. She and seven men, including Man Singh, surrendered. Mala Sen records that the male journalists gathered in Bhind were unimpressed with her plain appearance. \nPhoolan Devi faced the 48 criminal charges that she had previously been charged with \"in absentia\" and the gang was incarcerated at Gwalior, in Madhya Pradesh. Despite the prior agreement that she would not spend more than eight years in prison, she spent over ten years on remand. During this time, she had tuberculosis and was diagnosed with two stomach tumours. Whilst receiving hospital treatment, she received a hysterectomy without her consent. The others, including Man Singh, agreed to trials in Uttar Pradesh and were all acquitted, but Phoolan Devi refused to make a deal and remained convinced she would be murdered if she went there.\nPolitical career.\nCharges against Phoolan Devi were dropped in 1994 by order of Mulayam Singh Yadav, the leader of the Samajwadi Party and Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. After her release from prison, she joined the Samajwadi Party and in the 1996 general election took a seat in the Indian lower legislative body, the Lok Sabha, as the Member of Parliament (MP) for Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh. She won with a margin of 37,000 and had more than 300,000 votes in total. She was not the only illiterate MP, joining others such as Bhagwati Devi and Shobhawati Devi. Phoolan Devi campaigned with limited success for the rights of women and to provide better amenities for the poor. She told author Roy Moxham \"I want to bring hospitals, schools, electricity and clean water to the poor in the villages. To stop child marriage and to improve life for women.\" Mallah people were happy to have someone of their caste representing them in parliament for the first time and she was generally popular among Other Backward Classes.\nThe Kanpur District Court set aside Yadav's pronouncement, which reinstated the charges against her in connection with the Behmai massacre. This decision was upheld by the Allahabad High Court. In 1996, Phoolan Devi lost a Supreme Court appeal to have the charges against her dropped. The following year, the court approved a request from Uttar Pradesh to arraign her on charges related to the Behmai massacre and she did not attend the court hearing in Kanpur. After several months of legal machinations, the Supreme Court ruled that Phoolan Devi did not need to be jailed before trial. She lost her seat to Virendra Singh, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) candidate in the 1998 elections, then regained it the following year.\nPhoolan Devi married Umed Singh in 1994; they appeared together in a film, called \"Sholay Aur Chingari\" (\"Blazing Fires and Sparks\"). Together with her new husband, she became a Buddhist, aiming to evade the Hindu caste system. According to Moxham, she later renounced Buddhism.\n\"Bandit Queen\" film.\nThe 1994 film \"Bandit Queen\" was loosely based on Mala Sen's biography; it was directed by Shekhar Kapur and starred Seema Biswas as Phoolan Devi. After it received acclaim at Cannes Film Festival, Kapur asked for permission from the Central Board of Film Certification to screen the film at cinemas in India. Phoolan Devi attempted to block the release, commenting \"It's simply not the story of my life\". She was supported by the feminist and novelist Arundhati Roy, who wrote a critique of the film (entitled \"The great Indian rape trick\"), arguing that whilst Sen's book presented a complex story with different perspectives, Kapur portrayed Phoolan Devi as a victim without having met her. In his 2021 autobiography Farrukh Dhondy, the former commissioning editor at Channel 4, described how he rushed to Delhi in order to enlist Umed Singh's aid in persuading Phoolan Devi to drop her complaint. When Phoolan Devi discovered this, the couple became estranged, before later reconciling. A court case was brought against screening the film by lawyer Indira Singh and Arundhati Roy at the Delhi High Court. Ultimately, Phoolan Devi received \u00a340,000 from Channel 4 and dropped the complaint. Later in 1994, she dictated her autobiography \"I, Phoolan Devi\" which was published first in French in 1996 and then in other languages, including English, Japanese and Malay. The income from book sales supported Phoolan Devi and enabled her to pay her legal fees.\nAssassination.\nAt 13:30 (IST) on 25 July 2001, Phoolan Devi was shot dead by three unknown assailants outside her house at 44 Ashoka Road in New Delhi. She was shot nine times and her bodyguard was hit twice; he returned fire as the attackers escaped by car. She was rushed to Lohia Hospital and was pronounced dead on arrival. She was aged 37 when she died and serving as an MP. All business of both houses of Parliament was adjourned for two days and the funeral took place in Mirzapur. Umed Singh commented \"No one likes it when someone, especially a woman, from the lower classes rises and makes a name for herself\" and her lawyer Kamini Jaiswal stated \"This murder is the result of caste conflict.\" The criminal case against her was still open at the time of her death.\nDays after the murder, Sher Singh Rana surrendered to police in Dehra Dun and claimed he had assassinated Phoolan Devi in revenge for the Behmai massacre; he at first struggled to convince police that he was present at the scene of the crime. He escaped from Tihar Jail in 2004 and was recaptured two years later. In August 2014, Rana received a life sentence for murder, with ten co-defendants being acquitted. Two years later, he appealed his sentence to the Delhi High Court and was set free by Justice Gita Mittal on a personal bond of \u20b950,000 (equivalent to \u20b972,000 or \u00a3750 in 2023) and two sureties, each of the same amount. He was required to not interact with Phoolan Devi's family and to report to the police every six months, whilst also informing them where he stayed and what mobile telephone number he was using. \nIn August 2001, Umed Singh announced prior to Phoolan Devi's terahvin that he was setting up a trust to administer the properties she owned; he was immediately denounced by her sisters and mother, who claimed he was trying to steal her investments worth \u20b925 million (equivalent to \u20b9100 million or \u00a31 million in 2023). Munni Devi alleged that Umed Singh knew the murderers and challenged his alibi. She said that Umed Singh was abusive towards Phoolan Devi and that her sister had tried at least twice to divorce him. Phoolan Devi's first husband Puttilal also made a demand for her properties since they had never officially divorced.\nLegacy.\nPhoolan Devi's fame throughout India continued to grow after her death and the controversy surrounding the \"Bandit Queen\" film had already ensured that she was globally famous. She has become a legendary figure, alongside other outlaws such as Ned Kelly, S\u00e1ndor R\u00f3zsa and Pancho Villa. Her life has inspired biographies by Roy Moxham, Mala Sen and Richard Shears and Isobelle Gidley, as well as novels by Ir\u00e8ne Frain and Dimitri Friedman. A graphic novel entitled \"Phoolan Devi, Rebel Queen\" by Claire Fauvel was published in 2020. The scholar Tatiana Szurlej notes that the facts presented in these biographies often contradict each other despite coming from interviews with Phoolan Devi herself and questions whether she forgot elements or adapted her account to suit her changing circumstances. In 1994, Arundhati Roy commented that Phoolan Devi \"is suffering from a case of Legenditis. She's only a version of herself. There are other versions of her that are jostling for attention.\" Media theorist Sandra Ponzanesi states Phoolan Devi is an example of a Third World postcolonial subject who is aware of the racist and patronising Orientalist attitudes that First World analysts have of her.\nSeveral films have been made about her life. Ashok Roy made the 1984 film \"Phoolan Devi\" in Bengali and followed it the next year with a Hindi version entitled \"Kahani Phoolvati Ki\" (\"The story of Phoolan\"). \"Bandit Queen\" came out in 1994 and in 2019 Hossein Martin Fazeli was developing a documentary entitled \"Phoolan\". In 2022, Farrukh Dhondy announced that he was making a web series about her life told from the perspective of Rajendra Chaturvedi, the person who arranged her surrender. Phoolan Devi has been represented in fine art by painters such as Rekha Rodwittiya. Her life has also been commemorated by folk singers, making her into a mythical outlaw figure. Shirish Korde and Lynn Kremer wrote an opera called \"Phoolan Devi: The Bandit Queen\" which premiered in 2010 at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Massachusetts, US.\nThe verdict in the court case concerning the Behmai massacre was delayed in 2020 because important case documents had been lost. The last witness died the following year and since the presiding judge had been transferred, the case began again in 2022. In 2023, another suspect died, leaving only two people on trial.\nThe Mallah subcaste forms part of the Nishad caste and two Nishad political parties laid claim to Phoolan Devi's legacy. In 2018, the NISHAD Party reported it would build a statue of her in Gorakhpur. Three years later, in order to mark twenty years since her assassination, the Vikassheel Insaan Party (VIP) announced it would place high statues of her in 18 districts of Uttar Pradesh and were prevented from doing so by the police. Mukesh Sahani, the leader of the VIP, was prevented from leaving Varanasi airport by the Government of Uttar Pradesh when he wanted to install a statue. He reacted by setting up a foundation in Phoolan Devi's name and promising to deliver up to 50,000 small idols of Phoolan Devi, to any local person who requested one. Also in 2021, tributes marking the anniversary of her death were made by Chirag Paswan of the Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas) and Tejashwi Yadav of Rashtriya Janata Dal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44542", "revid": "49542876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44542", "title": "Pat Mastelotto", "text": "American rock drummer and record producer (born 1955)\nLee Patrick Mastelotto (born September 10, 1955) is an American rock drummer and record producer. He has been a member of King Crimson, Stick Men, Mr. Mister and O.R.k., as well as working as a session drummer with XTC, The Pointer Sisters and The Rembrandts (including well known Friends theme song I'll Be There for You), among others. In addition, he has led or co-led other projects including Mastica, Tuner, TU and The Mastelottos.\nFor King Crimson, he initially formed part of the \"Double Trio\" lineup from 1994 to 1997, working with Bill Bruford as part of a double-drumkit arrangement. Following Bruford's departure in 1997, Mastelotto remained with King Crimson, becoming their longest-serving drummer and working both solo and in various configurations with subsequent drummers Gavin Harrison, Bill Rieflin and Jeremy Stacey.\nMastelotto is a pioneer and continuing developer of a mixed acoustic-and-electronic drumming approach which he refers to as \"traps and buttons\", and which incorporates techniques and methods from rock, pop and electronic dance music styles. As well as being a drummer, he works as a producer, engineer and mixer, working extensively with digital audio workstations.\nCareer.\nEarly years and Mr. Mister.\nMastelotto was born in Chico, California. He started playing the drums at the age of 10; by the time he was 16 he was playing in popular local bands and while still in high school commuted several hours to Lake Tahoe for gigs. Moving to Los Angeles in the mid-1970s, Mastelotto worked for many bands and as a studio session drummer. In this capacity he worked for Martin Briley, Holly Knight, Scandal, Al Jarreau, The Pointer Sisters, Patti LaBelle, Kenny Loggins, Martika, Danny Wilde and Holly Penfield as well as playing drums on the double platinum album \"Rockland\" by Canadian rock musician Kim Mitchell.\nIn 1982 Mastelotto was a founding member of Mr. Mister. The band had a number one album, \"Welcome to the Real World\", and two number one singles, \"Broken Wings\" and \"Kyrie\". They recorded four albums, with the fourth, \"Pull\", recorded in 1989\u20131990 but remaining unreleased until late 2010.\nHis tenure with Mr. Mister was followed by more session work for bands such as XTC, The Sugarcubes, Hall &amp; Oates, Cock Robin, The Rembrandts, Jude Cole, Eddie Money, Tina Arena, Matthew Sweet, Julia Fordham, Robyn Hitchcock and David Sylvian. In 1991 Mastelotto co-produced Peter Kingsbery's first solo album before being asked to join King Crimson.\nKing Crimson.\nMastelotto had been a member of King Crimson since 1994, resulting in him becoming their longest serving drummer. He was the first of two drummers hired for the \"Double Trio\" line-up of the mid-1990s, the second being previous long-term King Crimson drummer Bill Bruford. Mastelotto and Bruford operated as parallel drummers for the Double Trio, playing different styles and parts which sometimes intermeshed and sometimes worked separately. Following Bruford's departure in 1997, Mastelotto became the band's sole drummer, working mostly on the electronic Roland V-Drums set and bringing in simultaneous/triggered electronic drum loops and textures based on his interest in intelligent dance music and drum and bass. For King Crimson's 2008 lineup, the band returned to a double-drummer arrangement with Mastelotto now joined by Gavin Harrison.\nFor the period of King Crimson activity lasting from 2013 to 2021 (the \"Seven Headed Beast\" and \"Three over Five\" line-ups), Mastelotto played as part of a three-drummer arrangement, initially with Harrison and Bill Rieflin, and subsequently with Harrison and Jeremy Stacey. In each of these setups, Mastelotto also took on an extended percussionist role incorporating multiple sound effects, samples and programs (taking on something of the function played by percussionist/\"allsorts\" contributor Jamie Muir in the 1972 King Crimson).\nTo date, Mastelotto has appeared on three King Crimson studio albums (\"Thrak\", \"The ConstruKction of Light\" and \"The Power to Believe\", released between 1995 and 2003), one mini-album, two EPs and numerous live releases between 1995 and 2022.\nKing Crimson-related.\nDuring, and in parallel to, his King Crimson work, Mastelotto has been an integral part of several King Crimson-related bands. He produced, edited, mixed and played on the ProjeKct 3 and ProjeKct 4 releases by the band's \"ProjeKcts\" subgroupings, playing a particularly dominant role on the IDM-influenced ProjeKct 3.\nMastelotto also played with League of Crafty Guitarists who formed Fripp adjacent bands; one was California Guitar Trio. Along with Tony Levin and CGT, such pieces as Mahavishnu Orchestra covers were done.\nMastelotto currently works with King Crimson bass/Chapman Stick player Tony Levin and centrozoon's touch guitarist Markus Reuter in the art rock trio Stick Men. He is also a member of the progressive/experimental bands TU (with fellow King Crimson alumnus Trey Gunn), KTU (with Gunn, Kimmo Pohjonen and Samuli Kosminen), and Tuner (a duo with Markus Reuter).\nMastelotto was one of the two drummers in the Crimson ProjeKct, a six-piece band which merged Stick Men with the Adrian Belew Power Trio in order to play King Crimson music from the 1980s to 2000s periods. In conjunction with engineer/programmer Bill Munyon, Mastelotto formed the IDM project BPM&amp;M (which to date has recorded one album, 2001's 'XtraKcts &amp; ArtifaKcts', which featured or sampled many King Crimson members and associates). In early 2021 he released a new album, \"A Romantic's Guide to King Crimson\", with his wife Deborah on lead vocals, credited to \"The Mastelottos\". The album featured reworked versions of twelve King Crimson songs, deliberately re-arranged in a more popular style in order to accent the group's songwriting and its gentler side.\nO.R.k..\nIn 2015, Mastelotto joined Carmelo Pipitone (guitarist of Italian band Marta sui Tubi), Lorenzo Esposito Fornasari (singer and keyboard player with Berserk! and Obake) and Colin Edwin (former bass player with Porcupine Tree) in a new heavy progressive rock band called O.R.k. Their first album, \"Inflamed Rides\", was released the same year and was followed in 2017 by \"Soul of an Octopus\", in 2019 by \"Ramagehead\" (with artwork by Adam Jones of Tool) and in 2022 by \"Screamnasium\".\nOther projects.\nMastelotto's other projects include Mastica (an Americana/art-rock trio with Mark \"Gum B.\" Williams of Poi Dog Pondering/Alejandro Escovedo band and Monica 'MonKey' Champion from Baboon Orchestra), and M.P.TU (with Little Feat guitarist Phil Brown, singer Malford Milligan and Spirit/Firefall/Heart bassist Mark Andes). He has continued to guest with Jay Terrien, Cock Robin, drummer Terry Bozzio, Mecca, Herd of Instinct, Tony Levin and the California Guitar Trio, and has contributed to major network television themes.\nSince moving to Austin, Texas, Mastelotto has worked with Austinites Storyville, Abra Moore, ...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead and theremin player Pamelia Kurstin. In 2007 Mastelotto went on tour with The Flower Kings in Europe supporting their album \"The Sum Of No Evil\", followed by an appearance at the enormous Creation of Peace festival in Kazan, Russia, with Adrian Belew, Tony Levin and Eddie Jobson. This was followed by another new project, HoBoLeMa, with Levin, Bozzio and Allan Holdsworth.\nIn 2014, he released a collaborative album with Tobias Ralph called \"ToPaRaMa\". He played on Lucid, the solo album by The Fierce and the Dead guitarist Matt Stevens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44543", "revid": "5839510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44543", "title": "Prairie Prince", "text": "American drummer\nCharles Lempriere \"Prairie\" Prince (born May 7, 1950) is an American drummer and visual artist. He came to prominence in the 1970s as a member of the San Francisco\u2013based rock group The Tubes, was a member of Jefferson Starship from 1992 to 2008 and has worked with a wide range of other performers as a session musician.\nCareer.\nPrince is a member of The Tubes and was a founding member of Journey along with Neal Schon and Gregg Rolie. However, he quit Journey after a few months before they made any recordings.\nHe has subsequently worked with Chris Isaak (on his first four albums), Todd Rundgren, Brian Eno, David Byrne, XTC, Tom Waits, Paul Kantner, George Harrison, Dick Dale, Glenn Frey, Richard Marx, Bill Spooner, Neil Hamburger, John Fogerty, Nicky Hopkins, Tommy Bolin, Phil Lesh, Chris von Sneidern, John Ferenzik, Singer at Large Johnny J. Blair, The Gilmour Project, Negativland and former Tubes and Grateful Dead keyboardist Vince Welnick.\nPrince collaborated with Ross Valory, bassist and founding member of Journey, on a line of patented eco-friendly, US-made hoodie shirts called MouthMan, where graphic designs of jaws and teeth on the sleeves form a mouth when the wearer \"hugs himself\".\nIn 2006, he toured with The New Cars including Todd Rundgren, bassist Kasim Sulton (Rundgren's Utopia bandmate), and original The Cars guitarist Elliot Easton and keyboardist Greg Hawkes. He continues to play with The Tubes and Todd Rundgren.\nHe was an original member of the reformed Jefferson Starship, known as \"Jefferson Starship \u2013 The Next Generation\" in 1992 and appears on both that band's studio albums (the 1999 release \"Windows of Heaven\" and the 2008 release, \"Jefferson's Tree of Liberty\"), along with numerous live albums. Prince announced in early 2008 that he was leaving the band on amicable terms and remains available for international performances.\nHe is a sought-after session musician and played drums and percussion on all tracks of Chuck Prophet's 2012 release \"Temple Beautiful\" and seven of 12 tracks on Prophet's 2014's \"Night Surfer\".\nAs an artist he designed the album cover artwork for many artists including The Tubes, Todd Rundgren (1981 album \"Healing\"), Journey, Lyle Workman and Vince Welnick's 1998 album \"Missing Man Formation\", among many others. Along with his creative partner and fellow former Tube Michael Cotten, he has created numerous set designs for major artists including Michael Jackson, Billy Joel, Bette Midler, N'Sync, Shania Twain, Styx, The Tubes and Todd Rundgren. Prince and Cotten have teamed up with choreographer Kenny Ortega on several special events including the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, the Super Bowl XXX halftime show (which featured Diana Ross singing \"Take Me Higher\" as she was lifted from the field in a helicopter), Michael Jackson's \"This is It\" concert, and Shania Twain's residency, \"Shania: Still the One\", at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada.\nPersonal life.\nPrince lived with fellow Tubes member Re Styles from 1973 until the early 1990s. In a 2006 interview with \"Modern Drummer\" magazine's Billy Amendola, he referred to singer Diana Mangano as his wife, adding they were not formally married but had been together for a decade.\nThe nickname \"Prairie\" is based on a mispronunciation of his middle name Lempriere, originating from his father's childhood nanny (the drummer and his father share the same name).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44545", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44545", "title": "Till", "text": "Unsorted glacial sediment\nTill or glacial till is unsorted glacial sediment.\nTill is derived from the erosion and entrainment of material by the moving ice of a glacier. It is deposited some distance down-ice to form terminal, lateral, medial and ground moraines.\nTill is classified into primary deposits, laid down directly by glaciers, and secondary deposits, reworked by fluvial transport and other processes.\nDescription.\nTill is a form of \"glacial drift\", which is rock material transported by a glacier and deposited directly from the ice or from running water emerging from the ice. It is distinguished from other forms of drift in that it is deposited directly by glaciers without being reworked by meltwater.\nTill is characteristically unsorted and unstratified, and is not usually consolidated. Most till consists predominantly of clay, silt, and sand, but with pebbles, cobbles, and boulders scattered through the till. The abundance of clay demonstrates lack of reworking by turbulent flow, which otherwise would winnow the clay. Typically, the distribution of particle sizes shows two peaks (it is \"bimodal\") with pebbles predominating in the coarser peak.\nThe larger clasts (rock fragments) in till typically show a diverse composition, often including rock types from outcrops hundreds of kilometers away. Some clasts may be rounded, and these are thought to be stream pebbles entrained by the glacier. Many of the clasts are faceted, striated, or polished, all signs of glacial abrasion. The sand and silt grains are typically angular to subangular rather than rounded.\nIt has been known since the careful statistic work by geologist Chauncey D. Holmes in 1941 that elongated clasts in tills tend to align with the direction of ice flow. Clasts in till may also show slight imbrication, with the clasts dipping upstream.\nThough till is generally unstratified, till high in clay may show lamination due to compaction under the weight of overlying ice. Till may also contain lenses of sand or gravel, indicating minor and local reworking by water transitional to non-till glacial drift.\nThe term \"till\" comes from an old Scottish name for coarse, rocky soil. It was first used to describe primary glacial deposits by Archibald Geikie in 1863. Early researchers tended to prefer the term \"boulder clay\" for the same kind of sediments, but this has fallen into disfavor. Where it is unclear whether a poorly sorted, unconsolidated glacial deposit was deposited directly from glaciers, it is described as diamict or (when lithified) as diamictite. \"Tillite\" is a sedimentary rock formed by lithification of till.\nProcesses.\nErosional.\nGlacial till is mostly derived from subglacial erosion and from the entrainment by the moving ice of previously available unconsolidated sediments. Bedrock can be eroded through the action of glacial plucking and abrasion, and the resulting clasts of various sizes will be incorporated to the glacier's bed.\nGlacial abrasion is the weathering of bedrock below a flowing glacier by fragmented rock on the basal layer of the glacier. The two mechanisms of glacial abrasion are striation of the bedrock by coarse grains moved by the glacier, thus gouging the rock below, and polishing of the bedrock by smaller grains such as silts. Glacial plucking is the removal of large blocks from the bed of a glacier.\nMuch of the silt in till is produced by glacial grinding, and the longer the till remains at the ice-bedrock interface, the more thoroughly it is crushed. However, the crushing process appears to stop with fine silt. Clay in till is likely eroded from bedrock rather than being created by glacial processes.\nDepositional.\nThe sediments carried by a glacier will eventually be deposited some distance down-ice from its source. This takes place in the \"ablation zone\", which is the part of the glacier where the rate of ablation (removal of ice by evaporation, melting, or other processes) exceeds the rate of accumulation of new ice from snowfall. As ice is removed, debris are left behind as till. The deposition of glacial till is not uniform, and a single till plain can contain a wide variety of different types of tills due to the various erosional mechanisms and location of till with respect to the transporting glacier.\nThe different types of till can be categorized between subglacial (beneath) and supraglacial (surface) deposits. Subglacial deposits include lodgement, subglacial meltout, and deformation tills. Supraglacial deposits include supraglacial meltout and flow till. Supraglacial deposits and landforms are widespread in areas of glacial downwasting (vertical thinning of glaciers, as opposed to ice-retreat. They typically sit at the top of the stratigraphic sediment sequence, which has a major influence on land usage. Till is deposited as the terminal moraine, along the lateral and medial moraines and in the ground moraine of a glacier, and \"moraine\" is often conflated with \"till\" in older writings. Till may also be deposited as drumlins and flutes, though some drumlins consist of a core of stratified sediments with only a cover of till. Interpreting the glacial history of landforms can be difficult due to the tendency of overprinting landforms on top of each other.\nAs a glacier melts, large amounts of till are eroded and become a source of sediments for reworked glacial drift deposits. These include glaciofluvial deposits, such as outwash in sandurs, and as glaciolacustrine and glaciomarine deposits, such as varves (annual layers) in any proglacial lakes which may form. Erosion of till may take place even in the subglacial environment, such as in tunnel valleys.\nTypes of till.\nThere are various types of classifying tills:\nTraditionally (e.g. Dreimanis, 1988) a further set of divisions has been made to primary deposits, based upon the method of deposition. Van der Meer et al. 2003 have suggested that these till classifications are outdated and should instead be replaced with only one classification, that of deformation till. The reasons behind this are largely down to the difficulties in accurately classifying different tills, which are often based on inferences of the physical setting of the till rather than detailed analysis of the till fabric or particle size.\nSubglacial till.\nLodgement till.\nSubglacial lodgement tills are deposits beneath the glacier that are forced, or \"lodged\" into the bed below. As glaciers advance or retreat, the clasts that are deposited by the ice may have a lower velocity than the ice itself. When the friction between the clast and the bed exceeds the forces of the ice flowing above and around it, the clast will cease to move, and it will become a lodgement till.\nMeltout till.\nSubglacial meltout tills are tills that are deposited via the melting of the ice lobe. Clasts are transported to the base of the glacier over time, and as basal melting continues, they are slowly deposited below the glacier. Since the rate of deposition is controlled by the rate of basal melting, it is worth considering the factors that contribute to melting. These can be the geothermal heat flux, frictional heat generated by sliding, ice thickness, and ice-surface temperature gradients.\nDeformation till.\nSubglacial deformation tills refer to the homogenization of glacial sediments that occur when the stresses and shear forces from the moving glacier rework the topography of the bed. These contain preglacial sediments (non glacial or earlier glacial sediments), which have been run over and thus deformed by meltout processes or lodgement. The constant reworking of these deposited tills leads to a highly homogenized till.\nSupraglacial till.\nMeltout till.\nSupraglacial meltout tills are similar to subglacial meltout tills. Rather than being the product of basal melting, however, supraglacial meltout tills are imposed on top of the glacier. These consist of clasts and debris that become exposed due to melting via solar radiation. These debris are either just debris that have a high relative position on the glacier, or clasts that have been transported up from the base of the glacier. Debris accumulation has a feedback-loop relationship with melting. Initially, the darker colored debris absorb more heat and thus accelerate the melting process. After a significant amount of melting has occurred, the thickness of the till insulates the ice sheet and slows the melting process. Supraglacial meltout tills typically end up forming moraines.\nFlow till.\nSupraglacial flow tills refer to tills that are subject to a dense concentration of clasts and debris from meltout. These debris localities are then subsequently affected by ablation. Due to their unstable nature, they are subject to downslope flow, and thus named \"flow till.\" Properties of flow tills vary, and can depend on factors such as water content, surface gradient, and debris characteristics. Generally, flow tills with a higher water content behave more fluidly, and thus are more susceptible to flow. There are three main types of flows, which are listed below.\nTillite.\nIn cases where till has been indurated or lithified by subsequent burial into solid rock, it is known as the sedimentary rock tillite. Matching beds of ancient tillites on opposite sides of the south Atlantic Ocean provided early evidence for continental drift. The same tillites also provide some support to the Precambrian Snowball Earth glaciation event hypothesis.\nEconomic resources.\nTills sometimes contain placer deposits of valuable minerals such as gold. Diamonds have been found in glacial till in the north-central United States and in Canada. \"Till prospecting\" is a method of prospecting in which tills are sampled over a wide area to determine if they contain valuable minerals, such as gold, uranium, silver, nickel, or diamonds, and the flow direction indicated by the till is then used to trace the minerals back to their bedrock source.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44547", "revid": "92899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44547", "title": "Tie rod", "text": "Slender structural unit\nA tie rod or tie bar (also known as a hanger rod if vertical) is a slender structural unit used as a tie and (in most applications) capable of carrying tensile loads only.\nIt is any rod or bar-shaped structural member designed to prevent the separation of two parts, as in a vehicle.\nPhysics and engineering principles.\nIn general, because the ratio of the typical tie rod's length to its cross section is usually very large, it would buckle under the action of compressive forces. The working strength of a tie rod is the product of the allowable working stress and the rod's minimum cross-sectional area.\nIf threads are cut into a cylindrical rod, that minimum area occurs at the root of the thread. Often rods are upset (made thicker at the ends) so that the tie rod does not become weaker when threads are cut into it.\nTie rods may be connected at the ends in various ways, but it is desirable that the strength of the connection should be at least equal to the strength of the rod. The ends may be threaded and passed through drilled holes or shackles and retained by nuts screwed on the ends. If the ends are threaded right- and left-hand the length between points of loading may be altered. This furnishes a second method for pre-tensioning the rod at will by turning it in the nuts so that the length will be changed. A turnbuckle will accomplish the same purpose. The ends may also be swaged to receive a fitting which is connected to the supports. Another way of making end connections is to forge an eye or hook on the rod.\nAn infamous structural failure involving tie rods is the Hyatt Regency walkway collapse in Kansas City, Missouri, on July 17, 1981. The hotel had a large atrium with three walkways crossing it suspended from tie rods. Construction errors led to several of the walkways collapsing, killing 114 people and injuring over 200.\nGeometry.\nOsgood and Graustein used the rectangular hyperbola, its conjugate hyperbola, and conjugate diameters to rationalize tie rods at 15 degree radial spacing, to a square of girders, from its center. The tie-rods to the corners (45\u00b0) correspond to the asymptotes, while the pair at 15\u00b0 and 75\u00b0 are conjugate, as are the pair at 30\u00b0 and 60\u00b0. According to this model in linear elasticity, the application of a load compressing the square results in a deformation where the tie rods maintain their conjugate relations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44549", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44549", "title": "The War of the Worlds radio broadcast", "text": ""}
{"id": "44551", "revid": "94904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44551", "title": "UDF Format", "text": ""}
