{"id": "48334", "revid": "2542622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48334", "title": "Retina", "text": "Part of the eye\nThe retina (from la\u00a0'net'; pl.\u2009retinae or retinas) is the innermost, light-sensitive layer of tissue of the eye of most vertebrates and some molluscs. The optics of the eye create a focused two-dimensional image of the visual world on the retina, which then processes that image within the retina and sends nerve impulses along the optic nerve to the visual cortex to create visual perception. The retina serves a function which is in many ways analogous to that of the film or image sensor in a camera.\nThe neural retina consists of several layers of neurons interconnected by synapses and is supported by an outer layer of pigmented epithelial cells. The primary light-sensing cells in the retina are the photoreceptor cells, which are of two types: rods and cones. Rods function mainly in dim light and provide monochromatic vision. Cones function in well-lit conditions and are responsible for the perception of colour through the use of a range of opsins, as well as high-acuity vision used for tasks such as reading. A third type of light-sensing cell, the photosensitive ganglion cell, is important for entrainment of circadian rhythms and reflexive responses such as the pupillary light reflex.\nLight striking the retina initiates a cascade of chemical and electrical events that ultimately trigger nerve impulses that are sent to various visual centres of the brain through the fibres of the optic nerve. Neural signals from the rods and cones undergo processing by other neurons, whose output takes the form of action potentials in retinal ganglion cells whose axons form the optic nerve.\nIn vertebrate embryonic development, the retina and the optic nerve originate as outgrowths of the developing brain, specifically the embryonic diencephalon; thus, the retina is considered part of the central nervous system (CNS) and is actually brain tissue. It is the only part of the CNS that can be visualized noninvasively. Like most of the brain, the retina is isolated from the vascular system by the blood\u2013brain barrier. The retina is the part of the body with the greatest continuous energy demand.\nStructure.\nInverted versus non-inverted retina.\nThe vertebrate retina is \"inverted\" in the sense that the light-sensing cells are in the back of the retina, so that light has to pass through layers of neurons and capillaries before it reaches the photosensitive sections of the rods and cones. The ganglion cells, whose axons form the optic nerve, are at the front of the retina; therefore, the optic nerve must cross through the retina en route to the brain. No photoreceptors are in this region, giving rise to the blind spot. In contrast, in the cephalopod retina, the photoreceptors are in front, with processing neurons and capillaries behind them. Because of this, cephalopods do not have a blind spot.\nAlthough the overlying neural tissue is partly transparent, and the accompanying glial cells have been shown to act as fibre-optic channels to transport photons directly to the photoreceptors, light scattering does occur. Some vertebrates, including humans, have an area of the central retina adapted for high-acuity vision. This area, termed the fovea centralis, is avascular (does not have blood vessels), and has minimal neural tissue in front of the photoreceptors, thereby minimizing light scattering.\nThe cephalopods have a non-inverted retina, which is comparable in resolving power to the eyes of many vertebrates. Squid eyes do not have an analog of the vertebrate retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Although their photoreceptors contain a protein, retinochrome, that recycles retinal and replicates one of the functions of the vertebrate RPE, cephalopod photoreceptors are likely not maintained as well as in vertebrates, and that as a result, the useful lifetime of photoreceptors in invertebrates is much shorter than in vertebrates. Having easily replaced stalk eyes (some lobsters) or retinae (some spiders, such as\" Deinopis\") rarely occurs.\nThe cephalopod retina does not originate as an outgrowth of the brain, as the vertebrate one does. This difference suggests that vertebrate and cephalopod eyes are not homologous, but have evolved separately. From an evolutionary perspective, a more complex structure such as the inverted retina can generally come about as a consequence of two alternate processes - an advantageous \"good\" compromise between competing functional limitations, or as a historical maladaptive relic of the convoluted path of organ evolution and transformation. Vision is an important adaptation in higher vertebrates.\nA third view of the \"inverted\" vertebrate eye is that it combines two benefits - the maintenance of the photoreceptors mentioned above, and the reduction in light intensity necessary to avoid blinding the photoreceptors, which are based on the extremely sensitive eyes of the ancestors of modern hagfish (fish that live in very deep, dark water).\nA recent study on the evolutionary purpose for the inverted retina structure from the APS (American Physical Society) says that \"The directional of glial cells helps increase the clarity of human vision. But we also noticed something rather curious: the colours that best passed through the glial cells were green to red, which the eye needs most for daytime vision. The eye usually receives too much blue\u2014and thus has fewer blue-sensitive cones.\nFurther computer simulations showed that green and red are concentrated five to ten times more by the glial cells, and into their respective cones, than blue light. Instead, excess blue light gets scattered to the surrounding rods. This optimization is such that color vision during the day is enhanced, while night-time vision suffers very little\".\nRetinal layers.\nThe vertebrate retina has 10 distinct layers. From closest to farthest from the vitreous body:\nThese layers can be grouped into four main processing stages\u2014photoreception; transmission to bipolar cells; transmission to ganglion cells, which also contain photoreceptors, the photosensitive ganglion cells; and transmission along the optic nerve. At each synaptic stage, horizontal and amacrine cells also are laterally connected.\nThe optic nerve is a central tract of many axons of ganglion cells connecting primarily to the lateral geniculate body, a visual relay station in the diencephalon (the rear of the forebrain). It also projects to the superior colliculus, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, and the nucleus of the optic tract. It passes through the other layers, creating the optic disc in primates.\nAdditional structures, not directly associated with vision, are found as outgrowths of the retina in some vertebrate groups. In birds, the pecten is a vascular structure of complex shape that projects from the retina into the vitreous humour; it supplies oxygen and nutrients to the eye, and may also aid in vision. Reptiles have a similar, but much simpler, structure.\nIn adult humans, the entire retina is about 72% of a sphere about 22\u00a0mm in diameter. The entire retina contains about 7 million cones and 75 to 150 million rods. The optic disc, a part of the retina sometimes called \"the blind spot\" because it lacks photoreceptors, is located at the optic papilla, where the optic-nerve fibres leave the eye. It appears as an oval white area of 3\u00a0mm2. Temporal (in the direction of the temples) to this disc is the macula, at whose centre is the fovea, a pit that is responsible for sharp central vision, but is actually less sensitive to light because of its lack of rods. Human and non-human primates possess one fovea, as opposed to certain bird species, such as hawks, that are bifoviate, and dogs and cats, that possess no fovea, but a central band known as the visual streak. Around the fovea extends the central retina for about 6\u00a0mm and then the peripheral retina. The farthest edge of the retina is defined by the ora serrata. The distance from one ora to the other (or macula), the most sensitive area along the horizontal meridian, is about 32\u00a0mm.\nIn section, the retina is no more than 0.5\u00a0mm thick. It has three layers of nerve cells and two of synapses, including the unique ribbon synapse. The optic nerve carries the ganglion-cell axons to the brain, and the blood vessels that supply the retina. The ganglion cells lie innermost in the eye while the photoreceptive cells lie beyond. Because of this counter-intuitive arrangement, light must first pass through and around the ganglion cells and through the thickness of the retina, (including its capillary vessels, not shown) before reaching the rods and cones. Light is absorbed by the retinal pigment epithelium or the choroid (both of which are opaque).\nThe white blood cells in the capillaries in front of the photoreceptors can be perceived as tiny bright moving dots when looking into blue light. This is known as the blue field entoptic phenomenon (or Scheerer's phenomenon).\nBetween the ganglion-cell layer and the rods and cones are two layers of neuropils, where synaptic contacts are made. The neuropil layers are the outer plexiform layer and the inner plexiform layer. In the outer neuropil layer, the rods and cones connect to the vertically running bipolar cells, and the horizontally oriented horizontal cells connect to ganglion cells.\nThe central retina predominantly contains cones, while the peripheral retina predominantly contains rods. In total, the retina has about seven million cones and a hundred million rods. At the centre of the macula is the foveal pit where the cones are narrow and long, and arranged in a hexagonal mosaic, the most dense, in contradistinction to the much fatter cones located more peripherally in the retina. At the foveal pit, the other retinal layers are displaced, before building up along the foveal slope until the rim of the fovea, or parafovea, is reached, which is the thickest portion of the retina. The macula has a yellow pigmentation, from screening pigments, and is known as the macula lutea. The area directly surrounding the fovea has the highest density of rods converging on single bipolar cells. Since its cones have a much lesser convergence of signals, the fovea allows for the sharpest vision the eye can attain.\nThough the rod and cones are a mosaic of sorts, transmission from receptors, to bipolars, to ganglion cells is not direct. Since about 150 million receptors and only 1 million optic nerve fibres exist, convergence and thus mixing of signals must occur. Moreover, the horizontal action of the horizontal and amacrine cells can allow one area of the retina to control another (e.g. one stimulus inhibiting another). This inhibition is key to lessening the sum of messages sent to the higher regions of the brain. In some lower vertebrates (e.g. the pigeon), control of messages is \"centrifugal\" \u2013 that is, one layer can control another, or higher regions of the brain can drive the retinal nerve cells, but in primates, this does not occur.\nLayers imagable with optical coherence tomography.\nUsing optical coherence tomography (OCT), at least 13 layers can be identified in the retina. The layers and anatomical correlation are:\nFrom innermost to outermost, the layers identifiable by OCT are as follows:\nDevelopment.\nRetinal development begins with the establishment of the eye fields mediated by the SHH and SIX3 proteins, with subsequent development of the optic vesicles regulated by the PAX6 and LHX2 proteins. The role of Pax6 in eye development was elegantly demonstrated by Walter Gehring and colleagues, who showed that ectopic expression of Pax6 can lead to eye formation on Drosophila antennae, wings, and legs. The optic vesicle gives rise to three structures: the neural retina, the retinal pigmented epithelium, and the optic stalk. The neural retina contains the retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) that give rise to the seven cell types of the retina. Differentiation begins with the retinal ganglion cells and concludes with production of the Muller glia. Although each cell type differentiates from the RPCs in a sequential order, there is considerable overlap in the timing of when individual cell types differentiate. The cues that determine a RPC daughter cell fate are coded by multiple transcription factor families including the bHLH and homeodomain factors.\nIn addition to guiding cell fate determination, cues exist in the retina to determine the dorsal-ventral (D-V) and nasal-temporal (N-T) axes. The D-V axis is established by a ventral to dorsal gradient of VAX2, whereas the N-T axis is coordinated by expression of the forkhead transcription factors FOXD1 and FOXG1. Additional gradients are formed within the retina. This spatial distribution may aid in proper targeting of RGC axons that function to establish the retinotopic map.\nBlood supply.\nThe retina is stratified into distinct layers, each containing specific cell types or cellular compartments that have metabolisms with different nutritional requirements. To satisfy these requirements, the ophthalmic artery bifurcates and supplies the retina via two distinct vascular networks: the choroidal network, which supplies the choroid and the outer retina, and the retinal network, which supplies the retina's inner layer.\nAlthough the inverted retina of vertebrates appears counter-intuitive, it is necessary for the proper functioning of the retina. The photoreceptor layer must be embedded in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), which performs at least seven vital functions, one of the most obvious being to supply oxygen and other necessary nutrients needed for the photoreceptors to function.\nEnergy requirements.\nThe energy requirements of the retina are even greater than that of the brain. This is due to the additional energy needed to continuously renew the photoreceptor outer segments, of which 10% are shed daily. Energy demands are greatest during dark adaptation when its sensitivity is most enhanced. The choroid supplies about 75% of these nutrients to the retina and the retinal vasculature only 25%.\nWhen light strikes 11-cis-retinal (in the disks in the rods and cones), 11-cis-retinal changes to all-trans-retinal which then triggers changes in the opsins. Now, the outer segments do not regenerate the retinal back into the cis- form once it has been changed by light. Instead the retinal is pumped out to the surrounding RPE where it is regenerated and transported back into the outer segments of the photoreceptors. This recycling function of the RPE protects the photoreceptors against photo-oxidative damage and allows the photoreceptor cells to have decades-long useful lives.\nIn birds.\nThe bird retina is devoid of blood vessels, perhaps to give unobscured passage of light for forming images, thus giving better resolution. It is, therefore, a considered view that the bird retina depends for nutrition and oxygen supply on a specialized organ, called the \"pecten\" or pecten oculi, located on the blind spot or optic disk. This organ is extremely rich in blood vessels and is thought to supply nutrition and oxygen to the bird retina by diffusion through the vitreous body. The pecten is highly rich in alkaline phosphatase activity and polarized cells in its bridge portion \u2013 both befitting its secretory role. Pecten cells are packed with dark melanin granules, which have been theorized to keep this organ warm with the absorption of stray light falling on the pecten. This is considered to enhance metabolic rate of the pecten, thereby exporting more nutritive molecules to meet the stringent energy requirements of the retina during long periods of exposure to light.\nBiometric identification and diagnosis of disease.\nThe bifurcations and other physical characteristics of the inner retinal vascular network are known to vary among individuals, and these individual variances have been used for biometric identification and for early detection of the onset of disease. The mapping of vascular bifurcations is one of the basic steps in biometric identification. Results of such analyses of retinal blood vessel structure can be evaluated against the ground truth data of vascular bifurcations of retinal fundus images that are obtained from the DRIVE dataset. In addition, the classes of vessels of the DRIVE dataset have also been identified, and an automated method for accurate extraction of these bifurcations is also available. Changes in retinal blood circulation are seen with aging and exposure to air pollution, and may indicate cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and atherosclerosis. Determining the equivalent width of arterioles and venules near the optic disc is also a widely used technique to identify cardiovascular risks.\nFunction.\nThe retina translates an optical image into neural impulses starting with the patterned excitation of the colour-sensitive pigments of its rods and cones, the retina's photoreceptor cells. The excitation is processed by the neural system and various parts of the brain working in parallel to form a representation of the external environment in the brain.\nThe cones respond to bright light and mediate high-resolution colour vision during daylight illumination (also called photopic vision). The rod responses are saturated at daylight levels and do not contribute to pattern vision. However, rods do respond to dim light and mediate lower-resolution, monochromatic vision under very low levels of illumination (called scotopic vision). The illumination in most office settings falls between these two levels and is called mesopic vision. At mesopic light levels, both the rods and cones are actively contributing pattern information. What contribution the rod information makes to pattern vision under these circumstances is unclear.\nThe response of cones to various wavelengths of light is called their spectral sensitivity. In normal human vision, the spectral sensitivity of a cone falls into one of three subtypes, often called blue, green, and red, but more accurately known as short, medium, and long wavelength-sensitive cone subtypes. It is a lack of one or more of the cone subtypes that causes individuals to have deficiencies in colour vision or various kinds of colour blindness. These individuals are not blind to objects of a particular colour, but are unable to distinguish between colours that can be distinguished by people with normal vision. Humans have this trichromatic vision, while most other mammals lack cones with red sensitive pigment and therefore have poorer dichromatic colour vision. However, some animals have four spectral subtypes, e.g. the trout adds an ultraviolet subgroup to short, medium, and long subtypes that are similar to humans. Some fish are sensitive to the polarization of light as well.\nIn the photoreceptors, exposure to light hyperpolarizes the membrane in a series of graded shifts. The outer cell segment contains a photopigment. Inside the cell the normal levels of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) keep the Na+ channel open, and thus in the resting state the cell is depolarised. The photon causes the retinal bound to the receptor protein to isomerise to trans-retinal. This causes the receptor to activate multiple G-proteins. This in turn causes the Ga-subunit of the protein to activate a phosphodiesterase (PDE6), which degrades cGMP, resulting in the closing of Na+ cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels (CNGs). Thus the cell is hyperpolarised. The amount of neurotransmitter released is reduced in bright light and increases as light levels fall. The actual photopigment is bleached away in bright light and only replaced as a chemical process, so in a transition from bright light to darkness the eye can take up to thirty minutes to reach full sensitivity.\nWhen thus excited by light, the photoceptor sends a proportional response synaptically to bipolar cells which in turn signal the retinal ganglion cells. The photoreceptors are also cross-linked by horizontal cells and amacrine cells, which modify the synaptic signal before it reaches the ganglion cells, the neural signals being intermixed and combined. Of the retina's nerve cells, only the retinal ganglion cells and few amacrine cells create action potentials.\nIn the retinal ganglion cells there are two types of response, depending on the receptive field of the cell. The receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells comprise a central, approximately circular area, where light has one effect on the firing of the cell, and an annular surround, where light has the opposite effect. In ON cells, an increment in light intensity in the centre of the receptive field causes the firing rate to increase. In OFF cells, it makes it decrease. In a linear model, this response profile is well described by a difference of Gaussians and is the basis for edge detection algorithms. Beyond this simple difference, ganglion cells are also differentiated by chromatic sensitivity and the type of spatial summation. Cells showing linear spatial summation are termed X cells (also called parvocellular, P, or midget ganglion cells), and those showing non-linear summation are Y cells (also called magnocellular, M, or parasol retinal ganglion cells), although the correspondence between X and Y cells (in the cat retina) and P and M cells (in the primate retina) is not as simple as it once seemed.\nIn the transfer of visual signals to the brain, the visual pathway, the retina is vertically divided in two, a temporal (nearer to the temple) half and a nasal (nearer to the nose) half. The axons from the nasal half cross the brain at the optic chiasma to join with axons from the temporal half of the other eye before passing into the lateral geniculate body.\nAlthough there are more than 130 million retinal receptors, there are only approximately 1.2 million fibres (axons) in the optic nerve. So, a large amount of pre-processing is performed within the retina. The fovea produces the most accurate information. Despite occupying about 0.01% of the visual field (less than 2\u00b0 of visual angle), about 10% of axons in the optic nerve are devoted to the fovea. The resolution limit of the fovea has been determined to be around 10,000 points. The information capacity is estimated at 500,000 bits per second (for more information on bits, see information theory) without colour or around 600,000 bits per second including colour.\nSpatial encoding.\nWhen the retina sends neural impulses representing an image to the brain, it spatially encodes (compresses) those impulses to fit the limited capacity of the optic nerve. Compression is necessary because there are 100 times more photoreceptor cells than ganglion cells. This is done by \"decorrelation\", which is carried out by the \"centre\u2013surround structures\", which are implemented by the bipolar and ganglion cells.\nThere are two types of centre\u2013surround structures in the retina \u2013 on-centres and off-centres. On-centres have a positively weighted centre and a negatively weighted surround. Off-centres are just the opposite. Positive weighting is more commonly known as excitatory, and negative weighting as inhibitory.\nThese centre\u2013surround structures are not physical apparent, in the sense that one cannot see them by staining samples of tissue and examining the retina's anatomy. The centre\u2013surround structures are logical (i.e., mathematically abstract) in the sense that they depend on the connection strengths between bipolar and ganglion cells. It is believed that the connection strength between cells is caused by the number and types of ion channels embedded in the synapses between the bipolar and ganglion cells.\nThe centre\u2013surround structures are mathematically equivalent to the edge detection algorithms used by computer programmers to extract or enhance the edges in a digital photograph. Thus, the retina performs operations on the image-representing impulses to enhance the edges of objects within its visual field. For example, in a picture of a dog, a cat and a car, it is the edges of these objects that contain the most information. In order for higher functions in the brain (or in a computer for that matter) to extract and classify objects such as a dog and a cat, the retina is the first step to separating out the various objects within the scene.\nAs an example, the following matrix is at the heart of a computer algorithm that implements edge detection. This matrix is the computer equivalent to the centre\u2013surround structure. In this example, each box (element) within this matrix would be connected to one photoreceptor. The photoreceptor in the centre is the current receptor being processed. The centre photoreceptor is multiplied by the +1 weight factor. The surrounding photoreceptors are the \"nearest neighbors\" to the centre and are multiplied by the \u22121/8 value. The sum of all nine of these elements is finally calculated. This summation is repeated for every photoreceptor in the image by shifting left to the end of a row and then down to the next line.\nThe total sum of this matrix is zero, if all the inputs from the nine photoreceptors are of the same value. The zero result indicates the image was uniform (non-changing) within this small patch. Negative or positive sums mean the image was varying (changing) within this small patch of nine photoreceptors.\nThe above matrix is only an approximation to what really happens inside the retina. The differences are:\nHere is an example of an input image and how edge detection would modify it.\nOnce the image is spatially encoded by the centre\u2013surround structures, the signal is sent out along the optic nerve (via the axons of the ganglion cells) through the optic chiasm to the LGN (lateral geniculate nucleus). The exact function of the LGN is unknown at this time. The output of the LGN is then sent to the back of the brain. Specifically, the output of the LGN \"radiates\" out to the V1 primary visual cortex.\nSimplified signal flow: Photoreceptors \u2192 Bipolar \u2192 Ganglion \u2192 Chiasm \u2192 LGN \u2192 V1 cortex\nClinical significance.\nThere are many inherited and acquired diseases or disorders that may affect the retina. Some of them include:\nIn addition, the retina has been described as a \"window\" into the brain and body, given that abnormalities detected through an examination of the retina can discover both neurological and systemic diseases.\nDiagnosis.\nA number of different instruments are available for the diagnosis of diseases and disorders affecting the retina. Ophthalmoscopy and fundus photography have long been used to examine the retina. Recently, adaptive optics has been used to image individual rods and cones in the living human retina, and a company based in Scotland has engineered technology that allows physicians to observe the complete retina without any discomfort to patients.\nThe electroretinogram is used to non-invasively measure the retina's electrical activity, which is affected by certain diseases. A relatively new technology, now becoming widely available, is optical coherence tomography (OCT). This non-invasive technique allows one to obtain a 3D volumetric or high resolution cross-sectional tomogram of the fine structures of the retina, with histologic quality. Retinal vessel analysis is a non-invasive method to examine the small arteries and veins in the retina which allows to draw conclusions about the morphology and the function of small vessels elsewhere in the human body. It has been established as a predictor of cardiovascular disease and seems to have, according to a study published in 2019, potential in the early detection of Alzheimer's disease.\nTreatment.\nTreatment depends upon the nature of the disease or disorder.\nCommon treatment modalities.\nThe following are commonly modalities of management for retinal disease:\nUncommon treatment modalities.\nRetinal gene therapy\nGene therapy holds promise as a potential avenue to cure a wide range of retinal diseases. This involves using a non-infectious virus to shuttle a gene into a part of the retina. Recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors possess a number of features that render them ideally suited for retinal gene therapy, including a lack of pathogenicity, minimal immunogenicity, and the ability to transduce postmitotic cells in a stable and efficient manner. rAAV vectors are increasingly utilized for their ability to mediate efficient transduction of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), photoreceptor cells and retinal ganglion cells. Each cell type can be specifically targeted by choosing the appropriate combination of AAV serotype, promoter, and intraocular injection site.\nSeveral clinical trials have already reported positive results using rAAV to treat Leber's congenital amaurosis, showing that the therapy was both safe and effective. There were no serious adverse events, and patients in all three studies showed improvement in their visual function as measured by a number of methods. The methods used varied among the three trials, but included both functional methods such as visual acuity and functional mobility as well as objective measures that are less susceptible to bias, such as the pupil's ability to respond to light and improvements on functional MRI. Improvements were sustained over the long-term, with patients continuing to do well after more than 1.5 years.\nThe unique architecture of the retina and its relatively immune-privileged environment help this process. Tight junctions that form the blood retinal barrier separate the subretinal space from the blood supply, thus protecting it from microbes and most immune-mediated damage, and enhancing its potential to respond to vector-mediated therapies. The highly compartmentalized anatomy of the eye facilitates accurate delivery of therapeutic vector suspensions to specific tissues under direct visualization using microsurgical techniques. In the sheltered environment of the retina, AAV vectors are able to maintain high levels of transgene expression in the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE), photoreceptors, or ganglion cells for long periods of time after a single treatment. In addition, the eye and the visual system can be routinely and easily monitored for visual function and retinal structural changes after injections with noninvasive advanced technology, such as visual acuities, contrast sensitivity, fundus auto-fluorescence (FAF), dark-adapted visual thresholds, vascular diameters, pupillometry, electroretinography (ERG), multifocal ERG and optical coherence tomography (OCT).\nThis strategy is effective against a number of retinal diseases that have been studied, including neovascular diseases that are features of age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and retinopathy of prematurity. Since the regulation of vascularization in the mature retina involves a balance between endogenous positive growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and inhibitors of angiogenesis, such as pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), rAAV-mediated expression of PEDF, angiostatin, and the soluble VEGF receptor sFlt-1, which are all antiangiogenic proteins, have been shown to reduce aberrant vessel formation in animal models. Since specific gene therapies cannot readily be used to treat a significant fraction of patients with retinal dystrophy, there is a major interest in developing a more generally applicable survival factor therapy. Neurotrophic factors have the ability to modulate neuronal growth during development to maintain existing cells and to allow recovery of injured neuronal populations in the eye. AAV encoding neurotrophic factors such as fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family members and GDNF either protected photoreceptors from apoptosis or slowed down cell death.\nOrgan transplantation\nTransplantation of retinae has been attempted, but without much success. At MIT, The University of Southern California, RWTH Aachen University, and the University of New South Wales, an \"artificial retina\" is under development: an implant which will bypass the photoreceptors of the retina and stimulate the attached nerve cells directly, with signals from a digital camera.\nHistory.\nAround 300 BCE, Herophilos identified the retina from dissections of cadaver eyes. He called it the \"arachnoid\" layer, from its resemblance to a spider web, and \"retiform\", from its resemblance to a casting net. The term arachnoid came to refer to a layer around the brain; the term \"retiform\" came to refer to the \"retina\".\nBetween 1011 and 1021 CE, Ibn Al-Haytham published numerous experiments demonstrating that sight occurs from light reflecting from objects into the eye. This is consistent with intromission theory and against emission theory, the theory that sight occurs from rays emitted by the eyes. However, Ibn Al-Haytham decided that the retina could not be responsible for the beginnings of vision because the image formed on it was inverted. Instead he decided it must begin at the surface of the lens.\nIn 1604, Johannes Kepler worked out the optics of the eye and decided that the retina must be where sight begins. He left it up to other scientists to reconcile the inverted retinal image with our perception of the world as upright.\nIn 1894, Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal published the first major characterization of retinal neurons in \"Retina der Wirbelthiere\" (\"The Retina of Vertebrates\").\nGeorge Wald, Haldan Keffer Hartline, and Ragnar Granit won the 1967 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their scientific research on the retina.\nA recent University of Pennsylvania study calculated that the approximate bandwidth of human retinae is 8.75 megabits per second, whereas a guinea pig's retinal transfer rate is 875 kilobits per second.\nMacLaren &amp; Pearson and colleagues at University College London and Moorfields Eye Hospital in London, in 2006, showed that photoreceptor cells could be transplanted successfully in the mouse retina if donor cells were at a critical developmental stage. Recently Ader and colleagues in Dublin showed, using the electron microscope, that transplanted photoreceptors formed synaptic connections.\nIn 2012, Sebastian Seung and his laboratory at MIT launched EyeWire, an online Citizen science game where players trace neurons in the retina. The goals of the EyeWire project are to identify specific cell types within the known broad classes of retinal cells, and to map the connections between neurons in the retina, which will help to determine how vision works.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48335", "revid": "32392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48335", "title": "Marxist economics", "text": ""}
{"id": "48336", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48336", "title": "Electrolyte", "text": "Substance whose dissolved ions conduct electricity\nAn electrolyte is a substance that conducts electricity through the movement of ions, but not through the movement of electrons. This includes most soluble salts, acids, and bases, dissolved in a polar solvent like water. Upon dissolving, the substance separates into cations and anions, which disperse uniformly throughout the solvent. Solid-state electrolytes also exist. In medicine and sometimes in chemistry, the term electrolyte refers to the substance that is dissolved.\nElectrically, such a solution is neutral. If an electric potential is applied to such a solution, the cations of the solution are drawn to the electrode that has an abundance of electrons, while the anions are drawn to the electrode that has a deficit of electrons. The movement of anions and cations in opposite directions within the solution amounts to a current. Some gases, such as hydrogen chloride (HCl), under conditions of high temperature or low pressure can also function as electrolytes. Electrolyte solutions can also result from the dissolution of some biological (e.g., DNA, polypeptides) or synthetic polymers (e.g., polystyrene sulfonate), termed \"polyelectrolytes\", which contain charged functional groups. A substance that dissociates into ions in solution or in the melt acquires the capacity to conduct electricity. Sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, magnesium, and phosphate in a liquid phase are examples of electrolytes.\nIn medicine, electrolyte replacement is needed when a person has prolonged vomiting or diarrhea, and as a response to sweating due to strenuous athletic activity. Commercial electrolyte solutions are available, particularly for sick children (such as oral rehydration solution, Suero Oral, or Pedialyte) and athletes (sports drinks). Electrolyte monitoring is important in the treatment of anorexia and bulimia.\nIn science, electrolytes are one of the main components of electrochemical cells.\nIn clinical medicine, mentions of electrolytes usually refer metonymically to the ions, and (especially) to their concentrations (in blood, serum, urine, or other fluids). Thus, mentions of electrolyte levels usually refer to the various ion concentrations, not to the fluid volumes.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"electrolyte\" derives from Ancient Greek \u03ae\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf- (\"\u0113lectro\"-), prefix originally meaning \"amber\" but in modern contexts related to electricity, and \u03bb\u03c5\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 (\"lytos\"), meaning \"able to be taken apart\".\nHistory.\nIn his 1884 dissertation, Svante Arrhenius put forth his explanation of solid crystalline salts disassociating into paired charged particles when dissolved, for which he won the 1903 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Arrhenius's explanation was that in forming a solution, the salt dissociates into charged particles, to which Michael Faraday (1791\u20131867) had given the name \"ions\" many years earlier. Faraday's belief had been that ions were produced in the process of electrolysis. Arrhenius proposed that, even in the absence of an electric current, solutions of salts contained ions. He thus proposed that chemical reactions in solution were reactions between ions.\nShortly after Arrhenius's hypothesis of ions, Franz Hofmeister and Siegmund Lewith found that different ion types displayed different effects on such things as the solubility of proteins. A consistent ordering of these different ions on the magnitude of their effect arises consistently in many other systems as well. This has since become known as the Hofmeister series.\nWhile the origins of these effects are not abundantly clear and have been debated throughout the past century, it has been suggested that the charge density of these ions is important and might actually have explanations originating from the work of Charles-Augustin de Coulomb over 200 years ago.\nFormation.\nElectrolyte solutions are normally formed when salt is placed into a solvent such as water and the individual components dissociate due to the thermodynamic interactions between solvent and solute molecules, in a process called \"solvation\". For example, when table salt (sodium chloride), NaCl, is placed in water, the salt (a solid) dissolves into its component ions, according to the dissociation reaction:\n NaCl(s) \u2192 Na+(aq) + Cl\u2212(aq)\nIt is also possible for substances to react with water, producing ions. For example, carbon dioxide gas dissolves in water to produce a solution that contains hydronium, carbonate, and hydrogen carbonate ions.\nMolten salts can also be electrolytes as, for example, when sodium chloride is molten, the liquid conducts electricity. In particular, ionic liquids, which are molten salts with melting points below 100\u00a0\u00b0C, are a type of highly conductive non-aqueous electrolytes and thus have found more and more applications in fuel cells and batteries.\nAn electrolyte in a solution may be described as \"concentrated\" if it has a high concentration of ions, or \"dilute\" if it has a low concentration. If a high proportion of the solute dissociates to form free ions, the electrolyte is strong; if most of the solute does not dissociate, the electrolyte is weak. The properties of electrolytes may be exploited using electrolysis to extract constituent elements and compounds contained within the solution.\nAlkaline earth metals form hydroxides that are strong electrolytes with limited solubility in water, due to the strong attraction between their constituent ions. This limits their application to situations where high solubility is required.\nIn 2021, researchers have found that electrolyte can \"substantially facilitate electrochemical corrosion studies in less conductive media\".\nPhysiological importance.\nIn physiology, the primary ions of electrolytes are sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), calcium (Ca2+), magnesium (Mg2+), chloride (Cl\u2212), hydrogen phosphate (HPO42\u2212), and hydrogen carbonate (HCO3\u2212). The electric charge symbols of plus (+) and minus (\u2212) indicate that the substance is ionic in nature and has an imbalanced distribution of electrons, the result of chemical dissociation. Sodium is the main electrolyte found in extracellular fluid and potassium is the main intracellular electrolyte; both are involved in fluid balance and blood pressure control.\nAll known multicellular lifeforms require a subtle and complex electrolyte balance between the intracellular and extracellular environments. In particular, the maintenance of precise osmotic gradients of electrolytes is important. Such gradients affect and regulate the hydration of the body as well as blood pH, and are critical for nerve and muscle function. Various mechanisms exist in living species that keep the concentrations of different electrolytes under tight control.\nBoth muscle tissue and neurons are considered electric tissues of the body. Muscles and neurons are activated by electrolyte activity between the extracellular fluid or interstitial fluid, and intracellular fluid. Electrolytes may enter or leave the cell membrane through specialized protein structures embedded in the plasma membrane called \"ion channels\". For example, muscle contraction is dependent upon the presence of calcium (Ca2+), sodium (Na+), and potassium (K+). Without sufficient levels of these key electrolytes, muscle weakness or severe muscle contractions may occur.\nElectrolyte balance is maintained by oral, or in emergencies, intravenous (IV) intake of electrolyte-containing substances, and is regulated by hormones, in general with the kidneys flushing out excess levels. In humans, electrolyte homeostasis is regulated by hormones such as antidiuretic hormones, aldosterone and parathyroid hormones. Serious electrolyte disturbances, such as dehydration and overhydration, may lead to cardiac and neurological complications and, unless they are rapidly resolved, will result in a medical emergency.\nMeasurement.\nMeasurement of electrolytes is a commonly performed diagnostic procedure, performed via blood testing with ion-selective electrodes or urinalysis by medical technologists. The interpretation of these values is somewhat meaningless without analysis of the clinical history and is often impossible without parallel measurements of renal function. The electrolytes measured most often are sodium and potassium. Chloride levels are rarely measured except for arterial blood gas interpretations since they are inherently linked to sodium levels. One important test conducted on urine is the specific gravity test to determine the occurrence of an electrolyte imbalance.\nConductivity cells are another kind of tools used to measure the electrolyte solution's strength to conduct electricity.\nRehydration.\nAccording to a study paid for by the Gatorade Sports Science Institute, electrolyte drinks containing sodium and potassium salts replenish the body's water and electrolyte concentrations after dehydration caused by exercise, excessive alcohol consumption, diaphoresis (heavy sweating), diarrhea, vomiting, intoxication or starvation; the study says that athletes exercising in extreme conditions (for three or more hours continuously, e.g. a marathon or triathlon) who do not consume electrolytes risk dehydration (or hyponatremia).\nA home-made electrolyte drink can be made by using water, sugar and salt in precise proportions. It is important to include glucose (sugar) to utilise the co-transport mechanism of sodium and glucose. Commercial preparations are also available for both human and veterinary use.\nElectrolytes are commonly found in fruit juices, sports drinks, milk, nuts, and many fruits and vegetables (whole or in juice form) (e.g., potatoes, avocados).\nElectrochemistry.\nWhen electrodes are placed in an electrolyte and a voltage is applied, the electrolyte will conduct electricity. Lone electrons normally cannot pass through the electrolyte; instead, a chemical reaction occurs at the cathode, providing electrons to the electrolyte. Another reaction occurs at the anode, consuming electrons from the electrolyte. As a result, a negative charge cloud develops in the electrolyte around the cathode, and a positive charge develops around the anode. The ions in the electrolyte neutralize these charges, enabling the electrons to keep flowing and the reactions to continue.\nFor example, in a solution of ordinary table salt (sodium chloride, NaCl) in water, the cathode reaction will be\n 2 H2O + 2e\u2212 \u2192 2 OH\u2212 + H2\nand hydrogen gas will bubble up; the anode reaction is\n 2 NaCl \u2192 2 Na+ + Cl2 + 2e\u2212\nand chlorine gas will be liberated into solution where it reacts with the sodium and hydroxyl ions to produce sodium hypochlorite - household bleach. The positively charged sodium ions Na+ will react toward the cathode, neutralizing the negative charge of OH\u2212 there, and the negatively charged hydroxide ions OH\u2212 will react toward the anode, neutralizing the positive charge of Na+ there. Without the ions from the electrolyte, the charges around the electrode would slow down continued electron flow; diffusion of H+ and OH\u2212 through water to the other electrode takes longer than movement of the much more prevalent salt ions.\nElectrolytes dissociate in water because water molecules are dipoles and the dipoles orient in an energetically favorable manner to solvate the ions.\nIn other systems, the electrode reactions can involve the metals of the electrodes as well as the ions of the electrolyte.\nElectrolytic conductors are used in electronic devices where the chemical reaction at a metal-electrolyte interface yields useful effects.\nSolid electrolytes.\nSolid electrolytes can be mostly divided into four groups described below.\nGel electrolytes.\nGel electrolytes \u2013 closely resemble liquid electrolytes. In essence, they are liquids in a flexible lattice framework. Various additives are often applied to increase the conductivity of such systems.\nCeramic electrolytes.\nSolid ceramic electrolytes \u2013 ions migrate through the ceramic phase by means of vacancies or interstitials within the lattice. There are also glassy-ceramic electrolytes.\nPolymer electrolytes.\nDry polymer electrolytes differ from liquid and gel electrolytes in that salt is dissolved directly into the solid medium. Usually it is a relatively high-dielectric constant polymer (PEO, PMMA, PAN, polyphosphazenes, siloxanes, etc.) and a salt with low lattice energy. In order to increase the mechanical strength and conductivity of such electrolytes, very often composites are made, and inert ceramic phase is introduced. There are two major classes of such electrolytes: polymer-in-ceramic, and ceramic-in-polymer.\nOrganic plastic electrolytes.\nOrganic ionic plastic crystals \u2013 are a type organic salts exhibiting mesophases (i.e. a state of matter intermediate between liquid and solid), in which mobile ions are orientationally or rotationally disordered while their centers are located at the ordered sites in the crystal structure. They have various forms of disorder due to one or more solid\u2013solid phase transitions below the melting point and have therefore plastic properties and good mechanical flexibility as well as an improved electrode-electrolyte interfacial contact. In particular, protic organic ionic plastic crystals (POIPCs), which are solid protic organic salts formed by proton transfer from a Br\u00f8nsted acid to a Br\u00f8nsted base and in essence are protic ionic liquids in the molten state, have found to be promising solid-state proton conductors for fuel cells. Examples include 1,2,4-triazolium perfluorobutanesulfonate and imidazolium methanesulfonate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48337", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48337", "title": "Caterpillar", "text": "Larva of a butterfly or moth\nCaterpillars ( ) are the larval stage of members of the order Lepidoptera (the insect order comprising butterflies and moths).\nAs with most common names, the application of the word is arbitrary, since the larvae of sawflies (suborder Symphyta) are commonly called caterpillars as well. Both lepidopteran and symphytan larvae have eruciform body shapes.\nCaterpillars of most species eat plant material (often leaves), but not all; some (about 1%) eat insects, and some are even cannibalistic. Some feed on other animal products. For example, clothes moths feed on wool, and horn moths feed on the hooves and horns of dead ungulates.\nCaterpillars are typically voracious feeders and many of them are among the most serious of agricultural pests. In fact, many moth species are best known in their caterpillar stages because of the damage they cause to fruits and other agricultural produce, whereas the moths are obscure and do no direct harm. Conversely, various species of caterpillar are valued as sources of silk, as human or animal food, or for biological control of pest plants.\nEtymology.\nThe origins of the word \"caterpillar\" date from the early 16th century. They derive from Middle English \"catirpel\", \"catirpeller\", probably an alteration of Old North French \"catepelose\": \"cate\", cat (from Latin \"cattus\") + \"pelose\", hairy (from Latin \"pil\u014dsus\").\nThe inchworm, or looper caterpillars from the family Geometridae are so named because of the way they move, appearing to measure the earth (the word \"geometrid\" means \"earth-measurer\" in Greek); the primary reason for this unusual locomotion is the elimination of nearly all the prolegs except the clasper on the terminal segment.\nDescription.\nCaterpillars have soft bodies that can grow rapidly between moults. Their size varies between species and instars (moults) from as small as up to . Some larvae of the order Hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps) can appear like the caterpillars of the Lepidoptera. Such larvae are mainly seen in the sawfly suborder. However while these larvae superficially resemble caterpillars, they can be distinguished by the presence of prolegs on every abdominal segment, an absence of crochets or hooks on the prolegs (these are present on lepidopteran caterpillars), one pair of prominent ocelli on the head capsule, and an absence of the upside-down Y-shaped suture on the front of the head.\nLepidopteran caterpillars can be differentiated from sawfly larvae by:\nFossils.\nIn 2019, a geometrid moth caterpillar dating back to the Eocene epoch, approximately 44 million years ago, was found preserved in Baltic amber. It was described under \"Eogeometer vadens\". Previously, another fossil dating back approximately 125 million years was found in Lebanese amber.\nDefenses.\nMany animals feed on caterpillars as they are rich in protein. As a result, caterpillars have evolved various means of defense.\nCaterpillars have evolved defenses against physical conditions such as cold, hot or dry environmental conditions. Some Arctic species like \"Gynaephora groenlandica\" have special basking and aggregation behaviours apart from physiological adaptations to remain in a dormant state.\nAppearance.\nThe appearance of a caterpillar can often repel a predator: its markings and certain body parts can make it seem poisonous, or bigger in size and thus threatening, or non-edible. Some types of caterpillars are indeed poisonous or distasteful and their bright coloring warns predators of this. Others may mimic dangerous caterpillars or other animals while not being dangerous themselves. Many caterpillars are cryptically colored and resemble the plants on which they feed. An example of caterpillars that use camouflage for defense is the species \"Nemoria arizonaria\". If the caterpillars hatch in the spring and feed on oak catkins they appear green. If they hatch in the summer they appear dark colored, like oak twigs. The differential development is linked to the tannin content in the diet. Caterpillars may even have spines or growths that resemble plant parts such as thorns. Some look like objects in the environment such as bird droppings. Some Geometridae cover themselves in plant parts, while bagworms construct and live in a bag covered in sand, pebbles or plant material.\nChemical defenses.\nMore aggressive self-defense measures have evolved in some caterpillars. These measures include having spiny bristles or long fine hair-like setae with detachable tips that will irritate by lodging in the skin or mucous membranes. However some birds (such as cuckoos) will swallow even the hairiest of caterpillars. Other caterpillars acquire toxins from their host plants that render them unpalatable to most of their predators. For instance, ornate moth caterpillars utilize pyrrolizidine alkaloids that they obtain from their food plants to deter predators. The most aggressive caterpillar defenses are bristles associated with venom glands. These bristles are called urticating hairs. A venom which is among the most potent defensive chemicals in any animal is produced by the South American silk moth genus \"Lonomia\". Its venom is an anticoagulant powerful enough to cause a human to hemorrhage to death (See Lonomiasis). This chemical is being investigated for potential medical applications. Most urticating hairs range in effect from mild irritation to dermatitis. Example: brown-tail moth.\nPlants contain toxins which protect them from herbivores, but some caterpillars have evolved countermeasures which enable them to eat the leaves of such toxic plants. In addition to being unaffected by the poison, the caterpillars sequester it in their body, making them highly toxic to predators. The chemicals are also carried on into the adult stages. These toxic species, such as the cinnabar moth (\"Tyria jacobaeae\") and monarch (\"Danaus plexippus\") caterpillars, usually advertise themselves with the danger colors of red, yellow and black, often in bright stripes (see aposematism). Any predator that attempts to eat a caterpillar with an aggressive defense mechanism will learn and avoid future attempts.\nSome caterpillars regurgitate acidic digestive juices at attacking enemies. Many papilionid larvae produce bad smells from extrudable glands called osmeteria.\nDefensive behaviors.\nMany caterpillars display feeding behaviors which allow the caterpillar to remain hidden from potential predators. Many feed in protected environments, such as enclosed inside silk galleries, rolled leaves or by mining between the leaf surfaces.\nSome caterpillars, like early instars of the tomato hornworm and tobacco hornworm, have long \"whip-like\" organs attached to the ends of their body. The caterpillar wiggles these organs to frighten away flies and predatory wasps. Some caterpillars can evade predators by using a silk line and dropping off from branches when disturbed. Many species thrash about violently when disturbed to scare away potential predators. One species (\"Amorpha juglandis\") even makes high pitched whistles that can scare away birds.\nSocial behaviors and relationships with other insects.\nSome caterpillars obtain protection by associating themselves with ants. The Lycaenid butterflies are particularly well known for this. They communicate with their ant protectors by vibrations as well as chemical means and typically provide food rewards.\nSome caterpillars are gregarious; large aggregations are believed to help in reducing the levels of parasitization and predation. Clusters amplify the signal of aposematic coloration, and individuals may participate in group regurgitation or displays. Pine processionary (\"Thaumetopoea pityocampa\") caterpillars often link into a long train to move through trees and over the ground. The head of the lead caterpillar is visible, but the other heads can appear hidden. Forest tent caterpillars cluster during periods of cold weather.\nPredators.\nCaterpillars are eaten by many animals. The European pied flycatcher is one species that preys upon caterpillars. The flycatcher typically finds caterpillars among oak foliage. Paper wasps catch caterpillars to feed their young and themselves.\nBehavior.\nCaterpillars have been called \"eating machines\", and eat leaves voraciously. Most species shed their skin four or five times as their bodies grow, and they eventually enter a pupal stage before becoming adults. Caterpillars grow very quickly; for instance, a tobacco hornworm will increase its weight ten-thousandfold in less than twenty days. An adaptation that enables them to eat so much is a mechanism in a specialized midgut that quickly transports ions to the lumen (midgut cavity), to keep the potassium level higher in the midgut cavity than in the hemolymph.\nMost caterpillars are solely herbivorous. Many are restricted to feeding on one species of plant, while others are polyphagous. Some, including the clothes moth, feed on detritus. Some are predatory, and may prey on other species of caterpillars (e.g. Hawaiian \"Eupithecia\"). Others feed on eggs of other insects, aphids, scale insects, or ant larvae. A few are parasitic on cicadas or leaf hoppers (Epipyropidae). Some Hawaiian caterpillars (\"Hyposmocoma molluscivora\") use silk traps to capture snails.\nMany caterpillars are nocturnal. For example, the \"cutworms\" (of the family Noctuidae) hide at the base of plants during the day and only feed at night. Others, such as spongy moth (\"Lymantria dispar\") larvae, change their activity patterns depending on density and larval stage, with more diurnal feeding in early instars and high densities.\nEconomic effects.\nCaterpillars cause much damage, mainly by eating leaves. The propensity for damage is enhanced by monocultural farming practices, especially where the caterpillar is specifically adapted to the host plant under cultivation. The cotton bollworm causes enormous losses. Other species eat food crops. Caterpillars have been the target of pest control through the use of pesticides, biological control and agronomic practices. Many species have become resistant to pesticides. Bacterial toxins such as those from \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" which are evolved to affect the gut of Lepidoptera have been used in sprays of bacterial spores, toxin extracts and also by incorporating genes to produce them within the host plants. These approaches are defeated over time by the evolution of resistance mechanisms in the insects.\nPlants evolve mechanisms of resistance to being eaten by caterpillars, including the evolution of chemical toxins and physical barriers such as hairs. Incorporating host plant resistance (HPR) through plant breeding is another approach used in reducing the impact of caterpillars on crop plants.\nSome caterpillars are used in industry. The silk industry is based on the silkworm caterpillar.\nHuman health.\nCaterpillar hair can be a cause of human health problems. Caterpillar hairs sometimes have venoms in them and species from approximately 12 families of moths or butterflies worldwide can inflict serious human injuries ranging from urticarial dermatitis and atopic asthma to osteochondritis, consumption coagulopathy, kidney failure, and brain bleeding. Skin rashes are the most common, but there have been fatalities. \"Lonomia\" is a frequent cause of envenomation in Brazil, with 354 cases reported between 1989 and 2005. Lethality ranging up to 20% with death caused most often by intracranial hemorrhage.\nCaterpillar hair has also been known to cause kerato-conjunctivitis. The sharp barbs on the end of caterpillar hairs can get lodged in soft tissues and mucous membranes such as the eyes. Once they enter such tissues, they can be difficult to extract, often exacerbating the problem as they migrate across the membrane.\nThis becomes a particular problem in an indoor setting. The hair easily enter buildings through ventilation systems and accumulate in indoor environments because of their small size, which makes it difficult for them to be vented out. This accumulation increases the risk of human contact in indoor environments.\nCaterpillars are a food source in some cultures. For example, in South Africa mopane worms are eaten by the bushmen, and in China silkworms are considered a delicacy.\nIn popular culture.\nCaterpillars became a symbol for social dependents. Shakespeare's Bolingbroke described King Richard's friends as \"The caterpillars of the commonwealth, Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away\". In 1790 William Blake referenced this popular image in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell when he attacked priests: \"as the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so the priest lay his curse on the fairest joys\".\nThe role of caterpillars in the life stages of butterflies was badly understood. In 1679 Maria Sibylla Merian published the first volume of \"The Caterpillars' Marvelous Transformation and Strange Floral Food\", which contained 50 illustrations and a description of insects, moths, butterflies and their larvae. An earlier popular publication on moths and butterflies, and their caterpillars, by Jan Goedart had not included eggs in the life stages of European moths and butterflies, because he had believed that caterpillars were generated from water. When Merian published her study of caterpillars it was still widely believed that insects were spontaneously generated. Merian's illustrations supported the findings of Francesco Redi, Marcello Malpighi and Jan Swammerdam.\nButterflies were regarded as symbol for the human soul since ancient time, and also in the Christian tradition. Goedart thus located his empirical observations on the transformation of caterpillars into butterflies in the Christian tradition. As such he argued that the metamorphosis from caterpillar into butterfly was a symbol, and even proof, of Christ's resurrection. He argued \"that from dead caterpillars emerge living animals; so it is equally true and miraculous, that our dead and rotten corpses will rise from the grave.\" Swammerdam, who in 1669 had demonstrated that inside a caterpillar the rudiments of the future butterfly's limbs and wings could be discerned, attacked the mystical and religious notion that the caterpillar died and the butterfly subsequently resurrected. As a militant Cartesian, Swammerdam attacked Goedart as ridiculous, and when publishing his findings he proclaimed \"here we witness the digression of those who have tried to prove Resurrection of the Dead from these obviously natural and comprehensible changes within the creature itself.\"\nSince then the metamorphoses of the caterpillar into a butterfly has in Western societies been associated with countless human transformations in folktales and literature. There is no process in the physical life of human beings that resembles this metamorphoses, and the symbol of the caterpillar tends to depict a psychic transformation of a human. As such the caterpillar has in the Christian tradition become a metaphor for being \"born again\".\nLewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland includes the Caterpillar as a character. When Alice comments on the caterpillar's inevitable transformation into a butterfly, the caterpillar champions the position that in spite of changes it is still possible to know something, and that Alice is the same Alice at the beginning and end of a considerable interval.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48338", "revid": "46781372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48338", "title": "Butterfly", "text": "Group of insects in the order Lepidoptera\nButterflies are winged insects from the lepidopteran superfamily Papilionoidea, characterised by large, often brightly coloured wings that often fold together when at rest, and a conspicuous, fluttering flight. The oldest butterfly fossils have been dated to the Paleocene, about 56 million years ago, though molecular evidence suggests that they likely originated in the Cretaceous.\nButterflies have a four-stage life cycle, and like other holometabolous insects they undergo complete metamorphosis. Winged adults lay eggs on plant foliage on which their larvae, known as caterpillars, will feed. The caterpillars grow, sometimes very rapidly, and when fully developed, pupate in a chrysalis. When metamorphosis is complete, the pupal skin splits, the adult insect climbs out, expands its wings to dry, and flies off.\nSome butterflies, especially in the tropics, have several generations in a year, while others have a single generation, and a few in cold locations may take several years to pass through their entire life cycle.\nButterflies are often polymorphic, and many species make use of camouflage, mimicry, and aposematism to evade their predators. Some, like the monarch and the painted lady, migrate over long distances. Many butterflies are attacked by parasites or parasitoids, including wasps, protozoans, flies, and other invertebrates, or are preyed upon by other organisms. Some species are pests because in their larval stages they can damage domestic crops or trees; other species are agents of pollination of some plants. Larvae of a few butterflies (e.g., harvesters) eat harmful insects, and a few are predators of ants, while others live as mutualists in association with ants. Culturally, butterflies are a popular motif in the visual and literary arts. The Smithsonian Institution says \"butterflies are certainly one of the most appealing creatures in nature\".\nEtymology.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" derives the word straightforwardly from Old English \"butorfl\u0113oge\", butter-fly; similar names in Old Dutch and Old High German show that the name is ancient, but modern Dutch and German use different words ( and ) and the common name often varies substantially between otherwise closely related languages. A possible source of the name is the bright yellow male of the brimstone (\"Gonepteryx rhamni\"); another is that butterflies were on the wing in meadows during the spring and summer butter season while the grass was growing.\nPaleontology.\nThe earliest Lepidoptera fossils date to the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, around 200million years ago. Butterflies evolved from moths, so while the butterflies are monophyletic (forming a single clade), the moths are not. The oldest known butterfly is \"Protocoeliades kristenseni\" from the Palaeocene aged Fur Formation of Denmark, approximately 55million years old, which belongs to the family Hesperiidae (skippers). Molecular clock estimates suggest that butterflies originated sometime in the Late Cretaceous, but only significantly diversified during the Cenozoic, with one study suggesting a North American origin for the group. The oldest American butterfly is the Late Eocene \"Prodryas persephone\" from the Florissant Fossil Beds, approximately 34million years old.\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nButterflies are divided into seven families that contain a total of about 20,000 species.\nTraditionally, butterflies have been divided into the superfamilies Papilionoidea and the moth-like Hedyloidea. Recent work has discovered that Hedylidae, the only family within Hedyloidea, is nested within the Papilionoidea, meaning that Papilionoidea would be synonymous with Rhopalocera. The relationships between the rest of the 6 families are extremely well resolved, which is summarised in the below cladogram.\nBiology.\nGeneral description.\nButterfly adults are characterised by their four scale-covered wings, which give the Lepidoptera their name (Ancient Greek \u03bb\u03b5\u03c0\u03af\u03c2 lep\u00eds, scale + \u03c0\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd pter\u00f3n, wing). These scales give butterfly wings their colour; they are pigmented with melanins that give them blacks and browns, as well as uric acid derivatives and flavones that give them yellows, but many of the blues, greens, reds and iridescent colours are created by structural coloration produced by the micro-structures of the scales and hairs.\nAs in all insects, the body is divided into three sections: the head, thorax, and abdomen. The thorax is composed of three segments, each with a pair of legs. In most families of butterfly the antennae are clubbed (clavate), unlike those of moths which may be threadlike (filiform) or feathery (plumose). The long proboscis can be coiled when not in use for sipping nectar from flowers.\nNearly all butterflies are diurnal, have relatively bright colours, and hold their wings vertically above their bodies when at rest; these features differentiate butterflies from the majority of moths, which fly by night, are often cryptically coloured (well camouflaged), and either hold their wings flat (touching the surface on which the moth is standing) or fold them closely over their bodies. Some day-flying moths, such as the hummingbird hawk-moth, are exceptions to these rules.\nButterfly larvae, caterpillars, have a hard (sclerotised) head with strong mandibles used for cutting their food, most often leaves. They have cylindrical bodies, with ten segments to the abdomen, generally with short prolegs on segments 3\u20136 and 10; the three pairs of true legs on the thorax have five segments each. Many are well camouflaged; others are aposematic with bright colours and bristly projections containing toxic chemicals obtained from their food plants. The pupa or chrysalis, unlike that of moths, is not wrapped in a cocoon.\nMany butterflies are sexually dimorphic. Most butterflies have the ZW sex-determination system, where females are the heterogametic sex (ZW) and males homogametic (ZZ).\nDistribution and migration.\nButterflies are distributed worldwide except Antarctica, totalling some 18,500 species. Of these, 775 are Nearctic; 7,700 Neotropical; 1,575 Palearctic; 3,650 Afrotropical; and 4,800 are distributed across the combined Oriental and Australian/Oceania regions. The monarch butterfly is native to the Americas, but in the nineteenth century or before, spread across the world, and is now found in Australia, New Zealand, other parts of Oceania, and the Iberian Peninsula. It is not clear how it dispersed; adults may have been blown by the wind or larvae or pupae may have been accidentally transported by humans, but the presence of suitable host plants in their new environment was a necessity for their successful establishment.\nMany butterflies, such as the painted lady, monarch, and several danaine migrate for long distances. These migrations take place over a number of generations and no single individual completes the whole trip. The eastern North American population of monarchs can travel thousands of miles south-west to overwintering sites in Mexico. There is a reverse migration in the spring. It has recently been shown that the British painted lady undertakes a round trip in a series of steps by up to six successive generations, from tropical Africa to the Arctic Circle\u2009\u2014\u2009almost double the length of the famous migrations undertaken by monarch. Spectacular large-scale migrations associated with the monsoon are seen in peninsular India. Migrations have been studied in more recent times using wing tags and also using stable hydrogen isotopes.\nButterflies navigate using a time-compensated sun compass. They can see polarised light and therefore orient even in cloudy conditions. The polarised light near the ultraviolet spectrum appears to be particularly important. Many migratory butterflies live in semi-arid areas where breeding seasons are short. The life histories of their host plants also influence butterfly behaviour.\nLife cycle.\nButterflies in their adult stage can live from a week to nearly a year depending on the species. Many species have long larval life stages while others can remain dormant in their pupal or egg stages and thereby survive winters. The Melissa Arctic (\"Oeneis melissa\") overwinters twice as a caterpillar. Butterflies may have one or more broods per year. The number of generations per year varies from temperate to tropical regions with tropical regions showing a trend towards multivoltinism.\nCourtship is often aerial and often involves pheromones. Butterflies then land on the ground or on a perch to mate. Copulation takes place tail-to-tail and may last from minutes to hours. Simple photoreceptor cells located at the genitals are important for this and other adult behaviours. The male passes a spermatophore to the female; to reduce sperm competition, he may cover her with his scent, or in some species such as the Apollos (\"Parnassius\") plugs her genital opening to prevent her from mating again.\nThe vast majority of butterflies have a four-stage life cycle: egg, larva (caterpillar), pupa (chrysalis) and imago (adult). In the genera \"Colias\", \"Erebia\", \"Euchloe\", and \"Parnassius\", a small number of species are known that reproduce semi-parthenogenetically; when the female dies, a partially developed larva emerges from her abdomen.\nEggs.\nButterfly eggs are protected by a hard-ridged outer layer of shell, called the \"chorion\". This is lined with a thin coating of wax which prevents the egg from drying out before the larva has had time to fully develop. Each egg contains a number of tiny funnel-shaped openings at one end, called \"micropyles\"; the purpose of these holes is to allow sperm to enter and fertilise the egg. Butterfly eggs vary greatly in size and shape between species, but are usually upright and finely sculptured. Some species lay eggs singly, others in batches. Many females produce between one hundred and two hundred eggs.\nButterfly eggs are fixed to a leaf with a special glue which hardens rapidly. As it hardens it contracts, deforming the shape of the egg. This glue is easily seen surrounding the base of every egg forming a meniscus. The nature of the glue has been little researched but in the case of \"Pieris brassicae\", it begins as a pale yellow granular secretion containing acidophilic proteins. This is viscous and darkens when exposed to air, becoming a water-insoluble, rubbery material which soon sets solid. Butterflies in the genus \"Agathymus\" do not fix their eggs to a leaf; instead, the newly laid eggs fall to the base of the plant.\nEggs are almost invariably laid on plants. Each species of butterfly has its own host plant range and while some species of butterfly are restricted to just one species of plant, others use a range of plant species, often including members of a common family. In some species, such as the great spangled fritillary, the eggs are deposited close to but not on the food plant. This most likely happens when the egg overwinters before hatching and where the host plant loses its leaves in winter, as do violets in this example.\nThe egg stage lasts a few weeks in most butterflies, but eggs laid close to winter, especially in temperate regions, go through a diapause (resting) stage, and the hatching may take place only in spring. Some temperate region butterflies, such as the Camberwell beauty, lay their eggs in the spring and have them hatch in the summer.\nCaterpillar larva.\nButterfly larvae, or caterpillars, consume plant leaves and spend practically all of their time searching for and eating food. Although most caterpillars are herbivorous, a few species are predators: \"Spalgis epius\" eats scale insects, while lycaenids such as \"Liphyra brassolis\" are myrmecophilous, eating ant larvae.\nSome larvae, especially those of the Lycaenidae, form mutual associations with ants. They communicate with the ants using vibrations that are transmitted through the substrate as well as using chemical signals. The ants provide some degree of protection to these larvae and they in turn gather honeydew secretions. Large blue (\"Phengaris arion\") caterpillars trick \"Myrmica\" ants into taking them back to the ant colony where they feed on the ant eggs and larvae in a parasitic relationship.\nCaterpillars mature through a series of developmental stages known as instars. Near the end of each stage, the larva undergoes a process called apolysis, mediated by the release of a series of neurohormones. During this phase, the cuticle, a tough outer layer made of a mixture of chitin and specialised proteins, is released from the softer epidermis beneath, and the epidermis begins to form a new cuticle. At the end of each instar, the larva moults, the old cuticle splits and the new cuticle expands, rapidly hardening and developing pigment. \nCaterpillars have short antennae and several simple eyes. The mouthparts are adapted for chewing with powerful mandibles and a pair of maxillae, each with a segmented palp. Adjoining these is the labium-hypopharynx which houses a tubular spinneret which is able to extrude silk. Caterpillars such as those in the genus \"Calpodes\" (family Hesperiidae) have a specialised tracheal system on the 8th segment that function as a primitive lung. Butterfly caterpillars have three pairs of true legs on the thoracic segments and up to six pairs of prolegs arising from the abdominal segments. These prolegs have rings of tiny hooks called crochets that are engaged hydrostatically and help the caterpillar grip the substrate. The epidermis bears tufts of setae, the position and number of which help in identifying the species. There is also decoration in the form of hairs, wart-like protuberances, horn-like protuberances and spines. Internally, most of the body cavity is taken up by the gut, but there may also be large silk glands, and special glands which secrete distasteful or toxic substances. The developing wings are present in later stage instars and the gonads start development in the egg stage.\nPupa.\nWhen the larva is fully grown, hormones such as prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH) are produced. At this point the larva stops feeding, and begins \"wandering\" in the quest for a suitable pupation site, often the underside of a leaf or other concealed location. There it spins a button of silk which it uses to fasten its body to the surface and moults for a final time. While some caterpillars spin a cocoon to protect the pupa, most species do not. The naked pupa, often known as a chrysalis, usually hangs head down from the cremaster, a spiny pad at the posterior end, but in some species a silken girdle may be spun to keep the pupa in a head-up position. Most of the tissues and cells of the larva are broken down inside the pupa, as the constituent material is rebuilt into the imago. The structure of the transforming insect is visible from the exterior, with the wings folded flat on the ventral surface and the two halves of the proboscis, with the antennae and the legs between them.\nThe pupal transformation into a butterfly through metamorphosis has held great appeal to mankind. To transform from the miniature wings visible on the outside of the pupa into large structures usable for flight, the pupal wings undergo rapid mitosis and absorb a great deal of nutrients. If one wing is surgically removed early on, the other three will grow to a larger size. In the pupa, the wing forms a structure that becomes compressed from top to bottom and pleated from proximal to distal ends as it grows, so that it can rapidly be unfolded to its full adult size. Several boundaries seen in the adult colour pattern are marked by changes in the expression of particular transcription factors in the early pupa.\nAdult.\nThe reproductive stage of the insect is the winged adult or imago. The surface of both butterflies and moths is covered by scales, each of which is an outgrowth from a single epidermal cell. The head is small and dominated by the two large compound eyes. These are capable of distinguishing flower shapes or motion but cannot view distant objects clearly. Colour perception is good, especially in some species in the blue/violet range. The antennae are composed of many segments and have clubbed tips (unlike moths that have tapering or feathery antennae). The sensory receptors are concentrated in the tips and can detect odours. Taste receptors are located on the palps and on the feet. The mouthparts are adapted to sucking and the mandibles are usually reduced in size or absent. The first maxillae are elongated into a tubular proboscis which is curled up at rest and expanded when needed to feed. The first and second maxillae bear palps which function as sensory organs. Some species have a reduced proboscis or maxillary palps and do not feed as adults.\nMany \"Heliconius\" butterflies also use their proboscis to feed on pollen; in these species only 20% of the amino acids used in reproduction come from larval feeding, which allow them to develop more quickly as caterpillars, and gives them a longer lifespan of several months as adults.\nThe thorax of the butterfly is devoted to locomotion. Each of the three thoracic segments has two legs (among nymphalids, the first pair is reduced and the insects walk on four legs). The second and third segments of the thorax bear the wings. The leading edges of the forewings have thick veins to strengthen them, and the hindwings are smaller and more rounded and have fewer stiffening veins. The forewings and hindwings are not hooked together (as they are in moths) but are coordinated by the friction of their overlapping parts. The front two segments have a pair of spiracles which are used in respiration.\nThe abdomen consists of ten segments and contains the gut and genital organs. The front eight segments have spiracles and the terminal segment is modified for reproduction. The male has a pair of clasping organs attached to a ring structure, and during copulation, a tubular structure is extruded and inserted into the female's vagina. A spermatophore is deposited in the female, following which the sperm make their way to a seminal receptacle where they are stored for later use. In both sexes, the genitalia are adorned with various spines, teeth, scales and bristles, which act to prevent the butterfly from mating with an insect of another species. After it emerges from its pupal stage, a butterfly cannot fly until the wings are unfolded. A newly emerged butterfly needs to spend some time inflating its wings with hemolymph and letting them dry, during which time it is extremely vulnerable to predators.\nPattern formation.\nThe colourful patterns on many butterfly wings tell potential predators that they are toxic. Hence, the genetic basis of wing pattern formation can illuminate both the evolution of butterflies as well as their developmental biology. The colour of butterfly wings is derived from tiny structures called scales, each of which have their own pigments. In \"Heliconius\" butterflies, there are three types of scales: yellow/white, black, and red/orange/brown scales. Some mechanism of wing pattern formation are now being investigated using genetic techniques. For instance, a gene called \"cortex\" determines the colour of scales: deleting \"cortex\" turned black and red scales yellow. Mutations, e.g. transposon insertions of the non-coding DNA around the \"cortex\" gene, can turn a black-winged butterfly into a butterfly with a yellow wing band.\nMating.\nWhen the butterfly \"Bicyclus anynana\" is subjected to repeated inbreeding in the laboratory, there is a dramatic decrease in egg hatching. This severe inbreeding depression is considered to be likely due to a relatively high mutation rate to recessive alleles with substantial damaging effects and infrequent episodes of inbreeding in nature that might otherwise purge such mutations. Although \"B. anynana\" experiences inbreeding depression when forcibly inbred in the laboratory it recovers within a few generation when allowed to breed freely. During mate selection, adult females do not innately avoid or learn to avoid siblings, implying that such detection may not be critical to reproductive fitness. Inbreeding may persist in \"B anynana\" because the probability of encountering close relatives is rare in nature; that is, movement ecology may mask the deleterious effect of inbreeding resulting in relaxation of selection for active inbreeding avoidance behaviors.\nBehaviour.\nButterflies feed primarily on nectar from flowers. Some also derive nourishment from pollen, tree sap, rotting fruit, dung, decaying flesh, and dissolved minerals in wet sand or dirt. Butterflies are important as pollinators for some species of plants. In general, they do not carry as much pollen load as bees, but they are capable of moving pollen over greater distances. Flower constancy has been observed for at least one species of butterfly.\nAdult butterflies consume only liquids, ingested through the proboscis. They sip water from damp patches for hydration and feed on nectar from flowers, from which they obtain sugars for energy, and sodium and other minerals vital for reproduction. Several species of butterflies need more sodium than that provided by nectar and are attracted by sodium in salt; they sometimes land on people, attracted by the salt in human sweat. Some butterflies also visit dung and scavenge rotting fruit or carcasses to obtain minerals and nutrients. In many species, this mud-puddling behaviour is restricted to the males, and studies have suggested that the nutrients collected may be provided as a nuptial gift, along with the spermatophore, during mating.\nIn hilltopping, males of some species seek hilltops and ridge tops, which they patrol in search for females. Since it usually occurs in species with low population density, it is assumed these landscape points are used as meeting places to find mates.\nButterflies use their antennae to sense the air for wind and scents. The antennae come in various shapes and colours; the hesperiids have a pointed angle or hook to the antennae, while most other families show knobbed antennae. The antennae are richly covered with sensory organs known as sensillae. A butterfly's sense of taste is coordinated by chemoreceptors on the tarsi, or feet, which work only on contact, and are used to determine whether an egg-laying insect's offspring will be able to feed on a leaf before eggs are laid on it. Many butterflies use chemical signals, pheromones; some have specialised scent scales (androconia) or other structures (coremata or \"hair pencils\" in the Danaidae). Vision is well developed in butterflies and most species are sensitive to the ultraviolet spectrum. Many species show sexual dimorphism in the patterns of UV reflective patches. Colour vision may be widespread but has been demonstrated in only a few species. Some butterflies have organs of hearing and some species make stridulatory and clicking sounds.\nMany species of butterfly maintain territories and actively chase other species or individuals that may stray into them. Some species will bask or perch on chosen perches. The flight styles of butterflies are often characteristic and some species have courtship flight displays. Butterflies can only fly when their temperature is above ; when it is cool, they can position themselves to expose the underside of the wings to the sunlight to heat themselves up. If their body temperature reaches , they can orientate themselves with the folded wings edgewise to the sun. Basking is an activity which is more common in the cooler hours of the morning. Some species have evolved dark wingbases to help in gathering more heat and this is especially evident in alpine forms.\nAs in many other insects, the lift generated by butterflies is more than can be accounted for by steady-state, non-transitory aerodynamics. Studies using \"Vanessa atalanta\" in a wind tunnel show that they use a wide variety of aerodynamic mechanisms to generate force. These include wake capture, vortices at the wing edge, rotational mechanisms and the Weis-Fogh 'clap-and-fling' mechanism. Butterflies are able to change from one mode to another rapidly.\nEcology.\nParasitoids, predators, and pathogens.\nButterflies are threatened in their early stages by parasitoids and in all stages by predators, diseases and environmental factors. Braconid and other parasitic wasps lay their eggs in lepidopteran eggs or larvae and the wasps' parasitoid larvae devour their hosts, usually pupating inside or outside the desiccated husk. Most wasps are very specific about their host species and some have been used as biological controls of pest butterflies like the large white butterfly. When the small cabbage white was accidentally introduced to New Zealand, it had no natural enemies. In order to control it, some pupae that had been parasitised by a chalcid wasp were imported, and natural control was thus regained. Some flies lay their eggs on the outside of caterpillars and the newly hatched fly larvae bore their way through the skin and feed in a similar way to the parasitoid wasp larvae. Predators of butterflies include ants, spiders, wasps, and birds.\nCaterpillars are also affected by a range of bacterial, viral and fungal diseases, and only a small percentage of the butterfly eggs laid ever reach adulthood. The bacterium \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" has been used in sprays to reduce damage to crops by the caterpillars of the large white butterfly, and the entomopathogenic fungus \"Beauveria bassiana\" has proved effective for the same purpose.\nEndangered species.\nQueen Alexandra's birdwing, found in Papua New Guinea, is the largest butterfly in the world. The species is endangered, and is one of only three insects (the other two being butterflies as well) to be listed on Appendix I of CITES, making international trade illegal.\nDefences.\nButterflies protect themselves from predators by a variety of means.\nChemical defences are widespread and are mostly based on chemicals of plant origin. In many cases the plants themselves evolved these toxic substances as protection against herbivores. Butterflies have evolved mechanisms to sequester these plant toxins and use them instead in their own defence. These defence mechanisms are effective only if they are well advertised; this has led to the evolution of bright colours in unpalatable butterflies (aposematism). This signal is commonly mimicked by other butterflies, usually only females. A Batesian mimic imitates another species to enjoy the protection of that species' aposematism. The common Mormon of India has female morphs which imitate the unpalatable red-bodied swallowtails, the common rose and the crimson rose. M\u00fcllerian mimicry occurs when aposematic species evolve to resemble each other, presumably to reduce predator sampling rates; \"Heliconius\" butterflies from the Americas are a good example.\nCamouflage is found in many butterflies. Some like the oakleaf butterfly and autumn leaf are remarkable imitations of leaves. As caterpillars, many defend themselves by freezing and appearing like sticks or branches. Others have deimatic behaviours, such as rearing up and waving their front ends which are marked with eyespots as if they were snakes. Some papilionid caterpillars such as the giant swallowtail (\"Papilio cresphontes\") resemble bird droppings so as to be passed over by predators. Some caterpillars have hairs and bristly structures that provide protection while others are gregarious and form dense aggregations. Some species are myrmecophiles, forming mutualistic associations with ants and gaining their protection. Behavioural defences include perching and angling the wings to reduce shadow and avoid being conspicuous. Some female Nymphalid butterflies guard their eggs from parasitoidal wasps.\nThe Lycaenidae have a false head consisting of eyespots and small tails (false antennae) to deflect attack from the more vital head region. These may also cause ambush predators such as spiders to approach from the wrong end, enabling the butterflies to detect attacks promptly. Many butterflies have eyespots on the wings; these too may deflect attacks, or may serve to attract mates.\nAuditory defences can also be used, which in the case of the grizzled skipper refers to vibrations generated by the butterfly upon expanding its wings in an attempt to communicate with ant predators.\nMany tropical butterflies have seasonal forms for dry and wet seasons. These are switched by the hormone ecdysone. The dry-season forms are usually more cryptic, perhaps offering better camouflage when vegetation is scarce. Dark colours in wet-season forms may help to absorb solar radiation.\nButterflies without defences such as toxins or mimicry protect themselves through a flight that is more bumpy and unpredictable than in other species. It is assumed this behavior makes it more difficult for predators to catch them, and is caused by the turbulence created by the small whirlpools formed by the wings during flight.\nDeclining numbers.\nDeclining butterfly populations have been noticed in many areas of the world, and this phenomenon is consistent with the rapidly decreasing insect populations around the world. At least in the Western United States, this collapse in the number of most species of butterflies has been determined to be driven by global climate change, specifically, by warmer autumns. Butterfly populations in the United States declined by 22% between 2000 and 2020, mainly because of habitat loss, pesticides and climate change.\nIn culture.\nIn art and literature.\nButterflies have appeared in art from 3500 years ago in ancient Egypt. In hunting scenes, butterflies were sometimes included in a way that suggested life, freedom, and the strength to escape capture, creating a balance to scenes concerned with death and upholding ma'at. They also were suggestive of regeneration or rebirth and protection. Certain butterflies, such as the tiger butterfly, may have been associated with solar deities, particularly Ra. The tiger butterfly also would have a particular resemblance to the ankh, due to its black body and wingtips, that was likely noted by the Ancient Egyptians. Butterflies may also have been understood as one of the deceased's guides in the afterlife.\nIn the ancient Mesoamerican city of Teotihuacan, the brilliantly coloured image of the butterfly was carved into many temples, buildings, jewellery, and emblazoned on incense burners. The butterfly was sometimes depicted with the maw of a jaguar, and some species were considered to be the reincarnations of the souls of dead warriors. The close association of butterflies with fire and warfare persisted into the Aztec civilisation; evidence of similar jaguar-butterfly images has been found among the Zapotec and Maya civilisations.\nButterflies are widely used in objects of art and jewellery: mounted in frames, embedded in resin, displayed in bottles, laminated in paper, and used in some mixed media artworks and furnishings. The Norwegian naturalist Kjell Sandved compiled a photographic \"Butterfly Alphabet\" containing all 26 letters and the numerals 0 to 9 from the wings of butterflies. The butterfly is a symbol of being transgender, because of the transformation from caterpillar to winged adult.\nSir John Tenniel drew a famous illustration of Alice meeting a caterpillar for Lewis Carroll's \"Alice in Wonderland\", c. 1865. The caterpillar is seated on a toadstool and is smoking a hookah; the image can be read as showing either the forelegs of the larva, or as suggesting a face with protruding nose and chin. Eric Carle's children's book \"The Very Hungry Caterpillar\" portrays the larva as an extraordinarily hungry animal, while also teaching children how to count (to five) and the days of the week. A butterfly appeared in one of Rudyard Kipling's \"Just So Stories\", \"The Butterfly that Stamped\".\nOne of the most popular, and most often recorded, songs by Sweden's eighteenth-century bard, Carl Michael Bellman, is \"Fj\u00e4riln vingad syns p\u00e5 Haga\" (The butterfly wing\u00e8d's seen in Haga), one of his \"Fredman's Songs\". \"Madam Butterfly\" is a 1904 opera by Giacomo Puccini about a romantic young Japanese bride who is deserted by her American officer husband soon after they are married. It was based on an 1898 short story by John Luther Long.\nIn mythology and folklore.\nAccording to Lafcadio Hearn, a butterfly was seen in Japan as the personification of a person's soul; whether they be living, dying, or already dead. One Japanese superstition says that if a butterfly enters one's guest room and perches behind the bamboo screen, the person whom one loves is coming to visit. Large numbers of butterflies are viewed as bad omens. When Taira no Masakado was secretly preparing his famous revolt, a vast swarm of butterflies appeared in Kyoto. The people were frightened, thinking the apparition to be a portent of coming evil.\nDiderot's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" cites butterflies as a symbol for the soul. A Roman sculpture depicts a butterfly exiting the mouth of a dead man, representing the Roman belief that the soul leaves through the mouth. In line with this, the ancient Greek word for \"butterfly\" is \u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae (\"ps\u0233ch\u0113\"), which primarily means \"soul\" or \"mind\". According to Mircea Eliade, some of the Nagas of Manipur claim ancestry from a butterfly. In popular Burmese culture, the butterfly (called \"leippya\") is symbolic of the soul or consciousness of a person. During the transitory period after death, the Burmese believe that the \"butterfly soul\" becomes a wandering spirit in search of a new corporeality medium. In some cultures, butterflies symbolise rebirth. In the English county of Devon, people once hurried to kill the first butterfly of the year, to avoid a year of bad luck. In the Philippines, a lingering black or dark butterfly or moth in the house is taken to mean an impending or recent death in the family. Several American states have chosen an official state butterfly.\nCollecting, recording, and rearing.\n\"Collecting\" means preserving dead specimens, not keeping butterflies as pets. Collecting butterflies was once a popular hobby; it has now largely been replaced by photography, recording, and rearing butterflies for release into the wild. The zoological illustrator Frederick William Frohawk succeeded in rearing all the butterfly species found in Britain, at a rate of four per year, to enable him to draw every stage of each species. He published the results in the folio sized handbook \"The Natural History of British Butterflies\" in 1924. Butterflies and moths can be reared for recreation or for release.\nIn technology.\nStudy of the structural coloration of the wing scales of swallowtail butterflies has led to the development of more efficient light-emitting diodes, and is inspiring nanotechnology research to produce paints that do not use toxic pigments and the development of new display technologies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48339", "revid": "29492423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48339", "title": "Parachute", "text": "Device used to slow the motion of an object through an atmosphere\nA parachute is a device designed to slow an object's descent through an atmosphere by creating drag or aerodynamic lift. It is primarily used to safely support people exiting aircraft at height, but also serves various purposes like slowing cargo, aiding in space capsule recovery on Earth, landing spacecraft on other planets, and stabilizing vehicles or objects. Modern parachutes are typically made from durable fabrics like nylon and come in various shapes, such as dome-shaped, rectangular, and inverted domes, depending on their specific function.\nThe concept of the parachute dates back to ancient attempts at flight. In AD 852, Armen Firman, in C\u00f3rdoba, Spain, made the first recorded jump with a large cloak to slow his fall. Renaissance figures like Francesco di Giorgio Martini and Leonardo da Vinci later sketched designs resembling modern parachutes, but it was not until the 18th century that the first successful jumps occurred. French Louis-S\u00e9bastien Lenormand made the first public jump in 1783, and he coined the term \"parachute\" in 1785. In the following years, key advancements were made by figures like Andr\u00e9 Garnerin, with parachutes becoming lighter, more reliable, and easier to deploy.\nBy the time of World War I, parachutes had become essential for aviators, and significant improvements were made to their designs, including the introduction of the backpack-style parachute by Charles Broadwick and Gleb Kotelnikov's knapsack parachute. After World War II, parachuting became a popular sport, and new materials like nylon replaced silk. Today, parachutes are used in military, recreational, and emergency situations, continuing to evolve with advances in technology and design.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 852, in C\u00f3rdoba, Spain, the Andalusian Armen Firman attempted unsuccessfully to fly by jumping from a tower while wearing a large cloak. It was recorded that \"there was enough air in the folds of his cloak to prevent great injury when he reached the ground.\"\nEarly Renaissance.\nThe earliest evidence for the true parachute dates back to the Renaissance period. The oldest parachute design appears in a manuscript from the 1470s attributed to Francesco di Giorgio Martini (British Library, Add MS 34113, fol. 200v), showing a free-hanging man clutching a crossbar frame attached to a conical canopy. As a safety measure, four straps ran from the ends of the rods to a waist belt. Although the surface area of the parachute design appears to be too small to offer effective air resistance and the wooden base-frame is superfluous and potentially harmful, the basic concept of a working parachute is apparent.\nThe design is a marked improvement over another folio (189v), which depicts a man trying to break the force of his fall using two long cloth streamers fastened to two bars, which he grips with his hands.\nShortly after, a more sophisticated parachute was sketched by the polymath Leonardo da Vinci in his \"Codex Atlanticus\" (fol. 381v) dated to c.\u20091485. Here, the scale of the parachute is in a more favorable proportion to the weight of the jumper. A square wooden frame, which alters the shape of the parachute from conical to pyramidal, held open Leonardo's canopy. It is not known whether the Italian inventor was influenced by the earlier design, but he may have learned about the idea through the intensive oral communication among artist-engineers of the time. The feasibility of Leonardo's pyramidal design was successfully tested in 2000 by Briton Adrian Nicholas and again in 2008 by the Swiss skydiver Olivier Vietti-Teppa. According to historian of technology Lynn White, these conical and pyramidal designs, much more elaborate than early artistic jumps with rigid parasols in Asia, mark the origin of \"the parachute as we know it.\"\nThe Croatian polymath and inventor Fausto Veranzio, or Faust Vran\u010di\u0107 (1551\u20131617), examined da Vinci's parachute sketch and kept the square frame but replaced the canopy with a bulging sail-like piece of cloth that he came to realize decelerates a fall more effectively. A now-famous depiction of a parachute that he dubbed \"Homo Volans\" (Flying Man), showing a man parachuting from a tower, presumably St Mark's Campanile in Venice, appeared in his book on mechanics, \"Machinae Novae\" (\"New Machines\", published in 1615 or 1616), alongside a number of other devices and technical concepts.\nIt was once widely believed that in 1617, Veranzio, then aged 65 and seriously ill, implemented his design and tested the parachute by jumping from St Mark's Campanile, from a bridge nearby, or from St Martin's Cathedral in Bratislava. Various publications incorrectly claimed the event was documented some thirty years later by John Wilkins, one of the founders of, and secretary of, the Royal Society in London, in his book \"Mathematical Magick or, the Wonders that may be Performed by Mechanical Geometry\", published in London in 1648. However, Wilkins wrote about flying, not parachutes, and does not mention Veranzio, a parachute jump, or any event in 1617. Doubts about this test, which include a lack of written evidence, suggest it never occurred, and was instead a misreading of historical notes.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe modern parachute was invented in the late 18th century by Louis-S\u00e9bastien Lenormand in France, who made the first recorded public jump in 1783. Lenormand also sketched his device beforehand.\nTwo years later, in 1785, Lenormand coined the word \"parachute\" by hybridizing an Italian prefix \"para\", an imperative form of \"parare\" = to avert, defend, resist, guard, shield or shroud, from \"paro\" = to parry, and \"chute\", the French word for \"fall\", to describe the aeronautical device's real function.\nAlso in 1785, Jean-Pierre Blanchard demonstrated it as a means of safely disembarking from a hot-air balloon. While Blanchard's first parachute demonstrations were conducted with a dog as the passenger, he later claimed to have had the opportunity to try it himself in 1793 when his hot air balloon ruptured, and he used a parachute to descend. (This event was not witnessed by others.)\nOn 12 October 1799, Jeanne Genevi\u00e8ve Garnerin ascended in a gondola attached to a balloon. At 900 meters she detached the gondola from the balloon and descended in the gondola by parachute. In doing so, she became the first woman to parachute. She went on to complete many ascents and parachute descents in towns across France and Europe.\nSubsequent development of the parachute focused on it becoming more compact. While the early parachutes were made of linen stretched over a wooden frame, in the late 1790s, Blanchard began making parachutes from folded silk, taking advantage of silk's strength and light weight. In 1797, Andr\u00e9 Garnerin made the first descent of a \"frameless\" parachute covered in silk. In 1804, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande introduced a vent in the canopy to eliminate violent oscillations. In 1887, Park Van Tassel and Thomas Scott Baldwin invented a parachute in San Francisco, California, with Baldwin making the first successful parachute jump in the western United States.\nEve of World War I.\nIn 1907 Charles Broadwick demonstrated two key advances in the parachute he used to jump from hot air balloons at fairs: he folded his parachute into a backpack, and the parachute was pulled from the pack by a static line attached to the balloon. When Broadwick jumped from the balloon, the static line became taut, pulled the parachute from the pack, and then snapped.\nIn 1911 a successful test took place with a dummy at the Eiffel Tower in Paris. The puppet's weight was ; the parachute's weight was . The cables between the puppet and the parachute were long. On February 4, 1912, Franz Reichelt jumped to his death from the tower during initial testing of his wearable parachute.\nAlso in 1911, Grant Morton made the first parachute jump from an airplane, a Wright Model B piloted by Phil Parmalee, at Venice Beach, California. Morton's device was of the \"throw-out\" type where he held the parachute in his arms as he left the aircraft. In the same year (1911), Russian Gleb Kotelnikov invented the first knapsack parachute, although Hermann Lattemann and his wife K\u00e4the Paulus had been jumping with bagged parachutes in the last decade of the 19th century.\nIn 1912, on a road near Tsarskoye Selo, years before it became part of St. Petersburg, Kotelnikov successfully demonstrated the braking effects of a parachute by accelerating a Russo-Balt automobile to its top speed and then opening a parachute attached to the back seat, thus also inventing the drogue parachute.\nOn 1 March 1912, U.S. Army Captain Albert Berry made the first (attached-type) parachute jump in the United States from a fixed-wing aircraft, a Benoist pusher, while flying above Jefferson Barracks, St. Louis, Missouri. The jump utilized a parachute stored or housed in a cone-shaped casing under the airplane and attached to a harness on the jumper's body.\n\u0160tefan Bani\u010d patented an umbrella-like design in 1914, and sold (or donated) the patent to the United States military, which later modified his design, resulting in the first military parachute. Bani\u010d had been the first person to patent the parachute, and his design was the first to properly function in the 20th century.\nOn June 21, 1913, Georgia Broadwick became the first woman to parachute-jump from a moving aircraft, doing so over Los Angeles, California. In 1914, while doing demonstrations for the U.S. Army, Broadwick deployed her chute manually, thus becoming the first person to jump free-fall.\nWorld War I.\nThe first military use of the parachute was by artillery observers on tethered observation balloons in World War I. These were tempting targets for enemy fighter aircraft, though difficult to destroy, due to their heavy anti-aircraft defenses. Because it was difficult to escape from them, and dangerous when on fire due to their hydrogen inflation, observers would abandon them and descend by parachute as soon as enemy aircraft were seen. The ground crew would then attempt to retrieve and deflate the balloon as quickly as possible. The main part of the parachute was in a bag suspended from the balloon with the pilot wearing only a simple waist harness attached to the main parachute. When the balloon crew jumped the main part of the parachute was pulled from the bag by the crew's waist harness, first the shroud lines, followed by the main canopy. This type of parachute was first adopted on a large scale for their observation balloon crews by the Germans, and then later by the British and French. While this type of unit worked well from balloons, it had mixed results when used on fixed-wing aircraft by the Germans, where the bag was stored in a compartment directly behind the pilot. In many instances where it did not work the shroud lines became entangled with the spinning aircraft. Although this type of parachute saved a number of famous German fighter pilots, including Hermann G\u00f6ring, no parachutes were issued to the crews of Allied \"heavier-than-air\" aircraft. It has been claimed that the reason was to avoid pilots jumping from the plane when hit rather than trying to save the aircraft, but Air Vice Marshall Arthur Gould Lee, himself a pilot during the war, examined the British War Office files after the war and found no evidence of such claim.\nAirplane cockpits at that time also were not large enough to accommodate a pilot and a parachute, since a seat that would fit a pilot wearing a parachute would be too large for a pilot not wearing one. This is why the German type was stowed in the fuselage, rather than being of the \"backpack\" type. Weight was \u2013 at the very beginning \u2013 also a consideration since planes had limited load capacity. Carrying a parachute impeded performance and reduced the useful offensive and fuel load.\nIn the UK, Everard Calthrop, a railway engineer and breeder of Arab horses, invented and marketed through his Aerial Patents Company a \"British Parachute\" and the \"Guardian Angel\" parachute. As part of an investigation into Calthrop's design, on 13 January 1917, test pilot Clive Franklyn Collett successfully jumped from a Royal Aircraft Factory BE.2c flying over Orford Ness Experimental Station at . He repeated the experiment several days later.\nFollowing on from Collett, balloon officer Thomas Orde-Lees, known as the \"Mad Major\", successfully jumped from Tower Bridge in London, which led to the balloonists of the Royal Flying Corps using parachutes, though they were issued for use in aircraft.\nIn 1911, Solomon Lee Van Meter, Jr. of Lexington, Kentucky, submitted an application for, and in July 1916 received, a patent for a backpack style parachute \u2013 the Aviatory Life Buoy. His self-contained device featured a revolutionary quick-release mechanism \u2013 the ripcord \u2013 that allowed a falling aviator to expand the canopy only when safely away from the disabled aircraft.\nOtto Heinecke, a German airship ground crewman, designed a parachute which the German air service introduced in 1918, becoming the world's first air service to introduce a standard parachute. Schroeder company of Berlin manufactured Heinecke's design. The first successful use of this parachute was by Leutnant Helmut Steinbrecher of Jagdstaffel 46, who bailed on 27 June 1918 from his stricken fighter airplane to become the first pilot in history to successfully do so. Although many pilots were saved by the Heinecke design, their efficacy was relatively poor. Out of the first 70 German airmen to bail out, around a third died, These fatalities were mostly due to the chute or ripcord becoming entangled in the airframe of their spinning aircraft or because of harness failure, a problem fixed in later versions.\nThe French, British, American and Italian air services later based their first parachute designs on the Heinecke parachute to varying extents.\nIn the UK, Sir Frank Mears, who was serving as a Major in the Royal Flying Corps in France (Kite Balloon section), registered a patent in July 1918 for a parachute with a quick release buckle, known as the \"Mears parachute\", which was in common use from then onwards.\nPost-World War I.\nThe experience with parachutes during the war highlighted the need to develop a design that could be reliably used to exit a disabled airplane. For instance, tethered parachutes did not work well when the aircraft was spinning. After the war, Major Edward L. Hoffman of the United States Army led an effort to develop an improved parachute by bringing together the best elements of multiple parachute designs. Participants in the effort included Leslie Irvin and James Floyd Smith. The team eventually created the Airplane Parachute Type-A. This incorporated three key elements:\nIn 1919, Irvin successfully tested the parachute by jumping from an airplane. The Type-A parachute was put into production and over time saved a number of lives. The effort was recognized by the awarding of the Robert J. Collier Trophy to Major Edward L. Hoffman in 1926.\nIrvin became the first person to make a premeditated free-fall parachute jump from an airplane. An early brochure of the Irvin Air Chute Company credits William O'Connor as having become, on 24 August 1920, at McCook Field near Dayton, Ohio, the first person to be saved by an Irvin parachute. Test pilot Lt. Harold R. Harris made another life-saving jump at McCook Field on 20 October 1922. Shortly after Harris' jump, two Dayton newspaper reporters suggested the creation of the Caterpillar Club for successful parachute jumps from disabled aircraft.\nBeginning with Italy in 1927, several countries experimented with using parachutes to drop soldiers behind enemy lines. The regular Soviet Airborne Troops were established as early as 1931 after a number of experimental military mass jumps starting from 2 August 1930. Earlier the same year, the first Soviet mass jumps led to the development of the parachuting sport in the Soviet Union. By the time of World War II, large airborne forces were trained and used in surprise attacks, as in the battles for Fort Eben-Emael and The Hague, the first large-scale, opposed landings of paratroopers in military history, by the Germans. This was followed later in the war by airborne assaults on a larger scale, such as the Battle of Crete and Operation Market Garden, the latter being the largest airborne military operation ever. Aircraft crew were routinely equipped with parachutes for emergencies as well.\nIn 1937, drag chutes were used in aviation for the first time, by Soviet airplanes in the Arctic that were providing support for the polar expeditions of the era, such as the first drifting ice station, North Pole-1. The drag chute allowed airplanes to land safely on smaller ice floes.\nMost parachutes were made of silk until World War II cut off supplies from Japan. After Adeline Gray made the first jump using a nylon parachute in June 1942, the industry switched to nylon.\nTypes.\nToday's modern parachutes are classified into two categories \u2013 ascending and descending canopies. All ascending canopies refer to paragliders, built specifically to ascend and stay aloft as long as possible. Other parachutes, including ram-air non-elliptical, are classified as descending canopies by manufacturers.\nSome modern parachutes are classified as semi-rigid wings, which are maneuverable and can make a controlled descent to collapse on impact with the ground.\nRound.\nRound parachutes are purely a drag device (that is, unlike the ram-air types, they provide no lift) and are used in military, emergency and cargo applications (e.g. airdrops). Most have large dome-shaped canopies made from a single layer of triangular cloth gores. Some skydivers call them \"jellyfish 'chutes\" because of the resemblance to the marine organisms. Modern sports parachutists rarely use this type.\nThe first round parachutes were simple, flat circulars. These early parachutes suffered from instability caused by oscillations. A hole in the apex helped to vent some air and reduce the oscillations. Many military applications adopted conical, i.e., cone-shaped, or parabolic (a flat circular canopy with an extended skirt) shapes, such as the United States Army T-10 static-line parachute. A round parachute with no holes in it is more prone to oscillate and is not considered to be steerable. Some parachutes have inverted dome-shaped canopies. These are primarily used for dropping non-human payloads due to their faster rate of descent.\nForward speed (5\u201313\u00a0 km/h) and steering can be achieved by cuts in various sections (gores) across the back, or by cutting four lines in the back, thereby modifying the canopy shape to allow air to escape from the back of the canopy, providing limited forward speed. Other modifications sometimes used are cuts in various gores to cause some of the skirt to bow out. Turning is accomplished by forming the edges of the modifications, giving the parachute more speed from one side of the modification than the other. This gives the jumpers the ability to steer the parachute (such as the United States Army MC series parachutes), enabling them to avoid obstacles and to turn into the wind to minimize horizontal speed at landing.\nCruciform.\nThe unique design characteristics of cruciform parachutes decrease oscillation (its user swinging back and forth) and violent turns during descent. This technology will be used by the United States Army as it replaces its older T-10 parachutes with T-11 parachutes under a program called Advanced Tactical Parachute System (ATPS). The ATPS canopy is a highly modified version of a cross/ cruciform platform and is square in appearance. The ATPS system will reduce the rate of descent by 30 percent from to . The T-11 is designed to have an average rate of descent 14% slower than the T-10D, thus resulting in lower landing injury rates for jumpers. The decline in the rate of descent will reduce the impact energy by almost 25% to lessen the potential for injury.\nPull-down apex.\nA variation on the round parachute is the pull-down apex parachute, invented by a Frenchman named Pierre-Marcel Lemoigne. The first widely used canopy of this type was called the \"Para-Commander\" (made by the Pioneer Parachute Co.), although there are many other canopies with a pull-down apex produced in the years thereafter - these had minor differences in attempts to make a higher performance rig, such as different venting configurations. They are all considered 'round' parachutes, but with suspension lines to the canopy apex that apply load there and pull the apex closer to the load, distorting the round shape into a somewhat flattened or lenticular shape when viewed from the side. And while called \"rounds\", they generally have an elliptical shape when viewed from above or below, with the sides bulging out more than the for'd-and-aft dimension, the chord (see the lower photo to the right and you likely can ascertain the difference).\nDue to their lenticular shape and appropriate venting, they have a considerably faster forward speed than, say, a modified military canopy. And due to controllable rear-facing vents in the canopy's sides, they also have much snappier turning capabilities, though they are decidedly low-performance compared to today's ram-air rigs. From about the mid-1960s to the late-1970s, this was the most popular parachute design type for sport parachuting (prior to this period, modified military 'rounds' were generally used and after, ram-air 'squares' became common). Note that the use of the word \"elliptical\" for these 'round' parachutes is somewhat dated and may cause slight confusion, since some 'squares' (i.e. ram-airs) are elliptical nowadays, too.\nAnnular.\nSome designs with a pull-down apex have the fabric removed from the apex to open a hole through which air can exit (most, if not all, round canopies have at least a small hole to allow easier tie-down for packing - these aren't considered annular), giving the canopy an annular geometry. This hole can be very pronounced in some designs, taking up more 'space' than the parachute. They also have decreased horizontal drag due to their flatter shape and, when combined with rear-facing vents, can have considerable forward speed. Truly annular designs - with a hole large enough that the canopy can be classified as \"ring-shaped\" - are uncommon.\nRogallo wing.\nSport parachuting has experimented with the Rogallo wing, among other shapes and forms. These were usually an attempt to increase the forward speed and reduce the landing speed offered by the other options at the time. The ram-air parachute's development and the subsequent introduction of the sail slider to slow deployment reduced the level of experimentation in the sport parachuting community. The parachutes are also hard to build.\nRibbon and ring.\nRibbon and ring parachutes have similarities to annular designs. They are frequently designed to deploy at supersonic speeds. A conventional parachute would instantly burst upon opening and be shredded at such speeds. Ribbon parachutes have a ring-shaped canopy, often with a large hole in the centre to release the pressure. Sometimes the ring is broken into ribbons connected by ropes to leak air even more. These large leaks lower the stress on the parachute so it does not burst or shred when it opens. Ribbon parachutes made of Kevlar are used on nuclear bombs, such as the B61 and B83.\nRam-air.\nThe principle of the Ram-Air Multicell Airfoil was conceived in 1963 by Canadian Domina \"Dom\" C. Jalbert, but serious problems had to be solved before a ram-air canopy could be marketed to the sport parachuting community. Ram-air parafoils are steerable (as are most canopies used for sport parachuting), and have two layers of fabric\u2014top and bottom\u2014connected by airfoil-shaped fabric ribs to form \"cells\". The cells fill with higher-pressure air from vents that face forward on the leading edge of the airfoil. The fabric is shaped and the parachute lines trimmed under load such that the ballooning fabric inflates into an airfoil shape. This airfoil is sometimes maintained by use of fabric one-way valves called \"airlocks\". \"The first jump of this canopy (a Jalbert Parafoil) was made by International Skydiving Hall of Fame member Paul 'Pop' Poppenhager.\"\nVarieties.\nPersonal ram-air parachutes are loosely divided into two varieties \u2013 rectangular or tapered \u2013 commonly called \"squares\" or \"ellipticals\", respectively. Medium-performance canopies (reserve-, BASE-, canopy formation-, and accuracy-type) are usually rectangular. High-performance, ram-air parachutes have a slightly tapered shape to their leading and/or trailing edges when viewed in plan form, and are known as ellipticals. Sometimes all the taper is on the leading edge (front), and sometimes in the trailing edge (tail).\nEllipticals are usually used only by sport parachutists. They often have smaller, more numerous fabric cells and are shallower in profile. Their canopies can be anywhere from slightly elliptical to highly elliptical, indicating the amount of taper in the canopy design, which is often an indicator of the responsiveness of the canopy to control input for a given wing loading, and of the level of experience required to pilot the canopy safely.\nThe rectangular parachute designs tend to look like square, inflatable air mattresses with open front ends. They are generally safer to operate because they are less prone to dive rapidly with relatively small control inputs, they are usually flown with lower wing loadings per square foot of area, and they glide more slowly. They typically have a lower glide ratio.\nWing loading of parachutes is measured similarly to that of aircraft, comparing exit weight to area of parachute fabric. Typical wing loading for students, accuracy competitors, and BASE jumpers is less than 5\u00a0 kg per square meter (1.0 lbm/sqft) \u2013 often 3.5 kilograms per square meter (0.72 lbm/sqft) or less. Most student skydivers fly with wing loading below 5\u00a0 kg per square meter (1.0 lbm/sqft). Most sport jumpers fly with wing loading between 5 and 7\u00a0 kg per square meter (1.0-1.4 lbm/sqft), but many interested in performance landings exceed this wing loading. Professional canopy pilots compete with wing loading of 10 to over 15 kilograms per square meter (2.0-3.0 lbm/sqft). While ram-air parachutes with wing loading higher than 20 kilograms per square meter (4.0 lbm/sqft) have been landed, this is strictly the realm of professional test jumpers. Luigi Cani's Project 34 successfully landed a 34 square foot (3.2 m\u00b2) canopy.\nSmaller parachutes tend to fly faster for the same load, and ellipticals respond faster to control input. Therefore, small, elliptical designs are often chosen by experienced canopy pilots for the thrilling flying they provide. Flying a fast elliptical requires much more skill and experience. Fast ellipticals are also considerably more dangerous to land. With high-performance elliptical canopies, nuisance malfunctions can be much more serious than with a square design, and may quickly escalate into emergencies. Flying highly loaded, elliptical canopies is a major contributing factor in many skydiving accidents, although advanced training programs are helping to reduce this danger.\nHigh-speed, cross-braced parachutes, such as the Velocity, VX, XAOS, and Sensei, have given birth to a new branch of sport parachuting called \"swooping.\" A race course is set up in the landing area for expert pilots to measure the distance they are able to fly past the tall entry gate. Current world records exceed .\nAspect ratio is another way to measure ram-air parachutes. Aspect ratios of parachutes are measured the same way as aircraft wings, by comparing span with chord. Low aspect ratio parachutes, i.e., span 1.8 times the chord, are now limited to precision landing competitions. Popular precision landing parachutes include Jalbert (now NAA) Para-Foils and John Eiff's series of Challenger Classics. While low aspect ratio parachutes tend to be extremely stable, with gentle stall characteristics, they suffer from steep glide ratios and a small tolerance, or \"sweet spot\", for timing the landing flare.\nBecause of their predictable opening characteristics, parachutes with a medium aspect ratio around 2.1 are widely used for reserves, BASE, and canopy formation competition. Most medium aspect ratio parachutes have seven cells.\nHigh aspect ratio parachutes have the flattest glide and the largest tolerance for timing the landing flare, but the least predictable openings. An aspect ratio of 2.7 is about the upper limit for parachutes. High aspect ratio canopies typically have nine or more cells. All reserve ram-air parachutes are of the square variety, because of the greater reliability, and the less-demanding handling characteristics.\nParagliders.\nParagliders - virtually all of which use ram-air canopies - are more akin to today's sport parachutes than, say, parachutes of the mid-1970s and earlier. Technically, they are \"ascending parachutes\", though that term is not used in the paragliding community, and they have the same basic airfoil design of today's 'square' or 'elliptical' sports parachuting canopy, but generally have more sectioned cells, higher aspect ratio and a lower profile. Cell count varies widely, typically from the high 20s to the 70s, while aspect ratio can be 8 or more, though aspect ratio (projected) for such a canopy might be down at 6 or so - both outrageously higher than a representative skydiver's parachute. The wing span is typically so great that it's far closer to a very elongated rectangle or ellipse than a \"square\" and that term is rarely used by paraglider pilots. Similarly, span might be ~15 m with span (projected) at 12 m. Canopies are still attached to the harness by suspension lines and (four or six) risers, but they use lockable carabiners as the final connection to the harness. Modern high-performance paragliders often have the cell openings closer to the bottom of the leading edge and the end cells might appear to be closed, both for aerodynamic streamlining (these apparently closed end cells are vented and inflated from the adjacent cells, which have venting in the cell walls).\nThe main difference is in paragliders' usage, typically longer flights that can last all day and hundreds of kilometres in some cases. The harness is also quite different from a parachuting harness and can vary dramatically from ones for the beginner (which might be just a bench seat with nylon material and webbing to ensure the pilot is secure, no matter the position), to seatboardless ones for high altitude and cross-country flights (these are usually full-body cocoon- or hammock-like devices to include the outstretched legs - called \"speedbags\", \"aerocones\", etc. - to ensure aerodynamic efficiency and warmth). In many designs, there will be protection for the back and shoulder areas built-in, and support for a reserve canopy, water container, etc. Some even have windshields.\nBecause paragliders are made for foot- or ski-launch, they aren't suitable for terminal velocity openings and there is no slider to slow down an opening (paraglider pilots typically start with an \"open\" but uninflated canopy). To launch a paraglider, one typically spreads out the canopy on the ground to closely approximate an open canopy with the suspension lines having little slack and less tangle - see more in Paragliding. Depending on the wind, the pilot has three basic options: 1) a running forward launch (typically in no wind or slight wind), 2) a standing launch (in \"ideal\" winds) and 3) a reverse launch (in higher winds). In ideal winds, the pilot pulls on the top risers to have the wind inflate the cells and simply eases the brakes down, much like an aircraft's flaps, and takes off. Or if there is no wind, the pilot runs or skis to make it inflate, typically at the edge of a cliff or hill. Once the canopy is above one's head, it's a gentle pull down on both toggles in ideal winds, a tow (say, behind a vehicle) on flat ground, a continued run down the hill, etc. Ground handling in a variety of winds is important and there are even canopies made strictly for that practice, to save on wear and tear of more expensive canopies designed for say, XC, competition or just recreational flying.\nGeneral characteristics.\nMain parachutes used by skydivers today are designed to open softly. Overly rapid deployment was an early problem with ram-air designs. The primary innovation that slows the deployment of a ram-air canopy is the slider; a small rectangular piece of fabric with a grommet near each corner. Four collections of lines go through the grommets to the risers (risers are strips of webbing joining the harness and the rigging lines of a parachute). During deployment, the slider slides down from the canopy to just above the risers. The slider is slowed by air resistance as it descends and reduces the rate at which the lines can spread. This reduces the speed at which the canopy can open and inflate.\nAt the same time, the overall design of a parachute still has a significant influence on the deployment speed. Modern sport parachutes' deployment speeds vary considerably. Most modern parachutes open comfortably, but individual skydivers may prefer harsher deployment.\nThe deployment process is inherently chaotic. Rapid deployments can still occur even with well-behaved canopies. On rare occasions, deployment can even be so rapid that the jumper suffers bruising, injury, or death. Reducing the amount of fabric decreases the air resistance. This can be done by making the slider smaller, inserting a mesh panel, or cutting a hole in the slider.\nDeployment.\nReserve parachutes usually have a ripcord deployment system, which was first designed by Theodore Moscicki, but most modern main parachutes used by sports parachutists use a form of hand-deployed pilot chute. A ripcord system pulls a closing pin (sometimes multiple pins), which releases a spring-loaded pilot chute, and opens the container; the pilot chute is then propelled into the air stream by its spring, then uses the force generated by passing air to extract a deployment bag containing the parachute canopy, to which it is attached via a bridle. A hand-deployed pilot chute, once thrown into the air stream, pulls a closing pin on the pilot chute bridle to open the container, then the same force extracts the deployment bag. There are variations on hand-deployed pilot chutes, but the system described is the more common throw-out system.\nOnly the hand-deployed pilot chute may be collapsed automatically after deployment\u2014by a kill line reducing the in-flight drag of the pilot chute on the main canopy. Reserves, on the other hand, do not retain their pilot chutes after deployment. The reserve deployment bag and pilot chute are not connected to the canopy in a reserve system. This is known as a free-bag configuration, and the components are sometimes not recovered after a reserve deployment.\nOccasionally, a pilot chute does not generate enough force either to pull the pin or to extract the bag. Causes may be that the pilot chute is caught in the turbulent wake of the jumper (the \"burble\"), the closing loop holding the pin is too tight, or the pilot chute is generating insufficient force. This effect is known as \"pilot chute hesitation,\" and, if it does not clear, it can lead to a total malfunction, requiring reserve deployment.\nParatroopers' main parachutes are usually deployed by static lines that release the parachute, yet retain the deployment bag that contains the parachute\u2014without relying on a pilot chute for deployment. In this configuration, the deployment bag is known as a direct-bag system, in which the deployment is rapid, consistent, and reliable.\nSafety.\nA parachute is carefully folded, or \"packed\" to ensure that it will open reliably. If a parachute is not packed properly it can result in a malfunction where the main parachute fails to deploy correctly or fully. In the United States and many developed countries, emergency and reserve parachutes are packed by \"riggers\" who must be trained and certified according to legal standards. Sport skydivers are always trained to pack their own primary \"main\" parachutes.\nExact numbers are difficult to estimate because parachute design, maintenance, loading, packing technique and operator experience all have a significant impact on malfunction rates. Approximately one in a thousand sport main parachute openings malfunctions, requiring the use of the reserve parachute, although some skydivers have many thousands of jumps and never needed to use their reserve parachute.\nReserve parachutes are packed and deployed somewhat differently. They are also designed more conservatively, favouring reliability over responsiveness and are built and tested to more exacting standards, making them more reliable than main parachutes. Regulated inspection intervals, coupled with significantly less use contributes to reliability as wear on some components can adversely affect reliability. The safety advantage of a reserve parachute comes from the small probability of a main malfunction being multiplied by the even smaller probability of a reserve malfunction. This yields an even smaller probability of a double malfunction, although there is also a small possibility of a malfunctioning main parachute not being able to be released and thus interfering with the reserve parachute. In the United States, the 2017 average fatality rate is recorded to be 1 in 133,571 jumps.\nInjuries and fatalities in sport skydiving are possible even under a fully functional main parachute, such as may occur if the skydiver makes an error in judgment while flying the canopy which results in a high-speed impact either with the ground or with a hazard on the ground, which might otherwise have been avoided, or results in collision with another skydiver under canopy.\nMalfunctions.\nBelow are listed the malfunctions specific to round parachutes: \nRecords.\nOn August 16, 1960, Joseph Kittinger, in the Excelsior III test jump, set the previous world record for the highest parachute jump. He jumped from a balloon at an altitude of (which was also a piloted balloon altitude record at the time). A small stabilizer chute deployed successfully, and Kittinger fell for 4 minutes and 36 seconds, also setting a still-standing world record for the longest parachute free-fall, if falling with a stabilizer chute is counted as free-fall. At an altitude of , Kittinger opened his main chute and landed safely in the New Mexico desert. The whole descent took 13 minutes and 45 seconds. During the descent, Kittinger experienced temperatures as low as . In the free-fall stage, he reached a top speed of 614\u00a0mph (988\u00a0km/h or 274\u00a0m/s), or Mach 0.8.\nAccording to \"Guinness World Records\", Yevgeni Andreyev, a colonel in the Soviet Air Force, held the official FAI record for the longest free-fall parachute jump (without drogue chute) after falling for 24,500\u00a0m (80,380\u00a0ft) from an altitude of 25,457\u00a0m (83,523\u00a0ft) near the city of Saratov, Russia on November 1, 1962, until broken by Felix Baumgartner in 2012.\nFelix Baumgartner broke Joseph Kittinger's record on October 14, 2012, with a jump from an altitude of 127,852 feet (38,969.3 m) and reaching speeds up to 833.9\u00a0mph (1,342.0\u00a0km/h or 372.8\u00a0m/s), or nearly Mach\u00a01.1. Kittinger was an advisor for Baumgartner's jump.\nAlan Eustace made a jump from the stratosphere on October 24, 2014, from an altitude of 135,889.108 feet (41,419 m). However, because Eustace's jump involved a drogue parachute while Baumgartner's did not, their vertical speed and free fall distance records remain in different record categories.\nUses.\nIn addition to the use of a parachute to slow the descent of a person or object, a drogue parachute is used to aid horizontal deceleration of a land or air vehicle, including fixed-wing aircraft and drag racers, provide stability, as to assist certain types of light aircraft in distress, tandem free-fall; and as a pilot triggering deployment of a larger parachute.\nParachutes are also used as play equipment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48340", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48340", "title": "Pesticide", "text": "Substance used to destroy pests\nPesticides are substances that are used to control pests. They include herbicides, insecticides, nematicides, fungicides, and many others (see table). The most common of these are herbicides, which account for approximately 50% of all pesticide use globally. Most pesticides are used as plant protection products (also known as crop protection products), which in general protect plants from weeds, fungi, or insects. \nIn general, a pesticide is a chemical or biological agent (such as a virus, bacterium, or fungus) that deters, incapacitates, kills, or otherwise discourages pests. Target pests can include insects, plant pathogens, weeds, molluscs, birds, mammals, fish, nematodes (roundworms), and microbes that destroy property, cause nuisance, spread disease, or are disease vectors. Pesticides thus increase agricultural yields. Along with these benefits, pesticides also have drawbacks, such as potential toxicity to humans and other species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nThe word pesticide derives from the Latin \"pestis\" (plague) and \"caedere\" (kill).\nThe Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has defined \"pesticide\" as:\n any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, or controlling any pest, including vectors of human or animal disease, unwanted species of plants or animals, causing harm during or otherwise interfering with the production, processing, storage, transport, or marketing of food, agricultural commodities, wood and wood products or animal feedstuffs, or substances that may be administered to animals for the control of insects, arachnids, or other pests in or on their bodies. The term includes substances intended for use as a plant growth regulator, defoliant, desiccant, or agent for thinning fruit or preventing the premature fall of fruit. Also used as substances applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport.\nClassifications.\nPesticides can be classified by target organism (e.g., herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, and pediculicides \u2013 see table),\nBiopesticides according to the EPA include microbial pesticides, biochemical pesticides, and plant-incorporated protectants.\nPesticides can be classified into structural classes, with many structural classes developed for each of the target organisms listed in the table. A structural class is usually associated with a single mode of action, whereas a mode of action may encompass more than one structural class.\nThe pesticidal chemical (active ingredient) is mixed (formulated) with other components to form the product that is sold, and which is applied in various ways. Pesticides in gas form are fumigants.\nPesticides can be classified based upon their mode of action, which indicates the exact biological mechanism which the pesticide disrupts. The modes of action are important for resistance management, and are categorized and administered by the insecticide, herbicide, and fungicide resistance action committees.\nPesticides may be systemic or non-systemic. A systemic pesticide moves (translocates) inside the plant. Translocation may be upward in the xylem, or downward in the phloem or both. Non-systemic pesticides (contact pesticides) remain on the surface and act through direct contact with the target organism. Pesticides are more effective if they are systemic. Systemicity is a prerequisite for the pesticide to be used as a seed-treatment.\nPesticides can be classified as persistent (non-biodegradable) or non-persistent (biodegradable). A pesticide must be persistent enough to kill or control its target but must degrade fast enough not to accumulate in the environment or the food chain in order to be approved by the authorities. Persistent pesticides, including DDT, were banned many years ago, an exception being spraying in houses to combat malaria vectors.\nHistory.\nFrom ancient times until the 1950s the pesticides used were inorganic compounds and plant extracts. The inorganic compounds were derivatives of copper, arsenic, mercury, sulfur, among others, and the plant extracts contained pyrethrum, nicotine, and rotenone among others. The less toxic of these are still in use in organic farming. In the 1940s the insecticide DDT, and the herbicide 2,4-D, were introduced. These synthetic organic compounds were widely used and were very profitable. They were followed in the 1950s and 1960s by numerous other synthetic pesticides, which led to the growth of the pesticide industry. During this period, it became increasingly evident that DDT, which had been sprayed widely in the environment to combat the vector, had accumulated in the food chain. It had become a global pollutant, as summarized in the well-known book Silent Spring. Finally, DDT was banned in the 1970s in several countries, and subsequently all persistent pesticides were banned worldwide, an exception being spraying on interior walls for vector control.\nResistance to a pesticide was first seen in the 1920s with inorganic pesticides, and later it was found that development of resistance is to be expected, and measures to delay it are important. Integrated pest management (IPM) was introduced in the 1950s. By careful analysis and spraying only when an economical or biological threshold of crop damage is reached, pesticide application is reduced. This became in the 2020s the official policy of international organisations, industry, and many governments. With the introduction of high yielding varieties in the 1960s in the green revolution, more pesticides were used. Since the 1980s genetically modified crops were introduced, which resulted in lower amounts of insecticides used on them. Organic agriculture, which uses only non-synthetic pesticides, has grown and in 2020 represents about 1.5 per cent of the world's total agricultural land.\nPesticides have become more effective. Application rates fell from 1,000 to 2,500 grams of active ingredient per hectare (g/ha) in the 1950s to 40\u2013100 g/ha in the 2000s. Despite this, amounts used have increased. In high income countries over 20 years between the 1990s and 2010s amounts used increased 20%, while in the low income countries amounts increased 1623%.\nDevelopment of new pesticides.\nThe aim is to find new compounds or agents with improved properties such as a new mode of action or lower application rate. Another aim is to replace older pesticides which have been banned for reasons of toxicity or environmental harm or have become less effective due to development of resistance.\nThe process starts with testing (screening) against target organisms such as insects, fungi or plants. Inputs are typically random compounds, natural products, compounds designed to disrupt a biochemical target, compounds described in patents or literature, or biocontrol organisms.\nCompounds that are active in the screening process, known as hits or leads, cannot be used as pesticides, except for biocontrol organisms and some potent natural products. These lead compounds need to be optimised by a series of cycles of synthesis and testing of analogs. For approval by regulatory authorities for use as pesticides, the optimized compounds must meet several requirements. In addition to being potent (low application rate), they must show low toxicity to non-target organisms, low environmental impact, and viable manufacturing cost. The cost of developing a pesticide in 2024 was estimated to be 301 million US dollars. It has become more difficult to find new pesticides. More than 100 new active ingredients were introduced in the 2000s and less than 40 in the 2010s. Biopesticides are cheaper to develop, since the authorities require less toxicological and environmental study. Since 2000 the rate of new biological product introduction has frequently exceeded that of conventional products.\nMore than 25% of existing chemical pesticides contain one or more chiral centres (stereogenic centres). Newer pesticides with lower application rates tend to have more complex structures, and thus more often contain chiral centres. In cases when most or all of the pesticidal activity in a new compound is found in one enantiomer (the eutomer), the registration and use of the compound as this single enantiomer is preferred. This reduces the total application rate and avoids the tedious environmental testing required when registering a racemate. However, if a viable enantioselective manufacturing route cannot be found, then the racemate is registered and used.\nUses.\nIn addition to their main use in agriculture, pesticides have a number of other applications. Pesticides are used to control organisms that are considered to be harmful, or pernicious to their surroundings. For example, they are used to kill mosquitoes that can transmit potentially deadly diseases like West Nile virus, yellow fever, and malaria. They can also kill bees, wasps or ants that can cause allergic reactions. Insecticides can protect animals from illnesses that can be caused by parasites such as fleas. Pesticides can prevent sickness in humans that could be caused by moldy food or diseased produce. Herbicides can be used to clear roadside weeds, trees, and brush. They can also kill invasive weeds that may cause environmental damage. Herbicides are commonly applied in ponds and lakes to control algae and plants such as water grasses that can interfere with activities like swimming and fishing and cause the water to look or smell unpleasant. Uncontrolled pests such as termites and mold can damage structures such as houses. Pesticides are used in grocery stores and food storage facilities to manage rodents and insects that infest food such as grain. Pesticides are used on lawns and golf courses, partly for cosmetic reasons.\nIntegrated pest management, the use of multiple approaches to control pests, is becoming widespread and has been used with success in countries such as Indonesia, China, Bangladesh, the U.S., Australia, and Mexico. IPM attempts to recognize the more widespread impacts of an action on an ecosystem, so that natural balances are not upset.\nEach use of a pesticide carries some associated risk. Proper pesticide use decreases these associated risks to a level deemed acceptable by pesticide regulatory agencies such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) of Canada.\nDDT, sprayed on the walls of houses, is an organochlorine that has been used to fight malaria vectors (mosquitos) since the 1940s. The World Health Organization recommend this approach. It and other organochlorine pesticides have been banned in most countries worldwide because of their persistence in the environment and human toxicity. DDT has become less effective, as resistance was identified in Africa as early as 1955, and by 1972 nineteen species of mosquito worldwide were resistant to DDT.\nAmount used.\nTotal pesticides use in agriculture in 2021 was 3.54 million tonnes of active ingredients (Mt), a 4 percent increase with respect to 2020, an 11 percent increase in a decade, and a doubling since 1990. Pesticides use per area of cropland in 2021 was 2.26\u00a0kg per hectare (kg/ha), an increase of 4 percent with respect to 2020; use per value of agricultural production was 0.86\u00a0kg per thousand international dollar (kg/1000 I$) (+2%); and use per person was 0.45\u00a0kg per capita (kg/cap) (+3%). Between 1990 and 2021, these indicators increased by 85 percent, 3 percent, and 33 percent, respectively. Brazil was the world's largest user of pesticides in 2021, with 720 kt of pesticides applications for agricultural use, while the USA (457 kt) was the second-largest user.\nApplications per cropland area in 2021 varied widely, from 10.9\u00a0kg/hectare in Brazil to 0.8\u00a0kg/ha in the Russian Federation. The level in Brazil was about twice as high as in Argentina (5.6\u00a0kg/ha) and Indonesia (5.3\u00a0kg/ha). Insecticide use in the US has declined by more than half since 1980 (0.6%/yr), mostly due to the near phase-out of organophosphates. In corn fields, the decline was even steeper, due to the switchover to transgenic Bt corn.\nBenefits.\nPesticides increase agricultural yields. Median yield increases range between 12% and 27% when pesticides are used, depending on the crop. Another study found that not using pesticides reduced crop yields by about 10%. A study conducted in 1999, found that a ban on pesticides in the United States may result in a rise of food prices, loss of jobs, and an increase in world hunger.\nThere are two levels of benefits for pesticide use, primary and secondary. Primary benefits are direct gains from the use of pesticides and secondary benefits are effects that are more long-term.\nBiological.\nControlling pests and plant disease vectors\nControlling human/livestock disease vectors and nuisance organisms\nControlling organisms that harm other human activities and structures\nEconomics.\nIn 2018 world pesticide sales were estimated to be $65 billion, of which 88% was used for agriculture. Generic accounted for 85% of sales in 2018. In one study, it was estimated that for every dollar ($1) that is spent on pesticides for crops results in up to four dollars ($4) in crops which would otherwise be lost to insects, fungi and weeds. In general, farmers benefit from having an increase in crop yield and from being able to grow a variety of crops throughout the year. Consumers of agricultural products also benefit from being able to afford the vast quantities of produce available year-round.\nDisadvantages.\nOn the cost side of pesticide use there can be costs to the environment and costs to human health. Pesticides safety education and pesticide applicator regulation are designed to protect the public from pesticide misuse, but do not eliminate all misuse. Reducing the use of pesticides and choosing less toxic pesticides may reduce risks placed on society and the environment from pesticide use.\nHealth effects.\nMost health concerns related to pesticides stem from direct use, whether in occupational or non-occupational settings. In contrast, health risks from pesticide residues in fruits and vegetables are considered minimal.\nOccupational use of pesticides may affect health negatively. mimicking hormones causing reproductive problems, and also causing cancer. A 2007 systematic review found that \"most studies on non-Hodgkin lymphoma and leukemia showed positive associations with pesticide exposure\" and thus concluded that cosmetic use of pesticides should be decreased. There is substantial evidence of associations between organophosphate insecticide exposures and neurobehavioral alterations. Limited evidence also exists for other negative outcomes from pesticide exposure including neurological, birth defects, and fetal death.\n2014 epidemiological review found associations between autism and exposure to certain pesticides, but noted that the available evidence was insufficient to conclude that the relationship was causal.\nOwing to inadequate regulation and safety precautions, 99% of pesticide-related deaths occur in developing countries that account for only 25% of pesticide usage.\nExposure to pesticide residues from eating food.\nAccording to the American Cancer Society there is no evidence that pesticide residues in food increase the risk of people getting cancer. A 2009 study estimated that lifetime exposure to pesticide residues from eating fruits and vegetables results in only 4.2 and 3.2 minutes of lost life per person in Switzerland and the United States, respectively.\nNon-occupational pesticide use.\nPesticides are also found in majority of U.S. households with 88\u00a0million out of the 121.1\u00a0million households indicating that they use some form of pesticide in 2012. As of 2007, there were more than 1,055 active ingredients registered as pesticides, which yield over 20,000 pesticide products that are marketed in the United States.\nThe American Academy of Pediatrics recommends limiting exposure of children to pesticides and using safer alternatives:\nOne study found pesticide self-poisoning the method of choice in one third of suicides worldwide, and recommended, among other things, more restrictions on the types of pesticides that are most harmful to humans.\nPesticide use among agricultural workers.\nThe World Health Organization and the UN Environment Programme estimate that 3\u00a0million agricultural workers in the developing world experience severe poisoning from pesticides each year, resulting in 18,000 deaths. According to one study, as many as 25\u00a0million workers in developing countries may suffer mild pesticide poisoning yearly. Other occupational exposures besides agricultural workers, including pet groomers, groundskeepers, and fumigators, may also put individuals at risk of health effects from pesticides.\nPesticide use is widespread in Latin America, as around US$3\u00a0billion are spent each year in the region. Records indicate an increase in the frequency of pesticide poisonings over the past two decades. The most common incidents of pesticide poisoning is thought to result from exposure to organophosphate and carbamate insecticides. At-home pesticide use, use of unregulated products, and the role of undocumented workers within the agricultural industry makes characterizing true pesticide exposure a challenge. It is estimated that 50\u201380% of pesticide poisoning cases are unreported.\nUnderreporting of pesticide poisoning is especially common in areas where agricultural workers are less likely to seek care from a healthcare facility that may be monitoring or tracking the incidence of acute poisoning. The extent of unintentional pesticide poisoning may be much greater than available data suggest, particularly among developing countries. Globally, agriculture and food production remain one of the largest industries. In East Africa, the agricultural industry represents one of the largest sectors of the economy, with nearly 80% of its population relying on agriculture for income. Farmers in these communities rely on pesticide products to maintain high crop yields.\nSome East Africa governments are shifting to corporate farming, and opportunities for foreign conglomerates to operate commercial farms have led to more accessible research on pesticide use and exposure among workers. In other areas where large proportions of the population rely on subsistence, small-scale farming, estimating pesticide use and exposure is more difficult.\nPesticide poisoning.\nPesticides may exhibit toxic effects on humans and other non-target species, the severity of which depends on the frequency and magnitude of exposure. Toxicity also depends on the rate of absorption, distribution within the body, metabolism, and elimination of compounds from the body. Commonly used pesticides like organophosphates and carbamates act by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity, which prevents the breakdown of acetylcholine at the neural synapse. Excess acetylcholine can lead to symptoms like muscle cramps or tremors, confusion, dizziness and nausea. Studies show that farm workers in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Zimbabwe have decreased concentrations of plasma acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme responsible for breaking down acetylcholine acting on synapses throughout the nervous system. Other studies in Ethiopia have observed reduced respiratory function among farm workers who spray crops with pesticides. Numerous exposure pathways for farm workers increase the risk of pesticide poisoning, including dermal absorption walking through fields and applying products, as well as inhalation exposure.\nMeasuring exposure to pesticides.\nThere are multiple approaches to measuring a person's exposure to pesticides, each of which provides an estimate of an individual's internal dose. Two broad approaches include measuring biomarkers and markers of biological effect. The former involves taking direct measurement of the parent compound or its metabolites in various types of media: urine, blood, serum. Biomarkers may include a direct measurement of the compound in the body before it's been biotransformed during metabolism. Other suitable biomarkers may include the metabolites of the parent compound after they've been biotransformed during metabolism. Toxicokinetic data can provide more detailed information on how quickly the compound is metabolized and eliminated from the body, and provide insights into the timing of exposure.\nMarkers of biological effect provide an estimation of exposure based on cellular activities related to the mechanism of action. For example, many studies investigating exposure to pesticides often involve the quantification of the acetylcholinesterase enzyme at the neural synapse to determine the magnitude of the inhibitory effect of organophosphate and carbamate pesticides.\nAnother method of quantifying exposure involves measuring, at the molecular level, the amount of pesticide interacting with the site of action. These methods are more commonly used for occupational exposures where the mechanism of action is better understood, as described by WHO guidelines published in \"Biological Monitoring of Chemical Exposure in the Workplace\". Better understanding of how pesticides elicit their toxic effects is needed before this method of exposure assessment can be applied to occupational exposure of agricultural workers.\nAlternative methods to assess exposure include questionnaires to discern from participants whether they are experiencing symptoms associated with pesticide poisoning. Self-reported symptoms may include headaches, dizziness, nausea, joint pain, or respiratory symptoms.\nChallenges in assessing pesticide exposure.\nMultiple challenges exist in assessing exposure to pesticides in the general population, and many others that are specific to occupational exposures of agricultural workers. Beyond farm workers, estimating exposure to family members and children presents additional challenges, and may occur through \"take-home\" exposure from pesticide residues collected on clothing or equipment belonging to parent farm workers and inadvertently brought into the home. Children may also be exposed to pesticides prenatally from mothers who are exposed to pesticides during pregnancy. Characterizing children's exposure resulting from drift of airborne and spray application of pesticides is similarly challenging, yet well documented in developing countries. Because of critical development periods of the fetus and newborn children, these non-working populations are more vulnerable to the effects of pesticides, and may be at increased risk of developing neurocognitive effects and impaired development.\nWhile measuring biomarkers or markers of biological effects may provide more accurate estimates of exposure, collecting these data in the field is often impractical and many methods are not sensitive enough to detect low-level concentrations. Rapid cholinesterase test kits exist to collect blood samples in the field. Conducting large scale assessments of agricultural workers in remote regions of developing countries makes the implementation of these kits a challenge. The cholinesterase assay is a useful clinical tool to assess individual exposure and acute toxicity. Considerable variability in baseline enzyme activity among individuals makes it difficult to compare field measurements of cholinesterase activity to a reference dose to determine health risk associated with exposure. Another challenge in deriving a reference dose is identifying health endpoints that are relevant to exposure. More epidemiological research is needed to identify critical health endpoints, particularly among populations who are occupationally exposed.\nPrevention.\nMinimizing harmful exposure to pesticides can be achieved by proper use of personal protective equipment, adequate reentry times into recently sprayed areas, and effective product labeling for hazardous substances as per FIFRA regulations. Training high-risk populations, including agricultural workers, on the proper use and storage of pesticides, can reduce the incidence of acute pesticide poisoning and potential chronic health effects associated with exposure. Continued research into the human toxic health effects of pesticides serves as a basis for relevant policies and enforceable standards that are health protective to all populations.\nEnvironmental effects.\nPesticide use raises a number of environmental concerns. Over 98% of sprayed insecticides and 95% of herbicides reach a destination other than their target species, including non-target species, air, water and soil. Pesticide drift occurs when pesticides suspended in the air as particles are carried by wind to other areas, potentially contaminating them. Pesticides are one of the causes of water pollution, and some pesticides were persistent organic pollutants (now banned), which contribute to soil and flower (pollen, nectar) contamination. Furthermore, pesticide use can adversely impact neighboring agricultural activity, as pests themselves drift to and harm nearby crops that have no pesticide used on them.\nIn addition, pesticide use reduces invertebrate biodiversity in streams, contributes to pollinator decline, destroys habitat (especially for birds), and threatens endangered species. Pests can develop a resistance to the pesticide (pesticide resistance), necessitating a new pesticide. Alternatively a greater dose of the pesticide can be used to counteract the resistance, although this will cause a worsening of the ambient pollution problem.\nThe Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants banned all persistent pesticides, in particular DDT and other organochlorine pesticides, which were stable and lipophilic, and thus able to bioaccumulate in the body and the food chain. and which spread throughout the planet. Persistent pesticides are no longer used for agriculture, and will not be approved by the authorities. Because the half life in soil is long (for DDT 2\u201315 years) residues can still be detected in humans at levels 5 to 10 times lower than found in the 1970s.\nPesticides now have to be degradable in the environment. Such degradation of pesticides is due to both innate chemical properties of the compounds and environmental processes or conditions. For example, the presence of halogens within a chemical structure often slows down degradation in an aerobic environment. Adsorption to soil may retard pesticide movement, but also may reduce bioavailability to microbial degraders.\nPesticide contamination in the environment can be monitored through bioindicators such as bee pollinators.\nEconomics.\nIn one study, the human health and environmental costs due to pesticides in the United States was estimated to be $9.6 billion: offset by about $40\u00a0billion in increased agricultural production.\nAdditional costs include the registration process and the cost of purchasing pesticides: which are typically borne by agrichemical companies and farmers respectively. The registration process can take several years to complete (there are 70 types of field tests) and can cost $50\u201370\u00a0million for a single pesticide. At the beginning of the 21st century, the United States spent approximately $10\u00a0billion on pesticides annually.\nResistance.\nThe use of pesticides inherently entails the risk of resistance developing. Various techniques and procedures of pesticide application can slow the development of resistance, as can some natural features of the target population and surrounding environment.\nAlternatives.\nAlternatives to pesticides are available and include methods of cultivation, use of biological pest controls (such as pheromones and microbial pesticides), genetic engineering (mostly of crops), and methods of interfering with insect breeding. Application of composted yard waste has also been used as a way of controlling pests.\nThese methods are becoming increasingly popular and often are safer than traditional chemical pesticides. In addition, EPA is registering reduced-risk pesticides in increasing numbers.\nCultivation practices.\nCultivation practices include polyculture (growing multiple types of plants), crop rotation, planting crops in areas where the pests that damage them do not live, timing planting according to when pests will be least problematic, and use of trap crops that attract pests away from the real crop. Trap crops have successfully controlled pests in some commercial agricultural systems while reducing pesticide usage. In other systems, trap crops can fail to reduce pest densities at a commercial scale, even when the trap crop works in controlled experiments.\nUse of other organisms.\nRelease of other organisms that fight the pest is another example of an alternative to pesticide use. These organisms can include natural predators or parasites of the pests. Biological pesticides based on entomopathogenic fungi, bacteria and viruses causing disease in the pest species can also be used.\nBiological control engineering.\nInterfering with insects' reproduction can be accomplished by sterilizing males of the target species and releasing them, so that they mate with females but do not produce offspring. This technique was first used on the screwworm fly in 1958 and has since been used with the medfly, the tsetse fly, and the gypsy moth. This is a costly and slow approach that only works on some types of insects.\nOther alternatives.\nOther alternatives include \"laserweeding\" \u2013 the use of novel agricultural robots for weed control using lasers.\nPush pull strategy.\nPush-pull technique: intercropping with a \"push\" crop that repels the pest, and planting a \"pull\" crop on the boundary that attracts and traps it.\nEffectiveness.\nSome evidence shows that alternatives to pesticides can be equally effective as the use of chemicals. A study of Maize fields in northern Florida found that the application of composted yard waste with high carbon to nitrogen ratio to agricultural fields was highly effective at reducing the population of plant-parasitic nematodes and increasing crop yield, with yield increases ranging from 10% to 212%; the observed effects were long-term, often not appearing until the third season of the study. Additional silicon nutrition protects some horticultural crops against fungal diseases almost completely, while insufficient silicon sometimes leads to severe infection even when fungicides are used.\nPesticide resistance is increasing and that may make alternatives more attractive.\nTypes.\nBiopesticides.\nBiopesticides are certain types of pesticides derived from such natural materials as animals, plants, bacteria, and certain minerals. For example, canola oil and baking soda have pesticidal applications and are considered biopesticides. Biopesticides fall into three major classes:\nBy pest type.\nPesticides that are related to the type of pests are:\nRegulation.\nInternational.\nIn many countries, pesticides must be approved for sale and use by a government agency.\nWorldwide, 85% of countries have pesticide legislation for the proper storage of pesticides and 51% include provisions to ensure proper disposal of all obsolete pesticides.\nThough pesticide regulations differ from country to country, pesticides, and products on which they were used are traded across international borders. To deal with inconsistencies in regulations among countries, delegates to a conference of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization adopted an International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides in 1985 to create voluntary standards of pesticide regulation for many countries. The Code was updated in 1998 and 2002. The FAO claims that the code has raised awareness about pesticide hazards and decreased the number of countries without restrictions on pesticide use.\nThree other efforts to improve regulation of international pesticide trade are the United Nations London Guidelines for the Exchange of Information on Chemicals in International Trade and the United Nations Codex Alimentarius Commission. The former seeks to implement procedures for ensuring that prior informed consent exists between countries buying and selling pesticides, while the latter seeks to create uniform standards for maximum levels of pesticide residues among participating countries.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for regulating pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and the Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA).\nStudies must be conducted to establish the conditions in which the material is safe to use and the effectiveness against the intended pest(s). The EPA regulates pesticides to ensure that these products do not pose adverse effects to humans or the environment, with an emphasis on the health and safety of children. Pesticides produced before November 1984 continue to be reassessed in order to meet the current scientific and regulatory standards. All registered pesticides are reviewed every 15 years to ensure they meet the proper standards. During the registration process, a label is created. The label contains directions for proper use of the material in addition to safety restrictions. Based on acute toxicity, pesticides are assigned to a Toxicity Class. Pesticides are the most thoroughly tested chemicals after drugs in the United States; those used on food require more than 100 tests to determine a range of potential impacts.\nSome pesticides are considered too hazardous for sale to the general public and are designated restricted use pesticides. Only certified applicators, who have passed an exam, may purchase or supervise the application of restricted use pesticides. Records of sales and use are required to be maintained and may be audited by government agencies charged with the enforcement of pesticide regulations. These records must be made available to employees and state or territorial environmental regulatory agencies.\nIn addition to the EPA, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) set standards for the level of pesticide residue that is allowed on or in crops. The EPA looks at what the potential human health and environmental effects might be associated with the use of the pesticide.\nIn addition, the U.S. EPA uses the National Research Council's four-step process for human health risk assessment: (1) Hazard Identification, (2) Dose-Response Assessment, (3) Exposure Assessment, and (4) Risk Characterization.\nIn 2013 Kaua'i County (Hawai\u02bbi) passed Bill No. 2491 to add an article to Chapter 22 of the county's code relating to pesticides and GMOs. The bill strengthens protections of local communities in Kaua'i where many large pesticide companies test their products.\nThe first legislation providing federal authority for regulating pesticides was enacted in 1910.\nEU.\nEU legislation has been approved banning the use of highly toxic pesticides including those that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction, those that are endocrine-disrupting, and those that are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) or very persistent and very bioaccumulative (vPvB) and measures have been approved to improve the general safety of pesticides across all EU member states.\nIn 2023 The Environment Committee of European Parliament approved a decision aiming to reduce pesticide use by 50% (the most hazardous by 65%) by the year 2030 and ensure sustainable use of pesticides (for example use them only as a last resort). The decision also includes measures for providing farmers with alternatives.\nResidue.\nPesticide residue refers to the pesticides that may remain on or in food after they are applied to food crops. The maximum residue limits (MRL) of pesticides in food are carefully set by the regulatory authorities to ensure, to their best judgement, no health impacts. Regulations such as pre-harvest intervals also often prevent harvest of crop or livestock products if recently treated in order to allow residue concentrations to decrease over time to safe levels before harvest. Exposure of the general population to these residues most commonly occurs through consumption of treated food sources, or being in close contact to areas treated with pesticides such as farms or lawns.\nPersistent pesticides are no longer used for agriculture, and will not be approved by the authorities. Because the half life in soil is long (for DDT 2\u201315 years) residues can still be detected in humans at levels 5 to 10 times lower than found in the 1970s.\nResidues are monitored by the authorities. In 2016, over 99% of samples of US produce had no pesticide residue or had residue levels well below the EPA tolerance levels for each pesticide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (https://). Text taken from https://, FAO, FAO. "}
{"id": "48343", "revid": "49997101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48343", "title": "Tripartite Pact", "text": "1940 World War II mutual defense treaty\nThe Tripartite Pact, also known as the Berlin Pact, was an agreement between Germany, Italy, and Japan signed in Berlin on 27 September 1940 by, respectively, Joachim von Ribbentrop, Galeazzo Ciano, and Sabur\u014d Kurusu (in that order) and in the presence of Adolf Hitler. It was a defensive military alliance that was eventually joined by Hungary (20 November 1940), Romania (23 November 1940), Slovakia (24 November 1940), Bulgaria (1 March 1941), and Yugoslavia (25 March 1941). Yugoslavia's accession provoked a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" in Belgrade two days later. Germany, Italy, and Hungary responded by invading Yugoslavia. The resulting Italo-German client state, known as the Independent State of Croatia, joined the pact on 15 June 1941.\nThe Tripartite Pact was, together with the Anti-Comintern Pact and the Pact of Steel, one of a number of agreements between Germany, Japan, Italy, and other countries of the Axis powers governing their relationship.\nThe Tripartite Pact formally allied the Axis Powers with one another, and it was directed primarily at the United States. Because of the long distance between Japan and the two European Powers, the pact recognized two different regions that were to be under Axis rule. Japan recognized \"the leadership of Germany and Italy in the establishment of a new order in Europe\". In return, Germany and Italy recognized Japan's right to establish a new order \"in Greater East Asia\". But the pact's practical effects were limited since the Italo-German and Japanese operational theatres were on opposite sides of the world, and the high contracting powers had disparate strategic interests. As such, the Axis was only ever a loose alliance. Its defensive clauses were never invoked, and signing the agreement did not oblige its signatories to fight a common war \"per se\".\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Governments of Japan, Germany, and Italy consider it as the condition precedent of any lasting peace that all nations in the world be given each its own proper place, have decided to stand by and co-operate with one another in their efforts in Greater East Asia and the regions of Europe respectively wherein it is their prime purpose to establish and maintain a new order of things, calculated to promote the mutual prosperity and welfare of the peoples concerned.\nIt is, furthermore, the desire of the three Governments to extend cooperation to nations in other spheres of the world that are inclined to direct their efforts along lines similar to their own for the purpose of realizing their ultimate object, world peace.\nAccordingly, the Governments of Japan, Germany and Italy have agreed as follows:\nARTICLE 1. Japan recognizes and respects the leadership of Germany and Italy in the establishment of a new order in Europe.\nARTICLE 2. Germany and Italy recognize and respect the leadership of Japan in the establishment of a new order in Greater East Asia.\nARTICLE 3. Japan, Germany, and Italy agree to cooperate in their efforts on aforesaid lines. They further undertake to assist one another with all political, economic and military means if one of the Contracting Powers is attacked by a Power at present not involved in the European War or in the Japanese-Chinese conflict.\nARTICLE 4. With a view to implementing the present pact, joint technical commissions, to be appointed by the respective Governments of Japan, Germany and Italy, will meet without delay.\nARTICLE 5. Japan, Germany and Italy affirm that the above agreement affects in no way the political status existing at present between each of the three Contracting Powers and Soviet Russia.\nARTICLE 6. The present pact shall become valid immediately upon signature and shall remain in force ten years from the date on which it becomes effective.\nIn due time, before the expiration of said term, the High Contracting Parties shall, at the request of any one of them, enter into negotiations for its renewal.\nIn faith whereof, the undersigned duly authorized by their respective governments have signed this pact and have affixed hereto their signatures.\nBackground.\nAlthough Germany and Japan technically became allies with the signing of Anti-Comintern Pact of 1936, the 1939 Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union came as a surprise to Japan. In November 1939, Germany and Japan signed the \"Agreement for Cultural Cooperation between Japan and Germany\", which restored the \"reluctant alliance\" between them.\nLater signatories.\nIn a ceremonial speech following the signing of the pact on 27 September, Ribbentrop may have suggested that the signatories were open to accepting new signatories in the future. The \"Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung\" (DAZ) reported his words as follows:\nThe purpose of the Pact is, above all things, to help restore peace to the world as quickly as possible. Therefore any other State which wishes to accede to this bloc (\"der diesem Block beitreten will\"), with the intention of contributing to the restoration of peaceful conditions, will be sincerely and gratefully made welcome and will participate in the economic and political reorganisation.\nThe official \"Deutsches Nachrichtenb\u00fcro\" (DNB), however, as well as most of the press, reported a slightly different version in which the words \"having good will towards the pact\" (\"der diesem Pakt wohlwollend gegen\u00fcbertreten will\") instead of \"accede to\" were used. It is likely that other nations were not envisioned to join the treaty and that Ribbentrop misspoke. The official record in the DNB, therefore, corrected his words to remove any reference to \"accession\" by other states but produced an awkward wording in the process.\nThe Italian foreign minister, Ciano, was resolutely opposed to the idea of adding smaller states to the pact as late as 20 November 1940; he argued in his diary that they weakened the pact and were useless bits of diplomacy.\nHungary.\nThe Kingdom of Hungary was the fourth state to sign the pact and the first to join it after 27 September 1940. The Hungarian ambassador in Berlin, D\u00f6me Szt\u00f3jay, telegraphed his foreign minister, Istv\u00e1n Cs\u00e1ky, immediately after news of the signing and of Ribbentrop's speech had reached him. He urged Cs\u00e1ky to join the pact and even claimed that it was the expectation of Germany and Italy that he would do so. He considered it especially important for Hungary to sign the pact before Romania did. In response, Cs\u00e1ky asked Szt\u00f3jay and the ambassador in Rome, Frigyes Villani, to make enquiries regarding Hungary's accession and its potential obligations under the pact. On 28 September, the German secretary of state for foreign affairs, Ernst von Weizs\u00e4cker, informed Hungary that Ribbentrop had meant not a \"formal accession\" but merely \"an attitude in the spirit of the Pact\". The Italian answer was similar. Nonetheless, within a week, the Hungarian government had sent out formal notice of its \"spiritual adherence\" to the pact.\nIn the week after Hungary's \"spiritual adherence\", the Balkan situation changed. Romania granted a German request to send troops to guard the Ploie\u0219ti oil fields, and Hungary granted a German request to allow its troops to transit Hungary to get to Romania. On 7 October 1940, the first German troops arrived in Ploie\u0219ti. It is probable that Romania's accession to the pact had been delayed until the German troops were in place for fear of the Soviets taking pre-emptive action to secure the oil fields for themselves. In turn, Hungary's accession had been delayed until Romania's had been negotiated. On about 9 October, Weizs\u00e4cker delivered a message from Ribbentrop to Szt\u00f3jay to inform him that Hitler now wanted \"friendly states\" to join the pact. In a telephone conversation with Ciano on 9 or 10 October, Ribbentrop claimed that Hungary had sent a second request to join the pact. Mussolini reluctantly consented. On 12 October, Ribbentrop informed Szt\u00f3jay that both Italy and Japan had consented to Hungary's accession. Since the Hungarian regent, Mikl\u00f3s Horthy, had specifically instructed Szt\u00f3jay to ask for Hungary to be the first new state to accede to the pact, Ribbentrop granted the request.\nRomania.\nThe Kingdom of Romania had joined the Allied Powers in World War I and had received Transylvania from Austria-Hungary. After Germany and Italy awarded parts of Transylvania back to Hungary and Southern Dobruja back to Bulgaria and after the Soviet Union had taken Bessarabia and northern Bukovina, the Fascist Iron Guard party came to power and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact on November 23, 1940, because of the Romanian desire for protection against the Soviet Union.\nIn Marshal Ion Antonescu's affidavit read out at the IG Farben Trial (1947\u20131948), he stated that the agreement on entering the pact had been concluded before his visit to Berlin on 22 November 1940.\nSlovakia.\nOn 14 March 1939, the Slovak Republic was declared in the midst of the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. Hitler invited Monsignor Jozef Tiso to be the new nation's leader. Soon after it was formed, Slovakia was involved in a war with neighboring Hungary. Slovakia had signed a \"Protection Treaty\" with Germany, which, however, refused to intervene. The war resulted in territorial gains by Hungary at Slovakia's expense. Even so, Slovakia supported the German invasion of Poland in 1939.\nShortly after the signing of the Tripartite Pact, Slovakia, following the Hungarian lead, sent messages of \"spiritual adherence\" to Germany and Italy.\nOn 24 November 1940, the day after Romania signed the pact, the Slovak prime minister and foreign minister, Vojtech Tuka, went to Berlin to meet Ribbentrop and signed Slovakia's accession to the Tripartite Pact. His purpose was to increase Tuka's standing in Slovakia relative to that of his rival, Tiso, although the Germans had no intention of permitting Tiso to be removed.\nBulgaria.\nThe Tsardom of Bulgaria had been an ally of Germany and on the losing side in World War I. From the beginning, the Germans pressured Bulgaria to join the Tripartite Pact. On 17 November 1940, Tsar Boris III and Foreign Minister Ivan Popov met with Hitler in Germany. According to Hermann Neubacher, Germany's special envoy to the Balkans, Bulgaria's relation to the Axis powers was completely settled at that meeting. On 23 November, however, the Bulgarian ambassador in Berlin, Peter Draganov, informed the Germans that while Bulgaria had agreed in principle to join the pact, it wished to delay its signing for the time being.\nThe meeting with Hitler precipitated a visit to Bulgaria by the Soviet diplomat Arkady Sobolev on 25 November. He encouraged the Bulgarians to sign a mutual assistance pact that had first been discussed in October 1939. He offered Soviet recognition of Bulgarian claims in Greece and Turkey. The Bulgarian government, however, was disturbed by the subversive actions of the Bulgarian Communist Party in response to the talks, apparently at the Soviets' urging.\nOn 26 December 1940, the far-right politician Alexander Tsankov introduced a motion in the National Assembly urging the government to accede to the Tripartite Pact immediately, but it was voted down.\nBulgaria's hand was finally forced by Germany's desire to intervene in the Italo-Greek War, which would require moving troops through Bulgaria. With no possibility of resisting Germany militarily, Prime Minister Bogdan Filov signed Bulgaria's accession to the pact in Vienna on 1 March 1941. He announced that it was done partly in gratitude for Germany's assistance to Bulgaria in obtaining the Treaty of Craiova with Romania and that it would not affect Bulgaria's relations with Turkey or the Soviet Union. Later that day, Ribbentrop promised Filov that after the fall of Greece, Bulgaria would obtain an Aegean coastline between the Struma and Maritsa Rivers.\nAccording to Article 17 of the Tarnovo Constitution, treaties had to be ratified by the National Assembly. In the case of the Tripartite Pact, the government sought to have the treaty ratified without debate or discussion. Seventeen opposition deputies submitted an interpellation and one, Ivan Petrov, asked why the National Assembly had not been consulted in advance and whether the pact involved Bulgaria in war. They were ignored. The pact was ratified by a vote of 140 to 20.\nYugoslavia.\nOn 25 March 1941 in Vienna, Dragi\u0161a Cvetkovi\u0107, the prime minister of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, signed the Tripartite Pact. On 27 March, the regime was overthrown in a military \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" with British support. Seventeen-year-old King Peter II was declared to be of age. The new Yugoslav government under Prime Minister and General Du\u0161an Simovi\u0107, refused to ratify Yugoslavia's signing of the Tripartite Pact and started negotiations with the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. The enraged Hitler issued Directive 25 as an answer to the coup and then attacked both Yugoslavia and Greece on 6 April. The German Air Force bombed Belgrade for three days and nights. German ground troops moved in, and Yugoslavia capitulated on 17 April.\nIndependent State of Croatia.\nThe Independent State of Croatia (\"Nezavisna Dr\u017eava Hrvatska\", or NDH), created from some former territories of the conquered Yugoslavia, signed the Tripartite Pact on 15 June 1941.\nPotential signatories.\nSoviet Union.\nJust prior to the formation of the Tripartite Pact, the Soviet Union was informed of its existence and the potential of its joining. Vyacheslav Molotov was thus sent to Berlin to discuss the pact and the possibility of the Soviet Union joining. The Soviets considered joining the Tripartite Pact to be an update of existing agreements with Germany. During the visit to Berlin, Molotov agreed in principle to the Soviet Union joining the pact if some details, such as Soviet annexation of Finland, could be worked out. The Soviet government sent a revised version of the pact to Germany on 25 November. To demonstrate the benefits of partnership, the Soviet Union made large economic offerings to Germany.\nHowever, the Germans had no intention of allowing the Soviets to join the pact; they were already making preparations for their invasion of the Soviet Union, and were committed to doing so regardless of any action taken by the Soviets:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Political conversations designed to clarify the attitude of Russia in the immediate future have been started. Regardless of the outcome of these conversations, all preparations for the East previously ordered orally are to be continued. [Written] directives on that will follow as soon as the basic elements of the army's plan for the operation have been submitted to me and approved by me. \u2014Adolf Hitler\nWhen they received the Soviet proposal in November, they simply did not reply. They, however, accepted the new economic offerings and signed an agreement for them on 10 January 1941.\nFinland.\nMilitary co-operation between Finland and Nazi Germany started in late 1940 after Finland had lost a significant amount of its territory to Soviet aggression during the Winter War. Finland joined Operation Barbarossa on 25 June 1941, which started the Continuation War. In November, Finland signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, an anticommunist agreement directed against the Soviet Union, with many other countries allied with Germany. Soon, Germany suggested for Finland to sign the Tripartite Pact, but the Finnish government refused since Finland saw its war as a \"separate war\" from the Second World War and saw its objectives as different from those of Nazi Germany. Finland also wanted to maintain diplomatic relations with the Allies, particularly the United States. During the Second World War, Germany asked Finland several times to sign the pact but the Finnish government declined all offers. Diplomatic relations between Finland and the United States were maintained until June 1944 although the US ambassador had already been recalled. \nAfter Finland allied with Germany, the United Kingdom declared war on Finland on 5 December 1941.\nAt the request of the German command, the Finns established a winter warfare school in Kankaanp\u00e4\u00e4. It began its first two-month course for German officers and NCOs in December 1941. In the summer of 1942, the German-speaking Finnish instructors taught a course on forest warfare. General Waldemar Erfurth, the German liaison to the Finnish general headquarters, considered the school an outstanding success. It was also attended by some Hungarian officers.\nThailand.\nJapan invaded Thailand at 02:00 local time on 8 December 1941. The Japanese ambassador, Teiji Tsubokami, told the Thai foreign minister, Direk Jayanama, that Japan wanted only permission for its troops to pass through Thailand to attack the British in Malaya and Burma. At 07:00, Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram (Phibun) held an emergency cabinet meeting in Bangkok, and soon, a ceasefire was ordered. Phibun then met with Tsubokami, who offered him four options: to conclude a defensive\u2013offensive alliance with Japan, to join the Tripartite Pact, to co-operate in Japanese military operations, or to agree to the joint defence of Thailand. Military co-operation was chosen, and the Tripartite Pact was rejected.\nAccording to the postwar memoirs of Direk Jayanama, Phibun planned to sign the pact later but was prevented by Direk's opposition.\nTripartite relations, 1940\u20131943.\nThe \"joint technical commissions\" required by the pact were established by agreement on 20 December 1940. They were to consist of a general commission in each capital, consisting of the host's foreign minister and the other two partners' ambassadors. Under the general commission were to be military and economic commissions. On 15 December 1941, the first meeting of all three commissions in one capital, Berlin, took place, labelled a \"Tripartite Pact Conference\". It was decided there to form a \"Permanent Council of the Tripartite Pact Powers\", but nothing happened for two months. Only the Italians, whom the Japanese mistrusted, pushed for greater collaboration.\nOn 18 January 1942, the German and Italian governments signed two secret operational agreements: one with the Imperial Japanese Army and another with the Imperial Japanese Navy. The agreements divided the world along longitude 70\u00b0 east into two major operational zones, but it had almost no military significance. Chiefly, it committed the powers to co-operation in matters of commerce, intelligence and communication.\nOn 24 February 1942, the Permanent Council met under the chairmanship of Ribbentrop, who announced that \"the propaganda effect is one of the main reasons for our meetings\". The representatives set up a propaganda commission and then adjourned indefinitely. The military commission in Berlin met only two or three times by 1943, and there were no trilateral naval talks at all. Germany and Japan conducted separate naval discussions, and Italy consulted the Japanese independently for its planned assault on Malta in 1942.\nThe economic relationship between the Tripartite powers was fraught with difficulty. Japan would not grant economic concessions to Germany in 1941 for fear of them ruining its negotiations with the United States. In January 1942, negotiations on economic co-operation began, but an agreement was not signed until 20 January 1943 in Berlin. Italy was invited to sign a similar agreement in Rome at the same time for propaganda purposes, but none of the supplementary Berlin protocols applied to Italo-Japanese relations.\n\"No separate peace\" agreement.\nJapan first pressed Germany to join the war with the United States on 2 December 1941, only two days after notifying Berlin of its intention to go to war. Receiving no response, Japan approached Italy. At 04:00 on the morning of 5 December, Ribbentrop gave the Japanese ambassador a proposal, which had been approved by Italy, to join the war and to prosecute it jointly. On 11 December 1941, the same day as the German declaration of war against the United States and the Italian declaration, the three powers signed an agreement, already hammered out on 8 December, barring any separate peace with the United States or Britain. It was \"intended as a propaganda accompaniment to the declaration of war\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;ARTICLE I. Italy, Germany and Japan will henceforth conduct in common and jointly a war which has been imposed on them by the United States of America and England, by all means at their disposal and until the end of hostilities.\nARTICLE II. Italy, Germany and Japan undertake each for himself that none of the parties to the present accord will conclude either armistice or peace, be it with the United States or with England without complete and reciprocal agreement [of the three signatories to this pact].\nARTICLE III. Italy, Germany and Japan, even after the victorious conclusion of this war, will collaborate closely in the spirit of the Tripartite Pact, concluded Sept. 21, 1940, in order to realize and establish an equitable new order in the world.\nARTICLE IV. The present accord is effective immediately on its signature and remains in force for the duration of the Tripartite Pact, signed Sept. 27, 1940. The high contracting parties of this accord will at an opportune moment agree among themselves the means of implementing Article III above of this accord.\nLegacy.\nAs the defensive alliance under the pact was never invoked, and as the main signatories were widely separated between Europe and Asia limiting co-operation between the European and Asian signatories, the impact of the Pact was limited. The historian Paul W. Schroeder has described it as rapidly declining from a \"position of importance in late 1940 to one of merely nominal existence in late 1941\" and as \"virtually inoperative\" by December 1941.\nDespite its limited practical impact, the Tripartite Pact had significant symbolic implications, particularly in influencing American perceptions. It persuaded the American public that Japan was acting in concert with Germany, which played into broader narratives of a coordinated Axis effort to dominate globally. The charge that the Pact was part of an effort to co-ordinate aggression and achieve world domination also formed part of the case brought against the Nazi leaders at Nuremberg.\nSimilarly the Tokyo War Crimes Trials also focused on the establishing of mixed technical commissions between Germany, Japan, and Italy as evidence that the Pact began functioning shortly after it was signed, and showed mutual support in aggression under the pact, though these commissions never actually functioned.Moreover, the Pact's ideological underpinnings, rooted in global fascism and the aggressive ambitions for a new world order by its signatories, underscored the broader Axis strategy against the Allies.\nIt contributed to the legal and moral frameworks within which the Axis powers' actions were judged post-war, highlighting the complex legacy of wartime alliances not just in terms of their immediate strategic impacts, but also in terms of their longer-term effects on international relations and legal precedents for addressing acts of aggression.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48344", "revid": "30021739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48344", "title": "Alexander Pope", "text": "English poet (1688\u20131744)\nAlexander Pope (21 May 1688 O.S. \u2013 30 May 1744) was an English poet, translator, and satirist of the Enlightenment era who is considered one of the most prominent English poets of the early 18th century. An exponent of Augustan literature, Pope is best known for his satirical and discursive poetry including \"The Rape of the Lock\", \"The Dunciad\", and \"An Essay on Criticism,\" and for his translations of Homer.\nPope is often quoted in \"The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations\", some of his verses having entered common parlance (e.g. \"damning with faint praise\" or \"to err is human; to forgive, divine\").\nLife.\nAlexander Pope was born in London on 21 May 1688 during the year of the Glorious Revolution. His father Alexander Pope was a successful linen merchant in the Strand, London. His mother, Edith (n\u00e9e Turner), was the daughter of William Turner, Esquire, of York. Both parents were Catholics. His uncle-in-law was the miniature painter Samuel Cooper, through his mother's sister, Christiana. Pope's education was affected by the recently enacted Test Acts, a series of English penal laws that upheld the status of the established Church of England, banning Catholics from teaching, attending a university, voting, and holding public office on penalty of perpetual imprisonment. Pope was taught to read by his aunt and attended Twyford School circa 1698. He also attended two Roman Catholic schools in London. Such schools, though still illegal, were tolerated in some areas.\nIn 1700 his family moved to a small estate at Popeswood, in Binfield, Berkshire, close to the royal Windsor Forest. This was due to strong anti-Catholic sentiment and a statute preventing \"Papists\" from living within of London or Westminster. Pope would later describe the countryside around the house in his poem \"Windsor Forest\". Pope's formal education ended at this time, and from then on, he mostly educated himself by reading the works of classical writers such as the satirists Horace and Juvenal, the epic poets Homer and Virgil, as well as English authors such as Geoffrey Chaucer, William Shakespeare and John Dryden. He studied many languages, reading works by French, Italian, Latin, and Greek poets. After five years of study, Pope came into contact with figures from London literary society such as William Congreve, Samuel Garth and William Trumbull.\nAt Binfield he made many important friends. One of them, John Caryll (the future dedicatee of \"The Rape of the Lock\"), was twenty years older than the poet and had made many acquaintances in the London literary world. He introduced the young Pope to the ageing playwright William Wycherley and to William Walsh, a minor poet, who helped Pope revise his first major work, \"The Pastorals\". There, he met the Blount sisters, Teresa and Martha (Patty), in 1707. He remained close friends with Patty until his death, but his friendship with Teresa ended in 1722.\nFrom the age of 12 he suffered numerous health problems, including Pott disease, a form of tuberculosis that affects the spine, which deformed his body and stunted his growth, leaving him with a severe hunchback. His tuberculosis infection caused other health problems including respiratory difficulties, high fevers, inflamed eyes and abdominal pain. He grew to a height of only . Pope was already removed from society as a Catholic, and his poor health alienated him further. Although he never married, he had many female friends to whom he wrote witty letters, including Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. It has been alleged that his lifelong friend Martha Blount was his lover. His friend William Cheselden said, according to Joseph Spence, \"I could give a more particular account of Mr. Pope's health than perhaps any man. Cibber's slander (of carnosity) is false. He had been gay [happy], but left that way of life upon his acquaintance with Mrs. B.\"\nIn May 1709, Pope's \"Pastorals\" was published in the sixth part of bookseller Jacob Tonson's \"Poetical Miscellanies\". This earned Pope instant fame and was followed by \"An Essay on Criticism\", published in May 1711, which was equally well received.\nAround 1711, Pope made friends with Tory writers Jonathan Swift, Thomas Parnell and John Arbuthnot, who together formed the satirical Scriblerus Club. Its aim was to satirise ignorance and pedantry through the fictional scholar Martinus Scriblerus. He also made friends with Whig writers Joseph Addison and Richard Steele. In March 1713, \"Windsor Forest\" was published to great acclaim.\nDuring Pope's friendship with Joseph Addison, he contributed to Addison's play \"Cato\", as well as writing for \"The Guardian\" and \"The Spectator\". Around this time, he began the work of translating the \"Iliad\", which was a painstaking process \u2013 publication began in 1715 and did not end until 1720.\nIn 1714 the political situation worsened with the death of Queen Anne and the disputed succession between the Hanoverians and the Jacobites, leading to the Jacobite rising of 1715. Though Pope, as a Catholic, might have been expected to have supported the Jacobites because of his religious and political affiliations, according to Maynard Mack, \"where Pope himself stood on these matters can probably never be confidently known\". These events led to an immediate downturn in the fortunes of the Tories, and Pope's friend Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke, fled to France. This was added to by the Impeachment of the former Tory Chief Minister Lord Oxford.\nPope lived in his parents' house in Mawson Row, Chiswick, between 1716 and 1719; the red-brick building is now the \"Mawson Arms\", commemorating him with a blue plaque.\nThe money made from his translation of Homer allowed Pope to move in 1719 to a villa at Twickenham, where he created his now-famous grotto and gardens. The serendipitous discovery of a spring during the excavation of the subterranean retreat enabled it to be filled with the relaxing sound of trickling water, which would quietly echo around the chambers. Pope was said to have remarked, \"Were it to have nymphs as well \u2013 it would be complete in everything.\" Although the house and gardens have long since been demolished, much of the grotto survives beneath Radnor House Independent Co-educational School. The grotto has been restored and will open to the public for 30 weekends a year from 2023 under the auspices of Pope's Grotto Preservation Trust.\nPoetry.\n\"An Essay on Criticism\".\n\"An Essay on Criticism\" was first published anonymously on 15 May 1711. Pope began writing the poem early in his career and took about three years to finish it.\nAt the time the poem was published, its heroic couplet style was quite a new poetic form and Pope's work an ambitious attempt to identify and refine his own positions as a poet and critic. It was said to be a response to an ongoing debate on the question of whether poetry should be natural, or written according to predetermined artificial rules inherited from the classical past.\nThe \"essay\" begins with a discussion of the standard rules that govern poetry, by which a critic passes judgement. Pope comments on the classical authors who dealt with such standards and the authority he believed should be accredited to them. He discusses the laws to which a critic should adhere while analysing poetry, pointing out the important function critics perform in aiding poets with their works, as opposed to simply attacking them. The final section of \"An Essay on Criticism\" discusses the moral qualities and virtues inherent in an ideal critic, whom Pope claims is also the ideal man.\n\"The Rape of the Lock\".\nPope's most famous poem is \"The Rape of the Lock\", first published in 1712, with a revised version in 1714. A mock-epic, it satirises a high-society quarrel between Arabella Fermor (the \"Belinda\" of the poem) and Lord Petre, who had snipped a lock of hair from her head without permission. The satirical style is tempered, however, by a genuine, almost voyeuristic interest in the \"beau-monde\" (fashionable world) of 18th-century society. The revised, extended version of the poem focuses more clearly on its true subject: the onset of acquisitive individualism and a society of conspicuous consumers. In the poem, purchased artefacts displace human agency and \"trivial things\" come to dominate.\n\"The Dunciad\" and \"Moral Essays\".\nThough \"The Dunciad\" first appeared anonymously in Dublin, its authorship was not in doubt. Pope pilloried a host of other \"hacks\", \"scribblers\" and \"dunces\" in addition to Theobald, and Maynard Mack has accordingly called its publication \"in many ways the greatest act of folly in Pope's life\". Though a masterpiece due to having become \"one of the most challenging and distinctive works in the history of English poetry\", writes Mack, \"it bore bitter fruit. It brought the poet in his own time the hostility of its victims and their sympathizers, who pursued him implacably from then on with a few damaging truths and a host of slanders and lies.\"\nAccording to his half-sister Magdalen Rackett, some of Pope's targets were so enraged by \"The Dunciad\" that they threatened him physically. \"My brother does not seem to know what fear is,\" she told Joseph Spence, explaining that Pope loved to walk alone, so went accompanied by his Great Dane Bounce, and for some time carried pistols in his pocket. This first \"Dunciad\", along with John Gay's \"The Beggar's Opera\" and Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\", joined in a concerted propaganda assault against Robert Walpole's Whig ministry and the financial revolution it stabilised. Although Pope was a keen participant in the stock and money markets, he never missed a chance to satirise the personal, social and political effects of the new scheme of things. From \"The Rape of the Lock\" onwards, these satirical themes appear constantly in his work.\nIn 1731, Pope published his \"Epistle to Burlington\", on the subject of architecture, the first of four poems later grouped as the \"Moral Essays\" (1731\u20131735). The epistle ridicules the bad taste of the aristocrat \"Timon\". For example, the following are verses 99 and 100 of the Epistle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At Timon's Villa let us pa\u017fs a day,&lt;br&gt;Where all cry out, \"What \u017fums are thrown away!\"\nPope's foes claimed he was attacking the Duke of Chandos and his estate, Cannons. Though the charge was untrue, it did much damage to Pope.\nThere has been some speculation on a feud between Pope and Thomas Hearne, due in part to the character of Wormius in \"The Dunciad\", who is seemingly based on Hearne.\n\"An Essay on Man\".\n\"An Essay on Man\" is a philosophical poem in heroic couplets published between 1732 and 1734. Pope meant it as the centrepiece of a proposed system of ethics to be put forth in poetic form. It was a piece that he sought to make into a larger work, but he did not live to complete it. It\nattempts to \"vindicate the ways of God to Man\", a variation on Milton's attempt in \"Paradise Lost\" to \"justify the ways of God to Man\" (1.26). It challenges as prideful an anthropocentric worldview. The poem is not solely Christian, however. It assumes that man has fallen and must seek his own salvation.\nConsisting of four epistles addressed to Lord Bolingbroke, it presents an idea of Pope's view of the Universe: no matter how imperfect, complex, inscrutable and disturbing the Universe may be, it functions in a rational fashion according to natural laws, so that the Universe as a whole is a perfect work of God, though to humans it appears to be evil and imperfect in many ways. Pope ascribes this to our limited mindset and intellectual capacity. He argues that humans must accept their position in the \"Great Chain of Being\", at a middle stage between the angels and the beasts of the world. Accomplish this and we potentially could lead happy and virtuous lives.\nThe poem is an affirmative statement of faith: life seems chaotic and confusing to man in the centre of it, but according to Pope it is truly divinely ordered. In Pope's world, God exists and is what he centres the Universe around as an ordered structure. The limited intelligence of man can only take in tiny portions of this order and experience only partial truths, hence man must rely on hope, which then leads to faith. Man must be aware of his existence in the Universe and what he brings to it in terms of riches, power and fame. Pope proclaims that man's duty is to strive to be good, regardless of other situations.\nLater life and works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nFATHER of all! in every age,\nIn every clime adored,\nBy saint, by savage, and by sage,\nJehovah, Jove, or Lord!\nIf I am right, thy grace impart\nStill in the right to stay;\nIf I am wrong, O, teach my heart\nTo find that better way!\nSave me alike from foolish pride,\nOr impious discontent,\nAt aught thy wisdom has denied,\nOr aught thy goodness lent.\nTeach me to feel another's woe,\nTo hide the fault I see;\nThat mercy I to others show,\nThat mercy show to me.\nMean though I am, not wholly so,\nSince quickened by thy breath;\nO, lead me wheresoe'er I go,\nThrough this day's life or death!\nTo thee, whose temple is all space,\nWhose altar, earth, sea, skies!\nOne chorus let all Being raise!\nAll Nature's incense rise! \n&lt;/poem&gt;\nPope, \"The Universal Prayer\"\nThe \"Imitations of Horace\" that followed (1733\u20131738) were written in the popular Augustan form of an \"imitation\" of a classical poet, not so much a translation of his works as an updating with contemporary references. Pope used the model of Horace to satirise life under George II, especially what he saw as the widespread corruption tainting the country under Walpole's influence and the poor quality of the court's artistic taste. Pope added as an introduction to \"Imitations\" a wholly original poem that reviews his own literary career and includes famous portraits of Lord Hervey (\"Sporus\"), Thomas Hay, 9th Earl of Kinnoull (\"Balbus\") and Addison (\"Atticus\").\nIn 1738 came \"The Universal Prayer\".\nAmong the younger poets whose work Pope admired was Joseph Thurston. After 1738, Pope himself wrote little. He toyed with the idea of composing a patriotic epic in blank verse called \"Brutus\", but only the opening lines survive. His major work in those years was to revise and expand his masterpiece, \"The Dunciad\". Book Four appeared in 1742 and a full revision of the whole poem the following year. Here Pope replaced the \"hero\" Lewis Theobald with the Poet Laureate, Colley Cibber as \"king of dunces\". However, the real focus of the revised poem is Walpole and his works. By now Pope's health, which had never been good, was failing. When told by his physician, on the morning of his death, that he was better, Pope replied: \"Here am I, dying of a hundred good symptoms.\" He died at his villa surrounded by friends on 30 May 1744, about eleven o'clock at night. On the previous day, 29 May 1744, Pope had called for a priest and received the Last Rites of the Catholic Church. He was buried in the nave of St Mary's Church, Twickenham.\nTranslations and editions.\nThe \"Iliad\".\nPope had been fascinated by Homer since childhood. In 1713, he announced plans to publish a translation of the \"Iliad\". The work would be available by subscription, with one volume appearing every year over six years. Pope secured a revolutionary deal with the publisher Bernard Lintot, which earned him 200 guineas (\u00a3210) a volume, a vast sum at the time.\nHis \"Iliad\" translation appeared between 1715 and 1720. It was acclaimed by Samuel Johnson as \"a performance which no age or nation could hope to equal\". Conversely, the classical scholar Richard Bentley wrote: \"It is a pretty poem, Mr. Pope, but you must not call it Homer.\"\nThe \"Odyssey\".\nEncouraged by the success of the \"Iliad\", Bernard Lintot published Pope's five-volume translation of Homer's \"Odyssey\" in 1725\u20131726. For this Pope collaborated with William Broome and Elijah Fenton: Broome translated eight books (2, 6, 8, 11, 12, 16, 18, 23), Fenton four (1, 4, 19, 20) and Pope the remaining twelve. Broome provided the annotations. Pope tried to conceal the extent of the collaboration, but the secret leaked out. It did some damage to Pope's reputation for a time, but not to his profits. Leslie Stephen considered Pope's portion of the \"Odyssey\" inferior to his version of the \"Iliad\", given that Pope had put more effort into the earlier work \u2013 to which, in any case, his style was better suited.\nShakespeare's works.\nIn this period, Pope was employed by the publisher Jacob Tonson to produce an opulent new edition of Shakespeare. When it appeared in 1725, it silently regularised Shakespeare's metre and rewrote his verse in several places. Pope also removed about 1,560 lines of Shakespeare's material, arguing that some appealed to him more than others. In 1726, the lawyer, poet and pantomime-deviser Lewis Theobald published a scathing pamphlet called \"Shakespeare Restored\", which catalogued the errors in Pope's work and suggested several revisions to the text. This enraged Pope, wherefore Theobald became the main target of Pope's \"Dunciad\".\nThe second edition of Pope's \"Shakespeare\" appeared in 1728. Apart from some minor revisions to the preface, it seems that Pope had little to do with it. Most later 18th-century editors of Shakespeare dismissed Pope's creatively motivated approach to textual criticism. Pope's preface continued to be highly rated. It was suggested that Shakespeare's texts were thoroughly contaminated by actors' interpolations and they would influence editors for most of the 18th century.\nSpirit, skill and satire.\nPope's poetic career testifies to an indomitable spirit despite disadvantages of health and circumstance. The poet and his family were Catholics and so fell subject to the prohibitive Test Acts, which hampered their co-religionists after the abdication of James II. One of these banned them from living within ten miles of London, another from attending public school or university. So except for a few spurious Catholic schools, Pope was largely self-educated. He was taught to read by his aunt and became a book lover, reading in French, Italian, Latin and Greek and discovering Homer at the age of six. In 1700, when only twelve years of age, he wrote his poem \"Ode on Solitude\". As a child Pope survived once being trampled by a cow, but when he was 12 he began struggling with tuberculosis of the spine (Pott disease), which restricted his growth, so that he was only tall as an adult. He also suffered from crippling headaches.\nIn the year 1709, Pope showcased his precocious metrical skill with the publication of \"Pastorals\", his first major poems. They earned him instant fame. By the age of 23, he had written \"An Essay on Criticism\", released in 1711. A kind of poetic manifesto in the vein of Horace's \"Ars Poetica\", it met with enthusiastic attention and won Pope a wider circle of prominent friends, notably Joseph Addison and Richard Steele, who had recently begun to collaborate on the influential \"The Spectator\". The critic John Dennis, having found an ironic and veiled portrait of himself, was outraged by what he saw as the impudence of a younger author. Dennis hated Pope for the rest of his life, and save for a temporary reconciliation, dedicated his efforts to insulting him in print, to which Pope retaliated in kind, making Dennis the butt of much satire.\nA folio containing a collection of his poems appeared in 1717, along with two new ones about the passion of love: \"Verses to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady\" and the famous proto-romantic poem \"Eloisa to Abelard\". Though Pope never married, about this time he became strongly attached to Lady M. Montagu, whom he indirectly referenced in his popular \"Eloisa to Abelard\", and to Martha Blount, with whom his friendship continued through his life.\nAs a satirist, Pope made his share of enemies as critics, politicians and certain other prominent figures felt the sting of his sharp-witted satires. Some were so virulent that Pope even carried pistols while walking his dog. In 1738 and thenceforth, Pope composed relatively little. He began having ideas for a patriotic epic in blank verse titled \"Brutus\", but mainly revised and expanded his \"Dunciad\". Book Four appeared in 1742; and a complete revision of the whole in the year that followed. At this time Lewis Theobald was replaced with the Poet Laureate Colley Cibber as \"king of dunces\", but his real target remained the Whig politician Robert Walpole.\nReception.\nBy the mid-18th century, new fashions in poetry emerged. A decade after Pope's death, Joseph Warton claimed that Pope's style was not the most excellent form of the art. The Romantic movement that rose to prominence in early 19th-century England was more ambivalent about his work. Though Lord Byron identified Pope as one of his chief influences \u2013 believing his own scathing satire of contemporary English literature \"English Bards and Scotch Reviewers\" to be a continuance of Pope's tradition \u2013 William Wordsworth found Pope's style too decadent to represent the human condition. George Gilfillan in an 1856 study called Pope's talent \"a rose peering into the summer air, fine, rather than powerful\".\nPope's reputation revived in the 20th century. His work was full of references to the people and places of his time, which aided people's understanding of the past. The post-war period stressed the power of Pope's poetry, recognising that Pope's immersion in Christian and Biblical culture lent depth to his poetry. For example, Maynard Mack, in the late 20th-century, argued that Pope's moral vision demanded as much respect as his technical excellence. Between 1953 and 1967 the definitive Twickenham edition of Pope's poems appeared in ten volumes, including an index volume.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48351", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48351", "title": "Irving Berlin", "text": "American songwriter (1888\u20131989)\nIrving Berlin (born Israel Isidore Beilin; May 11, 1888 \u2013 September 22, 1989) was a Russian-born American composer and songwriter. His music forms a large part of the Great American Songbook. Berlin received numerous honors including an Academy Award, a Grammy Award, and a Tony Award. He also received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Gerald R. Ford in 1977. The broadcast journalist Walter Cronkite stated he \"helped write the story of this country, capturing the best of who we are and the dreams that shape our lives\".\nBorn in Imperial Russia, Berlin arrived in the United States at the age of five. His family left Russia to escape pogroms, one of which destroyed their village. He published his first song, \"Marie from Sunny Italy\", in 1907, receiving 33 cents for the publishing rights, and became known as the composer of numerous international hits, starting with 1911's \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\". He also was an owner of the Music Box Theatre on Broadway. For much of his career, Berlin could not read sheet music, and was such a limited piano player that he could only play in the key of F-sharp; he used his custom piano equipped with a transposing lever when he needed to play in keys other than F-sharp. He was known for writing music and lyrics in the American vernacular: uncomplicated, simple and direct, with his stated aim being to \"reach the heart of the average American\", who he saw as the \"real soul of the country\".\nHe wrote hundreds of songs, many becoming major hits, which made him famous before he turned thirty. During his 60-year career he wrote an estimated 1,500 songs, including the scores for 20 original Broadway shows and 15 original Hollywood films, with his songs nominated eight times for Academy Awards. Many songs became popular themes and anthems, including \"God Bless America\", \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\", \"Blue Skies\", \"Easter Parade\", \"Puttin' on the Ritz\", \"Cheek to Cheek\", \"White Christmas\", \"Happy Holiday\", \"Anything You Can Do (I Can Do Better)\", and \"There's No Business Like Show Business\". \nHis Broadway musical \"This Is the Army\" (1942) was adapted into the 1943 film of the same name.\nBerlin's songs have reached the top of the US charts 25 times and have been extensively re-recorded by numerous singers. Berlin died in 1989 at the age of 101. Composer Douglas Moore sets Berlin apart from all other contemporary songwriters, and includes him instead with Stephen Foster, Walt Whitman, and Carl Sandburg, as a \"great American minstrel\"\u2014someone who has \"caught and immortalized in his songs what we say, what we think about, and what we believe.\" Composer George Gershwin called him \"the greatest songwriter that has ever lived\", and composer Jerome Kern concluded that \"Irving Berlin has no \"place\" in American music\u2014he \"is\" American music.\"\nEarly life.\nJewish immigrant.\nLife in Russia.\nBerlin was born Israel Beilin on May 11, 1888, in the Russian Empire to a Jewish family. Although his family came from the \"shtetl\" of Tolochin, Berlin later learned that he was probably born in Tyumen, Siberia, where his father, an itinerant cantor, had taken his family. He was one of eight children of Moses (1848\u20131901) and Lena Lipkin Beilin (1850\u20131922).\nFrom Tyumen, the family returned to Tolochin, and from there, they travelled to Antwerp and left the old continent aboard the SS \"Rhynland\" from the Red Star Line. On September 14, 1893, the family arrived at Ellis Island in New York City. When they arrived, Israel was put in a pen with his brother and five sisters until immigration officials declared them fit to be allowed into the city. After the family's naturalization, the name \"Beilin\" was changed to \"Baline\".\nAccording to biographer Laurence Bergreen, as an adult Berlin admitted to no memories of his first five years in Russia except for one: \"he was lying on a blanket by the side of a road, watching his house burn to the ground. By daylight the house was in ashes.\" As an adult, Berlin said he was unaware of being raised in abject poverty since he had known no other life.\nThe Berlins were one of hundreds of thousands of Jewish families who emigrated to the United States in the late 19th and early 20th century, escaping discrimination, poverty and brutal pogroms. Other such families included those of George and Ira Gershwin, Al Jolson, Sophie Tucker, L. Wolfe Gilbert, Jack Yellen, Louis B. Mayer (of MGM), and the Warner brothers.\nSettling in New York City.\nAfter their arrival in New York City, the Baline family lived briefly in a basement flat on Monroe Street, and then moved to a three-room tenement at 330 Cherry Street. His father, unable to find comparable work as a cantor in New York, took a job at a kosher meat market and gave Hebrew lessons on the side to support his family. He died a few years later when Irving was thirteen years old.\nWith only a few years of schooling, eight-year-old Irving began helping to support his family. He became a newspaper boy, hawking \"The Evening Journal.\" One day while delivering newspapers, according to Berlin's biographer and friend, Alexander Woollcott, he stopped to look at a ship departing for China and became so entranced that he did not see a swinging crane, which knocked him into the river. When he was fished out after going down for the third time, he was still holding in his clenched fist the five pennies he earned that day.\nHis mother took a job as a midwife, and three of his sisters worked wrapping cigars, common for immigrant girls. His older brother worked in a sweatshop assembling shirts. Each evening, when the family came home from their day's work, Bergreen writes, \"they would deposit the coins they had earned that day into Lena's outspread apron.\" \nMusic historian Philip Furia writes that when \"Izzy\" began to sell newspapers in the Bowery, he was exposed to the music and sounds coming from saloons and restaurants that lined the crowded streets. Young Berlin sang some of the songs he heard while selling papers, and people would toss him some coins. He confessed to his mother one evening that his newest ambition in life was to become a singing waiter in a saloon. From this he stepped up to work as a song plugger and singing waiter in cafes and restaurants in the downtown areas of New York City. His first lyric, written with a caf\u00e9 pianist, earned him a royalty of thirty-seven cents.\nHowever, before Berlin was fourteen his meager income was still adding less than his sisters' to the family's budget, which made him feel worthless. He then decided to leave home and join the city's ragged army of other young immigrants. He lived in the Bowery, taking up residence in one of the lodging houses that sheltered the thousands of other homeless boys on the Lower East Side. Bergreen describes them as being uncharitable living quarters, \"Dickensian in their meanness, filth, and insensitivity to ordinary human beings.\"\nEarly jobs.\nHaving left school around the age of thirteen, Berlin had few survival skills and realized that formal employment was out of the question. His only ability was acquired from his father's vocation as a singer, and he joined with several other youngsters who went to saloons on the Bowery and sang to customers. Itinerant young singers like them were common on the Lower East Side. Berlin would sing a few of the popular ballads he heard on the street, hoping people would pitch him a few pennies. From these seamy surroundings, he became streetwise, with real and lasting education. Music was his only source of income, and he picked up the language and culture of the ghetto lifestyle.\nBerlin learned what kind of songs appealed to audiences, writes Bergreen: \"well-known tunes expressing simple sentiments were the most reliable.\" He soon began plugging songs at Tony Pastor's Music Hall in Union Square and, in 1906, when he was 18, got a job as a singing waiter at the Pelham Cafe in Chinatown. Besides serving drinks, he sang made-up \"blue\" parodies of hit songs to the delight of customers.\nBiographer Charles Hamm writes that in Berlin's free time after hours, he taught himself to play the piano. Never having had lessons, after the bar closed for the night, young Berlin would sit at a piano in the back and begin improvising tunes. He published his first song, \"Marie from Sunny Italy\", written in collaboration with the Pelham's resident pianist Mike Nicholson, in 1907, receiving 33 cents for the publishing rights. The sheet music to the published song presented his name as \"I. Berlin\".\nBerlin continued writing and playing music at Pelham Cafe and developing an early style. He liked the words to other people's songs but sometimes the rhythms were \"kind of boggy\", and he might change them. One night he delivered some hits composed by his friend George M. Cohan, another kid who was getting known on Broadway with his own songs. When Berlin ended with Cohan's \"Yankee Doodle Boy\", notes Whitcomb, \"everybody in the joint applauded the feisty little fellow.\"\nRecognition as songwriter.\nMax Winslow (c. 1883\u20131942), a staff member at music publisher Harry Von Tilzer Company, noticed Berlin's singing on many occasions and became so taken with his talent that he tried to get him a job with his firm. Von Tilzer said that Max claimed to have \"discovered a great kid\", and raved about him so much that Von Tilzer hired Berlin.\nIn 1908, when he was 20, Berlin took a new job at a saloon named Jimmy Kelly's in the Union Square neighborhood. There, he was able to collaborate with other young songwriters, such as Edgar Leslie, Ted Snyder, Al Piantadosi, and George A. Whiting. In 1909, the year of the premiere of Israel Zangwill's \"The Melting Pot\", he got another big break as a staff lyricist with the Ted Snyder Company.\nInstalled as a staff lyricist with a leading Tin Pan Alley music publishing house, Berlin quickly established himself as one of that frantic industry's top writers of words to other composer's melodies. By 1910 he was already in demand and even appeared in a Shubert Broadway revue performing his own songs. It was purely by chance that Berlin started composing music to the words of his songs. A lyric he had submitted to a publisher was thought to be complete with music. Not wishing to lose the sale, Berlin quickly wrote a melody. It was accepted and published. The success of this first effort opened the door to his career as a composer of music as well as lyrics. In 1910, Berlin wrote a hit that solidly established him as one of Tin Pan Alley's leading composers. \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\" not only popularized the vogue for \"ragtime\", but later inspired a major motion picture.\nSongwriting career.\nBefore 1920.\n\"Alexander's Ragtime Band\" (1911).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRagtime a Form of Insanity\n'Alexander's Ragtime Band' is a public menace...Hysteria is the form of insanity that an abnormal love for ragtime seems to produce. It is as much a mental disease as acute mania\u2014it has the same symptoms. When there is nothing done to check this form it produces idiocy.\n\u2014 Dr. Ludwig GruenerGerman newspaper story\nBerlin rose as a songwriter in Tin Pan Alley and on Broadway. In 1911, Emma Carus introduced his first world-famous hit, \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\", followed by a performance from Berlin himself at the Friars' Frolic of 1911 with Clifford Hess as his accompanist. He became an instant celebrity, and the featured performer later that year at Oscar Hammerstein's vaudeville house, where he introduced dozens of other songs. The \"New York Telegraph\" described how two hundred of his street friends came to see \"their boy\" onstage: \"All the little writer could do was to finger the buttons on his coat while tears ran down his cheeks\u2014in a vaudeville house!\"\nRichard Corliss, in a \"Time\" profile of Berlin, described \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\" as a march, not a rag, \"its savviest musicality comprised quotes from a bugle call and \"Swanee River\". The tune revived the ragtime fervor that Scott Joplin had begun a decade earlier, and made Berlin a songwriting star. From its first and subsequent releases, the song was near the top of the charts as others sang it: Bessie Smith, in 1927, and Louis Armstrong, in 1937; No. 1 by Bing Crosby and Connee Boswell; Johnny Mercer in 1945; Al Jolson, in 1947 and Nellie Lutcher in 1948. Add Ray Charles's big-band version in 1959, and \"Alexander\" had a dozen hit versions in just under a half century.\nInitially the song was not recognized as a hit, however; Broadway producer Jesse Lasky was uncertain about using it, although he did include it in his \"Follies\" show. It was performed as an instrumental but did not impress audiences, and was soon dropped from the show's score. Berlin regarded it as a failure. He then wrote lyrics to the score, played it again in another Broadway review, and this time \"Variety\" news weekly called it \"the musical sensation of the decade\". Composer George Gershwin, foreseeing its influence, said it was \"the first real American musical work\", adding, \"Berlin had shown us the way; it was now easier to attain our ideal.\"\nSparking an international dance craze.\nBerlin was \"flabbergasted\" by the sudden international popularity of the song, and wondered why it became a sudden hit. He decided it was partly because the lyrics, \"silly though it was, was fundamentally right ... [and] the melody ... started the heels and shoulders of all America and a good section of Europe to rocking.\" In 1913, Berlin was featured in the London revue Hello Ragtime, where he introduced \"That International Rag\", a song he had written for the occasion.\nFuria writes that the international success of \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\" gave ragtime \"new life and sparked a national dance craze\". Two dancers who expressed that craze were Vernon and Irene Castle. In 1914, Berlin wrote a ragtime revue, \"Watch Your Step\", which starred the couple and showcased their talents on stage. That musical revue became Berlin's first complete score with songs that \"radiated musical and lyrical sophistication\". Berlin's songs signified modernism, and they signified the cultural struggle between Victorian gentility and the \"purveyors of liberation, indulgence, and leisure\", says Furia. The song \"Play a Simple Melody\" became the first of his famous \"double\" songs in which two different melodies and lyrics are counterpointed against one another.\n\"Variety\" called \"Watch Your Step\" the \"first syncopated musical\", where the \"sets and the girls were gorgeous\". Berlin was then 26, and the success of the show was riding on his name alone. \"Variety\" said the show was a \"terrific hit\" from its opening night. It compared Berlin's newfound status as a composer with that of the Times building: \"That youthful marvel of syncopated melody is proving things in \"Watch Your Step\", firstly that he is not alone a rag composer, and that he is one of the greatest lyric writers America has ever produced.\"\nWhitcomb also points out the irony that Russia, the country Berlin's family was forced to leave, flung itself into \"the ragtime beat with an abandon bordering on mania\". For example, Prince Felix Yusupov, a recent Oxford undergraduate of Russian noble lineage and heir to the largest estate in Russia, was described by his dance partner as \"wriggling around the ballroom like a demented worm, screaming for 'more ragtime and more champagne'\".\nSimple and romantic ballads.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy ambition is to reach the heart of the average American, not the highbrow nor the lowbrow but that vast intermediate crew which is the real soul of the country. The highbrow is likely to be superficial, overtrained, supersensitive. The lowbrow is warped, subnormal. My public is the real people.\n\u2014 Irving Berlin\nSome of the songs Berlin created came out of his own sadness. For instance, in 1912 he married Dorothy Goetz, the sister of songwriter E. Ray Goetz. She died six months later of typhoid fever contracted during their honeymoon in Havana. The song he wrote to express his grief, \"When I Lost You\", was his first ballad. It was an immediate popular hit and sold more than a million copies.\nHe began to realize that ragtime was not a good musical style for serious romantic expression, and over the next few years adapted his style by writing more love songs. In 1915 he wrote the hit \"I Love a Piano\", a comical and erotic ragtime love song.\nBy 1918 he had written hundreds of songs, mostly topical, which enjoyed brief popularity. Many of the songs were for the new dances then appearing, such as the grizzly bear, chicken walk, or foxtrot. After a Hawaiian dance craze began, he wrote \"That Hula-Hula\", and then did a string of Southern songs, such as \"When the Midnight Choo-Choo Leaves for Alabam\". During this period, he was creating a few new songs every week, including songs aimed at the various immigrant cultures arriving from Europe. On one occasion, Berlin, whose face was still not known, was on a train trip and decided to entertain the fellow passengers with some music. They asked him how he knew so many hit songs, and Berlin modestly replied, \"I wrote them.\"\nAn important song that Berlin wrote during his transition from writing ragtime to lyrical ballads was \"A Pretty Girl is Like a Melody\", which became one of Berlin's \"first big guns\", says historian Alec Wilder. The song was written for Ziegfeld's \"Follies of 1919\" and became the musical's lead song. Its popularity was so great that it later became the theme for all of Ziegfeld's revues, and the theme song in the 1936 film \"The Great Ziegfeld\". Wilder puts it on the same level as Jerome Kern's \"pure melodies\", and in comparison with Berlin's earlier music, says it is \"extraordinary that such a development in style and sophistication should have taken place in a single year\".\nWorld War I.\nOn April 1, 1917, after President Woodrow Wilson declared that America would enter World War I, Berlin felt that Tin Pan Alley should do its duty and support the war with inspirational songs. Berlin wrote the song \"For Your Country and My Country\", stating that \"we must speak with the sword not the pen to show our appreciation to America for opening up her heart and welcoming every immigrant group.\" He also co-wrote a song aimed at ending ethnic conflict, \"Let's All Be Americans Now\".\n\"Yip Yip Yaphank\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt the grand finale... Sergeant Berlin led the entire 300-person cast off the stage, marching them down the theater's aisles, singing 'We're on Our Way to France,' all to tumultuous applause. The cast carried off their little producer like he was victor ludorum ... Tin Pan Alley had joined hands with real life\n \u2014 biographer Ian Whitcomb.\nIn 1917, Berlin was drafted into the United States Army, and his induction became headline news, with one paper headline reading, \"Army Takes Berlin!\" But the Army wanted Berlin, now aged 30, to do what he knew best: write songs. While stationed with the 152nd Depot Brigade at Camp Upton, he then composed an all-soldier musical revue titled \"Yip Yip Yaphank\", written as a patriotic tribute to the United States Army. The show was taken to Broadway where it also included a number of hits, including \"Mandy\" and \"Oh! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning\", which Berlin performed himself.\nThe shows earned $150,000 for a camp service center. One song he wrote for the show but decided not to use, he would introduce 20 years later: \"God Bless America\".\n1920 to 1940.\nBerlin returned to Tin Pan Alley after the war and in 1921 created a partnership with Sam Harris to build the Music Box Theater. He maintained an interest in the theater throughout his life, and even in his last years was known to call the Shubert Organization, his partner, to check on the receipts. In its early years, the theater was a showcase for revues by Berlin. As theater owner, producer and composer, he looked after every detail of his shows, from the costumes and sets to the casting and musical arrangements.\nAccording to Berlin biographer David Leopold, the theater, located at 239 West 45th St., was the only Broadway house built to accommodate the works of a songwriter. It was the home of Berlin's \"Music Box Revue\" from 1921 to 1925 and \"As Thousands Cheer\" in 1933 and today includes an exhibition devoted to Berlin in the lobby.\nVarious hit songs by Berlin.\nBy 1926, Berlin had written the scores to two editions of the \"Ziegfeld Follies\" and four annual editions of his \"Music Box Revue\". These shows spanned the years of 1921\u20131926, premiering songs such as \"Say It With Music\", \"Everybody Step\", and \"Pack Up Your Things and Go to the Devil\". \"Life\" magazine called Berlin the \"Lullaby Kid\", noting that \"couples at country-club dances grew misty-eyed when the band went into 'Always', because they were positive that Berlin had written it just for them. When they quarreled and parted in the bitter-sweetness of the 1920s, it was Berlin who gave eloquence to their heartbreak by way of 'What'll I Do' and 'Remember' and 'All Alone'\".\nThis ballad of love and longing was a hit record for Paul Whiteman and had several other successful recordings in 1924. Twenty-four years later, the song went to no. 22 for Nat King Cole and no. 23 for Frank Sinatra.\nWritten when he fell in love with Ellin Mackay, who later became his wife. The song became a hit twice (for Vincent Lopez and George Olsen) in its first incarnation. There were four more hit versions in 1944\u201345. In 1959, Sammy Turner took the song to no. 2 on the R&amp;B chart. It became Patsy Cline's postmortem anthem and hit no. 18 on the country chart in 1980, 17 years after her death, and a tribute musical called \"Always... Patsy Cline\", played a two-year Nashville run that ended in 1995. Leonard Cohen included a cover of this song on his 1992 release \"The Future (Leonard Cohen album)\".\nWritten after his first daughter's birth, he distilled his feelings about being married and a father for the first time: \"Blue days, all of them gone; nothing but blue skies, from now on.\" The American public often associated Irving Berlin's music with Jewish cultural sensibility, when Berlin composed \u201cBlue Skies\u201d, the question of how a piece that resonated strongly with Jewish culture, became a strong representation of American musical culture came into light. Studying the early performances and its sheet music can help us understand how Jewish culture helped influence the pieces\u2019 composition and popular reaction. Later interpretations transformed the songs\u2019 ethnic and cultural connections. The song was introduced by Belle Baker in \"Betsy\", a Ziegfeld production. It became a hit recording for Ben Selvin and one of several Berlin hits in 1927. It was performed by Al Jolson in the first feature sound film, \"The Jazz Singer\", that same year. In 1946, it returned to the top 10 on the charts with Count Basie and Benny Goodman. In 1978, Willie Nelson made the song a no. 1 country hit, 52 years after it was written.\nAn instant standard with one of Berlin's most \"intricately syncopated choruses\", this song is associated with Fred Astaire, who sang and danced to it in the 1946 film \"Blue Skies\". The song was written in 1928 with a separate set of lyrics and was introduced by Harry Richman in a 1930 film of the same name. In 1939, Clark Gable sang it in the movie \"Idiot's Delight\". In 1974 it was featured in the movie \"Young Frankenstein\" by Mel Brooks, and was a no. 4 hit for synth-pop artist Taco in 1982, when its composer was 94. In 2012 it was used for a flash mob wedding event in Moscow.\nThis waltz-time song was a hit for Rudy Vall\u00e9e in 1929, and in 1937, updated to a four-quarter-time swing arrangement, was a top hit for Tommy Dorsey. It was on the charts at no. 13 in 1953 for The Four Tunes and at no. 15 for the Bachelors in 1965, 36 years after its first appearance.\nRudy Vall\u00e9e performed it on his radio show, and the song was a hit for George Olsen, Connee Boswell (she was still known as Connie), and Ozzie Nelson's band. Aretha Franklin produced a single of the song in 1963, 31 years later. Furia notes that when Vall\u00e9e first introduced the song on his radio show, the \"song not only became an overnight hit, it saved Vall\u00e9e's marriage: The Vall\u00e9es had planned to get a divorce, but after Vall\u00e9e sang Berlin's romantic lyrics on the air, \"both he and his wife dissolved in tears\" and decided to stay together.\nPerformed by Dick Powell in the 1937 film \"On the Avenue\". Later it had four top-12 versions, including by Billie Holiday and Les Brown, who took it to no. 1.\n\"God Bless America\" (1938).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe song's introduction at that time enshrines a strain of official patriotism intertwined with a religious faith that runs deep in the American psyche. Patriotic razzle-dazzle, sophisticated melancholy and humble sentiments: Berlin songs span the emotional terrain of America with a thoroughness that others may have equaled but none have surpassed.\n \u2014 \"The New York Times\"\nThe song was written by Berlin twenty years earlier, but he filed it away until 1938 when Kate Smith needed a patriotic song to mark the 20th anniversary of Armistice Day, celebrating the end of World War I. Its release near the end of the Depression, which had by then gone on for nine years, enshrined a \"strain of official patriotism intertwined with a religious faith that runs deep in the American psyche,\" stated \"The New York Times\".\nBerlin's daughter, Mary Ellin Barrett, states that the song was actually \"very personal\" for her father, and was intended as an expression of his deep gratitude to the nation for merely \"allowing\" him, an immigrant raised in poverty, to become a successful songwriter. \"To me,\" said Berlin, \"'God Bless America' was not just a song but an expression of my feeling toward the country to which I owe what I have and what I am.\" The \"Economist\" magazine writes that \"Berlin was producing a deep-felt paean to the country that had given him what he would have said was everything.\"\nIt quickly became a second national anthem after America entered World War II a few years later. Over the decades it has earned millions for the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, to whom Berlin assigned all royalties. In 1954, Berlin received a special Congressional Gold Medal from President Dwight D. Eisenhower for contributing the song.\nThe song was heard after September 11, 2001, as U.S. senators and congressmen stood on the Capitol steps and sang it after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center. It is often played by sports teams such as major league baseball. The Philadelphia Flyers hockey team started playing it before crucial contests. When the 1980 U.S. Olympic hockey team pulled off the \"greatest upset in sports history\", referred to as the \"Miracle on Ice\", the players spontaneously sang it as Americans were overcome by patriotism.\nOther songs.\nThough most of his works for the Broadway stage took the form of revues\u2014collections of songs with no unifying plot\u2014he did write a number of book shows. \"The Cocoanuts\" (1929) was a light comedy with a cast featuring, among others, the Marx Brothers. \"Face the Music\" (1932) was a political satire with a book by Moss Hart, and \"Louisiana Purchase\" (1940) was a satire of a Southern politician obviously based on the exploits of Huey Long. \"As Thousands Cheer\" (1933) was a revue, also with book by Moss Hart, with a theme: each number was presented as an item in a newspaper, some of them touching on issues of the day. The show yielded a succession of hit songs, including \"Easter Parade\" sung by Marilyn Miller and Clifton Webb, \"Heat Wave\" (presented as the weather forecast), \"Harlem on My Mind\", and \"Supper Time\", a song about racial violence inspired by a newspaper headline about a lynching, sung by Ethel Waters. She once said about the song, \"If one song can tell the whole tragic history of a race, 'Supper Time' was that song. In singing it I was telling my comfortable, well-fed, well-dressed listeners about my people...those who had been slaves and those who were now downtrodden and oppressed.\"\n1941 to 1962.\nWorld War II patriotism\u2014\"This is the Army\" (1943).\nBerlin loved his country, and wrote many songs reflecting his patriotism. Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau requested a song to inspire Americans to buy war bonds, for which he wrote \"Any Bonds Today?\" He assigned all royalties to the United States Treasury Department. He then wrote songs for various government agencies and likewise assigned all profits to them: \"Angels of Mercy\" for the American Red Cross; \"Arms for the Love of America\", for the U.S. Army Ordnance Department; and \"I Paid My Income Tax Today\", again to Treasury.\nWhen the United States joined World War II after the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Berlin immediately began composing a number of patriotic songs. His most notable and valuable contribution to the war effort was a stage show he wrote called \"This Is The Army\". It was taken to Broadway and then on to Washington, D.C. (where President Franklin D. Roosevelt attended). It was eventually shown at military bases throughout the world, including London, North Africa, Italy, Middle East, and Pacific countries, sometimes in close proximity to battle zones. Berlin wrote nearly three dozen songs for the show which contained a cast of 300 men. He supervised the production and traveled with it, always singing \"Oh! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning\". The show kept him away from his family for three and a half years, during which time he took neither salary nor expenses, and turned over all profits to the Army Emergency Relief Fund.\nThe play was adapted into a movie of the same name in 1943, directed by Michael Curtiz, co-starring Joan Leslie and Ronald Reagan, who was then an army lieutenant. Kate Smith also sang \"God Bless America\" in the film with a backdrop showing families anxious over the coming war. The show became a hit movie and a morale-boosting road show that toured the battlefronts of Europe. The shows and movie combined raised more than $10 million for the Army, and in recognition of his contributions to troop morale, Berlin was awarded the Medal for Merit by President Harry S. Truman. Berlin's daughter, Mary Ellin Barrett, who was 15 when she was at the opening-night performance of \"This is the Army\" on Broadway, remembered that when her father, who normally shunned the spotlight, appeared in the second act in soldier's garb to sing \"Oh, How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning\", he was greeted with a standing ovation that lasted 10 minutes. She adds that he was in his mid-50s at the time, and later declared those years with the show were the \"most thrilling time of his life\".\n\"Annie Get Your Gun\" (1946).\nThe grueling tours Berlin did performing \"This Is The Army\" left him exhausted, but when his longtime close friend Jerome Kern, who was the composer for \"Annie Get Your Gun\", died suddenly, producers Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II persuaded Berlin to take over composing the score.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat distinguishes Berlin is the brilliance of his lyrics. 'You Can't Get a Man With a Gun'\u2014that's as good a comic song as has ever been written by anybody. You look at the jokes and how quickly they're told, and it still has a plot to it. It's sophisticated and very underrated.\n \u2014 composer-lyricist Stephen Sondheim\nLoosely based on the life of sharpshooter Annie Oakley, the music and lyrics were written by Berlin, with a book by Herbert Fields and his sister Dorothy Fields, and directed by Joshua Logan. At first Berlin refused to take on the job, claiming that he knew nothing about \"hillbilly music\", but the show ran for 1,147 performances and became his most successful score and biggest box office success. It is said that the showstopper song \"There's No Business Like Show Business\" was almost left out of the show altogether because Berlin mistakenly thought that Rodgers and Hammerstein didn't like it. However, it became the \"ultimate uptempo show tune\".\nOn the origin of another of the play's leading songs, Logan described how he and Hammerstein privately discussed wanting another duet between Annie and Frank. Berlin overheard their conversation, and although the show was to go into rehearsal within days, he wrote the song \"Anything You Can Do\" a few hours later.\nOne reviewer commented about the play's score, that \"its tough wisecracking lyrics are as tersely all-knowing as its melody, which is nailed down in brassy syncopated lines that have been copied\u2014but never equaled in sheer melodic memorability\u2014by hundreds of theater composers ever since.\" Singer and musicologist Susannah McCorkle writes that the score \"meant more to me than ever, now that I knew that he wrote it after a grueling world tour and years of separation from his wife and daughters.\" Historian and composer Alec Wilder says that the perfection of the score, when compared to his earlier works, was \"a profound shock\".\nApparently the \"creative spurt\" in which Berlin turned out several songs for the score in a single weekend was an anomaly. According to his daughter, he usually \"sweated blood\" to write his songs. \"Annie Get Your Gun\" is considered to be Berlin's best musical theatre score not only because of the number of hits it contains, but because its songs successfully combine character and plot development. The song \"There's No Business Like Show Business\" became \"Ethel Merman's trademark\".\nFinal shows.\nBerlin's next show, \"Miss Liberty\" (1949), was disappointing, but \"Call Me Madam\" (1950), starring Ethel Merman as Sally Adams, a Washington, D.C., socialite, loosely based on the famous Washington hostess Perle Mesta, fared better, giving him his second-greatest success. Berlin made two attempts to write a musical about his friend, the colorful Addison Mizner, and Addison's con-man brother Wilson. The first was the uncompleted \"The Last Resorts\" (1952); a manuscript of Act I is in the Library of Congress. \"Wise Guy\" (1956) was completed but never produced, although songs have been published and recorded on \"The Unsung Irving Berlin\" (1995). After a failed attempt at retirement, in 1962, at the age of 74, he returned to Broadway with \"Mr. President\". Although it ran for eight months, (with the premiere attended by President John F. Kennedy), it was not one of his successful plays.\nAfterwards, Berlin officially announced his retirement and spent his remaining years in New York. He did, however, write one new song, \"An Old-Fashioned Wedding\", for the 1966 Broadway revival of \"Annie Get Your Gun\" starring Ethel Merman. Though he lived 23 more years, this would be one of Berlin's final published compositions.\nBerlin maintained a low profile through the last decades of his life, almost never appearing in public after the late 1960s, even for events held in his honor. However, he continued to maintain control of his songs through his own music publishing company, which remained in operation for the rest of his life.\nFilm scores.\n1920s\u20131950s.\nIn 1927, his song \"Blue Skies\" was featured in the first feature-length talkie, \"The Jazz Singer\", with Al Jolson. Later, movies such as \"Top Hat\" (1935) became the first of a series of distinctive film musicals by Berlin starring performers Bing Crosby, Fred Astaire, Judy Garland, Ginger Rogers, and Alice Faye. \"Top Hat\" featured a brand-new score, as did several more, including \"Follow the Fleet\" (1936), \"On the Avenue\" (1937), \"Carefree\" (1938), and \"Second Fiddle\" (1939). Starting with \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\" (1938), he often blended new songs with existing ones from his catalog. He continued this process with the films \"Holiday Inn\" (1942), \"Blue Skies\" (1946) and \"Easter Parade\" (1948), with Judy Garland and Fred Astaire, and \"There's No Business Like Show Business\" (1954).\n\"White Christmas\" (1942).\nThe 1942 film \"Holiday Inn\" introduced \"White Christmas\", one of the most recorded songs in history. First sung in the film by Bing Crosby (along with Marjorie Reynolds, whose voice was dubbed by Martha Mears), it stayed no. 1 on the pop and R&amp;B charts for 10 weeks, and went on to over 50 million records. Crosby's version is the best-selling single of all time. Music critic Stephen Holden credits this partly to the fact that \"the song also evokes a primal nostalgia\u2014a pure childlike longing for roots, home and childhood\u2014that goes way beyond the greeting imagery.\"\nRichard Corliss also notes that the song was even more significant having been released soon after America entered World War II: [it] \"connected with... GIs in their first winter away from home. To them it voiced the ache of separation and the wistfulness they felt for the girl back home, for the innocence of youth...\" Poet Carl Sandburg wrote, \"We have learned to be a little sad and a little lonesome without being sickly about it. This feeling is caught in the song of a thousand jukeboxes and tune whistled in streets and homes, 'I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas'. When we sing that we don't hate anybody. And there are things we love that we're going to have sometimes if the breaks are not too bad against us. Way down under this latest hit of his, Irving Berlin catches us where we love peace.\"\n\"White Christmas\" won Berlin the Academy Award for Best Music in an Original Song, one of seven Oscar nominations he received during his career. In subsequent years, it was re-recorded and became a top-10 seller for numerous artists: Frank Sinatra, Jo Stafford, Ernest Tubb, The Ravens and The Drifters. It would also be the last time a Berlin song went to no. 1 upon its release.\nBerlin is the only Academy Award presenter and Academy Award winner to open the \"envelope\" and read his or her own name (for \"White Christmas\"). This result was so awkward for Berlin (since he had to present the Oscar to himself) that the academy changed the rules of protocol the following year to prevent this situation from arising again.\nTalking about Irving Berlin's \"White Christmas\", composer\u2013lyricist Garrison Hintz stated that although songwriting can be a complicated process, its final result should sound simple. Considering the fact that \"White Christmas\" has only eight sentences in the entire song, lyrically Mr. Berlin achieved all that was necessary to eventually sell over 100 million copies and capture the hearts of the American public at the same time.\nSongwriting methods.\nAccording to Saul Bornstein (a.k.a. Sol Bourne, Saul Bourne), Berlin's publishing company manager, \"It was a ritual for Berlin to write a complete song, words and music, every day.\" Berlin said that he \"did not believe in inspiration,\" and felt that although he might be gifted in certain areas, his most successful compositions were a \"result of work\". He said that he did most of his work under pressure. He would typically begin writing after dinner and continue until 4 or 5 in the morning. \"Each day I would attend rehearsals\", he said, \"and at night write another song and bring it down the next day.\"\nNot always certain about his own writing abilities, he once asked a songwriter friend, Victor Herbert, whether he should study composition. \"You have a natural gift for words and music,\" Mr. Herbert told him. \"Learning theory might help you a little, but it could cramp your style.\" Berlin took his advice. Herbert later became a moving force behind the creation of ASCAP, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. In 1914, Berlin joined him as a charter member of the organization that has protected the royalties of composers and writers ever since. In 1920, Irving Berlin became a member of SACEM, the French Society of Authors, Composers, and Publishers.\nIn later years, Berlin emphasized his conviction, saying that \"it's the lyrics that makes a song a hit, although the tune, of course, is what makes it last.\" He played almost entirely in the key of F-sharp so that he could stay on the black keys, and owned three transposing pianos so as to change keys by moving a lever. Though Berlin eventually learned how to produce written music, he never changed his method of dictating songs to a \"musical secretary\".\nAs a result, Wilder says that many admirers of the music of Jerome Kern, Richard Rodgers and Cole Porter were unlikely to consider Berlin's work in the same category because they forgot or never realized that Berlin wrote many popular tunes, such as \"Soft Lights and Sweet Music\", \"Supper Time\", and \"Cheek to Cheek\". Some are even more confused because he also wrote more romantic melodies, such as \"What'll I Do?\" and \"Always\". Wilder adds that \"in his lyrics as in his melodies, Berlin reveals a constant awareness of the world around him: the pulse of the times, the society in which his is functioning. There is nothing of the hothouse about his work, urban though it may be.\"\nMusic styles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis music has that vitality\u2014both rhythmic and melodic\u2014which never seems to lose any of its exuberant freshness; it has that rich, colorful melodic flow which is ever the wonder of all those of who, too, compose songs; his ideas are endless.\n \u2014 composer George Gershwin\nComposer Jerome Kern recognized that the essence of Irving Berlin's lyrics was his \"faith in the American vernacular\", an influence so profound that his best-known songs \"seem indivisible from the country's history and self-image\". Kern, along with George Gershwin, Richard Rodgers, Oscar Hammerstein II and Cole Porter, brought together Afro-American, Latin American, rural pop, and European operetta.\nBerlin, however, did not follow that method. Instead, says music critic Stephen Holden, Berlin's songs were always simple, \"exquisitely crafted street songs whose diction feels so natural that one scarcely notices the craft...they seem to flow straight out of the rhythms and inflections of everyday speech.\" Berlin can be credited with helping develop Jazz music. Jeffrey Magee wrote how his song \"Everybody Step\" was credited by composers such as Gershwin as one of the most important songs for learning jazz music. Berlin achieved this by using varying rhythms, such as the conventional rag and blues rhythms, as well as bringing in references to African American music. It led composer George Gershwin to claim that he learned from Berlin that ragtime, which later became jazz, \"was the only musical idiom in existence that could aptly express America\".\nAmong Berlin's contemporaries was Cole Porter, whose music style was often considered more \"witty, sophisticated, [and] dirty\", according to musicologist Susannah McCorkle. Of the five top songwriters, only Porter and Berlin wrote both their own words and music. However, she notes that Porter, unlike Berlin, was a Yale-educated and wealthy Midwesterner whose songs were not successful until he was in his thirties. She notes further that it was \"Berlin [who] got Porter the show that launched his career.\"\nPersonal life.\nMarriages.\nIn February 1912, after a brief whirlwind courtship, he married 20-year-old Dorothy Goetz of Buffalo, New York, the sister of one of Berlin's collaborators, E. Ray Goetz. During their honeymoon in Havana, she contracted typhoid fever, and doctors were unable to treat her illness when she returned to New York. She died July 17 of that year. Left with writer's block for months after Goetz's death, he eventually wrote his first ballad, \"When I Lost You\", to express his grief.\nYears later, in the 1920s, he fell in love with young author and heiress Ellin Mackay. Because Berlin was Jewish and she was a Catholic of Irish descent, their life was followed in every possible detail by the press, which found the romance of an immigrant from the Lower East Side and a young heiress a good story. Mackay's father, Clarence Mackay, the socially prominent head of the Postal Telegraph Cable Company, objected to their marriage.\nThey had met in 1924, and her father opposed the match from the start. He went so far as to send her off to Europe to find other suitors and forget Berlin. However, Berlin wooed her with letters and songs over the airwaves, such as \"Remember\" and \"All Alone\", and she wrote him daily. Biographer Philip Furia writes that newspapers rumored they were engaged before she returned from Europe, and some Broadway shows even performed skits of the \"lovelorn songwriter\". After her return, she and Berlin were besieged by the press, which followed them everywhere. \"Variety\" reported that her father vowed that their marriage \"would only happen 'over my dead body.'\" As a result, they decided to elope and were married in a simple civil ceremony at the Municipal Building away from media attention.\nThe wedding news made the front page of \"The New York Times\". The marriage took her father by surprise, and he was stunned when he read about it. The bride's mother, however, who was at the time divorced from Mackay, wanted her daughter to follow the dictates of her own heart. Berlin had gone to her mother's home before the wedding and had obtained her blessing.\nThere followed reports that the bride's father disowned his daughter because of the marriage. In response, Berlin gave her the rights to \"Always\", a song still played at weddings, as a wedding present. Ellin was thereby guaranteed a steady income regardless of what might happen with the marriage. For nearly three years, Mackay refused to speak to the Berlins, but they reconciled after the death of the Berlins' son, Irving Berlin Jr., on Christmas Day 1928, less than one month after he was born.\nTheir marriage remained a love affair, and they were inseparable until she died in July 1988 at the age of 85. They had four children during their 63 years of marriage: Mary Ellin Barrett in 1926, Irving Berlin Jr., who died in infancy in 1928, Linda Louise Emmet in 1932, and Elizabeth Irving Peters in 1936.\nLifestyle.\nIn 1916, in the earlier phase of Berlin's career, producer and composer George M. Cohan, during a toast to the young Berlin at a Friar's Club dinner in his honor, said, \"The thing I like about Irvie is that although he has moved up-town and made lots of money, it hasn't turned his head. He hasn't forgotten his friends, he doesn't wear funny clothes, and you will find his watch and his handkerchief in his pockets, where they belong.\"\nFuria says that throughout Berlin's life he often returned on foot to his old neighborhoods in Union Square, Chinatown, and the Bowery. He never forgot those childhood years when he \"slept under tenement steps, ate scraps, and wore secondhand clothes,\" and described those years as hard but good. \"Every man should have a Lower East Side in his life,\" he said. He used to visit \"The Music Box Theater\", which he founded and which still stands at 239 West 45th St. From 1947 to 1989, Berlin's home in New York City was 17 Beekman Place.\nGeorge Frazier of \"Life\" magazine found Berlin to be \"intensely nervous\", with a habit of tapping his listener with his index finger to emphasize a point, and continually pressing his hair down in back and \"picking up any stray crumbs left on a table after a meal\". While listening, \"he leans forward tensely, with his hands clasped below his knees like a prizefighter waiting in his corner for the bell... For a man who has known so much glory\", wrote Frazier, \"Berlin has somehow managed to retain the enthusiasm of a novice.\"\nBerlin's daughter wrote in her memoir that her father was a loving, if workaholic, family man who was \"basically an upbeat person, with down periods\". In his final decades, he retreated from public life. As such, he did not attend the televised Carnegie Hall celebration of his 100th birthday. Her parents liked to celebrate every single holiday with their children, and \"[t]hey seemed to understand the importance, particularly in childhood, of the special day, the same every year, the special stories, foods, and decorations and that special sense of well-being that accompanies a holiday.\" Although he did comment to his daughter about her mother's lavish Christmas spending, he remarked, \"I gave up trying to get your mother to economize. It was easier just to make more money.\"\nBerlin voted for both Democratic and Republican presidential candidates. He supported the presidential candidacy of General Dwight Eisenhower, and his song \"I Like Ike\" featured prominently in the Eisenhower campaign. In his later years, he also became more conservative in his views on music. According to his daughter, \"He was consumed by patriotism.\" He often said, \"I owe all my success to my adopted country,\" and once rejected his lawyers' advice of investing in tax shelters, insisting, \"I \"want\" to pay taxes. I love this country.\"\nBerlin was a Freemason, and was a member of Munn Lodge no. 190, New York City, the Scottish Rite Valley of New York City, and Mecca Shrine Temple.\nBerlin was a noted member of the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks.\nBerlin was a staunch advocate of civil rights. He was honored in 1944 by the National Conference of Christians and Jews for \"advancing the aims of the conference to eliminate religious and racial conflict\". His 1943 production \"This Is The Army\" featured the first integrated division army unit in the United States. In 1949, the Young Men's Hebrew Association (YMHA) honored him as one of the twelve \"most outstanding Americans of Jewish faith\". While he was ethnically and culturally Jewish, he was religiously agnostic. Berlin's Civil Rights Movement support also made him a target of the FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who continuously investigated him for years.\nDeath.\nBerlin died in his sleep at his 17 Beekman Place town house in Manhattan on September 22, 1989, at the age of 101, of a heart attack and other natural causes. He was interred in the Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York.\nOn the evening following the announcement of his death, the marquee lights of Broadway playhouses were dimmed before curtain time in his memory. President George H. W. Bush said Berlin was \"a legendary man whose words and music will help define the history of our nation\". Just minutes before his statement was released, the President joined a crowd of thousands to sing Berlin's \"God Bless America\" at a luncheon in Boston. Former President Ronald Reagan, who costarred in Berlin's 1943 musical \"This Is the Army,\" said, \"Nancy and I are deeply saddened by the death of a wonderfully talented man whose musical genius delighted and stirred millions and will live on forever.\"\nMorton Gould, the composer and conductor who was president of the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), of which Berlin was a founder, said, \"What to me is fascinating about this unique genius is that he touched so many people in so many age groups over so many years. He sounded our deepest feelings\u2014happiness, sadness, celebration, loneliness.\" Ginger Rogers, who danced to Berlin tunes with Fred Astaire, told The Associated Press upon hearing of Berlin's death that working with him had been \"like heaven\".\nLegacy and influence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther nations are defined by their classical composers. America is appropriately defined musically by this Russian immigrant...Germany has Beethoven, France, Ravel, Poland, Chopin, Italy, Verdi; America has Irving Berlin. Though he's not here with us tonight, he will be with us always. Wherever there is America, there is Irving Berlin.\n \u2014 Walter CronkiteKennedy Center Tribute to Irving Berlin, 1987\n\"The New York Times\", after his death in 1989, wrote, \"Irving Berlin set the tone and the tempo for the tunes America played and sang and danced to for much of the 20th century.\" His life as an immigrant from Russia became the \"classic rags-to-riches story that he never forgot could have happened only in America\". A legend by the time he turned 30, he went on to write an estimated 1,500 songs during his career. He composed the scores for 20 original Broadway shows and 15 original Hollywood films, with his songs nominated for Academy Awards on eight occasions. Music historian Susannah McCorkle writes that \"in scope, quantity, and quality his work was amazing.\" Others, such as Broadway musician Anne Phillips, called him \"an American institution.\"\nDuring his six-decade career, from 1907 to 1966, he produced sheet music, Broadway shows, recordings, and scores played on radio, in films and on television, and his tunes continue to evoke powerful emotions for millions around the world. He wrote songs like \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\", \"Cheek to Cheek\", \"There's No Business Like Show Business\", \"Blue Skies\" and \"Puttin' On the Ritz\". Some of his songs have become holiday anthems, such as \"Easter Parade\", \"White Christmas\" and \"Happy Holiday\". \"White Christmas\" alone sold over 50 million records, the top-selling song in recording history. It won an ASCAP and an Academy Award, and is one of the most frequently played songs ever written.\nIn 1938, \"God Bless America\" became the unofficial national anthem of the United States, and on September 11, 2001, members of the House of Representatives stood on the steps of the Capitol and solemnly sang \"God Bless America\" together. The song again became popular shortly after 9/11, when Celine Dion recorded it as the title track of a 9/11 benefit album. The following year, the Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp of Berlin. By then, the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of New York had received more than $10\u00a0million in royalties from \"God Bless America\" as a result of Berlin's donation of royalties. According to music historian Gary Giddins, \"No other songwriter has written as many anthems... No one else has written as many pop songs, period... [H]is gift for economy, directness, and slang, presents Berlin as an obsessive, often despairing commentator on the passing scene.\"\nIn 1934, \"Time\" put him on its cover and inside hailed \"this itinerant son of a Russian cantor\" as \"an American institution\". And again, in 1943, the same magazine described his songs as follows:\nThey possess a permanence not generally associated with Tin Pan Alley products and it is more than remotely possible that in days to come Berlin will be looked upon as the Stephen Foster of the 20th century.\nAt various times, his songs were also rallying cries for different causes: He produced musical editorials supporting Al Smith and Dwight Eisenhower as presidential candidates, he wrote songs opposing Prohibition, defending the gold standard, calming the wounds of the Great Depression, and helping the war against Hitler, and in 1950 he wrote an anthem for the state of Israel. Biographer David Leopold adds that \"We all know his songs... they are all part of who we are.\"\nBerlin inadvertently influenced American law when his publishing group sued \"Mad Magazine\" for copyright infringement in 1961. The humor magazine had published a collection of parody lyrics which it said could be \"sung to the tune of\" many popular songs. Berlin objected, and \"Irving Berlin et al. v. E.C. Publications, Inc.\" would ultimately become a landmark case. \"Mad\" prevailed at every stage. The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled largely in favor of \"Mad\" in 1963, but Judge Charles Metzner decided that two of the 25 disputed parodies - \"Always\" (sung to the tune of \"Always\") and \"There's No Business Like No Business\" (sung to the tune of \"There's No Business Like Show Business\") - would require a trial because they relied on the same verbal hooks (\"always\" and \"business\") as the originals.\nThe music publishers pressed on. The following year, the U.S. Court of Appeals not only upheld the pro-\"Mad\" decision in regard to the 23 songs, it adopted an approach that was broad enough to strip the publishers of their limited victory regarding the remaining two songs. Writing a unanimous opinion for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Circuit Judge Irving Kaufman observed, \"We doubt that even so eminent a composer as plaintiff Irving Berlin should be permitted to claim a property interest in iambic pentameter.\" The publishers again appealed, but the U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal, allowing the decision to stand. The precedent-setting 1964 ruling established the rights of parodists and satirists to mimic the meter of popular songs.\nAt his 100th-birthday celebration in May 1988, violinist Isaac Stern said, \"The career of Irving Berlin and American music were intertwined forever\u2014American music was born at his piano,\" while songwriter Sammy Cahn pointed out: \"If a man, in a lifetime of 50 years, can point to six songs that are immediately identifiable, he has achieved something. Irving Berlin can sing 60 that are immediately identifiable... [Y]ou couldn't have a holiday without his permission.\" Composer Douglas Moore added:\nIt's a rare gift which sets Irving Berlin apart from all other contemporary songwriters. It is a gift which qualifies him, along with Stephen Foster, Walt Whitman, Vachel Lindsay and Carl Sandburg, as a great American minstrel. He has caught and immortalized in his songs what we say, what we think about, and what we believe.\nASCAP's records show that 25 of Berlin's songs reached the top of the charts and were re-recorded by dozens of famous singers over the years, such as Eddie Fisher, Al Jolson, Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, Barbra Streisand, Linda Ronstadt, Rosemary Clooney, Doris Day, Diana Ross, Nat King Cole and Ella Fitzgerald. In 1924, when Berlin was 36, his biography, \"The Story of Irving Berlin\", was being written by Alexander Woollcott. In a letter to Woollcott, Jerome Kern offered what one writer said \"may be the last word\" on the significance of Irving Berlin:\nIrving Berlin has no \"place\" in American music\u2014he \"is\" American music. Emotionally, he honestly absorbs the vibrations emanating from the people, manners and life of his time and, in turn, gives these impressions back to the world\u2014simplified, clarified and glorified.\nComposer George Gershwin (1898\u20131937) also tried to describe the importance of Berlin's compositions:\nI want to say at once that I frankly believe that Irving Berlin is the greatest songwriter that has ever lived... His songs are exquisite cameos of perfection, and each one of them is as beautiful as its neighbor. Irving Berlin remains, I think, America's Schubert. But apart from his genuine talent for song-writing, Irving Berlin has had a greater influence upon American music than any other one man. It was Irving Berlin who was the very first to have created a real, inherent American music... Irving Berlin was the first to free the American song from the nauseating sentimentality which had previously characterized it, and by introducing and perfecting ragtime he had actually given us the first germ of an American musical idiom; he had sown the first seeds of an American music.\nMusical scores.\nThe following list includes scores mostly produced by Berlin. Although some of the plays using his songs were later adapted to films, the list will not include the film unless he was the primary composer.\nStage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilm scores.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48352", "revid": "27191417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48352", "title": "Le P\u00e9tomane", "text": "French entertainer\nJoseph Pujol (June 1, 1857 \u2013 August 8, 1945), better known by his stage name Le P\u00e9tomane (, ), was a French flatulist (professional fartist), comedian and entertainer. He was famous for his remarkable control of the abdominal muscles, which enabled him to seemingly fart at will. His stage name combines the French verb \"p\u00e9ter\", \"to fart\" with the -\"mane\", \"-maniac\" suffix, which translates to \"fartomaniac\". The profession is referred to as \"flatulist\", \"farteur\", or \"fartiste\".\nIt was a common misconception that Pujol passed intestinal gas as part of his stage performance. Rather, he was allegedly able to \"inhale\" or move air into his rectum and then control the release of that air with his anal sphincter muscles. Evidence of his ability to control those muscles was seen in the early accounts of demonstrations of his abilities to fellow soldiers.\nEarly life, family and education.\nJoseph Pujol was born in Marseille, one of five children of stonemason and sculptor Fran\u00e7ois Pujol and his wife Rose, in a family of Catalan origin. Soon after Joseph left school, he had a strange experience while swimming in the sea. He put his head under the water and held his breath, whereupon he felt an icy cold penetrating his rear. He ran ashore in fright and was amazed to sense water pouring from his anus.\nWhile serving in the army, he told his fellow soldiers about his special ability, and repeated it for their amusement, sucking up water from a pan into his rectum and then projecting it up to several yards. He found that he could suck in air as well. \nCareer.\nPujol trained as a baker. He would sometimes entertain his customers by imitating musical instruments and claiming to be playing them behind the counter. Pujol decided to try the stage, and debuted in Marseilles in 1887. When his act was well received, he moved to Paris, where he appeared at the Moulin Rouge in 1892.\nSome of the highlights of his stage act involved sound effects of cannon fire and thunderstorms, as well as playing \"'O Sole Mio\" and \"La Marseillaise\" on an ocarina through a rubber tube in his anus. He could also blow out a candle from several yards away. His audience included Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, King Leopold II of the Belgians, and Sigmund Freud.\nIn 1894, the managers of the Moulin Rouge sued Pujol for an impromptu exhibition he gave to aid a friend struggling with economic difficulties. Pujol was fined 3,000 francs (equivalent to \u20ac in 2022). The Moulin Rouge lost their star attraction, as the disagreement led him to set up his own travelling show, the Theatre Pompadour.\nIn the following decade Pujol tried to 'refine' and make his acts 'gentler'; one of his favourite numbers became a rhyme about a farm which he himself composed, and which he punctuated with anal renditions of the animals' sounds.\nWith the outbreak of World War I, Pujol retired from the stage and returned to his bakery in Marseilles. Later, he opened a biscuit factory in Toulon.\nPersonal life and demise.\nPujol died in 1945, aged 88. He was buried in the cemetery of La Valette-du-Var, where his grave can still be seen.\nLegacy.\nLe P\u00e9tomane left an enduring legacy and has inspired a number of artistic works. These include several musicals based on his life, such as \"The Fartiste\" (awarded Best Musical at the 2006 New York International Fringe Festival) and Seth Rozin's \"A Passing Wind\" which was premiered at the Philadelphia International Festival of the Arts in 2011. In addition, Le P\u00e9tomane was added to David Lee's 2007 reworked revival of the 1953 Broadway play \"Can-Can\", which had originally been written by Abe Burroughs and Cole Porter. The updated play, staged at the Pasadena Playhouse, featured musical theatre actor Robert Yacko as the fartiste, with sound effects provided by the band's trombone and piccolo players.\nThe character has been portrayed several times in film. In 1979 Ian MacNaughton made \"Le P\u00e9tomane\", a short humorous film. Written by Galton and Simpson, it was based on Joseph Pujol's story and stars veteran comic actor Leonard Rossiter. The 1983 Italian movie \"Il Petomane\", directed by Pasquale Festa Campanile and starring Ugo Tognazzi, gives a poetic rendition of the character, contrasting his deep longing for normality with the condition of 'freak' to which his act relegated him. The 1998 documentary \"Le P\u00e9tomane\" by Igor Vamos examines Pujol's place in history through archival films (none of which actually include him), historical documents, photographs, recreations and fake or tongue-in-cheek interviews.\nLe P\u00e9tomane is referenced in \"Blazing Saddles\", a 1974 satirical Western comedy film directed by Mel Brooks. Brooks appears in multiple supporting roles, including the dim-witted Governor William J. Le Petomane, whose name suggests he is full of hot air.\n\"Le Petoman\" (without the e, because English-speaking audiences will pronounce \u2013mane differently from \u2013man) was adapted for the theatre in 2001 by Tony Stowers, from the book \"Le Petomane 1857\u20131945\" by J. Nohain &amp; F. Caradec. It was declined by Hull Truck, Salisbury Playhouse and the National Theatre in the UK on the grounds that they felt their audiences would be 'too sophisticated' for the subject matter. It was read in English in Newcastle upon Tyne in 2005, in Paris in 2010, and in Nantes (in French); in June 2023, it finally made it to the stage with amateur actors.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48353", "revid": "43942669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48353", "title": "Leonard Rossiter", "text": "British actor (1926\u20131984)\nLeonard Rossiter (21 October 1926 \u2013 5 October 1984) was an English actor. He had a long career in the theatre but achieved his highest profile for his television comedy roles starring as Rupert Rigsby in the ITV series \"Rising Damp\" from 1974 to 1978, and Reginald Perrin in the BBC's \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" from 1976 to 1979.\nEarly life.\nRossiter was born on 21 October 1926 in Wavertree, Liverpool, the second son of John and Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Howell) Rossiter. The family lived over the barber's shop owned by his father. He was educated at the Liverpool Collegiate School (1939\u201346). In September 1939, when the Second World War began, Rossiter was an evacuee, along with his schoolmates, and went to Bangor in north Wales, where he stayed for 18 months. While at school, his ambition was to go to university to read modern languages and become a teacher; however, his father, who served as a voluntary ambulanceman during the war, was killed in the May Blitz air raid in 1941. Rossiter then had to support his mother, therefore he could not take up the place he had been offered at the University of Liverpool. Instead, he completed his National Service as a sergeant, initially in the Intelligence Corps, then in the Army Education Corps, spending much of the time in Germany writing letters home for other soldiers. After being demobbed he worked for six years as an insurance clerk in the claims and accident departments of the Commercial Union Insurance Company.\nCareer.\nTheatre.\nRossiter started acting after his actress girlfriend challenged him to try it, after he had scoffed at the performances of the amateur group she was in. He joined the Wavertree Community Centre Drama Group and made his first appearance with the Adastra Players in Terence Rattigan's \"Flare Path\". The local critic said that he \"was particularly outstanding, his one fault being a tendency to speak too fast on one or two occasions\". He gave up his insurance job to enrol in Preston repertory theatre and became a professional actor at the age of 27. He made his professional stage debut in Joseph Colton's \"The Gay Dog\" in Preston on 6 September 1954.\nHe later became assistant stage manager there, and then went on to Wolverhampton and Salisbury repertory companies. In his first 19 months in the business he played some 75 roles. He said later: \"There was no time to discuss the finer points of interpretation. You studied the part, you did it and then you studied the next part. I developed a frightening capacity for learning lines. The plays became like Elastoplast, which you just stuck on and then tore off. It was the perfect preparation for rehearsing situation comedy on television at the rate of one episode a week.\"\nIn 1957\u201358, he played in the musical \"Free as Air\" and then toured in Eugene O'Neill's \"The Iceman Cometh\". He joined the Bristol Old Vic and was there for two years, from 1959 to 1961, a time he described as \"the bedrock of his career\", followed by other stage work, in, among other plays, \"The Strange Case of Martin Richter\", \"Disabled\", \"The Heretic\", \"The Caretaker\" and \"Semi-Detached\" (in New York). His performance in the premiere of Michael Blakemore's stage production of Bertolt Brecht's \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\" in 1969 met with critical acclaim.\nFilm and television.\nRossiter soon established himself as a character actor in films and television, as well as on stage. He stated: \"I think I sensed fairly early on that I was not physically or facially built in the way that would ever fit even remotely into heroic or what used to be called juvenile parts. I always played character parts \u2013 right from the start.\" His first film role was in \"A Kind of Loving\" (1962). In \"Billy Liar\" (1963) he played the title character's boss. His first major television role was as Detective-Inspector Bamber in the long-running police television series \"Z-Cars\". He also had guest roles in series as diverse as \"The Avengers\" (\"Dressed to Kill\", 1963) and \"Steptoe and Son\" (\"The Lead Man Cometh\", 1964; \"The Desperate Hours\", 1972). Among his early film credits were four films directed by Bryan Forbes, namely \"King Rat\" (1965), \"The Wrong Box\" (1966), \"The Whisperers\" (1967), and \"Deadfall\" (1968).\nIn 1968, he played Mr Sowerberry in the film version of Lionel Bart's musical \"Oliver!\" and took one of the few speaking supporting roles in \"\" as the Russian scientist Smyslov. He worked with Stanley Kubrick again in \"Barry Lyndon\" (1975), in the role of Captain John Quin. He appeared opposite Peter Sellers in \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" (1976) as Superintendent Quinlan. In 1968, he appeared in Nigel Kneale's television play \"The Year of the Sex Olympics\", an episode of BBC2's \"Theatre 625\", one of his four appearances in the series.\nIn \"Rising Damp\", on ITV, Rossiter played Rupert Rigsby, the lecherous landlord of a house converted into shabby bedsits, reprising the role from the successful stage version, \"The Banana Box\". While he was in \"Rising Damp\" he also took the lead role in \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\", adapted by David Nobbs from his own comic novels and broadcast on the BBC. Rossiter was given a surprise tribute on \"This Is Your Life\" in 1975. He appeared in \"I Tell You It's Burt Reynolds\", an episode of the 1977 Yorkshire Television series \"The Galton &amp; Simpson Playhouse\", as well as the short films \"The Waterloo Bridge Handicap\" (1978), and Galton and Simpson's \"Le P\u00e9tomane\" (1979). After his portrayal of Reginald Perrin, Rossiter's non-comedy roles on television became less frequent, although there were exceptions, such as a debt collector in the one-off HTV thriller \"Machinegunner\" (1976), and Frank Harris in \"Fearless Frank, or Tit-bits from the Life of an Adventurer\" (1978), a BBC \"Play of the Week\".\nFrom 1978 to 1983, Rossiter performed in ten commercials for Cinzano. The series of adverts was created by film director Alan Parker and, at Rossiter's suggestion, used an old music hall joke where he spills a drink over his wife, played by Joan Collins. In the Channel 4 programme \"The 100 Greatest TV Ads\" (2000) Terry Lovelock, the director of two of the commercials, said that Rossiter used to refer jokingly to Collins as \"The Prop\".\nRossiter reprised Rigsby for a film version of \"Rising Damp\" in 1980, thus achieving the distinction of playing the same role on stage, television, and film. He continued to make a steady stream of film appearances, including a role in Lindsay Anderson's \"Britannia Hospital\" (1982). His last television role was as the supermarket manager in another ITV sitcom, \"Tripper's Day\" (1984).\nHe performed comic monologues in \"The Green Tie on the Little Yellow Dog\", which was recorded 1982, and broadcast by Channel 4 in 1983.\nRossiter also played the title role in the \"BBC Television Shakespeare\" production of \"The Life and Death of King John\" (1984). His last film appearance was in \"Water\" (1985).\nRadio and voice work.\nIn the animated adaptation of \"The Perishers\" (1979), Rossiter provided the voice for Boot the dog. He narrated an abridged version of the Charles Dickens book \"A Christmas Carol\", which was released on cassette in 1979. He appeared on the BBC Radio 4 show \"Desert Island Discs\" in 1980. In 1981, he hosted an episode of the BBC Radio 4 show \"With Great Pleasure\" in which he recited some of his favorite poetry and prose alongside his wife, Gillian Raine, and his friend, the actor James Grout. Also in 1981, he narrated a seven-part series of satirical five-minute monologues, written by Barry Pilton for BBC Radio 3, titled \"In a Nutshell\", followed in 1982 by a second series, also written by Barry Pilton, this time comprising 8 five-minute monologues. Rossiter narrated a three-part series of the children's story \"Harlequin and Columbine\" for \"Story Teller\" magazine in 1984. He voiced the King of Hearts in two episodes of Anglia Television's version of \"Alice In Wonderland\", which was broadcast in April 1985, six months after Rossiter's death.\nWriting.\nRossiter displayed his acid wit in two books: \"The Devil's Bedside Book\" (1980), a collection of cynical dictionary definitions in the style of Ambrose Bierce's \"The Devil's Dictionary\", and \"The Lowest Form of Wit\", (1981), a collection of biting bons mots, stinging retorts, insults and sarcasm illustrated with cartoons by Martin Honeysett. He also wrote the introduction to cook Keith Floyd's 1981 book \"Floyd's Food\".\nPersonal life.\nRossiter's first marriage was to the actress Josephine Tewson, with whom he had worked many times in repertory theatre in the 1950s. They married in 1958. The marriage ended in divorce in 1961. His second wife was the actress Gillian Raine, with whom he had a daughter, Camilla, and to whom he was still married at the time of his death. Rossiter had met Raine when he played the lead role of Fred Midway in David Turner's play \"Semi-Detached\", in a production directed by Tony Richardson. The play opened on 8 June 1962 at the Belgrade Theatre in Coventry and ran for a week. During the play's second run at the Belgrade, in September 1963, the couple fell in love and moved in together, but they did not marry until 1972.\nRossiter was a fan of the football club Everton, and a staunch supporter of the Conservative Party. He was also a wine connoisseur, and converted his attic into a sort of wine cellar.\nAfter his death, it was revealed that Rossiter had a five-year affair with the broadcaster Sue MacGregor. His wife had not been aware of their relationship until she received a letter from MacGregor breaking the news that her memoirs, which were about to be published, would include an account of the affair.\nDeath.\nOn 5 October 1984, Rossiter died from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy while waiting to go onstage at the Lyric Theatre, London, where he was performing in Joe Orton's play \"Loot\". \nA memorial service was held on 15 November 1984 at St Paul's, Covent Garden. Attendees included Rossiter's \"Loot\" castmates, as well as Derek Nimmo, Fulton Mackay, and Ned Sherrin. \"Loot\" director, Jonathan Lynn, gave a eulogy in which he said of Rossiter: \"Now that Leonard is up there, things had better be properly managed: I hope that the Heavenly Gates opened on cue and that the Choir of Angels is singing in tune. They had better be professional in Paradise. Because, if not, they'll certainly hear about it from Leonard.\"\nLegacy and tributes.\nRossiter was posthumously nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for \"Comedy Performance of the Year\", for his role as Inspector Truscott in \"Loot\".\nIn 1985, the book \"Leonard Rossiter\" by author Robert Tanitch was published. The book featured a collection of rare photos and reminiscences from friends and colleagues of Rossiter's.\nIn 2000, the ITV biography series \"The Unforgettable\" broadcast an episode about Rossiter's life. His wife and daughter were interviewed, as well as former colleagues, including Don Warrington, Joan Collins, and Sue Nicholls.\nA biography of Rossiter, \"Leonard Rossiter: Character Driven\", was published in 2010 by author Guy Adams.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48356", "revid": "3397128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48356", "title": "Substitution cipher", "text": "System to replace plaintext with ciphertext\nIn cryptography, a substitution cipher is a method of encrypting that creates the ciphertext (its output) by replacing units of the plaintext (its input) in a defined manner, with the help of a key; the \"units\" may be single letters (the most common), pairs of letters, triplets of letters, mixtures of the above, and so forth. The receiver deciphers the text by performing the inverse substitution process to extract the original message.\nSubstitution ciphers can be compared with transposition ciphers. In a transposition cipher, the units of the plaintext are rearranged in a different and usually quite complex order, but the units themselves are left unchanged. By contrast, in a substitution cipher, the units of the plaintext are retained in the same sequence in the ciphertext, but the units themselves are altered.\nThere are a number of different types of substitution cipher. If the cipher operates on single letters, it is termed a simple substitution cipher; a cipher that operates on larger groups of letters is termed polygraphic. A monoalphabetic cipher uses fixed substitution over the entire message, whereas a polyalphabetic cipher uses a number of substitutions at different positions in the message, where a unit from the plaintext is mapped to one of several possibilities in the ciphertext and vice versa.\nThe first ever published description of how to crack simple substitution ciphers was given by Al-Kindi in \"A Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages\" written around 850 AD. The method he described is now known as frequency analysis.\nTypes.\nSimple.\nThe simplest substitution ciphers are the Caesar cipher and Atbash cipher. Here single letters are substituted (referred to as simple substitution). It can be demonstrated by writing out the alphabet twice, once in regular order and again with the letters shifted by some number of steps or reversed to represent the \"ciphertext alphabet\" (or substitution alphabet).\nThe substitution alphabet could also be scrambled in a more complex fashion, in which case it is called a mixed alphabet or \"deranged alphabet\". Traditionally, mixed alphabets may be created by first writing out a keyword, removing repeated letters in it, then writing all the remaining letters in the alphabet in the usual order.\nUsing this system, the keyword \"zebras\" gives us the following alphabets:\nA message \n flee at once. we are discovered!\nenciphers to\n SIAA ZQ LKBA. VA ZOA RFPBLUAOAR!\nAnd the keyword \"grandmother\" gives us the following alphabets:\nThe same message \n flee at once. we are discovered!\nenciphers to\n MCDD GS JIAD. WD GPD NHQAJVDPDN!\nUsually the ciphertext is written out in blocks of fixed length, omitting punctuation and spaces; this is done to disguise word boundaries from the plaintext and to help avoid transmission errors. These blocks are called \"groups\", and sometimes a \"group count\" (i.e. the number of groups) is given as an additional check. Five-letter groups are often used, dating from when messages used to be transmitted by telegraph:\n SIAAZ QLKBA VAZOA RFPBL UAOAR\nIf the length of the message happens not to be divisible by five, it may be padded at the end with \"nulls\". These can be any characters that decrypt to obvious nonsense, so that the receiver can easily spot them and discard them.\nThe ciphertext alphabet is sometimes different from the plaintext alphabet; for example, in the pigpen cipher, the ciphertext consists of a set of symbols derived from a grid. For example:\nSuch features make little difference to the security of a scheme, however \u2013 at the very least, any set of strange symbols can be transcribed back into an A-Z alphabet and dealt with as normal.\nIn lists and catalogues for salespeople, a very simple encryption is sometimes used to replace numeric digits by letters.\nExamples: MAT would be used to represent 120, PAPR would be used for 5256, and OFTK would be used for 7803.\nSecurity.\nAlthough the traditional keyword method for creating a mixed substitution alphabet is simple, a serious disadvantage is that the last letters of the alphabet (which are mostly low frequency) tend to stay at the end. A stronger way of constructing a mixed alphabet is to generate the substitution alphabet completely randomly.\nAlthough the number of possible substitution alphabets is very large (26! \u2248 288.4, or about 88 bits), this cipher is not very strong, and is easily broken. Provided the message is of reasonable length (see below), the cryptanalyst can deduce the probable meaning of the most common symbols by analyzing the frequency distribution of the ciphertext. This allows formation of partial words, which can be tentatively filled in, progressively expanding the (partial) solution (see frequency analysis for a demonstration of this). In some cases, underlying words can also be determined from the pattern of their letters; for example, the English words \"tater\", \"ninth\", and \"paper\" all have the pattern \"ABACD\". Many people solve such ciphers for recreation, as with cryptogram puzzles in the newspaper.\nAccording to the unicity distance of English, 27.6 letters of ciphertext are required to crack a mixed alphabet simple substitution. In practice, typically about 50 letters are needed, although some messages can be broken with fewer if unusual patterns are found. In other cases, the plaintext can be contrived to have a nearly flat frequency distribution, and much longer plaintexts will then be required by the cryptanalyst.\nNomenclator.\nOne once-common variant of the substitution cipher is the nomenclator. Named after the public official who announced the titles of visiting dignitaries, this cipher uses a small code sheet containing letter, syllable and word substitution tables, sometimes homophonic, that typically converted symbols into numbers. Originally the code portion was restricted to the names of important people, hence the name of the cipher; in later years, it covered many common words and place names as well. The symbols for whole words (\"codewords\" in modern parlance) and letters (\"cipher\" in modern parlance) were not distinguished in the ciphertext. The Rossignols' Great Cipher used by Louis XIV of France was one.\nNomenclators were the standard fare of diplomatic correspondence, espionage, and advanced political conspiracy from the early fifteenth century to the late eighteenth century; most conspirators were and have remained less cryptographically sophisticated. Although government intelligence cryptanalysts were systematically breaking nomenclators by the mid-sixteenth century, and superior systems had been available since 1467, the usual response to cryptanalysis was simply to make the tables larger. By the late eighteenth century, when the system was beginning to die out, some nomenclators had 50,000 symbols.\nNevertheless, not all nomenclators were broken; today, cryptanalysis of archived ciphertexts remains a fruitful area of historical research.\nHomophonic.\nAn early attempt to increase the difficulty of frequency analysis attacks on substitution ciphers was to disguise plaintext letter frequencies by homophony. In these ciphers, plaintext letters map to more than one ciphertext symbol. Usually, the highest-frequency plaintext symbols are given more equivalents than lower frequency letters. In this way, the frequency distribution is flattened, making analysis more difficult.\nSince more than 26 characters will be required in the ciphertext alphabet, various solutions are employed to invent larger alphabets. Perhaps the simplest is to use a numeric substitution 'alphabet'. Another method consists of simple variations on the existing alphabet; uppercase, lowercase, upside down, etc. More artistically, though not necessarily more securely, some homophonic ciphers employed wholly invented alphabets of fanciful symbols.\nThe book cipher is a type of homophonic cipher, one example being the Beale ciphers. This is a story of buried treasure that was described in 1819\u201321 by use of a ciphered text that was keyed to the Declaration of Independence. Here each ciphertext character was represented by a number. The number was determined by taking the plaintext character and finding a word in the Declaration of Independence that started with that character and using the numerical position of that word in the Declaration of Independence as the encrypted form of that letter. Since many words in the Declaration of Independence start with the same letter, the encryption of that character could be any of the numbers associated with the words in the Declaration of Independence that start with that letter. Deciphering the encrypted text character \"X\" (which is a number) is as simple as looking up the Xth word of the Declaration of Independence and using the first letter of that word as the decrypted character.\nAnother homophonic cipher was described by Stahl in 1973 and was one of the first attempts to provide for computer security of data systems in computers through encryption. Stahl constructed the cipher in such a way that the number of homophones for a given character was in proportion to the frequency of the character, thus making frequency analysis much more difficult.\nFrancesco I Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, used the earliest known example of a homophonic substitution cipher in 1401 for correspondence with one Simone de Crema.\nMary, Queen of Scots, while imprisoned by Elizabeth I, during the years from 1578 to 1584 used homophonic ciphers with additional encryption using a nomenclator for frequent prefixes, suffixes, and proper names while communicating with her allies including Michel de Castelnau.\nPolyalphabetic.\nThe work of Al-Qalqashandi (1355-1418), based on the earlier work of Ibn al-Durayhim (1312\u20131359), contained the first published discussion of the substitution and transposition of ciphers, as well as the first description of a polyalphabetic cipher, in which each plaintext letter is assigned more than one substitute. Polyalphabetic substitution ciphers were later described in 1467 by Leone Battista Alberti in the form of disks. Johannes Trithemius, in his book \"Steganographia\" (Ancient Greek for \"hidden writing\") introduced the now more standard form of a \"tableau\" (see below; ca. 1500 but not published until much later). A more sophisticated version using mixed alphabets was described in 1563 by Giovanni Battista della Porta in his book, \"De Furtivis Literarum Notis\" (Latin for \"On concealed characters in writing\").\nIn a polyalphabetic cipher, multiple cipher alphabets are used. To facilitate encryption, all the alphabets are usually written out in a large table, traditionally called a \"tableau\". The tableau is usually 26\u00d726, so that 26 full ciphertext alphabets are available. The method of filling the tableau, and of choosing which alphabet to use next, defines the particular polyalphabetic cipher. All such ciphers are easier to break than once believed, as substitution alphabets are repeated for sufficiently large plaintexts.\nOne of the most popular was that of Blaise de Vigen\u00e8re. First published in 1585, it was considered unbreakable until 1863, and indeed was commonly called \"le chiffre ind\u00e9chiffrable\" (French for \"indecipherable cipher\").\nIn the Vigen\u00e8re cipher, the first row of the tableau is filled out with a copy of the plaintext alphabet, and successive rows are simply shifted one place to the left. (Such a simple tableau is called a \"tabula recta\", and mathematically corresponds to adding the plaintext and key letters, modulo 26.) A keyword is then used to choose which ciphertext alphabet to use. Each letter of the keyword is used in turn, and then they are repeated again from the beginning. So if the keyword is 'CAT', the first letter of plaintext is enciphered under alphabet 'C', the second under 'A', the third under 'T', the fourth under 'C' again, and so on, or if the keyword is 'RISE', the first letter of plaintext is enciphered under alphabet 'R', the second under 'I', the third under 'S', the fourth under 'E', and so on. In practice, Vigen\u00e8re keys were often phrases several words long.\nIn 1863, Friedrich Kasiski published a method (probably discovered secretly and independently before the Crimean War by Charles Babbage) which enabled the calculation of the length of the keyword in a Vigen\u00e8re ciphered message. Once this was done, ciphertext letters that had been enciphered under the same alphabet could be picked out and attacked separately as a number of semi-independent simple substitutions - complicated by the fact that within one alphabet letters were separated and did not form complete words, but simplified by the fact that usually a \"tabula recta\" had been employed.\nAs such, even today a Vigen\u00e8re type cipher should theoretically be difficult to break if mixed alphabets are used in the tableau, if the keyword is random, and if the total length of ciphertext is less than 27.67 times the length of the keyword. These requirements are rarely understood in practice, and so Vigen\u00e8re enciphered message security is usually less than might have been.\nOther notable polyalphabetics include:\nModern stream ciphers can also be seen, from a sufficiently abstract perspective, to be a form of polyalphabetic cipher in which all the effort has gone into making the keystream as long and unpredictable as possible.\nPolygraphic.\nIn a polygraphic substitution cipher, plaintext letters are substituted in larger groups, instead of substituting letters individually. The first advantage is that the frequency distribution is much flatter than that of individual letters (though not actually flat in real languages; for example, 'OS' is much more common than 'R\u00d1' in Spanish). Second, the larger number of symbols requires correspondingly more ciphertext to productively analyze letter frequencies.\nTo substitute \"pairs\" of letters would take a substitution alphabet 676 symbols long (formula_1). In the same \"De Furtivis Literarum Notis\" mentioned above, della Porta actually proposed such a system, with a 20 x 20 tableau (for the 20 letters of the Italian/Latin alphabet he was using) filled with 400 unique glyphs. However the system was impractical and probably never actually used.\nThe earliest practical digraphic cipher (pairwise substitution), was the so-called Playfair cipher, invented by Sir Charles Wheatstone in 1854. In this cipher, a 5 x 5 grid is filled with the letters of a mixed alphabet (two letters, usually I and J, are combined). A digraphic substitution is then simulated by taking pairs of letters as two corners of a rectangle, and using the other two corners as the ciphertext (see the Playfair cipher main article for a diagram). Special rules handle double letters and pairs falling in the same row or column. Playfair was in military use from the Boer War through World War II.\nSeveral other practical polygraphics were introduced in 1901 by Felix Delastelle, including the bifid and four-square ciphers (both digraphic) and the trifid cipher (probably the first practical trigraphic).\nThe Hill cipher, invented in 1929 by Lester S. Hill, is a polygraphic substitution which can combine much larger groups of letters simultaneously using linear algebra. Each letter is treated as a digit in base 26: A = 0, B =1, and so on. (In a variation, 3 extra symbols are added to make the basis prime.) A block of n letters is then considered as a vector of n dimensions, and multiplied by a n x n matrix, modulo 26. The components of the matrix are the key, and should be random provided that the matrix is invertible in formula_2 (to ensure decryption is possible). A mechanical version of the Hill cipher of dimension 6 was patented in 1929.\nThe Hill cipher is vulnerable to a known-plaintext attack because it is completely linear, so it must be combined with some non-linear step to defeat this attack. The combination of wider and wider weak, linear diffusive steps like a Hill cipher, with non-linear substitution steps, ultimately leads to a substitution\u2013permutation network (e.g. a Feistel cipher), so it is possible \u2013 from this extreme perspective \u2013 to consider modern block ciphers as a type of polygraphic substitution.\nMechanical.\nBetween around World War I and the widespread availability of computers (for some governments this was approximately the 1950s or 1960s; for other organizations it was a decade or more later; for individuals it was no earlier than 1975), mechanical implementations of polyalphabetic substitution ciphers were widely used. Several inventors had similar ideas about the same time, and rotor cipher machines were patented four times in 1919. The most important of the resulting machines was the Enigma, especially in the versions used by the German military from approximately 1930. The Allies also developed and used rotor machines (e.g., SIGABA and Typex).\nAll of these were similar in that the substituted letter was chosen electrically from amongst the huge number of possible combinations resulting from the rotation of several letter disks. Since one or more of the disks rotated mechanically with each plaintext letter enciphered, the number of alphabets used was astronomical. Early versions of these machine were, nevertheless, breakable. William F. Friedman of the US Army's SIS early found vulnerabilities in Hebern's rotor machine, and the Government Code and Cypher School's Dillwyn Knox solved versions of the Enigma machine (those without the \"plugboard\") well before WWII began. Traffic protected by essentially all of the German military Enigmas was broken by Allied cryptanalysts, most notably those at Bletchley Park, beginning with the German Army variant used in the early 1930s. This version was broken by inspired mathematical insight by Marian Rejewski in Poland.\nAs far as is publicly known, no messages protected by the SIGABA and Typex machines were ever broken during or near the time when these systems were in service.\nOne-time pad.\nOne type of substitution cipher, the one-time pad, is unique. It was invented near the end of World War I by Gilbert Vernam and Joseph Mauborgne in the US. It was mathematically proven unbreakable by Claude Shannon, probably during World War II; his work was first published in the late 1940s. In its most common implementation, the one-time pad can be called a substitution cipher only from an unusual perspective; typically, the plaintext letter is combined (not substituted) in some manner (e.g., XOR) with the key material character at that position.\nThe one-time pad is, in most cases, impractical as it requires that the key material be as long as the plaintext, \"actually\" random, used once and \"only\" once, and kept entirely secret from all except the sender and intended receiver. When these conditions are violated, even marginally, the one-time pad is no longer unbreakable. Soviet one-time pad messages sent from the US for a brief time during World War II used non-random key material. US cryptanalysts, beginning in the late 40s, were able to, entirely or partially, break a few thousand messages out of several hundred thousand. (See Venona project)\nIn a mechanical implementation, rather like the Rockex equipment, the one-time pad was used for messages sent on the Moscow-Washington \"hot line\" established after the Cuban Missile Crisis.\nIn modern cryptography.\nSubstitution ciphers as discussed above, especially the older pencil-and-paper hand ciphers, are no longer in serious use. However, the cryptographic concept of substitution carries on even today. From an abstract perspective, modern bit-oriented block ciphers (e.g., DES, or AES) can be viewed as substitution ciphers on a large binary alphabet. In addition, block ciphers often include smaller substitution tables called S-boxes. See also substitution\u2013permutation network.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48358", "revid": "39203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48358", "title": "Transposition cipher", "text": "Method of encryption\nIn cryptography, a transposition cipher (also known as a permutation cipher) is a method of encryption which scrambles the positions of characters (\"transposition\") without changing the characters themselves. Transposition ciphers reorder units of plaintext (typically characters or groups of characters) according to a regular system to produce a ciphertext which is a permutation of the plaintext. They differ from substitution ciphers, which do not change the position of units of plaintext but instead change the units themselves. Despite the difference between transposition and substitution operations, they are often combined, as in historical ciphers like the ADFGVX cipher or complex high-quality encryption methods like the modern Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).\nGeneral principle.\nPlaintexts can be rearranged into a ciphertext using a key, scrambling the order of characters like the shuffled pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. The resulting message is hard to decipher without the key because there are many ways the characters can be arranged.\nFor example, the plaintext \"THIS IS WIKIPEDIA\" could be encrypted to \"TWDIP SIHII IKASE\". To decipher the encrypted message without the key, an attacker could try to guess possible words and phrases like DIATHESIS, DISSIPATE, WIDTH, etc., but it would take them some time to reconstruct the plaintext because there are many combinations of letters and words. By contrast, someone with the key could reconstruct the message easily:\n C I P H E R Key\n 1 4 5 3 2 6 Sequence (key letters in alphabetical order)\n T H I S I S Plaintext\n W I K I P E\n D I A * * *\n Ciphertext by column:\n #1 TWD, #2 IP, #3 SI, #4 HII, #5 IKA, #6 SE\n Ciphertext in groups of 5 for readability:\n TWDIP SIHII IKASE\nIn practice, a message this short and with a predictable keyword would be broken almost immediately with cryptanalysis techniques.\nTransposition ciphers have several vulnerabilities (see the section on \"Detection and cryptanalysis\" below), and small mistakes in the encipherment process can render the entire ciphertext meaningless.\nHowever, given the right conditions - long messages (e.g., over 100\u2013200 letters), unpredictable contents, unique keys per message, strong transposition methods, and so on - guessing the right words could be computationally impossible without further information. In their book on codebreaking historical ciphers, Elonka Dunin and Klaus Schmeh describe double columnar transposition (see below) as \"one of the best manual ciphers known\".\nRail Fence cipher.\nThe Rail Fence cipher is a form of transposition cipher that gets its name from the way in which it is encoded. In the rail fence cipher, the plaintext is written downward and diagonally on successive \"rails\" of an imaginary fence, then moves up when it gets to the bottom. The message is then read off in rows. For example, using three \"rails\" and a message of 'WE ARE DISCOVERED FLEE AT ONCE', the encrypter writes out:\n W . . . E . . . C . . . R . . . L . . . T . . . E\n . E . R . D . S . O . E . E . F . E . A . O . C .\n . . A . . . I . . . V . . . D . . . E . . . N . .\nThen reads off:\n WECRL TEERD SOEEF EAOCA IVDEN\nScytale.\nThe rail fence cipher follows a pattern similar to that of the scytale, (pronounced \"SKIT-uhl-ee\") a mechanical system of producing a transposition cipher used by the ancient Greeks. The system consisted of a cylinder and a ribbon that was wrapped around the cylinder. The message to be encrypted was written on the coiled ribbon. The letters of the original message would be rearranged when the ribbon was uncoiled from the cylinder. However, the message was easily decrypted when the ribbon recoiled on a cylinder of the same diameter as the encrypting cylinder. Using the same example as before, if the cylinder has a radius such that only three letters can fit around its circumference, the cipherer writes out:\n W . . E . . A . . R . . E . . D . . I . . S . . C\n . O . . V . . E . . R . . E . . D . . F . . L . .\n . . E . . E . . A . . T . . O . . N . . C . . E .\nIn this example, the cylinder is running horizontally and the ribbon is wrapped around vertically. Hence, the cipherer then reads off:\n WOEEV EAEAR RTEEO DDNIF CSLEC\nRoute cipher.\nIn a route cipher, the plaintext is first written out in a grid of given dimensions, then read off in a pattern given in the key. For example, using the same plaintext that we used for rail fence:\n W R I O R F E O E \n E E S V E L A N J \n A D C E D E T C X \nThe key might specify \"spiral inwards, clockwise, starting from the top right\". That would give a cipher text of:\n EJXCTEDEC DAEWRIORF EONALEVSE\nRoute ciphers have many more keys than a rail fence. In fact, for messages of reasonable length, the number of possible keys is potentially too great to be enumerated even by modern machinery. However, not all keys are equally good. Badly chosen routes will leave excessive chunks of plaintext, or text simply reversed, and this will give cryptanalysts a clue as to the routes.\nA variation of the route cipher was the Union Route Cipher, used by Union forces during the American Civil War. This worked much like an ordinary route cipher, but transposed whole words instead of individual letters. Because this would leave certain highly sensitive words exposed, such words would first be concealed by code. The cipher clerk may also add entire null words, which were often chosen to make the ciphertext humorous. \nColumnar transposition.\nEncryption.\nIn a columnar transposition, the message is written out in rows of a fixed length, and then read out again column by column, and the columns are chosen in some scrambled order. Both the width of the rows and the permutation of the columns are usually defined by a keyword. For example, the keyword ZEBRAS is of length 6 (so the rows are of length 6), and the permutation is defined by the alphabetical order of the letters in the keyword. In this case, the order would be \"6 3 2 4 1 5\".\nIn a regular columnar transposition cipher, any spare spaces are filled with nulls; in an irregular columnar transposition cipher, the spaces are left blank. Finally, the message is read off in columns, in the order specified by the keyword. For example, suppose we use the keyword ZEBRAS and the message WE ARE DISCOVERED. FLEE AT ONCE. In a regular columnar transposition, we write this into the grid as follows:\n 6 3 2 4 1 5\n W E A R E D\n I S C O V E \n R E D F L E \n E A T O N C \n E Q K J E U \nproviding five nulls (QKJEU), these letters can be randomly selected as they just fill out the incomplete columns and are not part of the message. The ciphertext is then read off as:\n EVLNE ACDTK ESEAQ ROFOJ DEECU WIREE\nIn the irregular case, the columns are not completed by nulls:\n 6 3 2 4 1 5\n W E A R E D \n I S C O V E \n R E D F L E \n E A T O N C \n E \nThis results in the following ciphertext:\n EVLNA CDTES EAROF ODEEC WIREE\nDecryption.\nTo decipher it, the recipient has to work out the shape of the enciphering grid by dividing the message length by the key length to find the number of rows in the grid. The length of the grid's last line is given by the remainder. The key is written above the grid, and the ciphertext is written down the columns of the grid in the order given by the letters of the key. The plaintext appears on the rows. A partial decipherment of the above ciphertext, after writing in the first column:\n 6 3 2 4 1 5\n . . . . E .\n . . . . V .\n . . . . L .\n . . . . N .\nIn a variation, the message is blocked into segments that are the key length long and to each segment the same permutation (given by the key) is applied. This is equivalent to a columnar transposition where the read-out is by rows instead of columns.\nHistory.\nIn the middle of the 17th century, Samuel Morland introduced an early form of columnar transposition. The technique was developed further over the next two centuries and became widely used in the late 19th and 20th centuries, notably by French military services, Japanese diplomats, and Soviet intelligence agencies.\nJohn Falconer's \"Cryptomenysis Patefacta\" (1685) contains one of the earliest known English-language explanations of a keyed columnar transposition. Falconer gives no account of the cipher's origin, but he does explain how to write the plaintext into a rectangular grid, pad the final row with null letters, and extract the columns in a secret order determined by a keyword.\nEven more importantly, Falconer offers a worked method of cryptanalysis. He shows that an analyst can test different grid heights and reorder the columns by trial and error until readable text emerges, noting that the cipher preserves normal letters frequencies and is therefore susceptible to detection. He indicates that such letter frequencies can be used to detect the likely language of the text, even without knowing its contents, as letter frequencies differ between languages. Falconer does not discuss double transposition or how to solve ciphers where nulls are not provided in the final column, which suggests these were not widespread at the time.\nColumnar transposition was subsequently incorporated into more elaborate systems\u2014most famously the double transposition used by French military and diplomatic services, Japanese and German ciphers of the First and Second World Wars, and Soviet agents\u2014remaining in serious use into the 1950s. Falconer\u2019s analysis anticipates many of the systematic attacks later refined against those double-stage versions, making \"Cryptomenysis Patefacta\" a landmark in the early literature of cryptanalysis.\nDouble transposition.\nA single columnar transposition could be attacked by guessing possible column lengths, writing the message out in its columns (but in the wrong order, as the key is not yet known), and then looking for possible anagrams. Thus to make it stronger, a double transposition was often used. This is simply a columnar transposition applied twice. The same key can be used for both transpositions, or two different keys can be used.\nVisual demonstration of double transposition.\nIn the following example, we use the keys JANEAUSTEN and AEROPLANES to encrypt the following plaintext: \"Transposition ciphers scramble letters like puzzle pieces to create an indecipherable arrangement.\"The colors show how the letters are scrambled in each transposition step. While a single step only causes a minor rearrangement, the second step leads to a significant scrambling effect if the last row of the grid is incomplete.\nAnother example.\nAs an example, we can take the result of the irregular columnar transposition in the previous section, and perform a second encryption with a different keyword, STRIPE, which gives the permutation \"564231\":\n 5 6 4 2 3 1 \n E V L N A C\n D T E S E A\n R O F O D E\n E C W I R E\n E\nAs before, this is read off columnwise to give the ciphertext:\n CAEEN SOIAE DRLEF WEDRE EVTOC\nIf multiple messages of exactly the same length are encrypted using the same keys, they can be anagrammed simultaneously. This can lead to both recovery of the messages, and to recovery of the keys (so that every other message sent with those keys can be read).\nDuring World War I, the German military used a double columnar transposition cipher, changing the keys infrequently. The system was regularly solved by the French, naming it \u00dcbchi, who were typically able to quickly find the keys once they'd intercepted a number of messages of the same length, which generally took only a few days. However, the French success became widely known and, after a publication in \"Le Matin\", the Germans changed to a new system on 18 November 1914.\nDuring World War II, the double transposition cipher was used by Dutch Resistance groups, the French Maquis and the British Special Operations Executive (SOE), which was in charge of managing underground activities in Europe. It was also used by agents of the American Office of Strategic Services and as an emergency cipher for the German Army and Navy.\nUntil the invention of the VIC cipher, double transposition was generally regarded as the most complicated cipher that an agent could operate reliably under difficult field conditions.\nCryptanalysis.\nThe double transposition cipher can be treated as a single transposition with a key as long as the product of the lengths of the two keys.\nIn late 2013, a double transposition challenge, regarded by its author as undecipherable, was solved by George Lasry using a divide-and-conquer approach where each transposition was attacked individually.\nMyszkowski transposition.\nA variant form of columnar transposition, proposed by \u00c9mile Victor Th\u00e9odore Myszkowski in 1902, requires a keyword with recurrent letters. In usual practice, subsequent occurrences of a keyword letter are treated as if the next letter in alphabetical order, \"e.g.,\" the keyword TOMATO yields a numeric keystring of \"532164.\"\nIn Myszkowski transposition, recurrent keyword letters are numbered identically, TOMATO yielding a keystring of \"432143.\"\n 4 3 2 1 4 3\n W E A R E D\n I S C O V E\n R E D F L E\n E A T O N C\n E\nPlaintext columns with unique numbers are transcribed downward;\nthose with recurring numbers are transcribed left to right:\n ROFOA CDTED SEEEA CWEIV RLENE\nDisrupted transposition.\nA disrupted transposition cipher further complicates the transposition pattern with irregular filling of the rows of the matrix, i.e. with some spaces intentionally left blank (or blackened out like in the Rasterschl\u00fcssel 44), or filled later with either another part of the plaintext or random letters.\nComb approach.\nThis method (attributed to Gen. Luigi Sacco) starts a new row once the plaintext reaches a column whose key number is equal to the current row number. This produces irregular row lengths. For example, \n F O R E V E R J I G S A W &lt; Key\n 4 8 9 2 12 3 10 7 6 5 11 1 13 Blanks after no.:\n C O M P L I C A T E S T * 1\n H E T R * * * * * * * * * 2\n A N S P O S * * * * * * * 3\n I * * * * * * * * * * * * 4\n T I O N P A T T E R * * * 5\n N L I K E A C O M * * * * 6\n B _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * * * * * 7\nThe columns are then taken off as per regular columnar transposition: TPRPN, KISAA, CHAIT, NBERT, EMATO, etc.\nNumerical sequence approach.\nAnother simple option would be to use a password that places blanks according to its number sequence. E.g. \"SECRET\" would be decoded to a sequence of \"5,2,1,4,3,6\" and cross out the 5th field of the matrix, then count again and cross out the second field, etc. The following example would be a matrix set up for columnar transposition with the columnar key \"CRYPTO\" and filled with crossed out fields according to the disruption key \"SECRET\" (marked with an asterisk), whereafter the message \"we are discovered, flee at once\" is placed in the leftover spaces. The resulting ciphertext (the columns read according to the transposition key) is \"WCEEO ERET RIVFC EODN SELE ADA\".\n C R Y P T O\n 1 4 6 3 5 2\n W E A R * E\n * * D I S *\n C O * V E R\n E D * F L E\n E * A * * T\n O N * C E *\nGrilles.\nAnother form of transposition cipher uses \"grilles\", or physical masks with cut-outs. This can produce a highly irregular transposition over the period specified by the size of the grille, but requires the correspondents to keep a physical key secret. Grilles were first proposed in 1550, and were still in military use for the first few months of World War One.\nDetection and cryptanalysis.\nSince transposition does not affect the frequency of individual symbols, simple transposition can be easily detected by the cryptanalyst by doing a frequency count. If the ciphertext exhibits a frequency distribution very similar to plaintext, it is most likely a transposition.\nIn general, transposition methods are vulnerable to anagramming\u2014sliding pieces of ciphertext around, then looking for sections that look like anagrams of words in English or whatever language the plaintext was written in, and solving the anagrams. Once such anagrams have been found, they reveal information about the transposition pattern, and can consequently be extended. Simpler transpositions often suffer from the property that keys very close to the correct key will reveal long sections of legible plaintext interspersed by gibberish. Consequently, such ciphers may be vulnerable to optimum seeking algorithms such as genetic algorithms and hill-climbing algorithms.\nThere are several specific methods for attacking messages encoded using a transposition cipher. These include:\nThe third method was developed in 1878 by mathematician Edward S. Holden and New-York Tribune journalists John R. G. Hassard and William M. Grosvenor who managed to deciphere telegrams between the Democratic Party and their operatives in the Southern states during the 1876 presidential election and thus prove facts of vote buying, influencing the 1878-1879 congressional elections.\nA detailed description of the cryptanalysis of a German transposition cipher\ncan be found in chapter 7 of Herbert Yardley's \"The American Black Chamber.\"\nA cipher used by the Zodiac Killer, called \"Z-340\", organized into triangular sections with substitution of 63 different symbols for the letters and diagonal \"knight move\" transposition, remained unsolved for over 51 years, until an international team of private citizens cracked it on December 5, 2020, using specialized software.\nCombinations.\nTransposition is often combined with other techniques such as evaluation methods. For example, a simple substitution cipher combined with a columnar transposition avoids the weakness of both. Replacing high frequency ciphertext symbols with high frequency plaintext letters does not reveal chunks of plaintext because of the transposition. Anagramming the transposition does not work because of the substitution. The technique is particularly powerful if combined with fractionation (see below). A disadvantage is that such ciphers are considerably more laborious and error prone than simpler ciphers.\nFractionation.\nTransposition is particularly effective when employed with fractionation \u2013 that is, a preliminary stage that divides each plaintext symbol into two or more ciphertext symbols. For example, the plaintext alphabet could be written out in a grid, and every letter in the message replaced by its co-ordinates (see Polybius square and Straddling checkerboard).\nAnother method of fractionation is to simply convert the message to Morse code, with a symbol for spaces as well as dots and dashes.\nWhen such a fractionated message is transposed, the components of individual letters become widely separated in the message, thus achieving Claude E. Shannon's diffusion. Examples of ciphers that combine fractionation and transposition include the bifid cipher, the trifid cipher, the ADFGVX cipher, the JN-40 cipher, and the VIC cipher.\nAnother choice would be to replace each letter with its binary representation, transpose that, and then convert the new binary string into the corresponding ASCII characters. Looping the scrambling process on the binary string multiple times before changing it into ASCII characters would likely make it harder to break. Many modern block ciphers use more complex forms of transposition related to this simple idea.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48359", "revid": "1155503315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48359", "title": "Substitution ciphers", "text": ""}
{"id": "48360", "revid": "1215485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48360", "title": "New York County, New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "48361", "revid": "8183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48361", "title": "Geographic coordinate system", "text": "System to specify locations on Earth\nA geographic coordinate system (GCS) is a spherical or geodetic coordinate system for measuring and communicating positions directly on Earth as latitude and longitude. It is the simplest, oldest, and most widely used type of the various spatial reference systems that are in use, and forms the basis for most others. Although latitude and longitude form a coordinate tuple like a cartesian coordinate system, geographic coordinate systems are not cartesian because the measurements are angles and are not on a planar surface.\nA full GCS specification, such as those listed in the EPSG and ISO 19111 standards, also includes a choice of geodetic datum (including an Earth ellipsoid), as different datums will yield different latitude and longitude values for the same location.\nHistory.\nThe invention of a geographic coordinate system is generally credited to Eratosthenes of Cyrene, who composed his now-lost \"Geography\" at the Library of Alexandria in the 3rd century\u00a0BC. A century later, Hipparchus of Nicaea improved on this system by determining latitude from stellar measurements rather than solar altitude and determining longitude by timings of lunar eclipses, rather than dead reckoning. In the 1st or 2nd century, Marinus of Tyre compiled an extensive gazetteer and mathematically plotted world map using coordinates measured east from a prime meridian at the westernmost known land, designated the Fortunate Isles, off the coast of western Africa around the Canary or Cape Verde Islands, and measured north or south of the island of Rhodes off Asia Minor. Ptolemy credited him with the full adoption of longitude and latitude, rather than measuring latitude in terms of the length of the midsummer day.\nPtolemy's 2nd-century \"Geography\" used the same prime meridian but measured latitude from the Equator instead. After their work was translated into Arabic in the 9th century, Al-Khw\u0101rizm\u012b's \"Book of the Description of the Earth\" corrected Marinus' and Ptolemy's errors regarding the length of the Mediterranean Sea, causing medieval Arabic cartography to use a prime meridian around 10\u00b0 east of Ptolemy's line. Mathematical cartography resumed in Europe following Maximus Planudes' recovery of Ptolemy's text a little before 1300; the text was translated into Latin at Florence by Jacopo d'Angelo around 1407.\nIn 1884, the United States hosted the International Meridian Conference, attended by representatives from twenty-five nations. Twenty-two of them agreed to adopt the longitude of the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England as the zero-reference line. The Dominican Republic voted against the motion, while France and Brazil abstained. France adopted Greenwich Mean Time in place of local determinations by the Paris Observatory in 1911.\nLatitude and longitude.\nThe \"latitude\" \u03c6 of a point on Earth's surface is defined in one of three ways, depending on the type of coordinate system. In each case, the latitude is the angle formed by the plane of the equator and a line formed by the point on the surface and a second point on equatorial plane. What varies between the types of coordinate systems is how the point on the equatorial plane is determined:\nThe path that joins all points of the same latitude traces a circle on the surface of Earth, as viewed from above the north or south pole, called parallels, as they are parallel to the equator and to each other. The north pole is 90\u00b0\u00a0N; the south pole is 90\u00b0\u00a0S. The 0\u00b0 parallel of latitude is defined to be the equator, the fundamental plane of a geographic coordinate system. The equator divides the globe into Northern and Southern Hemispheres.\nThe \"longitude\" \u03bb of a point on Earth's surface is the angle east or west of a reference meridian to another meridian that passes through that point. All meridians are halves of great ellipses, which converge at the North and South Poles. The meridian of the British Royal Observatory in Greenwich, in southeast London, England, is the international prime meridian, although some organizations\u2014such as the French \u2014continue to use other meridians for internal purposes. The antipodal meridian of Greenwich is both 180\u00b0W and 180\u00b0E. This is not to be conflated with the International Date Line, which partly overlaps with the 180\u00b0 meridian but diverges from it in several places for political and convenience reasons, including between far eastern Russia and the far western Aleutian Islands.\nThe combination of these two components specifies the position of any location on the surface of Earth, without consideration of altitude or depth. The visual grid on a map formed by lines of latitude and longitude is known as a \"graticule\". The origin/zero point of this system is located in the Gulf of Guinea about south of Tema, Ghana, a location often facetiously called Null Island.\nGeodetic datum.\nIn order to use the theoretical definitions of latitude, longitude, and height to precisely measure actual locations on the physical earth, a \"geodetic datum\" must be used. A \"horizonal datum\" is used to precisely measure latitude and longitude, while a \"vertical datum\" is used to measure elevation or altitude. Both types of datum bind a mathematical model of the shape of the earth (usually a reference ellipsoid for a horizontal datum, and a more precise geoid for a vertical datum) to the earth. Traditionally, this binding was created by a network of control points, surveyed locations at which monuments are installed, and were only accurate for a region of the surface of the Earth. Newer datums are based on a global network for satellite measurements (GNSS, VLBI, SLR and DORIS).\nThis combination of a mathematical model and physical binding ensures that users of the same datum obtain identical coordinates for a given physical point. However, different datums typically produce different coordinates for the same location (sometimes deviating several hundred meters) not due to actual movement, but because the reference system itself is shifted. Because any spatial reference system or map projection is ultimately calculated from latitude and longitude, it is crucial that they clearly state the datum on which they are based. For example, a UTM coordinate based on a WGS84 realisation will be different than a UTM coordinate based on NAD27 for the same location. Transforming coordinates from one datum to another requires a datum transformation method such as a Helmert transformation, although in certain situations a simple translation may be sufficient.\nDatums may be global, meaning that they represent the whole Earth, or they may be regional, meaning that they represent an ellipsoid best-fit to only a portion of the Earth. Examples of global datums include the several realizations of WGS 84 (with the 2D datum ensemble EPSG:4326 with 2 meter accuracy as identifier) used for the Global Positioning System, and the several realizations of the International Terrestrial Reference System and Frame (such as ITRF2020 with subcentimeter accuracy), which takes into account continental drift and crustal deformation.\nDatums with a regional fit of the ellipsoid that are chosen by a national cartographical organization include the North American Datums, the European ED50, and the British OSGB36. Given a location, the datum provides the latitude formula_1 and longitude formula_2. In the United Kingdom there are three common latitude, longitude, and height systems in use. WGS84 differs at Greenwich from the one used on published maps OSGB36 by approximately 112m. ED50 differs from about 120m to 180m.\nPoints on the Earth's surface move relative to each other due to continental plate motion, subsidence, and diurnal Earth tidal movement caused by the Moon and the Sun. This daily movement can be as much as a meter. Continental movement can be up to 10 cm a year, or 10 m in a century. A weather system high-pressure area can cause a sinking of 5 mm. Scandinavia is rising by 1 cm a year as a result of the melting of the ice sheets of the last ice age, but neighboring Scotland is rising by only 0.2 cm. These changes are insignificant if a regional datum is used, but are statistically significant if a global datum is used.\nLength of a degree.\nOn the GRS80 or WGS84 spheroid at sea level at the Equator, one latitudinal second measures 30.715 m, one latitudinal minute is 1843 m and one latitudinal degree is 110.6\u00a0km. The circles of longitude, meridians, meet at the geographical poles, with the west\u2013east width of a second naturally decreasing as latitude increases. On the Equator at sea level, one longitudinal second measures 30.92\u00a0m, a longitudinal minute is 1855\u00a0m and a longitudinal degree is 111.3\u00a0km. At 30\u00b0 a longitudinal second is 26.76\u00a0m, at Greenwich (51\u00b028\u203238\u2033N) 19.22\u00a0m, and at 60\u00b0 it is 15.42 m.\nOn the WGS84 spheroid, the length in meters of a degree of latitude at latitude \u03d5 (that is, the number of meters you would have to travel along a north\u2013south line to move 1 degree in latitude, when at latitude \u03d5), is about\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_3\nThe returned measure of meters per degree latitude varies continuously with latitude.\nSimilarly, the length in meters of a degree of longitude can be calculated as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_4\nThe formulae both return units of meters per degree.\nAn alternative method to estimate the length of a longitudinal degree at latitude formula_1 is to assume a spherical Earth (to get the width per minute and second, divide by 60 and 3600, respectively):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_6\nwhere Earth's average meridional radius formula_7 is 6,367,449 m. Since the Earth is an oblate spheroid, not spherical, that result can be off by several tenths of a percent; a better approximation of a longitudinal degree at latitude formula_1 is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_9\nwhere Earth's equatorial radius formula_10 equals 6,378,137 m and formula_11; for the GRS80 and WGS84 spheroids, formula_12. (formula_13 is known as the reduced (or parametric) latitude). Aside from rounding, this is the exact distance along a parallel of latitude; getting the distance along the shortest route will be more work, but those two distances are always within 0.6 m of each other if the two points are one degree of longitude apart.\nAlternative encodings.\nLike any series of multiple-digit numbers, latitude-longitude pairs can be challenging to communicate and remember. Therefore, alternative schemes have been developed for encoding GCS coordinates into alphanumeric strings or words:\nThese are not distinct coordinate systems, only alternative methods for expressing latitude and longitude measurements.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48362", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48362", "title": "ROT13", "text": "Simple encryption method\nROT13 is a simple letter substitution cipher that replaces a letter with the 13th letter after it in the Latin alphabet. \nROT13 is a special case of the Caesar cipher which was developed in ancient Rome, used by Julius Caesar in the 1st century BC. An early entry on the Timeline of cryptography. \nROT13 can be referred by \"Rotate13\", \"rotate by 13 places\", hyphenated \"ROT-13\" or sometimes by its autonym \"EBG13\".\nDescription.\nApplying ROT13 to a piece of text requires examining its alphabetic characters and replacing each one by the letter 13 places further along in the English alphabet, wrapping back to the beginning as necessary.\nWhen encoding a message, A becomes N, B becomes O, and so on up to M, which becomes Z. Then the sequence continues at the beginning of the alphabet: N becomes A, O becomes B, and so on to Z, which becomes M. When decoding a message, the same substitution rules are applied, but this time on the ROT13 encrypted text. Other characters, such as numbers, symbols, punctuation or whitespace, are left unchanged.\nBecause there are 26 letters in the Latin alphabet and 26 = 2 \u00d7 13, the ROT13 function is its own inverse:\nformula_1 for any basic Latin-alphabet text formula_2.\nIn other words, two successive applications of ROT13 restore the original text (in mathematics, this is sometimes called an \"involution\"; in cryptography, a \"reciprocal cipher\").\nThe transformation can be done using a lookup table, such as the following:\nFor example, in the following joke, the punchline has been obscured by ROT13:\n Why did the chicken cross the road?\nGb trg gb gur bgure fvqr!\nTransforming the entire text via ROT13 form, the answer to the joke is revealed:\n Jul qvq gur puvpxra pebff gur ebnq?\n To get to the other side!\nA second application of ROT13 would restore the original.\nUsage.\nROT13 is not intended to be used in modern times. At the time of conception in an era of Ancient Roman technology, the encryption scheme was not represented by a mathematical structure. The key to decrypt a message requires no more knowledge than the fact that ROT13 is in use. Even if secrecy does not fail, any alien party or individual, capable of intercepting the message, could break the code by spending enough time on decoding the text through frequency analysis or finding other patterns.\nIn the early 1980s, people used ROT13 in their messages on Usenet newsgroup servers\nThey did this to hide potentially offensive jokes, or to obscure an answer to a puzzle or other spoiler, or to fool less sophisticated spam bots[\" \u2013 \"].\nROT13 has been the subject of many jokes.\nThe 1989 International Obfuscated C Code Contest (IOCCC) included an entry by Brian Westley. Westley's computer program can be encoded in ROT13 or reversed and still compiles correctly. Its operation, when executed, is either to perform ROT13 encoding on, or to reverse its input.\nIn December 1999, it was found that Netscape Communicator used ROT13 as part of an insecure scheme to store email passwords. \nIn 2001, Russian programmer Dimitry Sklyarov demonstrated that an eBook vendor, New Paradigm Research Group (NPRG), used ROT13 to encrypt their documents. It has been speculated that NPRG may have mistaken the ROT13 toy example\u2014provided with the Adobe eBook software development kit\u2014for a serious encryption scheme. Windows XP uses ROT13 on some of its registry keys. ROT13 is also used in the Unix fortune program to conceal potentially offensive dicta.\nJohann Ernst Elias Bessler, an 18th-century clock maker and constructor of perpetual motion machines, pointed out that ROT13 encodes his surname as \"Orffyre\". He used its latinised form, \"Orffyreus\", as his pseudonym.\nNet culture.\nBecause of its utter unsuitability for real secrecy, ROT13 has become a catchphrase to refer to any conspicuously weak encryption scheme; a critic might claim that \"56-bit DES is little better than ROT13 these days\". In a play on real terms like \"double DES\" several terms cropped up with humorous intent:\nROT13 jokes were popular on many newsgroup servers, like net.jokes as early as the 1980s.\nThe newsgroup alt.folklore.urban coined a word\u2014\"furrfu\"\u2014that was the ROT13 encoding of the frequently encoded utterance \"sheesh\". \"Furrfu\" evolved in mid-1992 as a response to postings repeating urban myths on alt.folklore.urban, after some posters complained that \"Sheesh!\" as a response to newcomers was being overused.\nLetter games.\nROT13 provides an opportunity for letter games. Some words will, when transformed with ROT13, produce another word. Examples of 7-letter pairs in the English language are \"abjurer\" and \"nowhere\", and \"Chechen\" and \"purpura\". Other examples of words like these are shown in the table. The pair \"gnat\" and \"tang\" is an example of words that are both ROT13 reciprocals and reversals.\nVariants and combinations.\nROT5 is a practice similar to ROT13 that applies to numeric digits (0 to 9). ROT13 and ROT5 can be used together in the same message, sometimes called ROT18 (18 = 13 + 5) or ROT13.5.\nROT47 is a derivative of ROT13 which, in addition to scrambling the basic letters, treats numbers and common symbols. Instead of using the sequence A\u2013Z as the alphabet, ROT47 uses a larger set of characters from the common character encoding known as ASCII. Specifically, the 7-bit printable characters, excluding space, from decimal 33 '!' through 126 '~', 94 in total, taken in the order of the numerical values of their ASCII codes, are rotated by 47 positions, without special consideration of case. For example, the character A is mapped to p, while a is mapped to 2.\nThe use of a larger alphabet produces a more thorough obfuscation than that of ROT13; for example, a telephone number such as +1-415-839-6885 is not obvious at first sight from the scrambled result Z`\\c`d\\gbh\\eggd. On the other hand, because ROT47 introduces numbers and symbols into the mix without discrimination, it is more immediately obvious that the text has been encoded.\nExample:\nThe Quick Brown Fox Jumps Over The Lazy Dog.\nenciphers to\n%96 \"F:4&lt; qC@H? u@I yF&gt;AD ~G6C %96 {2KJ s@8]\nThe GNU C library, a set of standard routines available for use in computer programming, contains a function\u2014memfrob()\u2014which has a similar purpose to ROT13, although it is intended for use with arbitrary binary data. The function operates by combining each byte with the binary pattern 00101010 (42) using the exclusive or (XOR) operation. This effects a simple XOR cipher. Like ROT13, XOR (and therefore memfrob()) is self-reciprocal, and provides a similar, virtually absent, level of security.\nImplementation.\ntr.\nThe ROT13 and ROT47 are fairly easy to implement using the Unix terminal application tr; to encrypt the string \"Pack My Box With Five Dozen Liquor Jugs\" in ROT13:\n$ # Map upper case A-Z to N-ZA-M and lower case a-z to n-za-m\n$ tr 'A-Za-z' 'N-ZA-Mn-za-m' \u00ab&lt; \"Pack My Box With Five Dozen Liquor Jugs\"\nCnpx Zl Obk Jvgu Svir Qbmra Yvdhbe Whtf\nand the string \"The Quick Brown Fox Jumps Over The Lazy Dog\" for ROT47:\n \nEmacs and Vim.\nIn Emacs, one can ROT13 the buffer or a selection with the commands: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;M-x toggle-rot13-mode, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;M-x rot13-other-window, or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;M-x rot13-region.\nIn the Vim text editor, one can ROT13 a buffer with the command: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;ggg?G.\nJavaScript.\nWithout using specific built-in cryptographic libraries or advanced string methods, a ROT13 function can be implemented manually in JavaScript by processing characters one by one and performing a direct letter lookup and shift:\nfunction rot13(str) {\n const upper_case = \"ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ\".split(\"\");\n const lower_case = \"abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz\".split(\"\");\n let result = \"\";\n for (let i = 0; i &lt; str.length; i++) {\n const char = str[i];\n if (upper_case.includes(char)) {\n let index = upper_case.indexOf(char);\n // Rotate the index by 13 positions.\n // If index is from 0 to 12 then add 13. If index is from 13 to 25, subtract 13\n let rotated_Index = index &lt; 13 ? index + 13 : index - 13;\n result += upper_case[rotated_Index];\n // Check if the character is a lowercase letter\n else if (lower_case.includes(char)) {\n let index = lower_case.indexOf(char);\n // Rotate the index by 13 positions.\n let rotated_Index = index &lt; 13 ? index + 13 : index - 13;\n result += lower_case[rotated_Index];\n // If it's not a letter, append it as it it\n else {\n result += char;\n return result;\n// Example usage:\n// console.log(rot13(\"Hello World!\")); // Uryyb Jbeyq!\n// console.log(rot13(\"Javascript is fun.\")); // Wninfpevcg vf sha.\nPython.\nThe module codecs provides 'rot13' text transform.\n\u00bb&gt; import codecs\n\u00bb&gt; print(codecs.encode(\"The Quick Brown Fox Jumps Over The Lazy Dog\", \"rot13\"))\nGur Dhvpx Oebja Sbk Whzcf Bire Gur Ynml Qbt\nWithout importing any libraries, it can be done by creating a translation table manually:\n\u00bb&gt; def gen_rot13_table(func=lambda x: x):\n... for c in (ord(\"A\"), ord(\"a\")):\n... for i in range(26):\n... yield func(i + c), func((i + 13) % 26 + c)\n\u00bb&gt; table = dict(gen_rot13_table(chr))\n\u00bb&gt; table\n\u00bb&gt; s = \"Quartz glyph job vext cwm porshrop finks?!\"\n\u00bb&gt; print(\"\".join(table.get(c, c) for c in s))\nDhnegm tylcu wbo irkg pjz cbefuebc svaxf?!\nFor Python 3, you can use the method https:// (with https://):\n\u00bb&gt; x, y = zip(*gen_rot13_table(chr))\n\u00bb&gt; \".join(x)\n'ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'\n\u00bb&gt; \".join(y)\n'NOPQRSTUVWXYZABCDEFGHIJKLMnopqrstuvwxyzabcdefghijklm'\n\u00bb&gt; table = str.maketrans(\".join(x), \".join(y))\n\u00bb&gt; table\n\u00bb&gt; print(s.translate(table))\nDhnegm tylcu wbo irkg pjz cbefuebc svaxf?!\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48363", "revid": "16852310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48363", "title": "Richmond County, New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "48364", "revid": "50783893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48364", "title": "Software architecture", "text": "High level structures of a software system\nSoftware architecture is the set of structures needed to reason about a software system and the discipline of creating such structures and systems. Each structure comprises software elements, relations among them, and properties of both elements and relations.\nThe \"architecture\" of a software system is a metaphor, analogous to the architecture of a building. It functions as the blueprints for the system and the development project, which project management can later use to extrapolate the tasks necessary to be executed by the teams and people involved.\nSoftware architecture is about making fundamental structural choices that are costly to change once implemented. Software architecture choices include specific structural options from possibilities in the design of the software. There are two fundamental laws in software architecture:\n\"Architectural Kata\" is a teamwork which can be used to produce an architectural solution that fits the needs. Each team extracts and prioritizes architectural characteristics (aka non functional requirements) then models the components accordingly. The team can use C4 Model which is a flexible method to model the architecture just enough. Note that synchronous communication between architectural components, entangles them and they must share the same architectural characteristics.\nDocumenting software architecture facilitates communication between stakeholders, captures early decisions about the high-level design, and allows the reuse of design components between projects.\nSoftware architecture design is commonly juxtaposed with software application design. Whilst application design focuses on the design of the processes and data supporting the required functionality (the services offered by the system), software architecture design focuses on designing the infrastructure within which application functionality can be realized and executed such that the functionality is provided in a way which meets the system's non-functional requirements.\nSoftware architectures can be categorized into two main types: monolith and distributed architecture, each having its own subcategories.\nSoftware architecture tends to become more complex over time. Software architects should use \"fitness functions\" to continuously keep the architecture in check.\nScope.\nOpinions vary as to the scope of software architectures:\nThere is no sharp distinction between software architecture versus design and requirements engineering (see Related fields below). They are all part of a \"chain of intentionality\" from high-level intentions to low-level details.\nSoftware architecture style vs. software architecture pattern.\nSoftware Architecture Pattern refers to a reusable, proven solution to a recurring problem at the system level, addressing concerns related to the overall structure, component interactions, and quality attributes of the system. Software architecture patterns operate at a higher level of abstraction than software design patterns, solving broader system-level challenges. While these patterns typically affect system-level concerns, the distinction between architectural patterns and architectural styles can sometimes be blurry. Examples include Circuit Breaker.\nSoftware Architecture Style refers to a high-level structural organization that defines the overall system organization, specifying how components are organized, how they interact, and the constraints on those interactions. Architecture styles typically include a vocabulary of component and connector types, as well as semantic models for interpreting the system's properties. These styles represent the most coarse-grained level of system organization. Examples include Layered Architecture, Microservices, and Event-Driven Architecture.\nAnti-patterns.\nThe following architectural anti-patterns can arise when architects make decisions. These anti-patterns often follow a progressive sequence, where resolving one may lead to the emergence of another.\nCharacteristics.\nSoftware architecture exhibits the following:\nMultitude of stakeholders: software systems have to cater to a variety of stakeholders such as business managers, owners, users, and operators. These stakeholders all have their own concerns with respect to the system. Balancing these concerns and demonstrating that they are addressed is part of designing the system. This implies that architecture involves dealing with a broad variety of concerns and stakeholders, and has a multidisciplinary nature.\nSeparation of concerns: the established way for architects to reduce complexity is to separate the concerns that drive the design. Architecture documentation shows that all stakeholder concerns are addressed by modeling and describing the architecture from separate points of view associated with the various stakeholder concerns. These separate descriptions are called architectural views (see for example the 4+1 architectural view model).\nQuality-driven: classic software design approaches (e.g. Jackson Structured Programming) were driven by required functionality and the flow of data through the system, but the current insight is that the architecture of a software system is more closely related to its quality attributes such as fault-tolerance, backward compatibility, extensibility, reliability, maintainability, availability, security, usability, and other such \u2013ilities. Stakeholder concerns often translate into requirements on these quality attributes, which are variously called non-functional requirements, extra-functional requirements, behavioral requirements, or quality attribute requirements.\nRecurring styles: like building architecture, the software architecture discipline has developed standard ways to address recurring concerns. These \"standard ways\" are called by various names at various levels of abstraction. Common terms for recurring solutions are architectural style, tactic, reference architecture and architectural pattern.\nConceptual integrity: a term introduced by Fred Brooks in his 1975 book \"The Mythical Man-Month\" to denote the idea that the architecture of a software system represents an overall vision of what it should do and how it should do it. This vision should be separated from its implementation. The architect assumes the role of \"keeper of the vision\", making sure that additions to the system are in line with the architecture, hence preserving conceptual integrity.\nCognitive constraints: An observation first made in a 1967 paper by computer programmer Melvin Conway that organizations which design systems are constrained to produce designs which are copies of the communication structures of these organizations. Fred Brooks introduced it to a wider audience when he cited the paper and the idea in \"The Mythical Man-Month\", calling it Conway's Law.\nMotivation.\nSoftware architecture is an \"intellectually graspable\" abstraction of a complex system. This abstraction provides a number of benefits:\nHistory.\nThe comparison between software design and (civil) architecture was first drawn in the late 1960s, but the term \"software architecture\" did not see widespread usage until the 1990s. The field of computer science had encountered problems associated with complexity since its formation. Earlier problems of complexity were solved by developers by choosing the right data structures, developing algorithms, and by applying the concept of separation of concerns. Although the term \"software architecture\" is relatively new to the industry, the fundamental principles of the field have been applied sporadically by software engineering pioneers since the mid-1980s. Early attempts to capture and explain software architecture of a system were imprecise and disorganized, often characterized by a set of box-and-line diagrams.\nSoftware architecture as a concept has its origins in the research of Edsger Dijkstra in 1968 and David Parnas in the early 1970s. These scientists emphasized that the structure of a software system matters and getting the structure right is critical. During the 1990s there was a concerted effort to define and codify fundamental aspects of the discipline, with research work concentrating on architectural styles (patterns), architecture description languages, architecture documentation, and formal methods.\nResearch institutions have played a prominent role in furthering software architecture as a discipline. Mary Shaw and David Garlan of Carnegie Mellon wrote a book titled \"Software Architecture: Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline\" in 1996, which promoted software architecture concepts such as components, connectors, and styles. The University of California, Irvine's Institute for Software Research's efforts in software architecture research is directed primarily in architectural styles, architecture description languages, and dynamic architectures.\nIEEE 1471-2000, \"Recommended Practice for Architecture Description of Software-Intensive Systems\", was the first formal standard in the area of software architecture. It was adopted in 2007 by ISO as ISO/IEC 42010:2007. In November 2011, IEEE 1471\u20132000 was superseded by ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011, \"Systems and software engineering \u2013 Architecture description\" (jointly published by IEEE and ISO).\nWhile in IEEE 1471, software architecture was about the architecture of \"software-intensive systems\", defined as \"any system where software contributes essential influences to the design, construction, deployment, and evolution of the system as a whole\", the 2011 edition goes a step further by including the ISO/IEC 15288 and ISO/IEC 12207 definitions of a system, which embrace not only hardware and software, but also \"humans, processes, procedures, facilities, materials and naturally occurring entities\". This reflects the relationship between software architecture, enterprise architecture and solution architecture.\nArchitecture activities.\nMaking architectural decisions involves collecting sufficient relevant information, providing justification for the decision, documenting the decision and its rationale, and communicating it effectively to the appropriate stakeholders. \nIt's software architect's responsibility to match architectural characteristics (aka non-functional requirements) with business requirements. For example: \nThere are four core activities in software architecture design. These core architecture activities are performed iteratively and at different stages of the initial software development life-cycle, as well as over the evolution of a system.\nArchitectural analysis is the process of understanding the environment in which a proposed system will operate and determining the requirements for the system. The input or requirements to the analysis activity can come from any number of stakeholders and include items such as:\nThe outputs of the analysis activity are those requirements that have a measurable impact on a software system's architecture, called architecturally significant requirements.\nArchitectural synthesis or design is the process of creating an architecture. Given the architecturally significant requirements determined by the analysis, the current state of the design and the results of any evaluation activities, the design is created and improved.\nArchitecture evaluation is the process of determining how well the current design or a portion of it satisfies the requirements derived during analysis. An evaluation can occur whenever an architect is considering a design decision, it can occur after some portion of the design has been completed, it can occur after the final design has been completed or it can occur after the system has been constructed. Some of the available software architecture evaluation techniques include Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method (ATAM) and TARA. Frameworks for comparing the techniques are discussed in frameworks such as \"SARA Report\" and \"Architecture Reviews: Practice and Experience\".\nArchitecture evolution is the process of maintaining and adapting an existing software architecture to meet changes in requirements and environment. As software architecture provides a fundamental structure of a software system, its evolution and maintenance would necessarily impact its fundamental structure. As such, architecture evolution is concerned with adding new functionality as well as maintaining existing functionality and system behavior.\nArchitecture requires critical supporting activities. These supporting activities take place throughout the core software architecture process. They include knowledge management and communication, design reasoning and decision-making, and documentation.\nArchitecture supporting activities.\nSoftware architecture supporting activities are carried out during core software architecture activities. These supporting activities assist a software architect to carry out analysis, synthesis, evaluation, and evolution. For instance, an architect has to gather knowledge, make decisions, and document during the analysis phase.\nSoftware Architecture Design Strategies.\nSoftware architecture inherently deals with uncertainties, and the size of architectural components can significantly influence a system's outcomes, both positively and negatively. Neal Ford and Mark Richards propose an iterative approach to address the challenge of identifying and right-sizing components. This method emphasizes continuous refinement as teams develop a more nuanced understanding of system behavior and requirements.\nThe approach typically involves a cycle with several stages: \nThis cycle serves as a general framework and can be adapted to different domains.\nSoftware architecture topics.\nSoftware architecture and agile development.\nThere are also concerns that software architecture leads to too much big design up front, especially among proponents of agile software development. A number of methods have been developed to balance the trade-offs of up-front design and agility, including the agile method DSDM which mandates a \"Foundations\" phase during which \"just enough\" architectural foundations are laid. \"IEEE Software\" devoted a special issue to the interaction between agility and architecture.\nSoftware architecture erosion.\nSoftware architecture erosion refers to a gradual gap between the intended and implemented architecture of a software system over time. The phenomenon of software architecture erosion was initially brought to light in 1992 by Perry and Wolf alongside their definition of software architecture.\nSoftware architecture erosion may occur in each stage of the software development life cycle and has varying impacts on the development speed and the cost of maintenance. Software architecture erosion occurs due to various reasons, such as \"architectural violations\", \"the accumulation of technical debt\", and \"knowledge vaporization\". A famous case of architecture erosion is the failure of Mozilla Web browser. Mozilla is an application created by Netscape with a complex codebase that became harder to maintain due to continuous changes. Due to initial poor design and growing architecture erosion, Netscape spent two years redeveloping the Mozilla Web browser, demonstrating the importance of proactive architecture management to prevent costly repairs and project delays.\nArchitecture erosion can decrease software performance, substantially increase evolutionary costs, and degrade software quality. Various approaches and tools have been proposed to detect architecture erosion. These approaches are primarily classified into four categories: consistency-based, evolution-based, defect-based, and decision-based approaches. For instance, automated architecture conformance checks, static code analysis tools, and refactoring techniques help identify and mitigate erosion early.\nBesides, the measures used to address architecture erosion contain two main types: preventative and remedial measures. Preventative measures include enforcing architectural rules, regular code reviews, and automated testing, while remedial measures involve refactoring, redesign, and documentation updates.\nSoftware architecture recovery.\nSoftware architecture recovery (or reconstruction, or reverse engineering) includes the methods, techniques, and processes to uncover a software system's architecture from available information, including its implementation and documentation. Architecture recovery is often necessary to make informed decisions in the face of obsolete or out-of-date documentation and \narchitecture erosion: implementation and maintenance decisions diverging from the envisioned architecture. Practices exist to recover software architecture as static program analysis. This is a part of the subjects covered by the software intelligence practice.\nRelated fields.\nDesign.\nArchitecture is design but not all design is architectural. In practice, the architect is the one who draws the line between software architecture (architectural design) and detailed design (non-architectural design). There are no rules or guidelines that fit all cases, although there have been attempts to formalize the distinction. \nAccording to the \"Intension/Locality Hypothesis\", the distinction between architectural and detailed design is defined by the \"Locality Criterion\", according to which a statement about software design is non-local (architectural) if and only if a program that satisfies it can be expanded into a program that does not. For example, the client\u2013server style is architectural (strategic) because a program that is built on this principle can be expanded into a program that is not client\u2013server\u2014for example, by adding peer-to-peer nodes.\nRequirements engineering.\nRequirements engineering and software architecture can be seen as complementary approaches: while software architecture targets the 'solution space' or the 'how', requirements engineering addresses the 'problem space' or the 'what'. Requirements engineering entails the elicitation, negotiation, specification, validation, documentation, and management of requirements. Both requirements engineering and software architecture revolve around stakeholder concerns, needs, and wishes.\nThere is considerable overlap between requirements engineering and software architecture, as evidenced for example by a study into five industrial software architecture methods that concludes that \"the inputs (goals, constraints, etc.) are usually ill-defined, and only get discovered or better understood as the architecture starts to emerge\" and that while \"most architectural concerns are expressed as requirements on the system, they can also include mandated design decisions\". In short, required behavior impacts solution architecture, which in turn may introduce new requirements. Approaches such as the Twin Peaks model aim to exploit the synergistic relation between requirements and architecture.\nComputer architecture targets the internal structure of a computer system, in terms of collaborating hardware components such as the CPU \u2013 or processor \u2013 the bus and the memory.\nServerless architecture is a cloud computing paradigm that is often misunderstood as being server-free. It essentially shifts server management responsibilities from developers to cloud service providers. This allows businesses to run their backend code on cloud infrastructure, eliminating the need for physical server management. The event-driven approach of serverless architecture relies on small, task-specific functions that are executed on-demand. These functions are known as Function as a Service (FaaS), and they offer cost-efficiency through a pay-as-you-go billing model and dynamic resource scaling based on application demand.\nThe term systems architecture has originally been applied to the architecture of systems that consist of both hardware and software. The main concern addressed by the systems architecture is then the integration of software and hardware in a complete, correctly working device. In another common \u2013 much broader \u2013 meaning, the term applies to the architecture of any complex system which may be of a technical, sociotechnical or social nature.\nThe goal of enterprise architecture is to \"translate business vision and strategy into effective enterprise\". Enterprise architecture frameworks, such as TOGAF and the Zachman Framework, usually distinguish between different enterprise architecture layers. Although terminology differs from framework to framework, many include at least a distinction between a \"business layer\", an \"application\" (or \"information\") \"layer\", and a \"technology layer\". Enterprise architecture addresses among others the alignment between these layers, usually in a top-down approach.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48365", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48365", "title": "Rot13", "text": ""}
{"id": "48366", "revid": "51017504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48366", "title": "Polyurethane", "text": "Polymer composed of a chain of organic units joined by carbamate (urethane) links\nPolyurethane (; often abbreviated as PUR and PU) is a class of polymers composed of organic units joined by carbamate (urethane) links. In contrast to other common polymers such as polyethylene and polystyrene, polyurethane refers to a group of polymers. Unlike polyethylene and polystyrene, polyurethanes can be produced from a wide range of starting materials, resulting in various polymers within the same group. This chemical variety produces polyurethanes with different chemical structures leading to many different applications. These include rigid and flexible foams, and coatings, adhesives, electrical potting compounds, and fibers such as spandex and polyurethane laminate (PUL). Foams are the largest application accounting for 67% of all polyurethane produced in 2016.\nA polyurethane is typically produced by reacting a polymeric isocyanate with a polyol. Since a polyurethane contains two types of monomers, which polymerize one after the other, they are classed as alternating copolymers. Both the isocyanates and polyols used to make a polyurethane contain two or more functional groups per molecule.\nGlobal production in 2019 was 25 million metric tonnes, accounting for about 6% of all polymers produced in that year.\nHistory.\nOtto Bayer and his coworkers at IG Farben in Leverkusen, Germany, first made polyurethanes in 1937. The new polymers had some advantages over existing plastics that were made by polymerizing olefins or by polycondensation, and were not covered by patents obtained by Wallace Carothers on polyesters. Early work focused on the production of fibers and flexible foams and PUs were applied on a limited scale as aircraft coating during World War II. Polyisocyanates became commercially available in 1952, and production of flexible polyurethane foam began in 1954 by combining toluene diisocyanate (TDI) and polyester polyols. These materials were also used to produce rigid foams, gum rubber, and elastomers. Linear fibers were produced from hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) and 1,4-Butanediol (BDO).\nDuPont introduced polyethers, specifically poly(tetramethylene ether) glycol, in 1956. BASF and Dow Chemical introduced polyalkylene glycols in 1957. Polyether polyols were cheaper, easier to handle and more water-resistant than polyester polyols. Union Carbide and Mobay, a U.S. Monsanto/Bayer joint venture, also began making polyurethane chemicals. In 1960 more than 45,000 metric tons of flexible polyurethane foams were produced. The availability of chlorofluoroalkane blowing agents, inexpensive polyether polyols, and methylene diphenyl diisocyanate (MDI) allowed polyurethane rigid foams to be used as high-performance insulation materials. In 1967, urethane-modified polyisocyanurate rigid foams were introduced, offering even better thermal stability and flammability resistance. During the 1960s, automotive interior safety components, such as instrument and door panels, were produced by back-filling thermoplastic skins with semi-rigid foam.\nIn 1969, Bayer exhibited an all-plastic car in D\u00fcsseldorf, Germany. Parts of this car, such as the fascia and body panels, were manufactured using a new process called reaction injection molding (RIM), in which the reactants were mixed and then injected into a mold. The addition of fillers, such as milled glass, mica, and processed mineral fibers, gave rise to reinforced RIM (RRIM), which provided improvements in flexural modulus (stiffness), reduction in coefficient of thermal expansion and better thermal stability. This technology was used to make the first plastic-body automobile in the United States, the Pontiac Fiero, in 1983. Further increases in stiffness were obtained by incorporating pre-placed glass mats into the RIM mold cavity, also known broadly as resin injection molding, or structural RIM.\nStarting in the early 1980s, water-blown microcellular flexible foams were used to mold gaskets for automotive panels and air-filter seals, replacing PVC polymers. Polyurethane foams are used in many automotive applications including seating, head and arm rests, and headliners.\nPolyurethane foam (including foam rubber) is sometimes made using small amounts of blowing agents to give less dense foam, better cushioning/energy absorption or thermal insulation. In the early 1990s, because of their impact on ozone depletion, the Montreal Protocol restricted the use of many chlorine-containing blowing agents, such as trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11). By the late 1990s, blowing agents such as carbon dioxide, pentane, 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a) and 1,1,1,3,3-pentafluoropropane (HFC-245fa) were widely used in North America and the EU, although chlorinated blowing agents remained in use in many developing countries. Later, HFC-134a was also banned due to high ODP and GWP readings, and HFC-141B was introduced in early 2000s as an alternate blowing agent in developing nations.\nChemistry.\nPolyurethanes are produced by reacting diisocyanates with polyols, often in the presence of a catalyst, or upon exposure to ultraviolet radiation. \nCommon catalysts include tertiary amines, such as DABCO, DMDEE, or metallic soaps, such as dibutyltin dilaurate. The stoichiometry of the starting materials must be carefully controlled as excess isocyanate can trimerise, leading to the formation of rigid polyisocyanurates. The polymer usually has a highly crosslinked molecular structure, resulting in a thermosetting material which does not melt on heating; although some thermoplastic polyurethanes are also produced.\nformula_1\nThe most common application of polyurethane is as solid foams, which requires the presence of a gas, or blowing agent, during the polymerization step. This is commonly achieved by adding small amounts of water, which reacts with isocyanates to form CO2 gas and an amine, via an unstable carbamic acid group. The amine produced can also react with isocyanates to form urea groups, and as such the polymer will contain both these and urethane linkers. The urea is not very soluble in the reaction mixture and tends to form separate \"hard segment\" phases consisting mostly of polyurea. The concentration and organization of these polyurea phases can have a significant impact on the properties of the foam.\nThe type of foam produced can be controlled by regulating the amount of blowing agent and also by the addition of various surfactants which change the rheology of the polymerising mixture. Foams can be either \"closed-cell\", where most of the original bubbles or cells remain intact, or \"open-cell\", where the bubbles have broken but the edges of the bubbles are stiff enough to retain their shape, in extreme cases reticulated foams can be formed. Open-cell foams feel soft and allow air to flow through, so they are comfortable when used in seat cushions or mattresses. Closed-cell foams are used as rigid thermal insulation. High-density microcellular foams can be formed without the addition of blowing agents by mechanically frothing the polyol prior to use. These are tough elastomeric materials used in covering car steering wheels or shoe soles.\nThe properties of a polyurethane are greatly influenced by the types of isocyanates and polyols used to make it. Long, flexible segments, contributed by the polyol, give soft, elastic polymer. High amounts of crosslinking give tough or rigid polymers. Long chains and low crosslinking give a polymer that is very stretchy, short chains with many crosslinks produce a hard polymer while long chains and intermediate crosslinking give a polymer useful for making foam. The choices available for the isocyanates and polyols, in addition to other additives and processing conditions allow polyurethanes to have the very wide range of properties that make them such widely used polymers.\nRaw materials.\nThe main ingredients to make a polyurethane are di- and tri-isocyanates and polyols. Other materials are added to aid processing the polymer or to modify the properties of the polymer. PU foam formulation sometimes have water added too.\nIsocyanates.\nIsocyanates used to make polyurethane have two or more isocyanate groups on each molecule. The most commonly used isocyanates are the aromatic diisocyanates, toluene diisocyanate (TDI) and methylene diphenyl diisocyanate, (MDI). These aromatic isocyanates are more reactive than aliphatic isocyanates.\nTDI and MDI are generally less expensive and more reactive than other isocyanates. Industrial grade TDI and MDI are mixtures of isomers and MDI often contains polymeric materials. They are used to make flexible foam (for example slabstock foam for mattresses or molded foams for car seats), rigid foam (for example insulating foam in refrigerators) elastomers (shoe soles, for example), and so on. The isocyanates may be modified by partially reacting them with polyols or introducing some other materials to reduce volatility (and hence toxicity) of the isocyanates and decrease their freezing points to make handling easier or to improve the properties of the final polymers.\nAliphatic and cycloaliphatic isocyanates are used in smaller quantities, most often in coatings and other applications where color and transparency are important since polyurethanes made with aromatic isocyanates tend to darken on exposure to light.{{page needed|date=August 2023}} The most important aliphatic and cycloaliphatic isocyanates are 1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI), 1-isocyanato-3-isocyanatomethyl-3,5,5-trimethyl-cyclohexane (isophorone diisocyanate, IPDI), and 4,4\u2032-diisocyanato dicyclohexylmethane (H12MDI or hydrogenated MDI). Other more specialized isocyanates include Tetramethylxylylene diisocyanate (TMXDI).\nPolyols.\nPolyols are polymers in their own right and have on average two or more hydroxyl groups per molecule. They can be converted to polyether polyols by co-polymerizing ethylene oxide and propylene oxide with a suitable polyol precursor. Polyester polyols are made by the polycondensation of multifunctional carboxylic acids and polyhydroxyl compounds. They can be further classified according to their end use. Higher molecular weight polyols (molecular weights from 2,000 to 10,000) are used to make more flexible polyurethanes while lower molecular weight polyols make more rigid products.\nPolyols for flexible applications use low functionality initiators such as dipropylene glycol (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a02), glycerine (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a03), or a sorbitol/water solution (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a02.75). Polyols for rigid applications use higher functionality initiators such as sucrose (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a08), sorbitol (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a06), toluenediamine (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a04), and Mannich bases (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a04). Propylene oxide and/or ethylene oxide is added to the initiators until the desired molecular weight is achieved. The order of addition and the amounts of each oxide affect many polyol properties, such as compatibility, water-solubility, and reactivity. Polyols made with only propylene oxide are terminated with secondary hydroxyl groups and are less reactive than polyols capped with ethylene oxide, which contain primary hydroxyl groups. Incorporating carbon dioxide into the polyol structure is being researched by multiple companies.\nGraft polyols (also called filled polyols or polymer polyols) contain finely dispersed styrene\u2013acrylonitrile, acrylonitrile, or polyurea (PHD) polymer solids chemically grafted to a high molecular weight polyether backbone. They are used to increase the load-bearing properties of low-density high-resiliency (HR) foam, as well as add toughness to microcellular foams and cast elastomers. Initiators such as ethylenediamine and triethanolamine are used to make low molecular weight rigid foam polyols that have built-in catalytic activity due to the presence of nitrogen atoms in the backbone. A special class of polyether polyols, poly(tetramethylene ether) glycols, which are made by polymerizing tetrahydrofuran, are used in high performance coating, wetting and elastomer applications.\nConventional polyester polyols are based on virgin raw materials and are manufactured by the direct polyesterification of high-purity diacids and glycols, such as adipic acid and 1,4-butanediol. Polyester polyols are usually more expensive and more viscous than polyether polyols, but they make polyurethanes with better solvent, abrasion, and cut resistance. Other polyester polyols are based on reclaimed raw materials. They are manufactured by transesterification (glycolysis) of recycled poly(ethyleneterephthalate) (PET) or dimethylterephthalate (DMT) distillation bottoms with glycols such as diethylene glycol. These low molecular weight, aromatic polyester polyols are used in rigid foam, and bring low cost and excellent flammability characteristics to polyisocyanurate (PIR) boardstock and polyurethane spray foam insulation.\nSpecialty polyols include polycarbonate polyols, polycaprolactone polyols, polybutadiene polyols, and polysulfide polyols. The materials are used in elastomer, sealant, and adhesive applications that require superior weatherability, and resistance to chemical and environmental attack. Natural oil polyols derived from castor oil and other vegetable oils are used to make elastomers, flexible bunstock, and flexible molded foam.\nCo-polymerizing chlorotrifluoroethylene or tetrafluoroethylene with vinyl ethers containing hydroxyalkyl vinyl ether produces fluorinated (FEVE) polyols. Two-component fluorinated polyurethanes prepared by reacting FEVE fluorinated polyols with polyisocyanate have been used to make ambient cure paints and coatings. Since fluorinated polyurethanes contain a high percentage of fluorine\u2013carbon bonds, which are the strongest bonds among all chemical bonds, fluorinated polyurethanes exhibit resistance to UV, acids, alkali, salts, chemicals, solvents, weathering, corrosion, fungi and microbial attack. These have been used for high performance coatings and paints.\nPhosphorus-containing polyols are available that become chemically bonded to the polyurethane matrix for the use as flame retardants. This covalent linkage prevents migration and leaching of the organophosphorus compound.\nBio-derived materials.\nInterest in sustainable \"green\" products raised interest in polyols derived from vegetable oils, fatty acids, lignin, sorbitol, etc. These are mostly contributing to polyol part. There are attempts made to prepare isocyanate part using bio-derived material. However, as far as commercialization is concern, polyol part is more targeted being easy and required in more quantity than isocyanate part. Various oils used in the preparation polyols for polyurethanes include soybean oil, cottonseed oil, neem seed oil, algae oil, and castor oil. Vegetable oils are functionalized in various ways and modified to polyetheramides, polyethers, alkyds, etc. Renewable sources used to prepare polyols may be fatty acids or dimer fatty acids. Some biobased and isocyanate-free polyurethanes exploit the reaction between polyamines and cyclic carbonates to produce polyhydroxyurethanes.\nChain extenders and cross linkers.\nChain extenders (\"f\"\u00a0=\u00a02) and cross linkers (\"f\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a03) are low molecular weight hydroxyl and amine terminated compounds that play an important role in the polymer morphology of polyurethane fibers, elastomers, adhesives, and certain integral skin and microcellular foams.\nThe elastomeric properties of these materials are derived from the phase separation of the hard and soft copolymer segments of the polymer, such that the urethane hard segment domains serve as cross-links between the amorphous polyether (or polyester) soft segment domains. This phase separation occurs because the mainly nonpolar, low melting soft segments are incompatible with the polar, high melting hard segments. The soft segments, which are formed from high molecular weight polyols, are mobile and are normally present in coiled formation, while the hard segments, which are formed from the isocyanate and chain extenders, are stiff and immobile. As the hard segments are covalently coupled to the soft segments, they inhibit plastic flow of the polymer chains, thus creating elastomeric resiliency. Upon mechanical deformation, a portion of the soft segments are stressed by uncoiling, and the hard segments become aligned in the stress direction. This reorientation of the hard segments and consequent powerful hydrogen bonding contributes to high tensile strength, elongation, and tear resistance values.\nThe choice of chain extender also determines flexural, heat, and chemical resistance properties.\nThe most important chain extenders are ethylene glycol, 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO or BDO), 1,6-hexanediol, cyclohexane dimethanol and hydroquinone bis(2-hydroxyethyl) ether (HQEE). All of these glycols form polyurethanes that phase separate well and form well defined hard segment domains, and are melt processable. They are all suitable for thermoplastic polyurethanes with the exception of ethylene glycol, since its derived bis-phenyl urethane undergoes unfavorable degradation at high hard segment levels. Diethanolamine and triethanolamine are used in flex molded foams to build firmness and add catalytic activity. Diethyltoluenediamine is used extensively in RIM, and in polyurethane and polyurea elastomer formulations.\nCatalysts.\nPolyurethane catalysts can be classified into two broad categories, basic and acidic amine. Tertiary amine catalysts function by enhancing the nucleophilicity of the diol component. Alkyl tin carboxylates, oxides and mercaptides oxides function as mild Lewis acids in accelerating the formation of polyurethane. As bases, traditional amine catalysts include triethylenediamine (TEDA, also called DABCO, 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane), dimethylcyclohexylamine (DMCHA), dimethylethanolamine (DMEA), Dimethylaminoethoxyethanol and bis-(2-dimethylaminoethyl)ether, a blowing catalyst also called A-99. A typical Lewis acidic catalyst is dibutyltin dilaurate. The process is highly sensitive to the nature of the catalyst and is also known to be autocatalytic.\nAnother class of catalysts was published in a study in May 2024. In this study, polyurethane synthesis was investigated in the presence of acid catalysts, namely dimethylphosphite (DMHP), methanesulfonic acid (MSA), and trifluoromethanesulfonic acid (TFMSA). The thermodynamic profile was examined and described in detail through computational tools, showing that TFMSA had the best catalytic properties. The study aimed to open the door to a new class of catalysts.\nFactors affecting catalyst selection include balancing three reactions: urethane (polyol+isocyanate, or gel) formation, the urea (water+isocyanate, or \"blow\") formation, or the isocyanate trimerization reaction (e.g., using potassium acetate, to form isocyanurate rings). A variety of specialized catalysts have been developed.\nSurfactants.\nSurfactants are used to modify the characteristics of both foam and non-foam polyurethane polymers. They take the form of polydimethylsiloxane-polyoxyalkylene block copolymers, silicone oils, nonylphenol ethoxylates, and other organic compounds. In foams, they are used to emulsify the liquid components, regulate cell size, and stabilize the cell structure to prevent collapse and sub-surface voids. In non-foam applications they are used as air release and antifoaming agents, as wetting agents, and are used to eliminate surface defects such as pin holes, orange peel, and sink marks.\nProduction.\nPolyurethanes are produced by mixing two or more liquid streams. The polyol stream contains catalysts, surfactants, blowing agents (when making polyurethane foam insulation) and so on. The two components are referred to as a polyurethane system, or simply a system. The isocyanate is commonly referred to in North America as the 'A-side' or just the 'iso'. The blend of polyols and other additives is commonly referred to as the 'B-side' or as the 'poly'.{{citation needed|date=December 2016}} This mixture might also be called a 'resin' or 'resin blend'. In Europe the meanings for 'A-side' and 'B-side' are reversed.{{citation needed|date=December 2016}} Resin blend additives may include chain extenders, cross linkers, surfactants, flame retardants, blowing agents, pigments, and fillers. Polyurethane can be made in a variety of densities and hardnesses by varying the isocyanate, polyol or additives.\nHealth and safety.\nFully reacted polyurethane polymer is chemically inert. No exposure limits have been established in the U.S. by OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) or ACGIH (American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists). It is not regulated by OSHA for carcinogenicity.\nPolyurethanes are combustible. Decomposition from fire can produce significant amounts of carbon monoxide and hydrogen cyanide, in addition to nitrogen oxides, isocyanates, and other toxic products. Due to the flammability of the material, it has to be treated with flame retardants (at least in case of furniture), almost all of which are considered harmful. California later issued Technical Bulletin 117 2013 which allowed most polyurethane foam to pass flammability tests without the use of flame retardants. Green Science Policy Institute states: \"Although the new standard can be met without flame retardants, it does NOT ban their \nuse. Consumers who wish to reduce household exposure to flame retardants can look for a TB117-2013 tag on furniture, and verify with retailers that products do not contain flame retardants.\"\nLiquid resin blends and isocyanates may contain hazardous or regulated components. Isocyanates are known skin and respiratory sensitizers. Additionally, amines, glycols, and phosphate present in spray polyurethane foams present risks.\nExposure to chemicals that may be emitted during or after application of polyurethane spray foam (such as isocyanates) are harmful to human health and therefore special precautions are required during and after this process.\nIn the United States, additional health and safety information can be found through organizations such as the Polyurethane Manufacturers Association (PMA) and the Center for the Polyurethanes Industry (CPI), as well as from polyurethane system and raw material manufacturers. Regulatory information can be found in the Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 (Food and Drugs) and Title 40 (Protection of the Environment). In Europe, health and safety information is available from ISOPA, the European Diisocyanate and Polyol Producers Association.\nManufacturing.\nThe methods of manufacturing polyurethane finished goods range from small, hand pour piece-part operations to large, high-volume bunstock and boardstock production lines. Regardless of the end-product, the manufacturing principle is the same: to meter the liquid isocyanate and resin blend at a specified stoichiometric ratio, mix them together until a homogeneous blend is obtained, dispense the reacting liquid into a mold or on to a surface, wait until it cures, then demold the finished part.\nDispensing equipment.\nThe pumps can drive low-pressure (10 to 30\u00a0bar, 1 to 3\u00a0MPa) or high-pressure (125 to 250\u00a0bar, 12.5 to 25.0\u00a0MPa) dispense systems. Mix heads can be simple static mix tubes, rotary-element mixers, low-pressure dynamic mixers, or high-pressure hydraulically actuated direct impingement mixers. Control units may have basic on/off and dispense/stop switches, and analogue pressure and temperature gauges, or may be computer-controlled with flow meters to electronically calibrate mix ratio, digital temperature and level sensors, and a full suite of statistical process control software. Add-ons to dispense equipment include nucleation or gas injection units, and third or fourth stream capability for adding pigments or metering in supplemental additive packages.\nTooling.\nDistinct from pour-in-place, bun and boardstock, and coating applications, the production of piece parts requires tooling to contain and form the reacting liquid.\nThe choice of mold-making material is dependent on the expected number of uses to end-of-life (EOL), molding pressure, flexibility, and heat transfer characteristics.\nRTV silicone is used for tooling that has an EOL in the thousands of parts. It is typically used for molding rigid foam parts, where the ability to stretch and peel the mold around undercuts is needed.\nThe heat transfer characteristic of RTV silicone tooling is poor. High-performance, flexible polyurethane elastomers are also used in this way.\nEpoxy, metal-filled epoxy, and metal-coated epoxy is used for tooling that has an EOL in the tens of thousands of parts. It is typically used for molding flexible foam cushions and seating, integral skin and microcellular foam padding, and shallow-draft RIM bezels and fascia. The heat transfer characteristic of epoxy tooling is fair; the heat transfer characteristic of metal-filled and metal-coated epoxy is good. Copper tubing can be incorporated into the body of the tool, allowing hot water to circulate and heat the mold surface.\nAluminum is used for tooling that has an EOL in the hundreds of thousands of parts. It is typically used for molding microcellular foam gasketing and cast elastomer parts, and is milled or extruded into shape.\nMirror-finish stainless steel is used for tooling that imparts a glossy appearance to the finished part. The heat transfer characteristic of metal tooling is excellent.\nFinally, molded or milled polypropylene is used to create low-volume tooling for molded gasket applications. Instead of many expensive metal molds, low-cost plastic tooling can be formed from a single metal master, which also allows greater design flexibility. The heat transfer characteristic of polypropylene tooling is poor, which must be taken into consideration during the formulation process.\nApplications.\nIn 2007, the global consumption of polyurethane raw materials was above 12 million metric tons, and the average annual growth rate was about 5%. Revenues generated with PUR on the global market are expected to rise to approximately US$75 billion by 2022. As they are such an important class of materials, research is constantly taking place and papers published.\nDegradation and environmental fate.\nEffects of visible light.\nPolyurethanes, especially those made using aromatic isocyanates, contain chromophores that interact with light. This is of particular interest in the area of polyurethane coatings, where light stability is a critical factor and is the main reason that aliphatic isocyanates are used in making polyurethane coatings. When PU foam, which is made using aromatic isocyanates, is exposed to visible light, it discolors, turning from off-white to yellow to reddish brown. It has been generally accepted that apart from yellowing, visible light has little effect on foam properties. This is especially the case if the yellowing happens on the outer portions of a large foam, as the deterioration of properties in the outer portion has little effect on the overall bulk properties of the foam itself.\nIt has been reported that exposure to visible light can affect the variability of some physical property test results.\nHigher-energy UV radiation promotes chemical reactions in foam, some of which are detrimental to the foam structure.\nHydrolysis and biodegradation.\nPolyurethanes may degrade due to hydrolysis. This is a common problem with shoes left in a closet, and reacting with moisture in the air.\nMicrobial degradation of polyurethane is believed to be due to the action of esterase, urethanase, hydrolase and protease enzymes. The process is slow as most microbes have difficulty moving beyond the surface of the polymer. Susceptibility to fungi is higher due to their release of extracellular enzymes, which are better able to permeate the polymer matrix. Two species of the Ecuadorian fungus \"Pestalotiopsis\" are capable of biodegrading polyurethane in aerobic and anaerobic conditions such as found at the bottom of landfills. Degradation of polyurethane items at museums has been reported. Polyester-type polyurethanes are more easily biodegraded by fungus than polyether-type."}
{"id": "48367", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48367", "title": "Westchester County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nWestchester County is a county located in the southeastern portion of the U.S. state of New York, bordering the Long Island Sound and the Byram River to its east and the Hudson River on its west. The county is the seventh most populous county in the State of New York and the most populous north of New York City. According to the 2020 United States census, the county had a population of 1,004,456, its highest decennial count ever and an increase of 55,344 (5.8%) from the 949,113 counted in 2010. Westchester covers an area of , consisting of six cities, 19 towns, and 23 villages. Established in 1683, Westchester was named after the city of Chester, England. The county seat is the city of White Plains, while the most populous municipality in the county is the city of Yonkers, with 211,569 residents per the 2020 census. The county is part of the Hudson Valley region of the state.\nThe annual per capita income for Westchester was $67,813 in 2011. The 2011 median household income of $77,006 was the fifth-highest in New York (after Nassau, Putnam, Suffolk, and Rockland counties) and the 47th highest in the United States. By 2021, the county's median household income had risen to $105,387. Westchester County ranks second in the state after New York County (the New York City borough of Manhattan) for median income per person, with a higher concentration of incomes in smaller households. Simultaneously, Westchester County had the highest property taxes of any county in the United States in 2013.\nWestchester County is one of the centrally located counties within the New York metropolitan area. The county is positioned with New York City, plus Nassau and Suffolk counties (on Long Island, across the Long Island Sound) to its south; Putnam County to its north; Fairfield County, Connecticut to its east (partially across the Byram River); and Rockland County and Bergen County, New Jersey across the Hudson River to its west. Westchester was the first suburban area of its scale in the world to develop, due mostly to the upper-middle-class development of entire communities in the late 19th century and the subsequent rapid population growth.\nWestchester County has numerous road and mass transit connections to New York City, and the county is home to the headquarters of large multinational corporations including IBM, Mastercard, PepsiCo, and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. Westchester County high school students often feature prominently as winners of the International Science and Engineering Fair and similar STEM-based academic awards.\nHistory.\nAt the time of European contact in the 16th and 17th centuries, this region was a part of Lenape Country, properly called Lenapehoking. The Lenape, also known as the 'Delaware' Nation, are an Algonquian people, related to large nations like the Wampanoag, Anishinaabe, Abenaki, and the Powhatan of Tsenacommacah as well as neighboring communities like the Manhattans, Weckquaesgeek and Siwanoy bands of the Wappinger in the south, and Tankiteke, Sintsink and Kitchawank Wappinger in the north.\nThe first European explorers to visit the Westchester area were Giovanni da Verrazzano in 1524 and Henry Hudson in 1609. Dutch settlers began arriving in the 1620s, followed by settlers from England in the 1640s. Westchester County was one of the original twelve counties of the Province of New York, created by an act of the New York General Assembly in 1683. At the time it included present-day Bronx County, and abutted then-Dutchess County to the north. By 1775, Westchester was the richest and most populous county in the colony of New York. Although the Revolutionary War devastated the county, recovery after the war was rapid. In 1788, five years after the end of the war, the county was divided into 20 towns. In 1790, the first federal census recorded a population of 24,000 for the county.\nTwo developments in the first half of the 19th century\u2014the construction of the first Croton Dam and Aqueduct, and the coming of the railroad\u2014had enormous impacts on the growth of Westchester. The Croton Dam and Aqueduct was begun in 1837 and completed in 1842; now a National Historic Landmark, the Croton Aqueduct is considered one of the great engineering achievements of the 19th century. In the 1840s, the first railroads were built in Westchester, and included the New York and Harlem Railroad, the Hudson River Railroad, and the New York and New Haven Railroad. The railroads often determined the growth of a town, and the population shifted from Northern to Southern Westchester. By 1860, the total county population was 99,000, with the most populated city being Yonkers.\nThe period following the American Civil War enabled entrepreneurs in the New York area to create fortunes, and many built large estates, such as Lyndhurst, in Westchester. During the latter half of the 19th century, Westchester's transportation system and labor force attracted a manufacturing base, particularly along the Hudson River and Nepperhan Creek. In 1874, the western portion of the present Bronx County was transferred to New York County, and in 1895 the remainder of the present Bronx County was also transferred to New York County. These would later split from Manhattan to form a county.\nDuring the 20th century, the rural character of Westchester transformed into the suburban county known today. The Bronx River Parkway, completed in 1925, was the first modern, multi-lane limited-access roadway in North America. The development of Westchester's parks and parkway systems supported existing communities and encouraged the establishment of new ones, transforming the development pattern for Westchester. With the need for homes expanding after World War II, multistory apartment houses appeared in the urbanized areas of the county, while the market for single-family houses continued to expand. By 1950, the total county population was 625,816. Major interstate highways were constructed in Westchester during the 1950s and 1960s. The establishment of these roadways, along with the construction of the Tappan Zee Bridge, led to further growth in the county.\nGeography.\nWestchester County is located in the New York metropolitan area and Downstate New York, north of New York City and south of Upstate New York. It shares its southern boundary with New York City and its northern border with Putnam County. It is bordered on the west side by the Hudson River and on the east side by the Long Island Sound and Fairfield County, Connecticut. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (14%) is water.\nWhere Pelham Manor meets Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx, the southern border of Westchester is just under from Columbus Circle in Manhattan. At over , Pelham Bay Park is the largest of New York City's parks, forming a substantial buffer between suburban Westchester and the urban Bronx, while Van Cortlandt Park to the west acts as a similar buffer.\nLong Island Sound shore.\nWestchester's Long Island Sound shore is generally rocky, interspersed with tidal mud flats, marshes and wetlands, as well as several natural and artificially-maintained sand beaches. Municipal and county owned parks provide access to beaches, nature preserves and passive and active waterfront recreational facilities. Several large harbors lie along the shore including Milton Harbor in Rye, Mamaroneck Harbor, Larchmont Harbor, and Echo Bay, and the upper and lower harbors in southern New Rochelle.\nA number of islands can be found off the Long Island Sound shore, most of which are located in New Rochelle. Davids Island, the former location of the U.S. Army's Fort Slocum, is currently unoccupied but is slated for use as passive parkland; Glen Island, currently a Westchester Parks Department run beach and park, was one of the first amusement parks in the country serving as a summer resort at the turn of the twentieth century; Huckleberry Island is largely undeveloped, and has one of the largest rookeries in western Long Island Sound; Echo Island is owned and used by a private yacht club; Execution Rocks is the site of a 19th-century lighthouse listed on the National Register of Historic Places; Columbia, Pea, and Goose Islands are undeveloped; Clifford, Harrison and Tank Islands are part of the Five Islands Park and nature preserve; while Oak and Pine Islands are used as private residences.\nHudson River.\nThe widest section of the Hudson River, at , is found between the Westchester and Rockland County shorelines immediately north of Croton Point. In Colonial times, this area was called the Tappan Zee or Sea. The Hudson River is tidal and brackish through Westchester and contains a small number of estuarine marshes. Two bridges span the Hudson in Westchester: the Bear Mountain Bridge crosses at Cortlandt and the Tappan Zee Bridge at Tarrytown. Municipal, county and state-owned parks provide access to waterfront landmarks and sites, including Croton Point in Croton, Kingsland Point in Sleepy Hollow and JFK Memorial Marina in Yonkers.\nThe Hudson River waterfront in Westchester is in a transitional period, converting from primarily industrial uses to mixed residential, commercial, retail, and recreational uses. This transformation is most notable in Yonkers, Hastings-on-Hudson, Dobbs Ferry, Irvington, Tarrytown, Sleepy Hollow, Ossining, and Peekskill, where redevelopment projects are in various stages of design and completion. In 2004, the county began a project to create Westchester RiverWalk, a walkway along the Hudson River of which will provide pedestrian access between New York City and Putnam County. 32.9 miles of the route are complete and accessible.\nAt , the highest elevation in the county is a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey benchmark known as \"Bailey\" in Mountain Lakes Park near the Connecticut state line. The lowest elevation is sea level, along both the Hudson and Long Island Sound.\nWatersheds.\nWestchester County is divided into six primary drainage basins or watersheds: the Upper and Lower Long Island Sound; and the Bronx, Upper Hudson, Lower Hudson, and Croton River basins. Within these primary drainage basins are approximately 60 smaller basins, or subwatersheds. The principal streams draining the southern part of the county include Beaver Swamp Brook, Blind Brook, Bronx River, Hutchinson River, Mamaroneck River, Saw Mill River, Sheldrake River, Stephenson Brook and Tibbetts Brook. The primary streams draining the central part of the county include Byram River, Kisco River, Mianus River, Mill River, Pocantico River and Silvermine River. The principal streams draining the northern part of the county include Dickey Brook, Furnace Brook, Hallocks Mill Brook, Hunter Brook, Muscoot River, Peekskill Hollow Brook, and Titicus River. The county contains several major reservoirs; The Croton system and the Kensico Reservoir are important components of the New York City water supply system. The system is a series of interconnected reservoirs and lakes in northern Westchester and Putnam Counties that provide 10% of New York City's water under normal conditions and up to 30% in times of drought. The components of the system include the New Croton Reservoir, the Cross River Reservoir, the Titicus Reservoir, the Amawalk Reservoir, and the Muscoot Reservoir. Other major reservoirs are the Kensico and Byram Lake Reservoir, while there are a number of smaller reservoirs throughout the county.\nThe Westchester County Department of Planning divides the county into North, Central and South sub-regions.\nGeology.\nThe rock that underlies Manhattan and Westchester is chiefly gneiss and mica-schist, with layers of dolomitic marble and serpentine.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Westchester County is borderline humid subtropical and humid continental (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa/Dfa\"). Winters are cold, wet, and occasionally snowy throughout the county, with more snow inland in higher elevations. Summers are hot inland but cooler towards the coast, with a relative dryness in the early summer. Precipitation is plentiful and in some elevated areas reaches over 50\u00a0inches. Snowfall is more common in Westchester than in New York City, with the exception of the southeast of the county where snowfall is often between 20 and 25 inches. In January, inland areas have a low of 21\u201326\u00a0\u00b0F and a high of 34\u201337\u00a0\u00b0F while coastal areas have a low of 27\u201330\u00a0\u00b0F and a high of 38\u201341\u00a0\u00b0F. In the summer, this effect is much milder. Coastal areas, including Mamaroneck, New Rochelle, Rye, and Port Chester have highs of 81\u201383\u00a0\u00b0F and lows of 68\u201373\u00a0\u00b0F, while inland highs will be 84\u201387\u00a0\u00b0F and lows will be 65\u201370\u00a0\u00b0F. Winds can be heavy, especially by the coast.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 American Community Survey, the county's Latino population was: 5.12% Puerto Rican, 4.46% Dominican, 4.14% Mexican, 2.73% Ecuadorian, 1.73% Guatemalan, 1.26% Colombian.\n2018.\nAt the American Community Survey's 2018 estimates 967,612 people inhabited the county, up 18,499 from 2010's census. 53.1% of the county was non-Hispanic white, 16.6% Black or African American, 1.0% American Indian or Alaska Native, 6.4% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 2.5% from two or more races, and 25.1% Hispanic or Latino of any race. 25.6% of the population were foreign-born. 4.2% of the population was West Indian.\nFrom 2014 to 2018 there were 375,852 housing units and 347,332 households. The owner-occupied housing rate was 61.3% and the median monthly owner costs of a house were $3,398 with a mortgage and $1,426 without. The median gross rent in 2018 was $1,493, up $517 from the monthly owner cost without a mortgage. The average persons per household in 2018 was 2.71 and 33.3% of residents spoke a language other than English at home. 21.9% of Westchester was under 18 and 17.1% were aged 65 and older.\nWestchester County's median income was $92,758 and the per capita income was $54,572. The Census Bureau reported 65.4% of the county's residents aged 16 and older were employed in the civilian labor force, and 59.5% of women worked in the labor force. 8.3% of the county lived below the poverty line from 2014 to 2018.\n2010 census.\nAs of 2010, there were 949,113 residents at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 57.4% non-Hispanic White, 15.6% African American, 0.4% Native American, 5.4% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 7.6% from other races, and 3.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 21.8% of the population. 71.7% spoke only English at home, while 14.4% spoke Spanish, 3.5% Italian, 1.1% Portuguese and 1.1% French at home.\nThere were 337,142 households, of which 34% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.9% were married couples living together, 12.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.2% were non-families. Of all households 25.7% were made up of individuals, and 10.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.21.\nAge distribution was 25% under the age of 18, 7.2% from 18 to 24, 30.4% from 25 to 44, 23.5% from 45 to 64, and 14% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.30 males.\nAccording to census data, the per capita income for the county in 1999 was $36,726. The American Community Survey lists Westchester in 2011 with the median household income of $77,006, the 47th highest in the country. The U.S. Census Bureau reports that 6.4% of families and 8.7% (2003) of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.53% of those under age 18 and 7.60% of those age 65 or over.\nExpatriates.\nAs of 2000, several different expatriate populations lived in Westchester County. Notable French communities are located in Larchmont, Mamaroneck, and New Rochelle; while Scarsdale, Tarrytown and Bronxville are the preferred locations for Japanese immigrants and Japanese Americans.\nHealth.\nIn March 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, the state government ordered a one square mile \"containment zone\" in the northern part of the city of New Rochelle. Part of New Rochelle is adjacent to the Bronx, where the majority of New York State's COVID-19 positive cases were (as of May 8, 350,000 out of 20 million residents). As of April 22 there were a total of 25,276 cases, 838 deaths, and 9,371 recoveries. As of May 22, 2020, there were between 30 and 35,000 cases going both by COVID-19 testing and serological samples, constituting the highest number of highest per capita infections in the world: 3% out of 1 million residents. On May 26, 2020, the area started their first phase of reopening after being placed on lockdown for two months.\nCommunities.\nWestchester County has six cities, 19 towns, and 23 villages.\nCities in Westchester have many well established sub-areas within the municipal boundaries. Many of these are similar to hamlets and date back to as early as the late 1600s such as Cooper's Corners in New Rochelle. These areas also include some of the first planned communities in the country such as New Rochelle's Residence Park, Rochelle Park and Heights and Sutton Manor.\nThe six cities in the county are:\nAny land area in the county that is not contained in one of the cities is in a town. A town may have from zero to multiple villages. The largest city in the county by population is Yonkers with over 211,000 residents. The city with the highest population density is Mount Vernon with a density of 16,824 individuals per square mile.\nThe towns of Harrison, Mount Kisco, and Scarsdale are coterminous with the villages of the same names. Two villages are split between two towns: Briarcliff Manor crosses the border between Ossining town and Mount Pleasant, and Mamaroneck village straddles the boundary between Mamaroneck town and Rye town.\nWith the exception of the towns of Rye, Pelham, Harrison, Mount Kisco, and Scarsdale, all the towns contain area and residents which do not belong to any village. These areas may contain communities referred to as hamlets, or \"unincorporated areas\". Hamlets have no legal status and depend upon the town for all municipal government and services. There are also areas called census-designated places (CDPs), which are defined by the U.S. Census Bureau for statistical purposes only. A CDP may or may not correspond to a hamlet.\nBecause some municipalities have the same name, it is often necessary to indicate whether one is referring to the city, town, village, or hamlet. For example, the town of Rye is completely separate from the city of Rye. Pelham is the name of a town and also of a village in the town. The village of Mamaroneck is located partially in the town of Mamaroneck and partially in the town of Rye, but has nothing to do with the city of Rye.\nZIP Codes in Westchester often are not coterminous with the actual municipality borders, causing mailing addresses to sometimes differ from the actual municipal location in which a property resides. For instance, the ZIP Codes for Bronxville, Larchmont, Rye, and Scarsdale contain large areas that lie outside of those municipalities.\nAll of the towns have justice courts, and some of the villages do as well.\nThe towns are listed as follows:\n (\"The list of towns, villages, and CDPs is complete. The listing of additional communities should not be considered complete.\")\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nDue to its proximity to New York City, many Fortune 500 companies are headquartered in Westchester County, including:\nHigh technology.\nTech Valley is a marketing name for the eastern part of New York State, including the Hudson Valley and the Capital District. The term originated in 1998 to promote the Greater Albany metropolitan area as a competitor to regions such as Silicon Valley and Boston. It has since grown to represent the counties in New York between IBM's Westchester County plants in the south and the Canada\u2013U.S. border to the north.\nBiotechnology.\nWestchester County has also developed a burgeoning biotechnology sector in the 21st century, with over $1 billion in planned private investment as of 2016, spurring \"Westchester Magazine\" to nickname the county \"Biochester\". In April 2017, county officials unveiled plans for an 80-acre, 3 million square-foot biotechnology hub to be built with US$1.2 billion in private investment on vacant land adjacent to Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla; the bioscience center, a public-private partnership, is anticipated to create 12,000 new jobs and include over 2.25 million square feet of biotechnology research space.\nEducation.\nWestchester County contains 48 public school districts, nearly 120 private college-preparatory and parochial schools, and 14 colleges and universities. Many public and private high schools are continuously ranked among the best in New York State and the United States. Public schools in the county are largely funded by local property taxes, and the median annual property tax bill for Westchester County residents was $13,842 in 2013, the highest in the United States. According to the 2018 rankings provided by the education website Niche, taking into account public comments, 28 of the top 100 school districts in the state of New York were located in Westchester County.\nCulture and recreation.\nHistoric sites.\nThe Timothy Knapp House, built around 1670, is the oldest standing building in Westchester.9 Philipse Manor Hall and the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow are also among the oldest, built around 1682 and 1685 respectively. Philipse Manor Hall is located in Getty Square, Yonkers, and is operated by the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.\nCurrent National Historic Landmarks in the county are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe former Edwin H. Armstrong House is the only delisted National Historic Landmark in Westchester.\nLibraries.\nWestchester County is served by the Westchester Library System, established in 1958. The system comprises 38 public libraries and 25 college and special libraries in the county. The Westchester Library Association is an organization which advocates on behalf of libraries and their personnel and support systems within Westchester County.\nOther attractions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfrican American history.\nThere are 14 sites on Westchester County's African American Heritage Trail. The Trail was created in 2004.\nGovernment.\nThe Westchester County Government is currently headed by the County Executive Ken Jenkins, who won a special election to finish the term of George Latimer who resigned on January 2, 2025 in order to be sworn in as U.S. representative of New York's 16th Congressional District. The district attorney is Miriam E. Rocah, and the County Clerk is Timothy C. Idoni. All three are Democrats.\nBoard of Legislators.\nThe Westchester County Board of Legislators is the legislative branch of Westchester County. Currently, there are fifteen Democrats, one Republican, and one Conservative who caucuses with the Republicans. The current chair of the board is Vedat Gashi.\nPolitics.\nWestchester County generally leans toward the political left in recent decades. The Republican nominee for president last won a majority in 1988.\nHistorically, Westchester County was a classic \"Yankee Republican\" county. It supported Republican presidential candidates in all but two elections from 1896 to 1988. The only exceptions were 1912, when the GOP was divided between William Howard Taft and Theodore Roosevelt, and 1964, when Lyndon B. Johnson won a national landslide and swept every county in New York. As a measure of how Republican the county was for years, it was one of the few counties where Franklin D. Roosevelt of neighboring Dutchess County was completely shut out in all four of his campaigns for president.\nHowever, it swung Democratic in the early 1990s\u2014much like other New York City suburbs. In the most recent national elections, Westchester voters tended to be far more Democratic than the national average. In fact, Westchester, after New York City and Albany County, has produced the biggest margins for statewide Democrats in recent years. Democratic voters are mainly concentrated in the more populated southern and central parts of the county. More than 63 percent of Westchester County voters voted for Barack Obama in the 2008 presidential race, the seventh-highest percentage of any New York county.\nCurrently, Westchester County is represented in the U.S. House by Republican Mike Lawler and Democrat George Latimer. Lawler's district covers most of the county's northern half. It also includes all of Rockland and Putnam Counties and a portion of Dutchess. Latimer's district includes most of the southern half of the county, including Yonkers, Mount Vernon, White Plains, New Rochelle and Rye along with a sliver of the Bronx.\nAdditionally, Republicans remain competitive with Democrats in state and local elections. For instance, it voted for Republican George Pataki, by a margin of 23.07% against Democratic candidate, Carl McCall in the gubernatorial race of 2002, and by 26.22% in 1998. Pataki hails from Westchester; he previously served as mayor of Peekskill and represented part of the county in the state Assembly and state Senate prior to being elected governor.\nIn 1998, County Executive Andrew Spano became just the second Democrat to hold the post in at least a half-century. In 2006, county legislator Andrea Stewart-Cousins defeated 20-year incumbent Nicholas Spano for a seat in the New York State Senate in a rematch of the 2004 race, which she had lost by only 18 votes. His brother, Assembly Member Mike Spano, switched parties in July 2007 to become a Democrat. District attorney Janet DiFiore also switched parties from Republican to Democratic in August 2007. In 2009, Republican Rob Astorino ousted three-term county executive Andy Spano, who had the endorsement of the New York Conservative Party, winning in a landslide. Astorino became the first Republican county executive since Andrew O'Rourke left the post in 1997. In 2011, the GOP broke the Democratic two-thirds majority in the county legislature by picking up two seats. However, two of the Democrats formed a coalition with the Republicans to control the board, with a Republican becoming vice-chair. In 2017 Democrats gained three seats to take outright control of the board. In 2019 Democrats gained two seats and in 2020 the last remaining Republican switched parties to become a Democrat. As of the 2021 elections the current composition is fifteen Democrats, one Republican and one Conservative.\nWestchester County was the home of U.S. Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, who occupied the Kykuit mansion near the hamlet of Pocantico Hills.\nThe county is also home to 42nd U.S. President Bill Clinton and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who live in Chappaqua. Former First Lady Barbara Bush grew up in Rye.\nU.S. President Donald Trump owns a home in Bedford. The 230-acre Seven Springs estate was acquired by Trump in 1996.\nLaw enforcement and emergency services.\nThere are currently 42 local police agencies located in Westchester County. These agencies frequently work with one another and with other agencies, including county, state, and federal law enforcement agencies responsible for protecting Westchester County.\nWestchester County has a wide array of emergency services and is the home to 58 municipal fire departments, one federal fire department, 42 ambulance services, three Haz-Mat teams, a volunteer technical rescue team, a fire academy and a fire investigations unit. Each department has career, volunteer or a combination of personnel. Westchester County Department of Emergency Services operates the main dispatching system for EMS and fire departments, located in Valhalla. The department also provides numerous support services for the various agencies throughout the county.\nThe Career Chief's Association, a cooperative of career fire departments, also operates the Special Operations Task Force. The force consists of six squad companies that can be rapidly assembled for a major hazardous materials incident, CBRNE event, collapse or confined space rescue, or other incident requiring a large number of HazMat or rescue technicians. Over 700 firefighters, police officers and EMS providers were trained to be part of this effort and serve over half the population of Westchester County including Yonkers, Mount Vernon, New Rochelle, White Plains, Scarsdale, Eastchester, and the Fairview, Hartsdale, and Greenville Fire Departments in the Town of Greenburgh.\nMedia.\nCounty-wide media outlets include:\nTransportation.\nThe combination of the county's numerous roadways and bridges, proximity to New York City, and the county's large population all lead to substantial traffic enforcement and busy local courts.\nTransportation routes have been responsible for the county's development patterns, with city and town growth being most pronounced along these corridors. There are five mostly north\u2013south corridors and three which traverse the county in the east\u2013west direction. The north\u2013south routes are (going from west to east): S. Route 9/Albany Post Rd/Broadway Corridor, the Saw Mill River Parkway Corridor, the Sprain Brook Parkway, the Hutchinson River Parkway, and the I-95/New England Thruway. The east\u2013west corridors are, from south to north: the Cross County Parkway, the Cross Westchester Expressway/I-287, and the U.S. 202 corridor.\nMajor roadways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor bridges.\nThe Tappan Zee Bridge bridges the Hudson River between Tarrytown in Westchester and South Nyack in Rockland County; costing $4 billion, it was constructed during 2013\u20132017 to replace an earlier bridge at the same location and was renamed the Governor Mario M. Cuomo Bridge upon its opening. About upstream, the Bear Mountain Bridge crosses the Hudson between Cortlandt and Orange County.\nPublic transit.\nWestchester County Airport serves the county, and is adjacent to White Plains. Bus service is provided by the Bee-Line Bus System (owned by the Westchester County Department of Public Works and Transportation) within Westchester and to/from the Bronx, Manhattan, and Putnam County. Additionally, the MTA Bus Company runs to and from Getty Square in Yonkers to Midtown Manhattan. The Hudson Link operates express bus routes from city centers and train stations in Tarrytown and White Plains to Nyack, Nanuet, Spring Valley in Rockland County on the opposite side of the Hudson River.\nAdditionally, NY Waterway operates a water ferry service between Ossining in Westchester and Haverstraw in Rockland County.\nRailroads.\nAmtrak serves Croton-Harmon, New Rochelle, and Yonkers. Commuter rail service in Westchester is provided by Metro-North Railroad (operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority). Metro-North operates three lines in the county; west to east, they are the Hudson, the Harlem, and the New Haven lines. These are former operations of the New York Central and the New York, New Haven and Hartford railroads (and their successors, Penn Central and Conrail), each of which stops in the Bronx between Westchester and Manhattan.\nIn popular culture.\nWestchester County has been the home of many novelists, including Washington Irving. His most famous work is \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\", which is set at the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow among other locations in Sleepy Hollow, New York. The story has inspired a variety of works, including the 2013 television series \"Sleepy Hollow\", set in the modern village.\nIn the \"X-Men\" multimedia series, the X-Mansion is located on the Titicus Reservoir, on Graymalkin Lane, outside of Salem Center. At the mansion, Professor Charles Xavier runs the Xavier \"School for Gifted Youngsters\" to educate mutant children and keeps a headquarters for the X-Men.\nOne of the most successful films shot in the county was the 1988 film \"Big\". While the majority of the film takes place in New York City, the amusement park scenes were filmed in Rye Playland in Westchester.\nAmerican singer and songwriter Loudon Wainwright III recorded a song titled \"Westchester County\" for his 1983 LP record \"Fame and Wealth\". It recounts his postwar upbringing in Bedford, Westchester County, New York.\nIn print media, the area is a frequent setting of the Nero Wolfe detective stories by Rex Stout, which ran from 1934 to 1975. An early documented mention of Westchester County is in the Trixie Belden series (which ran from 1948 to 1986). The series was set in Sleepyside-on-Hudson, a fictional village in the Hudson Valley. The original author, Julie Campbell Tatham, modeled the fictional Crabapple Farm in Sleepyside after her own home at Wolf Hollow on Glendale Road in Ossining. She also mentioned it in her last work in the series: Cherry Ames, Country Doctor's Nurse. Westchester is the primary setting and residence of the main characters in \"The Clique\" young adult novel series by Lisi Harrison. In Edward Lewis Wallant's novel \"The Pawnbroker\", the main character Sol Nazerman lives in Mount Vernon.\nIn television, an early broadcast media presentation of Westchester County was on \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\" (1961\u20131966), whose main characters live in New Rochelle. Much was made of their suburban setting and Rob's separate world from New York City. The 1970s sitcom \"Maude\" was set in Tuckahoe. In the final season of the American sitcom \"Friends\", the characters Monica and Chandler moved from New York City to live in Westchester. In the CBS sitcom \"How I Met Your Mother\", Future Ted and his family live in Westchester. In the AMC show \"Mad Men\", Ossining is home to main characters Don Draper and his family. From season 4, Don lives in Manhattan and Betty lives with Henry Francis and the children in Rye. The animated show \"Big Mouth\" is also set in Westchester County, where creator Nick Kroll grew up.\nE. L. Doctorow's novel \"Ragtime\" and the subsequent musical adaptation \"Ragtime: The Musical\" are both partially set in New Rochelle. The town serves as a setting that represents the affluence of white suburbanites in the early stages of the 20th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48369", "revid": "13902714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48369", "title": "Nassau County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nNassau County ( ) is a suburban county located on Long Island, immediately to the east of New York City, bordering the Long Island Sound on the north and the open Atlantic Ocean to the south. As of the 2020 United States census, Nassau County's population was 1,395,774, making it the sixth-most populous county in the State of New York, and reflecting an increase of 56,242 (+4.2%) from the 1,339,532 residents enumerated at the 2010 census. Its county seat is Mineola, while the county's largest and most populous town is Hempstead.\nSituated on western Long Island, the County of Nassau borders New York City's borough of Queens to its west, and Long Island's Suffolk County to its east. It is the most densely populated and second-most populous county in the State of New York outside of New York City, with which it maintains extensive rail and highway connectivity, and is considered one of the central counties within the New York metropolitan area.\nNassau County comprises two cities, three towns, 64 incorporated villages, and more than 60 unincorporated hamlets. Nassau County has a designated police department, fire commission, and elected executive and legislative bodies.\nA 2012 \"Forbes\" article based on the American Community Survey reported Nassau County as the most expensive county and one of the highest income counties in the U.S., and the most affluent in New York state, with four of the nation's top ten towns by median income located in the county. As of 2025, the median home price overall in Nassau County is nearly US$900,000, while the Gold Coast of Nassau County features some of the world's most expensive real estate.\nNassau County high school students often feature prominently as winners of the International Science and Engineering Fair and similar STEM-based academic awards as well as top U.S. schools lists. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in the Town of Oyster Bay; the Old Westbury campus of New York Institute of Technology; the second campus of the New York University Grossman School of Medicine in Mineola, Zucker School of Medicine in the Village of Hempstead; and the Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research in Manhasset, are prominent life sciences research and academic institutions in Nassau County. The presence of numerous prominent health care systems has made Nassau County a central hub for advanced medical care and technology. Eight cricket matches of the 2024 ICC Men's T20 World Cup were played at a temporary cricket stadium in Eisenhower Park in East Meadow in June 2024.\nEtymology.\nThe name of Nassau County originated from an old name for Long Island, which was at one time named \"Nassau\", after the Dutch family of King William III of England, the House of Nassau, itself named after the German town of Nassau. The county colors (orange and blue) are also the colors of the House of Orange-Nassau.\nSeveral alternate names had been considered for the county, including \"Bryant\", \"Matinecock\" (a village within the county currently has that name), \"Norfolk\" (presumably because of the proximity to Suffolk County), and \"Sagamore\". However, \"Nassau\" had the historical advantage of having at one time been the name of Long Island itself, and was the name most mentioned after the new county was proposed in 1875.\nHistory.\nThe area now designated as Nassau County was originally the eastern 70% of Queens County, one of the original twelve counties formed in 1683, and was then contained within two towns: Hempstead, and Oyster Bay. In 1784, the Town of North Hempstead, was formed through secession by the northern portions of the Town of Hempstead. Nassau County was formed in 1899 by the division of Queens County, after the western portion of Queens had become a borough of New York City in 1898, as the three easternmost towns seceded from the county.\nWhen the first European settlers arrived, among the Native Americans to occupy the present area of Nassau County were the Marsapeque, Matinecoc, and Sacatogue. Dutch settlers in New Netherland predominated in the western portion of Long Island, while English settlers from Connecticut occupied the eastern portion. Until 1664, Long Island was split, roughly at the present border between Nassau and Suffolk counties, between the Dutch in the west and Connecticut claiming the east. The Dutch did grant an English settlement in Hempstead (now in western Nassau), but drove settlers from the present-day eastern Nassau hamlet of Oyster Bay as part of a boundary dispute. In 1664, all of Long Island became part of the English Province of New York within the Shire of York. Present-day Queens and Nassau were then just part of a larger North Riding. In 1683, the colonial territory of Yorkshire was dissolved, Suffolk County and Queens County were established, and the local seat of government was moved west from Hempstead to Jamaica (now in New York City).\nBy 1700, virtually none of Long Island's area remained unpurchased from the Native Americans by the English colonists, and townships controlled whatever land had not already been distributed. The courthouse in Jamaica was torn down by the British during the American Revolution to use the materials to build barracks.\nIn 1784, following the American Revolutionary War, the Town of Hempstead was split in two, when Patriots in the northern part formed the new Town of North Hempstead, leaving Loyalist majorities in the Town of Hempstead. About 1787, a new Queens County Courthouse was erected (and later completed) in the new Town of North Hempstead, near present-day Mineola (now in Nassau County), known then as Clowesville.\nThe Long Island Rail Road reached as far east as Hicksville in 1837, but did not proceed to Farmingdale until 1841 due to the Panic of 1837. The 1850 census was the first in which the combined population of the three western towns (Flushing, Jamaica, and Newtown) exceeded that of the three eastern towns that are now part of Nassau County. Concerns were raised about the condition of the old courthouse and the inconvenience of travel and accommodations, with the three eastern and three western towns divided on the location for the construction of a new one. Around 1874, the seat of county government was moved to Long Island City from Mineola. As early as 1875, representatives of the three eastern towns began advocating the separation of the three eastern towns from Queens, with some proposals also including the towns of Huntington and Babylon (in Suffolk County).\nIn 1898, the western portion of Queens County became a borough of the City of Greater New York, leaving the eastern portion a part of Queens County but not part of the Borough of Queens. As part of the city consolidation plan, all town, village, and city (other than NYC) governments within the borough were dissolved, as well as the county government with its seat in Jamaica. The areas excluded from the consolidation included all of the Town of North Hempstead, all of the Town of Oyster Bay, and most of the Town of Hempstead (excluding the Rockaway Peninsula, which was separated from the Town of Hempstead and became part of the city borough).\nIn 1899, following approval from the New York State Legislature, the three towns were separated from Queens County, and the new county of Nassau was constituted.\nIn preparation for the new county, in November 1898, voters had selected Mineola to become the county seat for the new county (before Mineola incorporated as a village in 1906 and set its boundaries almost entirely within the Town of North Hempstead), winning out over Hicksville and Hempstead.\nThe Garden City Company (founded in 1893 by the heirs of Alexander Turney Stewart) donated four acres of land for the county buildings in the Town of Hempstead, just south of the Mineola train station and the present day village of Mineola. The land and the buildings have a Mineola postal address, but are within the present day Village of Garden City, which did not incorporate, nor set its boundaries, until 1919.\nIn 1917, the hamlet of Glen Cove was granted a city charter, making it independent from the Town of Oyster Bay. In 1918, the village of Long Beach was incorporated in the Town of Hempstead. In 1922, it became a city, making it independent of the town. These are the only two administrative divisions in Nassau County identified as cities.\nFrom the early 1900s until the Depression and the early 1930s, many hilly farmlands on the North Shore were transformed into luxurious country estates for wealthy New Yorkers, with the area receiving the \"Gold Coast\" moniker and becoming the setting of F. Scott Fitzgerald's 1925 novel \"The Great Gatsby\". One summer resident of the Gold Coast was President Theodore Roosevelt, at Sagamore Hill. In 1908, William Kissam Vanderbilt constructed the Long Island Motor Parkway as a toll road through Nassau County. With overpasses and bridges to remove intersections, it was among the first limited access motor highways in the world, and was also used as a racecourse to test the capabilities of the fledgling automobile industry.\nNassau County, with its extensive flat land, was the site of many aviation firsts. Military aviators for both World Wars were trained on the Hempstead Plains at installations such as Mitchel Air Force Base, and a number of successful aircraft companies were established. Charles Lindbergh took off for Paris from Roosevelt Field in 1927, completing the first non-stop trans-Atlantic flight from the United States. Grumman (which in 1986 employed 23,000 people on Long Island) built many planes for World War II, and later contributed the Apollo Lunar Module to the Space program.\nThe United Nations Security Council was temporarily located in Nassau County, from 1946 till 1951. Council meetings were held at the Sperry Gyroscope headquarters in the village of Lake Success, near the border with Queens County. It was here that on June 27, 1950, the Security Council voted to back U.S. President Harry S Truman and send a coalition of forces to the Korean Peninsula, leading to the Korean War.\nUntil World War II, most of Nassau County was still farmland, particularly in the eastern portion. Following the war, the county saw an influx of people from the five boroughs of New York City, especially from Brooklyn and Queens, who left their urban dwellings for a more suburban setting. This led to a massive population boom in the county. In 1947, William Levitt built his first planned community in Nassau County, in the Island Trees section (later renamed Levittown; this should not be confused with the county's first planned community, which in general is Garden City). In the 1930s, Robert Moses had engineered curving parkways and parks such as Jones Beach State Park and Bethpage State Park for the enjoyment of city-dwellers; in the 1950s and 1960s the focus turned to alleviating commuter traffic.\nIn 1994, Federal Judge Arthur Spatt declared the Nassau County Board of Supervisors unconstitutional and directed that a 19-member legislature be formed. Republicans won 13 seats in the election and chose Bruce Blakeman as the first Presiding Officer (Speaker).\nAccording to a \"Forbes\" magazine 2012 survey, residents of Nassau County have the 12th highest median household annual income in the country and the highest in the state. In the 1990s, however, Nassau County experienced substantial budget problems, forcing the county to near bankruptcy. Thus, the county government increased taxes to prevent a takeover by the state of New York, leading to the county having high property taxes. Nevertheless, on January 27, 2011, a State of New York oversight board seized control of Nassau County's finances, saying the wealthy and heavily taxed county had failed to balance its $2.6 billion budgets.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (37%) is water.\nNassau County borders the Long Island Sound on the north and the open Atlantic Ocean on the south. The highest point in the county is Harbor Hill on the north shore. The county occupies a portion of Long Island immediately east of the New York City borough of Queens. It is divided into two cities and three towns, the latter of which contain 64 villages and numerous hamlets. The county borders Connecticut across the Long Island Sound.\nBetween the 1990 U.S. census and the 2000 U.S. census, the Nassau County exchanged territory with Suffolk County and lost territory to Queens County. Dozens of CDPs had boundaries changed, and 12 new CDPs were listed.\nClimate.\nNassau County has a climate similar to other coastal areas of the Northeastern United States; it has warm, humid summers and cool, wet winters. The county's climate is classified as humid subtropical (\"Cfa\") according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. According to the Trewartha climate classification the climate is oceanic (\"Do\") since six to seven months average above 50\u2033F (10\u2033C). The Atlantic Ocean helps bring afternoon sea breezes that temper the heat in the warmer months and limit the frequency and severity of thunderstorms. Nassau County has a moderately sunny climate, averaging between 2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually. The hardiness zone is 7b.\nAdjacent counties.\nNassau County borders the following counties:\nTransportation.\nIn July 2017, the approval was granted by state legislators to the plan proposed by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo to add a third railroad track to the Long Island Rail Road corridor between the communities of Floral Park and Hicksville in Nassau County. The nearly US$2 billion transportation infrastructure enhancement project was expected to accommodate anticipated growth in rail ridership and facilitate commutes between New York City and Nassau and Suffolk counties on Long Island.\nThe Long Island Expressway, Northern State Parkway, and Southern State Parkway are the primary east\u2013west controlled-access highways in Nassau County. Northern Boulevard (New York State Route 25A), Hillside Avenue (New York State Route 25B), Jericho Turnpike (New York State Route 25), New York State Route 24, and Sunrise Highway (New York State Route 27) are also major east\u2013west commercial thoroughfares across the county. The Meadowbrook State Parkway, Wantagh State Parkway, and Seaford-Oyster Bay Expressway (New York State Route 135) are the major north\u2013south controlled-access highways traversing Nassau County.\nNassau County also has a public bus network known as NICE (Nassau Inter-County Express, formerly MTA Long Island Bus) that operates routes throughout the county into Queens and Suffolk counties. 24 hour service is provided on the n4, n6, and most recently the n40/41 lines.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the 2019 American Community Survey, the population of Nassau County stood at 1,356,924, an increase of 17,392 since the 2010 census. At the 2010 U.S. census, there were 1,339,532 people, 448,528 households, and 340,523 families residing in the county. The population of Nassau County was estimated by the U.S. Census Bureau to have increased by 2.2% to 1,369,514 in 2017, representing 6.9% of the census-estimated State of New York population of 19,849,399 and 17.4% of the census-estimated Long Island population of 7,869,820. At the 2000 United States census, there were 1,334,544 people, 447,387 households, and 347,172 families residing in the county.\nIn 2010, there were 340,523 family households. 33.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them. 60.0% were married couples living together. 11.7% had a female householder with no husband present. 24.1% were non-families. 20.1% of all households were made up of individuals. 15.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.94. The average family size was 3.38.\nIn 2010, the population was 23.3% under the age of 18. 18.7% were 62 years of age or older. The median age was 41.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.4 males. In 2019, there were 474,165 housing units and 446,977 family households. From 2015 to 2019, there was an average of 2.99 persons per household, and 21.4% of the population was under 18 years of age.\nAt the 2019 American Community Survey, Nassau had a median household income of $116,100. The per capita income was $51,422. About 5.6% of the population lived at or below the poverty line. The median income for a household in the county in 2010 was $72,030. and the median income for a family was $81,246. These figures had risen to $87,658 and $101,661 respectively according to a 2007 estimate. Males had a median income of $52,340 versus $37,446 for females. The per capita income for the county was $32,151. About 3.50% of families and 5.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.80% of those under age 18 and 5.60% of those age 65 or over.\nThe population density in 2010 was . In 2000, the population density was . In the 2010 census, there were 468,346 housing units at an average density of .\nRace and ethnicity.\nIn 2010, the racial makeup of the county was 73.0% White (65.5% non-Hispanic white), 10.1% African American, 0.2% Native American, 7.6% Asian (3.0% Indian, 1.8% Chinese, 1.0% Korean, 0.7% Filipino, 0.1% Japanese, 0.1% Vietnamese, 0.9% Other Asian), 0.03% Pacific Islander, 5.6% from other races, and 2.4% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 15.6% of the population. In 2019, Nassau County's racial and ethnic makeup was 58.2% non-Hispanic white, 11.3% Black or African American, 0.2% American Indian or Alaska Native, 10.3% Asian, 0.7% some other race, and 1.9% two or more races. The Hispanic and Latin American population increased to 17.5% of the population.\n \nIn 2011, there were about 230,000 Jewish people in Nassau County, representing 17.2% of the population, (as compared to 2% of the total U.S. population). Italian Americans also made up a large portion of Nassau's population. The five most reported ancestries were Italian (23%), Irish (14%), German (7%), Indian (5%), and Polish (4%). The county's population was highest at the 1970 U.S. census. More recently, a Little India community has emerged in Hicksville, Nassau County, spreading eastward from the more established Little India enclaves in Queens. Rapidly growing Chinatowns have developed in Brooklyn and Queens, as did earlier European immigrants, such as the Irish and Italians.\nAs of 2019, the Asian population in Nassau County had grown by 39% since 2010, to an estimated 145,191 individuals. There were approximately 50,000 Indian Americans and 40,000 Chinese Americans. Nassau County has become the leading suburban destination in the U.S. for Chinese immigrants. Likewise, the Long Island Koreatown originated in Flushing, Queens, and is expanding eastward along Northern Boulevard and into Nassau County. \"The New York Times\" cited a 2002 study by the non-profit group ERASE Racism, which determined that Nassau, and its neighboring county, Suffolk, as the most de facto racially segregated suburbs in the United States.\nLaw enforcement.\nCounty police services are provided by the Nassau County Police Department. The cities of Glen Cove and Long Beach, as well as a number of villages, are not members of the county police district and maintain their own police forces. The following village police departments exist in Nassau County: Brookville (Brookville P.D. provides police protection for Brookville, Matinecock, Mill Neck and Cove Neck), Centre Island, Floral Park, Freeport, Garden City, Great Neck Estates, Hempstead, Kensington, Kings Point, Lake Success, Lynbrook, Malverne, Muttontown-Upper Brookville, Old Brookville, Old Westbury, Oyster Bay Cove, Rockville Centre and Sands Point.\nThe Port Washington Police District is not a village department but is authorized by a special district, the only such district in the State of New York. These smaller forces make use of such specialized county police services as the police academy and the aviation unit. All homicides in the county are investigated by the county police, regardless of whether or not they occur within the police district.\nIn June 2011, the Muttontown Police Department commenced operations. The Old Brookville Police had formerly provided police services to the Village of Muttontown.\nOn June 1, 2022, the Old Brookville Police Department reverted to serving only the Village of Old Brookville and moved its headquarters to the grounds of the Old Brookville village hall. The Village of Brookville formed a new police department, established headquarters on the grounds of the Brookville Nature Park and assumed policing duties for the villages of Brookville, Matinecock, Mill Neck and Cove Neck, that were formerly served by the Old Brookville Police Department. The Village of Upper Brookville joined the Muttontown Police Department which was subsequently renamed the Muttontown-Upper Brookville (MUB) Police Department. The former Old Brookville Police headquarters is now the Upper Brookville village hall and also a substation for the Muttontown-Upper Brookville Police Department.\nIn 2006, village leaders in the county seat of Mineola expressed dissatisfaction with the level of police coverage provided by the county force and actively explored seceding from the police district and having the village form its own police force. A referendum in December 2006 decisively defeated the proposal.\nSince the Long Island State Parkway Police was disbanded in 1980, all of Nassau County's state parkways have been patrolled by Troop L of the New York State Police. State parks in Nassau are patrolled by the New York State Park Police. In 1996, the Long Island Rail Road Police Department was consolidated into the Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police. The MTA Police patrol Long Island Rail Road tracks, stations and properties. The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Police provides enforcement of state environmental laws and regulations. The State University of New York Police provides enforcement for SUNY Old Westbury.\nThe Nassau County Police Department posts the mug shots of DWI offenders as press releases on their website. This practice has come under the scrutiny of residents, media, and those pictured in these press releases. This practice has been criticized as being able to cost potential employees, students, or public figures their positions.\nCounty correctional services and enforcement of court orders are provided by the Nassau County Sheriff's Department. New York State Court Officers provide security for courthouses.\nThe Nassau County Auxiliary Police are a unit of the Nassau County Police Department. These volunteer police officers are assigned to 1 of 38 local community units and perform routine patrols of the neighborhood. They provide traffic control for local parades, races and other community events. Auxiliary Police officers are empowered to make arrests for crimes that occur in their presence.\nNassau County Auxiliary Police are required to complete a 42-week training course at the Nassau County Police Academy. Qualified officers are offered Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) training. Auxiliary Police officers are certified and registered by the New York Division of Criminal Justice Services as full-time \"peace officers\". The City of Long Beach has an independent auxiliary police force which is part of its municipal police force. These officers are represented by the Auxiliary Police Benevolent Association of Long Island.\nFire departments.\nNassau County is currently protected and served by 71 independent volunteer or combination paid/volunteer fire departments, organized into 9 battalions. The Nassau County Fire Commission also provides logistical support to all 71 departments.\nLaw and government.\nThe head of the county's governmental structure is the county executive, a post created in Nassau County in 1938. The current county executive is Bruce Blakeman, a Republican who was elected in 2021. The chief deputy county executive is Republican Arthur Walsh. The district attorney is Republican Anne T. Donnelly, who was elected in 2021, replacing Acting District Attorney Joyce Smith. Smith succeeded Madeline Singas after she was nominated and confirmed as an associate judge on the New York Court of Appeals in June 2021.\nThe county comptroller is Elaine Phillips, a Republican who formerly served in the New York State Senate. The county clerk is Republican Maureen O'Connell. Former elected offices chairman of the County Board of Assessors, county treasurer, and county sheriff were made appointed and serve at the pleasure of the county executive (county assessor in 2008 via referendum, changing it from a six-year term to appointed).\nCounty executive.\nThe current Nassau County executive is Bruce Blakeman, a Republican.\nChief deputy county executive.\nThe chief deputy county executive is the highest appointed official in the Nassau County government, serving second-in-command under the auspice of the county executive. The Chief Deputy is responsible for managing the activities of all departments of the Nassau County government, which provides services to its 1.36 million residents. The chief deputy also officially serves as the acting county executive in the absence of, or disability of the County Executive. The current chief deputy county executive is Arthur T. Walsh, who was appointed by Executive Bruce Blakeman in 2022.\nComptroller.\nThe comptroller of Nassau County is the chief fiscal officer and chief auditing officer of the County who presides over the Nassau County Comptroller's Office. The comptroller is elected countywide to a four-year term and has no term limit.\n\"* George Maragos was originally elected as a Republican, but became a Democrat in September 2016.\"\nCounty legislature.\nThe county legislature has 19 members. There are twelve Republicans and seven Democrats.\nPolitics.\nFor most of the twentieth century, residents of Nassau County and neighboring Suffolk County primarily supported the Republican Party in national elections. In presidential elections during the first half of the century, the Republican candidate often received more than twice as many votes as the Democratic candidate. Between the county's incorporation in 1899 and the 1980s, Democrats only won Nassau County in the elections of 1912 (where Theodore Roosevelt's Progressive Party split the Republican vote) and 1964 (where Lyndon B. Johnson won in a landslide).\nThe county began trending Democratic in the 1990s, like many of New York City's suburbs. From 1992 to 2020, it voted for a Democrat in every presidential election. Bill Clinton carried the county in 1992 and 1996, as did Al Gore in 2000, the latter two times by margins of nearly 20 points. John Kerry's margin in Nassau County was considerably slimmer (5.6 points) in 2004, as he won the towns of Hempstead and North Hempstead but lost the town of Oyster Bay. The county went solidly for Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012, both times by around 8 points. Hillary Clinton did marginally worse in 2016, winning by 6 points. Joe Biden in 2020 fared better than Obama to win the county by 9.5 percentage points, but still not as well as Bill Clinton and Gore. \nThe streak Democratic candidates carrying the county ended in 2024, as Donald Trump carried the county by over four percentage points, the first time Nassau was won by a Republican presidential candidate since 1988.\nDemocratic strength is chiefly concentrated in both the wealthier and lower income sections of the county. Liberal voters dominate many of the wealthy communities of the North Shore, particularly in the Town of North Hempstead where affluent villages such as Sands Point, Old Westbury, Roslyn, Kensington, Thomaston, Great Neck Plaza, and Great Neck Estates as well as the neighboring City of Glen Cove vote consistently Democratic. Democratic strongholds also include several low income municipalities in the central portion of the county, such as the Village of Hempstead, Roosevelt, Uniondale and New Cassel, as well as in a few waterfront communities on the South Shore, such as the City of Long Beach and the Village of Freeport.\nRepublican voters are primarily concentrated in the middle to upper middle class southeastern portion of the county, which developed during the \"post-war boom era\". Heavily Republican communities such as Massapequa, Massapequa Park, Seaford, Wantagh, Levittown, Bethpage, and Farmingdale are the political base of many county GOP officials such as former Congressman Peter T. King and former County Executive Edward P. Mangano. In the western portion of the county, wealthy Garden City is solidly Republican, as is the middle-class community of Floral Park. Additionally, some of the more rustic areas of the North Shore, particularly in the Town of Oyster Bay usually vote for the GOP.\nAreas of the county containing large numbers of swing voters include East Meadow, Oceanside, and Rockville Centre on the South Shore and Mineola on the North Shore. Several areas have changed in partisan affiliation. Formerly Democratic strongholds such as the Five Towns and parts of Great Neck have trended to the GOP while previously Republican areas such as Elmont, Valley Stream and Baldwin have become Democratic bastions.\nEducation.\nEducation features strongly in Nassau County's culture.\nNassau County has 58 public school districts, which like post office districts use the same names as a city, hamlet, or village within them, but each sets the boundaries independently. School district and community are not the same, and residences often have postal addresses that differ from the hamlet and/or school district in which they are located. Several of Nassau County's school districts are among the highest ranked public school systems in the country, including the Jericho Union Free School District, Great Neck Public Schools, and the Syosset Central School District.\nSchool districts include:\nK-12:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSecondary:\nElementary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports.\nNassau County is home to the New York Islanders of the National Hockey League, who played at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale from their inception in 1972. However, the Islanders announced in 2012 that starting in the fall of 2015, the team would be moving to Brooklyn and would play at the Barclays Center. Due to issues with Barclays Center being unable to adequately support ice hockey and declining attendance, the Islanders announced that for the 2018\u201319 season they would split their home games between Barclays Center and the newly renovated Nassau Coliseum. In December 2017, the Islanders won a bid to build a new 18,000-seat arena near Belmont Park in Elmont, returning them to Nassau County; UBS Arena opened in 2021.\nThe Brooklyn Nets of the National Basketball Association, then known as the New York Nets, formerly played their home games in Nassau County at the now-demolished Island Garden arena in West Hempstead from 1969 to 1972 and then at the Coliseum from 1972 to 1977, before the franchise moved to New Jersey\u2014its original home for several years before coming to Long Island in the late 1960s \u2013 and eventually, to Brooklyn.\nThe New York Cosmos (1970\u20131985) of the former North American Soccer League (1968\u20131984) played for two seasons, 1972 and 1973, at Hofstra Stadium at Hofstra University in Hempstead. The team's name was revived in 2010 with the New York Cosmos (2010) of the new North American Soccer League to also play at Hofstra Stadium, which had been renamed James M. Shuart Stadium in 2002. Nassau County is also the home of the New York Lizards of Major League Lacrosse, who play at Shuart Stadium. The county also operates several sports events for student-athletes, such as the Nassau County Executive Cup College Showcase.\nBelmont Park in Elmont is a major horse racing venue which annually hosts the Belmont Stakes, the third and final leg of the prestigious Triple Crown of thoroughbred racing. The now-demolished Roosevelt Raceway in Westbury hosted auto racing and, from 1940 through 1988, was a popular harness racing track.\nNassau is home to some famous and historic golf courses. Rockaway Hunting Club, founded in 1878, is the oldest country club in the country. The U.S. Open has been held in Nassau five times, once each at Garden City Golf Club, Inwood Country Club, and Fresh Meadow Country Club, and twice at Bethpage Black Course, the first ever municipally owned course. Courses consistently ranked in the top 100 in the U.S. such as Bethpage Black, Garden City Golf Club, Piping Rock Club, and The Creek are located in the county. Nassau County hosted the 1984 Summer Paralympics, marking the first Paralympic Games to be held in the United States.\nNassau County hosted eight cricket matches of the 2024 ICC Men's T20 World Cup at Eisenhower Park in East Meadow during June 2024.\nHealth.\nThe first case of COVID-19 was reported in March 2020. As of January 12, 2021, there have been 104,078 cases, 3,044 deaths, 2,102,900 tests conducted, and a 4.9% positivity rate. According to \"The New York Times\"' COVID-19 tracker, Nassau County's average daily case count is 1,567 (116 per capita), with 1 in 13 testing positive (the third-worst of any county in the state) and 1 in 545 dying.\nIn August 2024, Nassau County passed into law a ban on wearing face masks in public, making it a misdemeanor subject to a $1,000 fine and up to one year in prison to wear a facial covering in public, a move that was criticized by the New York Civil Liberties Union as a \"dangerous misuse of the law to score political points.\" The law does not apply to facial coverings \"worn to protect the health or safety of the wearer,\" but does appear to ban wearing a mask in order to protect the health or safety of others, including persons with compromised immune systems.\nHospitals.\nPublic hospitals:\nTertiary care hospitals:\nCommunity hospitals:\nCommunities.\nFigures in parentheses are 2019 population estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau.\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48371", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48371", "title": "3DES", "text": ""}
{"id": "48372", "revid": "50603519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48372", "title": "Oscar Niemeyer", "text": "Brazilian architect (1907\u20132012)\nOscar Ribeiro de Almeida Niemeyer Soares Filho (15 December 1907\u00a0\u2013 5 December 2012), known as Oscar Niemeyer (), was a Brazilian architect considered to be one of the key figures in the development of modern architecture. Niemeyer was best known for his design of civic buildings for Bras\u00edlia, a planned city that became Brazil's capital in 1960, as well as his collaboration with other architects on the headquarters of the United Nations in New York. His exploration of the aesthetic possibilities of reinforced concrete was highly influential in the late 20th and early 21st centuries.\nBoth lauded and criticized for being a \"sculptor of monuments\", Niemeyer was hailed as a great artist and one of the greatest architects of his generation by his supporters. He said his architecture was strongly influenced by Le Corbusier, but in an interview, assured that this \"didn't prevent [his] architecture from going in a different direction\". Niemeyer was most famous for his use of abstract forms and curves and wrote in his memoirs:\nI am not attracted to straight angles or to the straight line, hard and inflexible, created by man. I am attracted to free-flowing, sensual curves. The curves that I find in the mountains of my country, in the sinuousness of its rivers, in the waves of the ocean, and on the body of the beloved woman. Curves make up the entire Universe, the curved Universe of Einstein.\nNiemeyer was educated at the Escola Nacional de Belas Artes at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, and after graduating, he worked at his father's typography house and as a draftsman for local architectural firms. In the 1930s, he interned with L\u00facio Costa, with the pair collaborating on the design for the Pal\u00e1cio Gustavo Capanema in Rio de Janeiro. Niemeyer's first major project was a series of buildings for Pampulha, a planned suburb north of Belo Horizonte. His work, especially on the Church of Saint Francis of Assisi, received critical acclaim and drew international attention. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, Niemeyer became one of Brazil's most prolific architects, working both domestically and overseas. This included the design of the Edif\u00edcio Copan (a large residential building in S\u00e3o Paulo) and a collaboration with Le Corbusier (and others) on the United Nations Headquarters, which yielded invitations to teach at Yale University and the Harvard Graduate School of Design.\nIn 1956, Niemeyer was invited by Brazil's new president, Juscelino Kubitschek, to design the civic buildings for Brazil's new capital, Bras\u00edlia. His designs for the National Congress of Brazil, the Cathedral of Bras\u00edlia, the Pal\u00e1cio da Alvorada, the Pal\u00e1cio do Planalto, and the Supreme Federal Court, all designed by 1960, were experimental and linked by common design elements. This work led to his appointment as inaugural head of architecture at the University of Bras\u00edlia, as well as honorary membership of the American Institute of Architects. Due to his largely left-wing ideology and involvement with the Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), Niemeyer left the country after the 1964 military coup and opened an office in Paris. He returned to Brazil in 1985, and was awarded the prestigious Pritzker Architecture Prize in 1988. A socialist and atheist from an early age, Niemeyer had spent time in both Cuba and the Soviet Union during his exile, and on his return served as the PCB's president from 1992 to 1996. Niemeyer continued working at the end of the 20th and early 21st century, notably designing the Niter\u00f3i Contemporary Art Museum (1996) and the Oscar Niemeyer Museum (2002). Over a career of 78 years he designed approximately 600 projects. Niemeyer died in Rio de Janeiro on 5 December 2012 at the age of 104.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nNiemeyer was born in the city of Rio de Janeiro on 15 December 1907. His great-great-grandfather was a Portuguese immigrant who, in turn, was the son of a German soldier who had settled in Portugal. Niemeyer spoke about it: \"my name ought to have been Oscar Ribeiro de Almeida de Niemeyer Soares, or simply Oscar de Almeida Soares, but the foreign surname prevailed and I am known simply as Oscar Niemeyer\". He spent his youth as a typical young Carioca of the time: bohemian and relatively unconcerned with his future. In 1928, at age 21, Niemeyer left school (Santo Antonio Maria Zaccaria priory school) and married Annita Baldo, daughter of Italian immigrants from Padua. He pursued his passion at the National School of Fine Arts in Rio de Janeiro and graduated with a BA in architecture in 1934.\nEarly career.\nAfter graduating, Niemeyer worked in his father's typography house. Even though he was not financially stable, he insisted on working in the architecture studio of L\u00facio Costa, Gregori Warchavchik and Carlos Le\u00e3o, even though they could not pay him. Niemeyer joined them as a draftsman, an art that he mastered (Corbusier himself would later compliment Niemeyer's 'beautiful perspectives'). The contact with Costa would be important to Niemeyer's maturation. After an initial flirtation with the Neocolonial movement, Costa believed that the advances of the International Style in Europe were the way forward for architecture. His writings on the insights that could unite Brazil's traditional colonial architecture (such as that in Olinda) with modernist principles would be the basis of the architecture that he and his contemporaries, such as Affonso Eduardo Reidy, would later realize.\nIn 1936, at the age of 29, L\u00facio Costa was appointed by Education Minister Gustavo Capanema to design the new headquarters of the Ministry of Education and Health in Rio de Janeiro. Costa himself, although open to change, was unsure of how to proceed. He assembled a group of young architects (Carlos Le\u00e3o, Affonso Eduardo Reidy, Jorge Moreira and Ernani Vasconcellos) to design the building. He also insisted that Le Corbusier himself should be invited as a consultant. Though Niemeyer was not initially part of the team, Costa agreed to accept him after Niemeyer insisted. During the period of Le Corbusier's stay in Rio, he was appointed to help the master with his drafts, which allowed him a close contact with the Swiss. After his departure, Niemeyer's significant changes to Corbusier's scheme impressed Costa, who allowed him to progressively take charge of the project, of which he assumed leadership in 1939.\nBrazilian modernism.\nThe Ministry of Education had assumed the task of shaping the \"novo homem, Brasileiro e moderno\" (new man, Brazilian and modern). It was the first state-sponsored modernist skyscraper in the world, of a much larger scale than anything Le Corbusier had built until then. Completed in 1943, when he was 36 years old, the building that housed the regulator and manager of Brazilian culture and cultural heritage developed the elements of what was to become recognized as Brazilian modernism. It employed local materials and techniques, like the azulejos linked to the Portuguese tradition; the revolutionized Corbusian brises-soleil, made adjustable and related to the Moorish shading devices of colonial architecture; bold colors; the tropical gardens of Roberto Burle Marx; the Imperial Palm (\"Roystonea oleracea\"), known as the Brazilian order; further allusions to the icons of the Brazilian landscape; and specially commissioned works by Brazilian artists. This building is considered by some architects as one of the most influential of the 20th century. It was taken as a model on how to blend low- and high-rise structures (Lever House).\n1939 New York World's Fair.\nIn 1939, at age 32, Niemeyer and Costa designed the Brazilian pavilion for the New York World's Fair (executed in collaboration with Paul Lester Wiener). Neighbouring the much larger French pavilion, the Brazilian structure contrasted with its heavy mass. Costa explained that the Brazilian Pavilion adopted a language of 'grace and elegance', lightness and spatial fluidity, with an open plan, curves and free walls, which he termed 'Ionic', contrasting it to the mainstream contemporary modernist architecture, which he termed 'Doric'. Impressed by its avant-garde design, Mayor Fiorello La Guardia awarded Niemeyer the keys to the city of New York.\nIn 1937, Niemeyer was invited by a relative to design a nursery for philanthropic institution which catered for young mothers, the \"Obra do Ber\u00e7o\". It would become his first finalised work. However, Niemeyer has said that his architecture really began in Pampulha, Minas Gerais, and as he explained in an interview, \"Pampulha was the starting point of this freer architecture full of curves which I still love even today. It was in fact, the beginning of Bras\u00edlia ...\".\nPampulha Project.\nIn 1940, at 33, Niemeyer met Juscelino Kubitschek, who was at the time the mayor of Belo Horizonte, capital of the state of Minas Gerais. Kubitschek, together with the state's governor Benedito Valadares, wanted to develop a new suburb to the north of the city called Pampulha and commissioned Niemeyer to design a series of buildings which would become known as the \"Pampulha architectural complex\". The complex included a casino, a restaurant/dance hall, a yacht club, a golf club and a church, all of which would be distributed around a new artificial lake. A weekend retreat for the mayor was built near the lake.\nThe buildings were completed in 1943 and received international acclaim following the 1943 'Brazil Builds' exhibition, at the New York Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). Most of the buildings show Niemeyer's particular approach to the Corbusian language. In the casino, with its relatively rigid main fa\u00e7ade, Niemeyer departed from Corbusian principles and designed curved volumes outside the confinement of a rational grid. He also expanded upon Corbusier's idea of a \"promenade architecturale\" with his designs for floating catwalk-like ramps which unfold open vistas to the occupants.\nThe small restaurant (Casa do Baile), which is perhaps the least \"bourgeois\" of the complex, is built on its own artificial island and comprises an approximately circular block from which a free-form marquee follows the contour of the island. Although free form had been used even in Corbusier's and Mies's architecture, its application on an outdoors marquee was Niemeyer's innovation. This application of free-form, together with the butterfly roof used at the Yacht Club and Kubitschek's house became extremely fashionable from then on.\nThe Church of Saint Francis of Assisi is considered the masterpiece of the complex. When it was built, reinforced concrete was used in traditional ways, such as in pillar, beam and slab structures. Auguste Perret, in Casablanca and Robert Maillart in Zurich had experimented with the plastic freedom of concrete, taking advantage of the parabolic arch's geometry to build extremely thin shells. Niemeyer's decision to use such an economical approach, based on the inherent plasticity allowed by reinforced concrete was revolutionary. According to Joaquim Cardoso, the unification of wall and roof into a single element was revolutionary for fusing vertical and horizontal elements. The church's exuberance added to the integration between architecture and art. The church is covered by Azulejos by Portinari and tile murals by Paulo Werneck. It led to the church being seen as baroque. Though some European purists condemned its formalism, the fact that the form's idea was directly linked to a logical, structural reason placed the building in the 20th century, while refusing to break completely from the past.\nDue to its importance in the history of architecture, the church was the first listed modern building in Brazil. This fact did not influence the conservative church authorities of Minas Gerais, who refused to consecrate it until 1959, in part because of its unorthodox form and in part because of Portinari's altar mural, which depicts Saint Francis as the savior of the ill, the poor and, most importantly, the sinner.\nNiemeyer stated that Pampulha offered him the opportunity to 'challenge the monotony of contemporary architecture, the wave of misinterpreted functionalism that hindered it and the dogmas of form and function that had emerged, counteracting the plastic freedom that reinforced concrete introduced. I was attracted by the curve\u00a0\u2013 the liberated, sensual curve suggested by the possibilities of new technology yet so often recalled in venerable old baroque churches. [...] I deliberately disregarded the right angle and rationalist architecture designed with ruler and square to boldly enter the world of curves and straight lines offered by reinforced concrete. [...] This deliberate protest arose from the environment in which I lived, with its white beaches, its huge mountains, its old baroque churches and the beautiful suntanned women.'\nThe experience also marked the first collaborations between Niemeyer and Roberto Burle Marx, considered the most important modern landscape architect. They would be partners in many projects in the next 10 years.\n1940s and 1950s.\nWith the success of Pampulha and the Brazil Builds exhibition, Niemeyer achieved international recognition. His architecture further developed the \"Brazilian style\" that the Saint Francis of Assisi Church and, to a lesser extent (due to its primary Corbusian language) the Ministry building, had pioneered. Works of this period shows the traditional modernist method in which form follows function, but Niemeyer's (and other Brazilian architects) handling of scale, proportion and program allowed him to resolve complex problems with simple and intelligent plans. Stamo Papadaki in his monography on Niemeyer mentioned the spatial freedom that characterized his work. The headquarters of the Banco Boavista, inaugurated in 1948 show such an approach. Dealing with a typical urban site, Niemeyer adopted creative solutions to enliven the otherwise monolithic high rise, thus challenging the predominant solidity which was the norm for bank buildings. The glazed south fa\u00e7ade (with least insulation) reflects the 19th century Candel\u00e1ria Church, showing Niemeyer's sensitivity to the surroundings and older architecture. Such austere designs to high rises within urban grids can also be seen in the Edif\u00edcio Montreal (1951\u20131954), Edif\u00edcio Tri\u00e2ngulo (1955) and the Edif\u00edcio Sede do Banco Mineiro da Produ\u00e7\u00e3o.\nIn 1947, Niemeyer returned to New York City to integrate the international team working on the design for the United Nations headquarters. Niemeyer's scheme 32 was approved by the Board of Design, but he eventually gave in to pressure by Le Corbusier, and together they submitted project 23/32 (developed with Bodiansky and Weissmann), which combined elements from Niemeyer's and Le Corbusier's schemes. Despite Le Corbusier's insistence to remain involved, the design was carried forward by the Director of Planning, Wallace Harrison and Max Abramovitz, then a partnership.\nTremaine House (unbuilt).\nThis stay in the United States also facilitated contact regarding the unbuilt Burton G. Tremaine house project, one of Niemeyer's boldest residential designs. Amidst gardens by Roberto Burle Marx, it featured an open plan in Montecito, California on the Pacific Ocean. In February\u2013April 1949, the Museum of Modern Art exhibited \"From Le Corbusier to Niemeyer: Savoye House \u2013 Tremaine House 1949\". According to the museum, \"The theme of this show is based on Henry Russell-Hitchcock's book on the Miller Company Collection of Abstract Art, Painting toward architecture...\". In 2010, Berry Bergdoll, a curator at MoMA asserted the importance of the exhibition as fusing strands of the geometric and organic soon after WWII. Hitchcock's seminal essay in the \"Painting toward architecture\" book included an illustration of Niemeyer's design, and in an associated 28-venue exhibition, Burle-Marx's \"Design for a garden\" (1948) was exhibited in several shows, as was a photo mural of Church at Pampulha.\nNiemeyer produced very few designs for the United States because his affiliation to the Communist Party usually prevented him from obtaining a visa. This happened in 1946 when he was invited to teach at Yale University, when his political views cost him a visa. In 1953, at 46, Niemeyer was appointed dean of the Harvard Graduate School of Design, but because of his political views the United States government denied his visa therefore preventing him from entering the country.\nIn 1950 the first book about his work to be published in the United States, \"The Work of Oscar Niemeyer\" by Stamo Papadaki, was released. It was the first systematic study of his architecture, which significantly contributed to the awareness of his work abroad. It would be followed in 1956 by \"Oscar Niemeyer: Works in Progress\", by the same author. By this time, Niemeyer was already self-confident and following his own path internationally. In 1948 Niemeyer departed from the parabolic arches he had designed in Pampulha to further explore his signature material, concrete.\nNiemeyer's formal creativity has been compared to that of sculptors. In the 1950s, a time of intensive construction in Brazil produced numerous commissions. Yves Bruand stressed that Niemeyer's 1948 project for a theatre next to the Ministry of Education and Health allowed him to develop his vocabulary. In 1950 he was asked to design S\u00e3o Paulo's Ibirapuera Park for the city's 400th anniversary celebration. The plan, which consisted of several porticoed pavilions related via a gigantic free form marquee, had to be simplified due to cost. The resulting buildings were less interesting individually, which meant that the ensemble effect became the dominant aesthetic experience. Niemeyer developed V-shaped pilotis for the project, which became fashionable for a time. A variation on that theme was the W-shaped piloti which supports the Governador Juscelino Kubitschek housing complex (1951), two large buildings containing around 1,000 apartments. Its design was based on Niemeyer's scheme for the Quitandinha apartment hotel in Petr\u00f3polis designed one year earlier, but never realised. At 33 stories and over 400 meters long, it was to contain 5,700 living units together with communal services such as shops, schools etc., his version of Corbusier's Unit\u00e9 d'Habitation.\nA similar program was realized in the centre of S\u00e3o Paulo, the Copan apartment building (1953\u201366). This landmark represents a microcosm of the diverse population of the city. Its horizontality, which is emphasized by the concrete brise-soleil, together with the fact that it was a residential building made it an interesting approach to popular housing, given that in the 1950s suburbanization had begun and city centres were being occupied primarily by business, usually occupying vertical \"masculine\" buildings, as opposed to Niemeyer's \"feminine\" approach. In 1954 Niemeyer also designed the \"Niemeyer apartment building\" at the Pra\u00e7a da Liberdade, Belo Horizonte. The building's completely free form layout is reminiscent of Mies van der Rohe's 1922 glass skyscraper, although with a much more material feel than the airy German one. Also in 1954 as part of the same plaza Niemeyer built a library the (Biblioteca P\u00fablica Estadual).\nDuring this period Niemeyer built several residences. Among them were a weekend house for his father, in Mendes (1949), developed from a chicken coop, the Prudente de Morais Neto house, in Rio (1943\u201349), based on Niemeyer's original design for Kubitschek's house in Pampulha, a house for Gustavo Capanema (1947) (the minister who commissioned the Ministry of Education and Health building), the Leonel Miranda house (1952), featuring two spiral ramps which provide access to the butterfly-roofed first floor, lifted up on oblique piloti. These houses featured the same inclined fa\u00e7ade used in the Tremaine design, which allowed good natural lighting. In 1954 he built the famous Cavanelas house, with its tent-like metallic roof and which, with the help of Burle Marx's gardens, is perfectly adapted to its mountainous site. However, his residential (and free-form architecture) masterpiece is considered to be the 1953 Canoas House Niemeyer built for himself. The house is located on sloped terrain overlooking the ocean from afar. It comprises two floors, the first of which is under a free form roof, supported on thin metallic columns. The living quarters is located on the floor below and is more traditionally divided. The design takes advantage of the uneven terrain so that the house seems not to disturb the landscape. Although the house is extremely well-suited to its environment, it did not escape criticism. Niemeyer recalled that Walter Gropius, who was visiting the country as a jury in the second Biennial exhibition in S\u00e3o Paulo, argued that the house could not be mass-produced, to which Niemeyer responded that the house was designed with himself in mind and for that particular site, not a general flat one. For Henry-Russell Hitchcock, the house at Canoas was Niemeyer's most extreme lyrical statement, placing rhythm and dance as the antithesis of utility.\nDepoimento.\nIn 1953 modern Brazilian architecture, which had been praised since Brazil Builds, became the target of international criticism, mainly from rationalists. Niemeyer's architecture in particular was criticised by Max Bill in an interview for Manchete Magazine. He attacked Niemeyer's use of free-form as purely decorative (as opposed to Reidy's Pedregulho housing), his use of mural panels and the individualistic character of his architecture which \"is in risk of falling in a dangerous anti-social academicism\". He even belittled Niemeyer's V piloti, as purely aesthetic.\nNiemeyer's first response was denial, followed by a counterattack based on Bill's patronizing attitude, which prevented him from considering the differing social and economic realities of Brazil and European countries. Costa also stressed that Brazilian (and Niemeyer's) architecture was based on unskilled work which allowed for a crafted architecture based on concrete, expressing a tradition of (Brazilian) church builders, as opposed to (Swiss) clock builders.\nAlthough it was badly received and to an extent an exaggeration, Bill's words were effective in bringing to attention the mediocre architecture coming from less talented architects, who employed Niemeyer's vocabulary in the decorative fashion that Bill had criticised. Niemeyer himself admitted that for a certain period he had \"handled too many commissions, executing them in a hurry, trusting the improvisational skills he believed to have\". The Calif\u00f3rnia Building (Edif\u00edcio Calif\u00f3rnia) in S\u00e3o Paulo is an example. Usually neglected by its creator, it features the V piloti which had worked so well in isolated buildings, creating a different treatment to that space without the need for two separate structural systems as Corbusier had done in Marseille. Its use in a typical urban context was formalistic and even compromised the building's structural logic in that it required many different sized supports.\nBerlin's 1957 Interbau exhibition gave Niemeyer the chance to build an example of his architecture in Germany along with the chance to visit Europe for the first time. The contact with the monuments of the old world had a lasting impact on Niemeyer's views, which he now believed was completely dependent on its aesthetic qualities. Together with his own realisations of how Brazilian architecture had been harmed by untalented architects, this trip led Niemeyer to revise his approach, which he published as a text named \"Depoimento\" in his M\u00f3dulo Magazine. He proposed a simplification, discarding multiple elements such as brises, sculptural piloti and marquees. His architecture from then on would be a pure expression of structure as a representation of solid volumes. His design method would also change, prioritizing aesthetic impact over programmatic functions, given that for him \"when form creates beauty, it has in beauty itself its justification\".\nIn 1955, at 48, Niemeyer designed the Museum of Modern Art in Caracas. The design of this museum was the material realization of his work revision. Meant to rise from the top of a cliff overlooking central Caracas, the museum had an inverted pyramid shape which dominated and overpowered its surroundings. The opaque prismatic building had almost no connection to the outside through its walls, although its glass ceiling allowed natural light to enter. An electronic system was used to keep lighting conditions unchanged throughout the day using artificial light to complement it. The interior, however, was more recognizably done in Niemeyer's mode, with cat-walk ramps linking the different levels and the mezzanine made as a free-form slab hung from ceiling beams.\nThis aesthetic simplicity would culminate in his work in Bras\u00edlia, where the qualities of the buildings are expressed by their structural elements alone.\nDesign of Bras\u00edlia.\nJuscelino Kubitschek visited Niemeyer at the Canoas House in September 1956, soon after he assumed the Brazilian presidency. While driving back to the city, the politician spoke to the architect about his most audacious scheme: \"I am going to build a new capital for this country and I want you to help me [...] Oscar, this time we are going to build the capital of Brazil.\"\nNiemeyer organized a competition for the lay-out of Bras\u00edlia, the new capital, and the winner was the project of his old master and great friend, L\u00facio Costa. Niemeyer would design the buildings, L\u00facio the layout of the city.\nIn the space of a few months, Niemeyer designed residential, commercial and government buildings. Among them were the residence of the President (\"Pal\u00e1cio da Alvorada\"), the chamber of deputies, the National Congress of Brazil, the Cathedral of Bras\u00edlia (a hyperboloid structure), diverse ministries. Viewed from above, the city can be seen to have elements that repeat themselves in every building, achieving a formal unity.\nBehind the construction of Bras\u00edlia lay a monumental campaign to construct an entire city in the barren center of the country, hundreds of kilometers from any major city. The brainchild of Kubitschek, Niemeyer had as aims included stimulating industry, integrating the country's distant areas, populating inhospitable regions and bringing progress to a region where only cattle ranching then existed. Niemeyer and Costa used it to test new concepts of city planning: streets without transit, buildings floating off the ground supported by columns and allowing the space underneath to be free and integrated with nature.\nThe project adopted a socialist ideology: in Bras\u00edlia all the apartments would be owned by the government and rented to employees. Bras\u00edlia did not have \"nobler\" regions, meaning that top ministers and common laborers would share the same building. Many of these concepts were ignored or changed by other presidents with different visions in later years. Bras\u00edlia was designed, constructed, and inaugurated within four years. After its completion, Niemeyer was named chief of the college of architecture of the University of Bras\u00edlia. In 1963, he became an honorary member of the American Institute of Architects in the United States; the same year, he received the Lenin Peace Prize from the USSR.\nNiemeyer and his contribution to the construction of Bras\u00edlia are portrayed in the 1964 French film \"L'homme de Rio\" (\"The Man from Rio\"), starring Jean-Paul Belmondo.\nIn 1964, at 57, after being invited by Abba Hushi, the mayor of Haifa, Israel, to plan the campus of the University of Haifa on Mount Carmel, he came back to a completely different Brazil. In March President Jo\u00e3o Goulart, who succeeded President J\u00e2nio Quadros in 1961, was deposed in a military coup. General Castelo Branco assumed command of the country, which would remain a dictatorship until 1985.\nIn 1987, Bras\u00edlia was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Niemeyer is the first person to have received such recognition for one of his works during his lifetime.\nExile and projects overseas.\nNiemeyer's politics cost him during the military dictatorship. His office was pillaged, the headquarters of the magazine he coordinated were destroyed and clients disappeared. In 1965, two hundred professors, Niemeyer among them, resigned from the University of Bras\u00edlia, to protest against the government's treatment of universities. In the same year he traveled to France for an exhibition in the Louvre.\nThe following year, Niemeyer moved to Paris. In 1962 he visited Tripoli, Lebanon to design the International Permanent Exhibition Centre. Despite completing construction, the start of the civil war in 1975 in Lebanon disrupted its launch.\nHe opened an office on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es and found customers in diverse countries, especially in Algeria where he designed the University of Science and Technology-Houari Boumediene. In Paris he created the Headquarters of the French Communist Party, Place du Colonel Fabien, and in Italy that of the Mondadori publishing company. In Funchal on Madeira, he designed a casino. He worked through the mail with architects based in California in the United States to build a house for Anne and Joseph Strick in Santa Monica, as well as the \"Beauty Pavillion\" for plastic surgeon Dr. Robert Alan Franklyn on Sunset Boulevard in West Hollywood. Since 1995, it has been the home of Mark Mothersbaugh's Mutato Muzika production office.\nWhile in Paris, Niemeyer began designing furniture that was produced by Mobilier International. He created an easy chair and ottoman composed of bent steel and leather in limited numbers for private clients. Later, in 1978, this chair and other designs, including the \"Rio\" chaise-longue were produced in Brazil by Tendo company, then Tendo Brasileira. The easy chairs and ottomans were made of bent wood and were placed in Communist party headquarters around the world. Much like his architecture, Niemeyer's furniture designs evoked the beauty of Brazil, with curves mimicking the female form and the hills of Rio de Janeiro.\nLater life and death.\nThe Brazilian dictatorship lasted until 1985. Under Jo\u00e3o Figueiredo's rule it softened and gradually turned towards democracy. At this time Niemeyer returned to his country. During the 1980s, he made the Memorial Juscelino Kubitschek (1980), the Pantheon (\"Pante\u00e3o da P\u00e1tria e da Liberdade Tancredo Neves\", 1985) and the Latin America Memorial (1987) (described by \"The Independent\" of London to be \"an incoherent and vulgar construction\"). The memorial sculpture represents a wounded hand, whose wound bleeds in the shape of Central and South America. In 1988, at 81, Niemeyer was awarded the Pritzker Architecture Prize, architecture's most prestigious award. From 1992 to 1996, Niemeyer was the president of the Brazilian Communist Party (PCB). As a lifelong activist, Niemeyer was a powerful public figure who could be linked to the party at a time when it appeared to be in its death throes after the USSR's demise. Although not politically active, his image helped the party survive its crisis, after the 1992 split and to remain as a political force on the national scene, which eventually led to its renewal. He was replaced by Zuleide Faria de Mello in 1996. He designed at least two more buildings in Bras\u00edlia, the Memorial dos Povos Indigenas (\"Memorial for the Indigenous People\") and the Catedral Militar, Igreja de N.S. da Paz. In 1996, at the age of 89, he was responsible for the design of the Niter\u00f3i Contemporary Art Museum in Niter\u00f3i, a city next to Rio de Janeiro. The building cantilevers out from a sheer rock face, offering a view of Guanabara Bay and the city of Rio de Janeiro.\nNiemeyer maintained his studio in Rio de Janeiro into the 21st century. In 2002, the Oscar Niemeyer Museum complex was inaugurated in the city of Curitiba, Paran\u00e1. In 2003, at 96, Niemeyer was called to design the Serpentine Gallery Summer Pavilion in Hyde Park, London, a gallery that each year invites a famous architect, who has never previously built in the UK, to design this temporary structure. He was still involved in diverse projects at the age of 100, mainly sculptures and adjustments of previous works. On Niemeyer's 100th birthday, Russia's president Vladimir Putin awarded him the Order of Friendship.\nGrateful for the \"Prince of Asturias Award of Arts\" received in 1989, he collaborated on the 25th anniversary of the award with the donation to Asturias of the design of a cultural centre. The Oscar Niemeyer International Cultural Centre (also known in Spain as Centro Niemeyer), is located in Avil\u00e9s and was inaugurated in 2011. In January 2010, the Auditorium Oscar Niemeyer Ravello was officially opened in Ravello, Italy, on the Amalfi Coast. The Auditorium's concept design, drawings, model, sketches and text were made by Niemeyer in 2000 and completed under the guidance of his friend, Italian sociologist Domenico de Masi. The project was delayed for several years due to objections arising from its design, siting, and clear difference from the local architecture; since its inauguration the project has experienced problems and was closed for a year.\nAfter reaching 100, Niemeyer was regularly hospitalized. In 2009, after a four-week hospitalization for the treatment of gallstones and an intestinal tumour, he was quoted as saying that hospitalization is a \"very lonely thing; I needed to keep busy, keep in touch with friends, maintain my rhythm of life.\" His daughter and only child, Anna Maria, died of emphysema in June 2012, aged 82. Niemeyer died of cardiorespiratory arrest on 5 December 2012, at the Hospital Samaritano in Rio de Janeiro. He had been hospitalised with a respiratory infection prior to his death.\nThe BBC's obituary of Niemeyer stated that he \"built some of the world's most striking buildings\u00a0\u2013 monumental, curving concrete and glass structures which almost defy description\", describing him as \"one of the most innovative and daring architects of the last 60 years\". \"The Washington Post\" said he was \"widely regarded as the foremost Latin American architect of the last century\".\nPersonal life.\nNiemeyer married Annita Baldo in 1928. They had one daughter, Anna Maria, in 1929 (she predeceased her father on June 6, 2012). Niemeyer subsequently had five grandchildren, thirteen great-grandchildren, and seven great-great-grandchildren. Annita died in 2004, at 93, after 76 years of marriage. In 2006, shortly before his 99th birthday, Niemeyer married for the second time, to his longtime secretary Vera Lucia Cabreira at his apartment, a month after he had fractured his hip in a fall.\nOscar Niemeyer was a keen smoker of cigars, smoking more in later life. His architectural studio was a smoking zone.\nPolitical and religious views.\nNiemeyer had a left-wing political ideology. In 1945, many communist militants who were arrested under the Vargas' dictatorship were released, and Niemeyer sheltered some of them at his office. He met Lu\u00eds Carlos Prestes, perhaps the most important left-winger in Brazil. After several weeks, he gave up the house to Prestes and his supporters, who founded the Brazilian Communist Party. Niemeyer joined the party in 1945 and became its president in 1992.\nDuring the military dictatorship of Brazil his office was raided and he was forced into exile in Europe. The Minister of Aeronautics of the time reportedly said that \"the place for a communist architect is Moscow.\" He subsequently visited the Soviet Union, meeting with a number of the country's leaders, and in 1963 was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize. Niemeyer was a close friend of Fidel Castro, who often visited his apartment and studio in Brazil. Castro was once quoted as saying \"Niemeyer and I are the last communists on this planet.\" Niemeyer was regularly visited by Hugo Ch\u00e1vez.\nSome critics pointed out that Niemeyer's architecture was often in opposition to his views. His first major work, the Church of Saint Francis of Assisi, informally known also as the Church of Pampulha, had a \"bourgeois\" character and Bras\u00edlia was famous for its palaces. Niemeyer never saw architecture in the same way as Walter Gropius, who defended a rational and industrial architecture capable of molding society to make it suitable for the new industrial era. Skeptical about architecture's ability to change an \"unjust society\", Niemeyer defended that such activism should be undertaken politically. Using architecture for such purposes would be anti-modern (as it would be limiting constructive technology). Niemeyer says: \"Our concern is political too\u00a0\u2013 to change the world ... Architecture is my work, and I've spent my whole life at a drawing board, but life is more important than architecture. What matters is to improve human beings.\"\nNiemeyer was a lifelong atheist, basing his beliefs both on the \"injustices of this world\" and on cosmological principles: \"It's a fantastic Universe which humiliates us, and we can't make any use of it. But we are amazed by the power of the human mind \u2026 in the end, that's it\u2014you are born, you die, that's it!\". Such views never stopped him from designing religious buildings, which included small Catholic chapels, huge Orthodox churches and large mosques. He also catered to the spiritual beliefs of the public who facilitated his religious buildings. In the Cathedral of Bras\u00edlia, he intended for the large glass windows \"to connect the people to the sky, where their Lord's paradise is.\"\nHe was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt a Constitution for the Federation of Earth.\nCriticism.\nNicolai Ouroussoff, the architecture critic of \"The New York Times\", published an article asking whether Niemeyer's last work had been affected by advanced age. Ouroussoff found the \"Niter\u00f3i Contemporary Art Museum\" to be of significantly lower quality than the architect's earlier works. He argued that \"the greatest threat to Mr. Niemeyer's remarkable legacy may not be the developer's bulldozer or insensitive city planners, but Mr. Niemeyer himself.\" He considers iconic works at \"Esplanada dos Minist\u00e9rios\" to \"have been marred by the architect's own hand.\"\nLegacy.\nSince 1984 the Rio de Janeiro carnival parade is held in the Sambadrome designed by Oscar Niemeyer. In 2003 the Unidos de Vila Isabel Samba School celebrated the life of Niemeyer in their carnival parade. It was the first time that Vila Isabel paid tribute to a living historical figure. The parade's theme song\u00a0\u2013 http://\u00a0\u2013 was composed by the Brazilian singer Martinho da Vila.\nOscar Niemeyer's projects have also been a major source of inspiration for the French painter Jacques Benoit. In 2006 Benoit presented in Paris a series of paintings entitled http:// , paying tribute to the legacy of Niemeyer in France. In 2010 the Bras\u00edlia Jubilee Commission chose Benoit's works for an exhibition that celebrated the 50th anniversary of the city. The exhibition\u00a0\u2013 http:// \u00a0\u2013 displayed 27 canvas divided into three series, all of them inspired by the architectural landscape of Bras\u00edlia and the history of its construction.\nShortly before Niemeyer's death in 2012, artist Sarah Morris filmed Niemeyer in his office for her 2012 film \"Rio\".\nIn 2013, soon after Niemeyer's death, the Brazilian street artist Eduardo Kobra and four other painters paid their tribute to the architect with a gigantic mural, covering the entire side of a skyscraper at Paulista Avenue in S\u00e3o Paulo's financial district. The artwork is inspired by Niemeyer's architecture, his love of concrete and Le Corbusier.\nNiemeyer is featured in the film \"Urbanized\" discussing his design process and architectural philosophy.\nDuring the homage to Oscar Niemeyer on December 15, 2012 (it would have been his 105th birthday), the citizens movement released \"Sentimiento Niemeyer\" at the Centro Niemeyer in Spain. The verses were written by different people through a Facebook event and put together by musicians. The song was released under a Creative Commons license (attribution, non-profit, no-variations) so that other artists who shared the \"feeling\" around the world could make their own cover of the song, keeping the melody and translating the lyrics.\nIn July 2015 the Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo (MoT) organized the first major retrospective of Niemeyer in Japan, curated by Yuko Hasegawa in collaboration with Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa from SANAA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48374", "revid": "39457907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48374", "title": "CT", "text": "CT or ct may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48375", "revid": "50056326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48375", "title": "Triple DES", "text": "Block cipher\nIn cryptography, Triple DES (3DES or TDES), officially the Triple Data Encryption Algorithm (TDEA or Triple DEA), is a symmetric-key block cipher, which applies the DES cipher algorithm three times to each data block. The 56-bit key of the Data Encryption Standard (DES) is no longer considered adequate in the face of modern cryptanalytic techniques and supercomputing power; Triple DES increases the effective security to 112\u00a0bits. A CVE released in 2016, \"https://\", disclosed a major security vulnerability in the DES and 3DES encryption algorithms. This CVE, combined with the inadequate key size of 3DES, led to NIST deprecating 3DES in 2019 and disallowing all uses (except processing already encrypted data) by the end of 2023. It has been replaced with the more secure, more robust AES.\nWhile US government and industry standards abbreviate the algorithm's name as TDES (Triple DES) and TDEA (Triple Data Encryption Algorithm), RFC 1851 referred to it as 3DES from the time it first promulgated the idea, and this namesake has since come into wide use by most vendors, users, and cryptographers.\nHistory.\nIn 1978, a triple encryption method using DES with two 56-bit keys was proposed by Walter Tuchman; in 1981, Merkle and Hellman proposed a more secure triple-key version of 3DES with 112\u00a0bits of security.\nStandards.\nThe Triple Data Encryption Algorithm is variously defined in several standards documents:\nAlgorithm.\nThe original DES cipher's key size of 56\u00a0bits was considered generally sufficient when it was designed, but the availability of increasing computational power made brute-force attacks feasible. Triple DES provides a relatively simple method of increasing the key size of DES to protect against such attacks, without the need to design a completely new block cipher algorithm.\nA naive approach to increase the strength of a block encryption algorithm with a short key length (like DES) would be to use two keys formula_1 instead of one, and encrypt each block twice: formula_2. If the original key length is formula_3 bits, one would hope this scheme provides security equivalent to using a key formula_4 bits long. Unfortunately, this approach is vulnerable to the meet-in-the-middle attack: given a known plaintext pair formula_5, such that formula_6, one can recover the key pair formula_1 in formula_8 steps, instead of the formula_9 steps one would expect from an ideally secure algorithm with formula_4 bits of key.\nTherefore, Triple DES uses a \"key bundle\" that comprises three DES keys, formula_11, formula_12 and formula_13, each of 56\u00a0bits (excluding parity bits). The encryption algorithm is:\n formula_14\nThat is, encrypt with formula_11, decrypt with formula_12, then encrypt with formula_13.\nDecryption is the reverse:\n formula_18\nThat is, decrypt with formula_13, encrypt with formula_12, then decrypt with formula_11.\nEach triple encryption encrypts one block of 64\u00a0bits of data.\nIn each case, the middle operation is the reverse of the first and last. This improves the strength of the algorithm when using keying option 2 and provides backward compatibility with DES with keying option 3.\nEEE operation.\nThe text above describes the mode common and standardized EDE (encrypt-decrypt-encrypt) sequence. There is a separate \"EEE\" (encrypt-encrypt-encrypt) sequence supported by some libraries in two-key or three-key setups.\nKeying options.\nThe standards define three keying options:\n All three keys are independent. Sometimes known as 3TDEA or triple-length keys.This is the strongest, with 3 \u00d7 56 = 168 independent key bits. It is still vulnerable to the meet-in-the-middle attack, but the attack requires 22 \u00d7 56 steps.\n K1 and K2 are independent, and K3 = K1. Sometimes known as 2TDEA or double-length keys.This provides a shorter key length of 56 \u00d7 2 or 112\u00a0bits and a reasonable compromise between DES and keying option 1, with the same caveat as above. This is an improvement over \"double DES\" which only requires 256 steps to attack. NIST disallowed this option in 2015.\n All three keys are identical, i.e. K1 = K2 = K3.This is backward-compatible with DES, since two of the operations cancel out. ISO/IEC 18033-3 never allowed this option, and NIST no longer allows K1 = K2 or K2 = K3.\nEach DES key is 8 odd-parity bytes, with 56\u00a0bits of key and 8\u00a0bits of error-detection. A key bundle requires 24\u00a0bytes for option 1, 16 for option 2, or 8 for option 3.\nNIST (and the current TCG specifications version 2.0 of approved algorithms for Trusted Platform Module) also disallows using any one of the 64 following 64-bit values in any keys (note that 32 of them are the binary complement of the 32 others; and that 32 of these keys are also the reverse permutation of bytes of the 32 others), listed here in hexadecimal (in each byte, the least significant bit is an odd-parity generated bit, which is discarded when forming the effectively 56-bit key):\n 01.01.01.01.01.01.01.01, FE.FE.FE.FE.FE.FE.FE.FE, E0.FE.FE.E0.F1.FE.FE.F1, 1F.01.01.1F.0E.01.01.0E,\n 01.01.FE.FE.01.01.FE.FE, FE.FE.01.01.FE.FE.01.01, E0.FE.01.1F.F1.FE.01.0E, 1F.01.FE.E0.0E.01.FE.F1,\n 01.01.E0.E0.01.01.F1.F1, FE.FE.1F.1F.FE.FE.0E.0E, E0.FE.1F.01.F1.FE.0E.01, 1F.01.E0.FE.0E.01.F1.FE,\n 01.01.1F.1F.01.01.0E.0E, FE.FE.E0.E0.FE.FE.F1.F1, E0.FE.E0.FE.F1.FE.F1.FE, 1F.01.1F.01.0E.01.0E.01,\n 01.FE.01.FE.01.FE.01.FE, FE.01.FE.01.FE.01.FE.01, E0.01.FE.1F.F1.01.FE.0E, 1F.FE.01.E0.0E.FE.01.F1,\n 01.FE.FE.01.01.FE.FE.01, FE.01.01.FE.FE.01.01.FE, E0.01.01.E0.F1.01.01.F1, 1F.FE.FE.1F.0E.FE.FE.0E,\n 01.FE.E0.1F.01.FE.F1.0E, FE.01.1F.E0.FE.01.0E.F1, E0.01.1F.FE.F1.01.0E.FE, 1F.FE.E0.01.0E.FE.F1.01,\n 01.FE.1F.E0.01.FE.0E.F1, FE.01.E0.1F.FE.01.F1.0E, E0.01.E0.01.F1.01.F1.01, 1F.FE.1F.FE.0E.FE.0E.FE,\n 01.E0.01.E0.01.F1.01.F1, FE.1F.FE.1F.FE.0E.FE.0E, E0.1F.FE.01.F1.0E.FE.01, 1F.E0.01.FE.0E.F1.01.FE,\n 01.E0.FE.1F.01.F1.FE.0E, FE.1F.01.E0.FE.0E.01.F1, E0.1F.01.FE.F1.0E.01.FE, 1F.E0.FE.01.0E.F1.FE.01,\n 01.E0.E0.01.01.F1.F1.01, FE.1F.1F.FE.FE.0E.0E.FE, E0.1F.1F.E0.F1.0E.0E.F1, 1F.E0.E0.1F.0E.F1.F1.0E,\n 01.E0.1F.FE.01.F1.0E.FE, FE.1F.E0.01.FE.0E.F1.01, E0.1F.E0.1F.F1.0E.F1.0E, 1F.E0.1F.E0.0E.F1.0E.F1,\n 01.1F.01.1F.01.0E.01.0E, FE.E0.FE.E0.FE.F1.FE.F1, E0.E0.FE.FE.F1.F1.FE.FE, 1F.1F.01.01.0E.0E.01.01,\n 01.1F.FE.E0.01.0E.FE.F1, FE.E0.01.1F.FE.F1.01.0E, E0.E0.01.01.F1.F1.01.01, 1F.1F.FE.FE.0E.0E.FE.FE,\n 01.1F.E0.FE.01.0E.F1.FE, FE.E0.1F.01.FE.F1.0E.01, E0.E0.1F.1F.F1.F1.0E.0E, 1F.1F.E0.E0.0E.0E.F1.F1,\n 01.1F.1F.01.01.0E.0E.01, FE.E0.E0.FE.FE.F1.F1.FE, E0.E0.E0.E0.F1.F1.F1.F1, 1F.1F.1F.1F.0E.0E.0E.0E\nWith these restrictions on allowed keys, Triple DES was reapproved with keying options 1 and 2 only. Generally, the three keys are generated by taking 24\u00a0bytes from a strong random generator, and only keying option 1 should be used (option 2 needs only 16 random bytes, but strong random generators are hard to assert and it is considered best practice to use only option 1).\nEncryption of more than one block.\nAs with all block ciphers, encryption and decryption of multiple blocks of data may be performed using a variety of modes of operation, which can generally be defined independently of the block cipher algorithm. However, ANS X9.52 specifies directly, and NIST SP 800-67 specifies via SP 800-38A, that some modes shall only be used with certain constraints on them that do not necessarily apply to general specifications of those modes. For example, ANS X9.52 specifies that for cipher block chaining, the initialization vector shall be different each time, whereas ISO/IEC 10116 does not. FIPS PUB 46-3 and ISO/IEC 18033-3 define only the single-block algorithm, and do not place any restrictions on the modes of operation for multiple blocks.\nSecurity.\nIn general, Triple DES with three independent keys (keying option\u00a01) has a key length of 168\u00a0bits (three 56-bit DES keys), but due to the meet-in-the-middle attack, the effective security it provides is only 112\u00a0bits. Keying option\u00a02 reduces the effective key size to 112\u00a0bits (because the third key is the same as the first). However, this option is susceptible to certain chosen-plaintext or known-plaintext attacks, and thus it is designated by NIST to have only 80\u00a0bits of security. This can be considered insecure; as a consequence, Triple DES's planned deprecation was announced by NIST in 2017.\nThe short block size of 64\u00a0bits makes 3DES vulnerable to block collision attacks if it is used to encrypt large amounts of data with the same key. The Sweet32 attack shows how this can be exploited in TLS and OpenVPN. Practical Sweet32 attack on 3DES-based cipher-suites in TLS required formula_22 blocks (785\u00a0GB) for a full attack, but researchers were lucky to get a collision just after around formula_23 blocks, which took only 25\u00a0minutes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The security of TDEA is affected by the number of blocks processed with one key bundle. One key bundle shall not be used to apply cryptographic protection (e.g., encrypt) more than formula_23 64-bit data blocks.\u2014\u200a\nOpenSSL does not include 3DES by default since version 1.1.0 (August 2016) and considers it a \"weak cipher\".\nUsage.\nAs of 2008, the electronic payment industry uses Triple DES and continues to develop and promulgate standards based upon it, such as EMV.\nEarlier versions of Microsoft OneNote, Microsoft Outlook 2007 and Microsoft System Center Configuration Manager 2012 use Triple DES to password-protect user content and system data. However, in December 2018, Microsoft announced the retirement of 3DES throughout their Office 365 service.\nIn 2025, starting with version 144, Firefox abandoned 3DES-CBC for encrypting credentials on the user's computer, and switched to AES-256-CBC.\nImplementations.\nBelow is a list of cryptography libraries that support Triple DES:\nSome implementations above may not include 3DES in the default build, in later or more recent versions, but may still support decryption in order to handle existing data.\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48377", "revid": "2747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48377", "title": "Gilgamesh epic", "text": ""}
{"id": "48378", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48378", "title": "346 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 346 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Corvus and Visolus (or, less frequently, year 408 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 346 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nSicily.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48379", "revid": "41295437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48379", "title": "Circuit Paul Ricard", "text": "French race track\nThe Circuit Paul Ricard () is a French motorsport race track built in 1969 at Le Castellet, Var, near Marseille, with finance from pastis magnate Paul Ricard. Ricard wanted to experience the challenge of building a racetrack. The circuit has hosted the FIA Formula One French Grand Prix intermittently from to .\nHistory.\nFirst years (1970\u20131990).\nOpened on 19 April 1970, the circuit's innovative facilities made it one of the safest motor racing circuits in the world at the time of its opening. The circuit had three track layout permutations, a large industrial park and an airstrip. The combination of modern facilities, mild winter weather and an airstrip made it popular amongst racing teams for car testing during the annual winter off-season.\nThe original track was dominated by the long Mistral Straight that is followed by the high-speed right hand Signes corner. The long main straight and other fast sections made the track very hard on engines as they ran at full revs for extended spells. Engine failures were common, such as Ayrton Senna's huge crash during the 1985 French Grand Prix after the Renault engine in his Lotus failed and he went off backwards at Signes on his own oil and crashed heavily, with only light bruising to the driver. Nigel Mansell crashed at the same place in the same weekend during practice and suffered a concussion which kept him out of the race. Mansell's crash was the result of a slow puncture in his left rear tyre causing it to explode at over , which detached his Williams FW10's rear wing. The Honda powered FW10 holds the race lap record for the original circuit when Mansell's teammate Keke Rosberg recorded a time of 1:39.914 during the 1985 French Grand Prix. During qualifying for the 1985 race, Swiss driver Marc Surer clocked what was at the time the highest speed recorded by a Formula One car on the Mistral when he pushed his turbocharged, Brabham-BMW to . This compared to the slowest car in the race, the naturally aspirated Tyrrell-Ford V8 of Stefan Bellof which could only manage . Bellof qualified 9 seconds slower than Surer and 12 seconds slower than pole winner Rosberg.\nPaul Ricard was inaugurated with a 2-litre sports car race; during the 1970s and the 1980s the track developed some of the best French drivers of the time including four time World Drivers' Champion Alain Prost who won the French Grand Prix at the circuit in 1983, 1988, 1989 and 1990. The circuit hosted the Formula One French Grand Prix on many occasions, the first of which was the 1971 French Grand Prix.\nThe circuit was also extensively used for testing, especially in Formula One. In 1986, Brabham Formula One driver Elio de Angelis was killed in a testing accident at the fast first turn after the rear wing of his Brabham BT55 had broken off. Although the circuit was not the cause of the crash, it was modified in order to make it safer. The length of the Mistral Straight was reduced from in length to just over , and the fast sweeping Verrerie curves where de Angelis had crashed were bypassed. Effectively, after the start, instead of heading into the left hand Verrerie sweeper, cars now braked hard and turned sharp right into a short run that connected the pit straight to the Mistral. This changed the circuit length for a Grand Prix from to just . This also had the effect of cutting lap times from Keke Rosberg's 1985 pole time of 1:32.462 in his Williams-Honda turbo, to Nigel Mansell's 1990 pole time of 1:04.402 in his V12 Ferrari.\nFrom 1990 the French Grand Prix was moved to Magny-Cours where it ran until 2008. Paul Ricard hosted the French Grand Prix on 14 occasions between 1971 and 1990. The Long Circuit was used from 1971 to 1985, with the Club Circuit used from 1986 to 1990. On six occasions (1971, 1975, 1976, 1978, 1980 and 1989) the winner at Paul Ricard went on to win the World Championship in the same year. Ronnie Peterson (1973 and 1974) and Ren\u00e9 Arnoux (1982) are the only Ricard winners who never won the championship.\nRecent times (1990\u2013present).\nIn the 1990s the circuit's use was limited to motorcycle racing and French national racing, most notably until 1999, the Bol d'or 24-hour motorcycle endurance race. The track was also the home of the Oreca F3000 team. After Ricard's death, the track was sold to Excelis, a company owned by Formula One promoter Bernie Ecclestone, in 1999. The track was rebuilt into an advanced test track, and was for a time known as the Paul Ricard High Tech Test Track (Paul Ricard HTTT) before changing its name back to Circuit Paul Ricard.\nAn aircraft landing strip suitable for private jets is amongst the circuit's facilities. There is a Karting Test Track (KTT) that features the same type of abrasive safety zones as the car track. The track has also hosted some races, including the 2006 Paul Ricard 500km, a round of the FIA GT Championship. Other GT championships have run races here, most notably the Ferrari Challenge and races organized by Porsche clubs of France and Italy.\nOn 5 December 2016, it was announced that the French Grand Prix would return to the Formula 1 calendar for the 2018 season at Paul Ricard. It was the first French Grand Prix since 2008 (last held at Magny-Cours) and the first at Circuit Paul Ricard since 1990. On 19 June 2017, the FIA's World Motor Sport Council in Geneva published its 2018 provisional calendar with the French Grand Prix scheduled for 24 June at Circuit Paul Ricard with the race itself followed immediately by the Austrian Grand Prix at the Red Bull Ring and then the British Grand Prix at Silverstone Circuit. Pirelli Motorsport has planned for a two-day tyre testing for its 2018 Formula 1 tyres at Circuit Paul Ricard in the months of May, June and September 2017. The track remained on the F1 calendar until the 2022 season, after which it disappeared from the calendar again.\nPaul Ricard has the 3-star FIA Environmental Accreditation. In a 2021 report, it was ranked the second most sustainable racetrack in the world, together with Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya and behind Mugello Circuit.\nTrack.\nThe track is characterised by its long Mistral straight and elongated track design. The track is also unusual in that it is built on a plateau: it is very flat. In 1986 the track was modified to shorten the circuit, by adding shortcut through to the middle of the Mistral Straight. This shorter circuit was also known as the GP short circuit and was long. After the modifications in 2000\u20132005, the track offers 247 possible configurations from to the full . The track's elevation ranges from above sea level. Its flexibility and mild winter weather mean that it is used for testing by several motorsport teams, including Formula One teams.\nThe track is known for its distinctive black and blue run-off areas known as the \"Blue Zone\". The runoff surface consists of a mixture of asphalt and tungsten, used instead of gravel traps, as common at other circuits. A second, deeper run-off area is the \"Red Zone\", with a more abrasive surface designed to maximize tyre grip and hence minimize braking distance, although at the cost of extreme tyre wear. The final safeguard consists of Tecpro barriers, a modern improvement on tyre barriers.\nIn 2019 the pitlane entry was moved following safety concerns. The entry, which was previously accessed via the main straight, is now situated between the final two corners (turns 14 and 15).\nLap records.\nThe official lap record for the current F1 circuit layout (1C-V2) is 1:32.740, set by Sebastian Vettel during the 2019 French Grand Prix. While the unofficial all-time track record is 1:28.319, set by Lewis Hamilton during final qualifying for the aforementioned 2019 race. As of October 2025, the fastest official race lap records at the Circuit Paul Ricard are listed as:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48381", "revid": "1812441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48381", "title": "Astronomical coordinate systems", "text": "System for specifying positions of celestial objects\nIn astronomy, coordinate systems are used for specifying positions of celestial objects (satellites, planets, stars, galaxies, etc.) relative to a given reference frame, based on physical reference points available to a situated observer (e.g. the true horizon and north to an observer on Earth's surface). Coordinate systems in astronomy can specify an object's relative position in three-dimensional space or plot merely by its direction on a celestial sphere, if the object's distance is unknown or trivial.\nSpherical coordinates, projected on the celestial sphere, are analogous to the geographic coordinate system used on the surface of Earth. These differ in their choice of fundamental plane, which divides the celestial sphere into two equal hemispheres along a great circle. Rectangular coordinates, in appropriate units, have the same fundamental (\"x, y\") plane and primary (\"x\"-axis) direction, such as an axis of rotation. Each coordinate system is named after its choice of fundamental plane.\nCoordinate systems.\nThe following table lists the common coordinate systems in use by the astronomical community. The fundamental plane divides the celestial sphere into two equal hemispheres and defines the baseline for the latitudinal coordinates, similar to the equator in the geographic coordinate system. The poles are located at \u00b190\u00b0 from the fundamental plane. The primary direction is the starting point of the longitudinal coordinates. The origin is the zero distance point, the \"center of the celestial sphere\", although the definition of celestial sphere is ambiguous about the definition of its center point.\nHorizontal system.\nThe \"horizontal\", or altitude-azimuth, system is based on the position of the observer on Earth, which revolves around its own axis once per sidereal day (23 hours, 56 minutes and 4.091 seconds) in relation to the star background. The positioning of a celestial object by the horizontal system varies with time, but is a useful coordinate system for locating and tracking objects for observers on Earth. It is based on the position of stars relative to an observer's ideal horizon.\nEquatorial system.\nThe \"equatorial\" coordinate system is centered at Earth's center, but fixed relative to the celestial poles and the March equinox. The coordinates are based on the location of stars relative to Earth's equator if it were projected out to an infinite distance. The equatorial describes the sky as seen from the Solar System, and modern star maps almost exclusively use equatorial coordinates.\nThe \"equatorial\" system is the normal coordinate system for most professional and many amateur astronomers having an equatorial mount that follows the movement of the sky during the night. Celestial objects are found by adjusting the telescope's or other instrument's scales so that they match the equatorial coordinates of the selected object to observe.\nPopular choices of pole and equator are the older B1950 and the modern J2000 systems, but a pole and equator \"of date\" can also be used, meaning one appropriate to the date under consideration, such as when a measurement of the position of a planet or spacecraft is made. There are also subdivisions into \"mean of date\" coordinates, which average out or ignore nutation, and \"true of date,\" which include nutation.\nEcliptic system.\nThe fundamental plane is the plane of the Earth's orbit, called the ecliptic plane. There are two principal variants of the ecliptic coordinate system: geocentric ecliptic coordinates centered on the Earth and heliocentric ecliptic coordinates centered on the center of mass of the Solar System.\nThe geocentric ecliptic system was the principal coordinate system for ancient astronomy and is still useful for computing the apparent motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets. It was used to define the twelve astrological signs of the zodiac, for instance.\nThe heliocentric ecliptic system describes the planets' orbital movement around the Sun, and centers on the barycenter of the Solar System (i.e. very close to the center of the Sun). The system is primarily used for computing the positions of planets and other Solar System bodies, as well as defining their orbital elements.\nGalactic system.\nThe galactic coordinate system uses the approximate plane of the Milky Way Galaxy as its fundamental plane. The Solar System is still the center of the coordinate system, and the zero point is defined as the direction towards the Galactic Center. Galactic latitude resembles the elevation above the galactic plane and galactic longitude determines direction relative to the center of the galaxy.\nSupergalactic system.\nThe supergalactic coordinate system corresponds to a fundamental plane that contains a higher than average number of local galaxies in the sky as seen from Earth.\nConverting coordinates.\nConversions between the various coordinate systems are given. See the notes before using these equations.\nNotation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nformula_1\nEquatorial \u2194 ecliptic.\nThe classical equations, derived from spherical trigonometry, for the longitudinal coordinate are presented to the right of a bracket; dividing the first equation by the second gives the convenient tangent equation seen on the left. The rotation matrix equivalent is given beneath each case. This division is ambiguous because tan has a period of 180\u00b0 (\u03c0) whereas cos and sin have periods of 360\u00b0 (2\u03c0).\nformula_2\nEquatorial \u2194 horizontal.\nAzimuth (A) is measured from the south point, turning positive to the west.\nZenith distance, the angular distance along the great circle from the zenith to a celestial object, is simply the complementary angle of the altitude: 90\u00b0 \u2212 \"a\".\nformula_3\nIn solving the tan(\"A\") equation for \"A\", in order to avoid the ambiguity of the arctangent, use of the two-argument arctangent, denoted atan2(\"x\",\"y\"), is recommended. The two-argument arctangent computes the arctangent of , and accounts for the quadrant in which it is being computed. Thus, consistent with the convention of azimuth being measured from the south and opening positive to the west,\nformula_4,\nwhere\nformula_5.\nIf the above formula produces a negative value for \"A\", it can be rendered positive by simply adding 360\u00b0.\nformula_6\nAgain, in solving the tan(\"h\") equation for \"h\", use of the two-argument arctangent that accounts for the quadrant is recommended. Thus, again consistent with the convention of azimuth being measured from the south and opening positive to the west,\n formula_7,\nwhere\nformula_8\nEquatorial \u2194 galactic.\nThese equations are for converting equatorial coordinates to Galactic coordinates.\nformula_9\nformula_10 are the equatorial coordinates of the North Galactic Pole and formula_11 is the Galactic longitude of the North Celestial Pole. Referred to J2000.0 the values of these quantities are:\n formula_12\nIf the equatorial coordinates are referred to another equinox, they must be precessed to their place at J2000.0 before applying these formulae.\nThese equations convert to equatorial coordinates referred to B2000.0.\nformula_13\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48382", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48382", "title": "Eudoxus", "text": "Eudoxus may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48384", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48384", "title": "Equatorial coordinate system", "text": "Celestial coordinate system used to specify the positions of celestial objects\nThe equatorial coordinate system is a celestial coordinate system widely used to specify the positions of celestial objects. It may be implemented in spherical or rectangular coordinates, both defined by an origin at the centre of Earth, a fundamental plane consisting of the projection of Earth's equator onto the celestial sphere (forming the celestial equator), a primary direction towards the March equinox, and a right-handed convention.\nThe origin at the centre of Earth means the coordinates are \"geocentric\", that is, as seen from the centre of Earth as if it were transparent. The fundamental plane and the primary direction mean that the coordinate system, while aligned with Earth's equator and pole, does not rotate with the Earth, but remains relatively fixed against the background stars. A right-handed convention means that coordinates increase northward from and eastward around the fundamental plane.\nPrimary direction.\nThis description of the orientation of the reference frame is somewhat simplified; the orientation is not quite fixed. A slow motion of Earth's axis, precession, causes a slow, continuous turning of the coordinate system westward about the poles of the ecliptic, completing one circuit in about 26,000 years. Superimposed on this is a smaller motion of the ecliptic, and a small oscillation of the Earth's axis, nutation.\nIn order to fix the exact primary direction, these motions necessitate the specification of the equinox of a particular date, known as an epoch, when giving a position. The three most commonly used are:\nA position in the equatorial coordinate system is thus typically specified \"true equinox and equator of date\", \"mean equinox and equator of J2000.0\", or similar. Note that there is no \"mean ecliptic\", as the ecliptic is not subject to small periodic oscillations.\nSpherical coordinates.\nUse in astronomy.\nA star's spherical coordinates are often expressed as a pair, right ascension and declination, without a distance coordinate. The direction of sufficiently distant objects is the same for all observers, and it is convenient to specify this direction with the same coordinates for all. In contrast, in the horizontal coordinate system, a star's position differs from observer to observer based on their positions on the Earth's surface, and is continuously changing with the Earth's rotation.\nTelescopes equipped with equatorial mounts and setting circles employ the equatorial coordinate system to find objects. Setting circles in conjunction with a star chart or ephemeris allow the telescope to be easily pointed at known objects on the celestial sphere.\nDeclination.\nThe declination symbol \"\u03b4\", (lower case \"delta\", abbreviated DEC) measures the angular distance of an object perpendicular to the celestial equator, positive to the north, negative to the south. For example, the north celestial pole has a declination of +90\u00b0. The origin for declination is the celestial equator, which is the projection of the Earth's equator onto the celestial sphere. Declination is analogous to terrestrial latitude.\nRight ascension.\nThe right ascension symbol \"\u03b1\", (lower case \"alpha\", abbreviated RA) measures the angular distance of an object eastward along the celestial equator from the March equinox to the hour circle passing through the object. The March equinox point is one of the two points where the ecliptic intersects the celestial equator. Right ascension is usually measured in sidereal hours, minutes and seconds instead of degrees, a result of the method of measuring right ascensions by timing the passage of objects across the meridian as the Earth rotates. There are = 15\u00b0 in one hour of right ascension, and 24h of right ascension around the entire celestial equator.\nWhen used together, right ascension and declination are usually abbreviated RA/Dec.\nHour angle.\nAlternatively to right ascension, hour angle (abbreviated HA or LHA, \"local hour angle\"), a left-handed system, measures the angular distance of an object westward along the celestial equator from the observer's meridian to the hour circle passing through the object. Unlike right ascension, hour angle is always increasing with the rotation of Earth. Hour angle may be considered a means of measuring the time since upper culmination, the moment when an object contacts the meridian overhead.\nA culminating star on the observer's meridian is said to have a zero hour angle (0h). One sidereal hour (approximately 0.9973 solar hours) later, Earth's rotation will carry the star to the west of the meridian, and its hour angle will be 1h. When calculating topocentric phenomena, right ascension may be converted into hour angle as an intermediate step.\nRectangular coordinates: geocentric equatorial coordinates.\nThere are a number of rectangular variants of equatorial coordinates. All have:\nThe reference frames do not rotate with the Earth (in contrast to Earth-centred, Earth-fixed frames), remaining always directed toward the equinox, and drifting over time with the motions of precession and nutation.\nGeneralization: heliocentric equatorial coordinates.\nIn astronomy, there is also a heliocentric rectangular variant of equatorial coordinates, designated \"x\", \"y\", \"z\", which has:\nThis frame is similar to the \"\u03be\", \"\u03b7\", \"\u03b6\" frame above, except that the origin is removed to the centre of the Sun. It is commonly used in planetary orbit calculation. The three astronomical rectangular coordinate systems are related by\nformula_2\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48386", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48386", "title": "Horizontal coordinate system", "text": "Type of celestial coordinate system\nThe horizontal coordinate system is a celestial coordinate system that uses the observer's local horizon as the fundamental plane to define two angles of a spherical coordinate system: altitude and \"azimuth\".\nTherefore, the horizontal coordinate system is sometimes called the az/el system, the alt/az system, or the alt-azimuth system, among others. In an altazimuth mount of a telescope, the instrument's two axes follow altitude and azimuth.\nDefinition.\nThis celestial coordinate system divides the sky into two hemispheres: The upper hemisphere, where objects are above the horizon and are visible, and the lower hemisphere, where objects are below the horizon and cannot be seen, since the Earth obstructs views of them. The great circle separating the hemispheres is called the celestial horizon, which is defined as the great circle on the celestial sphere whose plane is normal to the local gravity vector (the vertical direction). In practice, the horizon can be defined as the plane tangent to a quiet, liquid surface, such as a pool of mercury, or by using a bull's eye level. The pole of the upper hemisphere is called the \"zenith\" and the pole of the lower hemisphere is called the \"nadir\".\nThe following are two independent horizontal angular coordinates:\nA horizontal coordinate system should not be confused with a \"topocentric coordinate system\". Horizontal coordinates define the observer's orientation, but not location of the origin, while topocentric coordinates define the origin location, on the Earth's surface, in contrast to a geocentric celestial system.\nGeneral features.\nThe horizontal coordinate system is fixed to a location on Earth, not the stars. Therefore, the altitude and azimuth of an object in the sky changes with time, as the object appears to drift across the sky with Earth's rotation. In addition, since the horizontal system is defined by the observer's local horizon, the same object viewed from different locations on Earth at the same time will have different values of altitude and azimuth.\nThe cardinal points on the horizon have specific values of azimuth that are helpful references.\nHorizontal coordinates are very useful for determining the rise and set times of an object in the sky. When an object's altitude is 0\u00b0, it is on the horizon. If at that moment its altitude is increasing, it is rising, but if its altitude is decreasing, it is setting. However, all objects on the celestial sphere are subject to diurnal motion, which always appears to be westward.\nA northern observer can determine whether altitude is increasing or decreasing by instead considering the azimuth of the celestial object:\nThere are the following special cases:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48387", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48387", "title": "Ecliptic coordinate system", "text": "Celestial coordinate system used to describe Solar System objects\nIn astronomy, the ecliptic coordinate system is a celestial coordinate system commonly used for representing the apparent positions, orbits, and pole orientations of Solar System objects. Because most planets (except Mercury) and many small Solar System bodies have orbits with only slight inclinations to the ecliptic, using it as the fundamental plane is convenient. The system's origin can be the center of either the Sun or Earth, its primary direction is towards the March equinox, and it has a right-hand convention. It may be implemented in spherical or rectangular coordinates.\nPrimary direction.\nThe celestial equator and the ecliptic are slowly moving due to perturbing forces on the Earth, therefore the orientation of the primary direction, their intersection at the March equinox, is not quite fixed. A slow motion of Earth's axis, precession, causes a slow, continuous turning of the coordinate system westward about the poles of the ecliptic, completing one circuit in about 26,000 years. Superimposed on this is a smaller motion of the ecliptic, and a small oscillation of the Earth's axis, nutation.\nIn order to reference a coordinate system which can be considered as fixed in space, these motions require specification of the equinox of a particular date, known as an epoch, when giving a position in ecliptic coordinates. The three most commonly used are:\nA position in the ecliptic coordinate system is thus typically specified \"true equinox and ecliptic of date\", \"mean equinox and ecliptic of J2000.0\", or similar. Note that there is no \"mean ecliptic\", as the ecliptic is not subject to small periodic oscillations.\n\"Ecliptic longitude\" or \"celestial longitude\" (symbols: heliocentric \u2113, geocentric \u03bb) measures the angular distance of an object along the ecliptic from the primary direction. Like right ascension in the equatorial coordinate system, the primary direction (0\u00b0\u00a0ecliptic longitude) points from the Earth towards the Sun at the March equinox. Because it is a right-handed system, ecliptic longitude is measured positive eastwards in the fundamental plane (the ecliptic) from 0\u00b0\u2013360\u00b0\u202f. Because of axial precession, the ecliptic longitude of most \"fixed stars\" (referred to the equinox of date) increases by about 50.3\u00a0arcseconds per year, or 83.8\u00a0arcminutes per century, the speed of general precession. However, for stars near the ecliptic poles, the rate of change of ecliptic longitude is dominated by the slight movement of the ecliptic (that is, of the plane of the Earth's orbit), so the rate of change may be anything from minus infinity to plus infinity depending on the exact position of the star.\n\"Ecliptic latitude\" or \"celestial latitude\" (symbols: heliocentric b, geocentric measures the angular distance of an object from the ecliptic towards the north (positive) or south (negative) ecliptic pole. For example, the north ecliptic pole has a celestial latitude of +90\u00b0. Ecliptic latitude for \"fixed stars\" is not affected by precession.\n\"Distance\" is also necessary for a complete spherical position (symbols: heliocentric r, geocentric \u0394). Different distance units are used for different objects. Within the Solar System, astronomical units (AU) are used, and for objects near the Earth, Earth radii, Lunar distances, or thousands of kilometers are used.\nSpherical coordinates.\nHistorical use.\nFrom antiquity through the 18th\u00a0century, ecliptic longitude was commonly measured using twelve zodiacal signs, each of 30\u00b0\u00a0longitude, a practice that continues in modern astrology. The signs are approximately the positions on the ecliptic, relative to the position of the Sun on the March equinox, where constellations were on the ecliptic in the year however the stars of those constellations have precessed eastward and the stars are now shifted by about one-and-a-half 30\u00b0\u00a0signs from the locations of their nominal zodiacal signs. Longitudes were specified in signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds.\nFor an example of historical use, a longitude of is 19.933\u00b0\u00a0east of the start of the sign Leo (\u264c). Since Leo begins 120\u00b0\u00a0from the March equinox, the longitude in modern form is .\nIn China, ecliptic longitude is measured using 24\u00a0Solar terms, each of 15\u00b0\u00a0longitude, and are used by Chinese lunisolar calendars to stay synchronized with the seasons, which is crucial for agrarian societies.\nRectangular coordinates.\nA rectangular variant of ecliptic coordinates is often used in orbital calculations and simulations. It has its origin at the center of the Sun (or at the barycenter of the Solar System), its fundamental plane on the ecliptic plane, and the x-axis toward the March equinox. The coordinates have a right-handed convention, that is, if one extends their right thumb upward, it simulates the z-axis, their extended index finger the x-axis, and the curl of the other fingers points generally in the direction of the y-axis.\nThese rectangular coordinates are related to the corresponding spherical coordinates by\nformula_1\nConversion between celestial coordinate systems.\nConverting Cartesian vectors.\nConversion from ecliptic coordinates to equatorial coordinates.\nformula_2\nConversion from equatorial coordinates to ecliptic coordinates.\nformula_3\nwhere \u03b5 is the obliquity of the ecliptic.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48388", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48388", "title": "Eudoxus of Cnidus", "text": "Greek astronomer and mathematician (c.390\u2013c.340 BC)\nEudoxus of Cnidus (; , \"E\u00fadoxos ho Kn\u00eddios\"; c.\u2009390\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009340 BC) was an ancient Greek astronomer, mathematician, doctor, and lawmaker. He was a student of Archytas and Plato. All of his original works are lost, though some fragments are preserved in Hipparchus's \"Commentaries on the Phenomena of Aratus and Eudoxus\". \"Spherics\" by Theodosius of Bithynia may be based on a work by Eudoxus.\nLife.\nEudoxus, son of Aeschines, was born and died in Cnidus (also transliterated Knidos), a city on the southwest coast of Anatolia. The years of Eudoxus's birth and death are not fully known but Diogenes La\u00ebrtius gave several biographical details, mentioned that Apollodorus said he reached his acme in the 103rd Olympiad (368\u2013365 BC), and claimed he died in his 53rd year. From this 19th century mathematical historians reconstructed dates of 408\u2013355 BC, but 20th century scholars found their choices contradictory and prefer a birth year of c.\u2009390 BC. His name Eudoxus means \"honored\" or \"of good repute\" (, from \"eu\" \"good\" and \"doxa\" \"opinion, belief, fame\", analogous to the Latin \"Benedictus\").\nAccording to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, crediting Callimachus' \"Pinakes\", Eudoxus studied mathematics with Archytas (of Tarentum, Magna Graecia) and studied medicine with Philiston the Sicilian. At the age of 23, he traveled with the physician Theomedon\u2014who was his patron and possibly his lover\u2014to Athens to study with the followers of Socrates. He spent two months there\u2014living in Piraeus and walking each way every day to attend the Sophists' lectures\u2014then returned home to Cnidus. His friends then paid to send him to Heliopolis, Egypt for 16 months, to pursue his study of astronomy and mathematics. From Egypt, he then traveled north to Cyzicus, located on the south shore of the Sea of Marmara, the Propontis. He traveled south to the court of Mausolus. During his travels he gathered many students of his own.\nAround 368 BC, Eudoxus returned to Athens with his students. According to some sources, c.\u2009367 he assumed headship (scholarch) of the Academy during Plato's period in Syracuse, and taught Aristotle. He eventually returned to his native Cnidus, where he served in the city assembly. While in Cnidus, he built an observatory and continued writing and lecturing on theology, astronomy, and meteorology. He had one son, Aristagoras, and three daughters, Actis, Philtis, and Delphis.\nIn mathematical astronomy, his fame is due to the introduction of the concentric spheres, and his early contributions to understanding the movement of the planets. He is also credited, by the poet Aratus, with having constructed a celestial globe.\nHis work on proportions shows insight into irrational numbers and the linear continuum: it allows rigorous treatment of continuous quantities and not just whole numbers or even rational numbers. When it was revived by Tartaglia and others in the 16th century, it became the basis for quantitative work in science, and inspired Richard Dedekind's work on the real numbers.\nCraters on Mars and the Moon are named in his honor. An algebraic curve (the Kampyle of Eudoxus) is also named after him.\nMathematics.\nEudoxus is considered by some to be the greatest of classical Greek mathematicians, and in all Antiquity second only to Archimedes. Eudoxus was probably the source for most of book V of Euclid's Elements. He rigorously developed Antiphon's method of exhaustion, a precursor to the integral calculus which was also used in a masterly way by Archimedes in the following century. In applying the method, Eudoxus proved such mathematical statements as: areas of circles are to one another as the squares of their radii, volumes of spheres are to one another as the cubes of their radii, the volume of a pyramid is one-third the volume of a prism with the same base and altitude, and the volume of a cone is one-third that of the corresponding cylinder. \nEudoxus introduced the idea of non-quantified mathematical magnitude to describe and work with continuous geometrical entities such as lines, angles, areas and volumes, thereby avoiding the use of irrational numbers. In doing so, he reversed a Pythagorean emphasis on number and arithmetic, focusing instead on geometrical concepts as the basis of rigorous mathematics. Some Pythagoreans, such as Eudoxus's teacher Archytas, had believed that only arithmetic could provide a basis for proofs. Induced by the need to understand and operate with incommensurable quantities, Eudoxus established what may have been the first deductive organization of mathematics on the basis of explicit axioms. The change in focus by Eudoxus stimulated a divide in mathematics which lasted two thousand years. In combination with a Greek intellectual attitude unconcerned with practical problems, there followed a significant retreat from the development of techniques in arithmetic and algebra.\nThe Pythagoreans had discovered that the diagonal of a square does not have a common unit of measurement with the sides of the square; this is the famous discovery that the square root of 2 cannot be expressed as the ratio of two integers. This discovery had heralded the existence of incommensurable quantities beyond the integers and rational fractions, but at the same time it threw into question the idea of measurement and calculations in geometry as a whole. For example, Euclid provides an elaborate proof of the Pythagorean theorem (\"Elements\" I.47), by using addition of areas and only much later (\"Elements\" VI.31) a simpler proof from similar triangles, which relies on ratios of line segments.\nAncient Greek mathematicians calculated not with quantities and equations as we do today; instead, a proportionality expressed a relationship between geometric magnitudes. The ratio of two magnitudes was not a numerical value, as we think of it today; the ratio of two magnitudes was a primitive relationship between them. \n Eudoxus is credited with defining equality between two ratios, the subject of Book V of the \"Elements\".\nIn Definition 5 of Euclid's Book V we read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Magnitudes are said to be in the same ratio, the first to the second and the third to the fourth when, if any equimultiples whatever be taken of the first and third, and any equimultiples whatever of the second and fourth, the former equimultiples alike exceed, are alike equal to, or alike fall short of, the latter equimultiples respectively taken in corresponding order.\nUsing modern notation, this can be made more explicit. Given four quantities &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, take the ratio of the first to the second, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the ratio of the third to the fourth, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. That the two ratios are proportional, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, can be defined by the following condition:\nFor any two arbitrary positive integers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, form the equimultiples &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of the first and third; likewise form the equimultiples &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of the second and fourth. If it happens that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then also &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. If instead &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then also &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Finally, if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then also &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThis means that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; if and only if the ratios &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that are larger than &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are the same as the ones that are larger than &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and likewise for \"equal\" and \"smaller\". This can be compared with Dedekind cuts that define a real number by the set of rational numbers that are larger, equal or smaller than the number to be defined.\nEudoxus's definition depends on comparing the similar quantities &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the similar quantities &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and does not depend on the existence of a common unit for measuring these quantities.\nThe complexity of the definition reflects the deep conceptual and methodological innovation involved. The Eudoxian definition of proportionality uses the quantifier, \"for every\u00a0...\" to harness the infinite and the infinitesimal, similar to the modern epsilon-delta definitions of limit and continuity.\nThe Archimedean property, definition 4 of \"Elements\" Book V, was credited to Eudoxus by Archimedes.\nAstronomy.\nIn ancient Greece, astronomy was a branch of mathematics; astronomers sought to create geometrical models that could imitate the appearances of celestial motions. Identifying the astronomical work of Eudoxus as a separate category is therefore a modern convenience. Some of Eudoxus's astronomical texts whose names have survived include:\nWe are fairly well informed about the contents of \"Phaenomena\", for Eudoxus's prose text was the basis for a poem of the same name by Aratus. Hipparchus quoted from the text of Eudoxus in his commentary on Aratus.\nEudoxan planetary models.\nA general idea of the content of \"On Speeds\" can be gleaned from Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\" XII, 8, and a commentary by Simplicius of Cilicia (6th century AD) on \"De caelo\", another work by Aristotle. According to a story reported by Simplicius, Plato posed a question for Greek astronomers: \"By the assumption of what uniform and orderly motions can the apparent motions of the planets be accounted for?\" Plato proposed that the seemingly chaotic wandering motions of the planets could be explained by combinations of uniform circular motions centered on a spherical Earth, apparently a novel idea in the 4th century BC.\nIn most modern reconstructions of the Eudoxan model, the Moon is assigned three spheres:\nThe Sun is also assigned three spheres. The second completes its motion in a year instead of a month. The inclusion of a third sphere implies that Eudoxus mistakenly believed that the Sun had motion in latitude.\nThe five visible planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn) are assigned four spheres each:\nImportance of Eudoxan system.\nCallippus, a Greek astronomer of the 4th century, added seven spheres to Eudoxus's original 27 (in addition to the planetary spheres, Eudoxus included a sphere for the fixed stars). Aristotle described both systems, but insisted on adding \"unrolling\" spheres between each set of spheres to cancel the motions of the outer set. Aristotle was concerned about the physical nature of the system; without unrollers, the outer motions would be transferred to the inner planets.\nA major flaw in the Eudoxian system is its inability to explain changes in the brightness of planets as seen from Earth. Because the spheres are concentric, planets will always remain at the same distance from Earth. This problem was pointed out in Antiquity by Autolycus of Pitane. Astronomers responded by introducing the deferent and epicycle, which caused a planet to vary its distance. However, Eudoxus's importance to astronomy and in particular to Greek astronomy is considerable.\nEthics.\nAristotle, in the \"Nicomachean Ethics\", attributes to Eudoxus an argument in favor of hedonism\u2014that is, that pleasure is the ultimate good that activity strives for. According to Aristotle, Eudoxus put forward the following arguments for this position:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48389", "revid": "45406993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48389", "title": "Galactic coordinate system", "text": "Celestial coordinate system in spherical coordinates, with the Sun as its center\nThe galactic coordinate system (GCS) is a celestial coordinate system in spherical coordinates, with the Sun as its center, the primary direction aligned with the approximate center of the Milky Way Galaxy, and the fundamental plane parallel to an approximation of the galactic plane but offset to its north. It uses the right-handed convention, meaning that coordinates are positive toward the north and toward the east in the fundamental plane.\nSpherical coordinates.\nGalactic longitude.\nLongitude (symbol \"l\") measures the angular distance of an object eastward along the galactic equator from the Galactic Center. Analogous to terrestrial longitude, galactic longitude is usually measured in degrees (\u00b0).\nGalactic latitude.\nLatitude (symbol \"b\") measures the angle of an object northward of the galactic equator (or midplane) as viewed from Earth. Analogous to terrestrial latitude, galactic latitude is usually measured in degrees.\nDefinition.\nThe first galactic coordinate system was used by William Herschel in 1785. A number of different coordinate systems, each differing by a few degrees, were used until 1932, when Lund Observatory assembled a set of conversion tables that defined a standard galactic coordinate system based on a galactic north pole at RA 12h\u200940m, dec +28\u00b0 (in the B1900.0 epoch convention) and a 0\u00b0 longitude at the point where the galactic plane and equatorial plane intersected.\nIn 1958, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) defined the galactic coordinate system in reference to radio observations of galactic neutral hydrogen through the hydrogen line, changing the definition of the Galactic longitude by 32\u00b0 and the latitude by 1.5\u00b0. In the equatorial coordinate system, for equinox and equator of 1950.0, the north galactic pole is defined at right ascension 12h\u200949m, declination +27.4\u00b0, in the constellation Coma Berenices, with a probable error of \u00b10.1\u00b0. Longitude 0\u00b0 is the great semicircle that originates from this point along the line in position angle 123\u00b0 with respect to the equatorial pole. The galactic longitude increases in the same direction as right ascension. Galactic latitude is positive towards the north galactic pole, with a plane passing through the Sun and parallel to the galactic equator being 0\u00b0, whilst the poles are \u00b190\u00b0. Based on this definition, the galactic poles and equator can be found from spherical trigonometry and can be precessed to other epochs; see the table.\nThe IAU recommended that during the transition period from the old, pre-1958 system to the new, the old longitude and latitude should be designated \"l\"I and \"b\"I while the new should be designated \"l\"II and \"b\"II. This convention is occasionally seen.\nRadio source Sagittarius A*, which is the best physical marker of the true Galactic Center, is located at 17h\u200945m\u200940.0409s, \u221229\u00b0\u200900\u2032\u200928.118\u2033 (J2000). Rounded to the same number of digits as the table, 17h\u200945.7m, \u221229.01\u00b0 (J2000), there is an offset of about 0.07\u00b0 from the defined coordinate center, well within the 1958 error estimate of \u00b10.1\u00b0. Due to the Sun's position, which currently lies north of the midplane, and the heliocentric definition adopted by the IAU, the galactic coordinates of Sgr\u00a0A* are latitude +0\u00b0\u200907\u2032\u200912\u2033 south, longitude 0\u00b0\u200904\u2032\u200906\u2033. Since as defined the galactic coordinate system does not rotate with time, Sgr\u00a0A* is actually decreasing in longitude at the rate of galactic rotation at the sun, \u03a9, approximately 5.7 milliarcseconds per year (see Oort constants).\nConversion between equatorial and galactic coordinates.\nAn object's location expressed in the equatorial coordinate system can be transformed into the galactic coordinate system. In these equations, \"\u03b1\" is right ascension, \"\u03b4\" is declination. NGP refers to the coordinate values of the north galactic pole and NCP to those of the north celestial pole.\nformula_1\nThe reverse (galactic to equatorial) can also be accomplished with the following conversion formulas.\nformula_2\nWhere:\nformula_3\nRectangular coordinates.\nIn some applications use is made of rectangular coordinates based on galactic longitude and latitude and distance. In some work regarding the distant past or future the galactic coordinate system is taken as rotating so that the \"x\"-axis always goes to the centre of the galaxy.\nThere are two major rectangular variations of galactic coordinates, commonly used for computing space velocities of galactic objects. In these systems the \"xyz\"-axes are designated \"UVW\", but the definitions vary by author. In one system, the \"U\" axis is directed toward the Galactic Center (\"l\" = 0\u00b0), and it is a right-handed system (positive towards the east and towards the north galactic pole); in the other, the \"U\" axis is directed toward the galactic anticenter (\"l\" = 180\u00b0), and it is a left-handed system (positive towards the east and towards the north galactic pole).\nIn the constellations.\nThe galactic equator runs through the following constellations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48390", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48390", "title": "D\u00e9partment", "text": ""}
{"id": "48391", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48391", "title": "Departement", "text": ""}
{"id": "48392", "revid": "7949351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48392", "title": "Phenytoin", "text": "Anti-seizure medication\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhenytoin (PHT), sold under the brand name Dilantin among others, is an anti-seizure medication. It is useful for the prevention of tonic-clonic seizures (also known as grand mal seizures) and focal seizures, but not absence seizures. The intravenous form, fosphenytoin, is used for status epilepticus that does not improve with benzodiazepines. It may also be used for certain heart arrhythmias or neuropathic pain. It can be taken intravenously or by mouth. The intravenous form generally begins working within 30 minutes and is effective for roughly 24 hours. Blood levels can be measured to determine the proper dose.\nCommon side effects include nausea, stomach pain, loss of appetite, poor coordination, increased hair growth, and enlargement of the gums. Potentially serious side effects include sleepiness, self harm, liver problems, bone marrow suppression, low blood pressure, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and atrophy of the cerebellum. There is evidence that use during pregnancy results in abnormalities in the baby. It appears to be safe to use when breastfeeding. Alcohol may interfere with the medication's effects.\nPhenytoin was first made in 1908 by the German chemist Heinrich Biltz and found useful for seizures in 1936. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. Phenytoin is available as a generic medication. In 2020, it was the 260th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 1million prescriptions.\nMedical uses.\nSeizures.\nThough phenytoin has been used to treat seizures in infants, as of 2023, its effectiveness in this age group has been evaluated in only one study. Due to the lack of a comparison group, the evidence is inconclusive.\nSide effects.\nCommon side effects include nausea, stomach pain, loss of appetite, poor coordination, increased hair growth, and enlargement of the gums. Potentially serious side effects include sleepiness, self harm, liver problems, bone marrow suppression, low blood pressure, and toxic epidermal necrolysis. There is evidence that use during pregnancy results in abnormalities in the baby. Its use appears to be safe during breastfeeding. Alcohol may interfere with the medication's effects.\nHeart and blood vessels.\nSevere low blood pressure and abnormal heart rhythms can be seen with rapid infusion of IV phenytoin. IV infusion should not exceed 50\u00a0mg/min in adults or 1\u20133\u00a0mg/kg/min (or 50\u00a0mg/min, whichever is slower) in children. Heart monitoring should occur during and after IV infusion. Due to these risks, oral phenytoin should be used if possible.\nNeurological.\nAt therapeutic doses, phenytoin may produce nystagmus on lateral gaze. At toxic doses, patients experience vertical nystagmus, double vision, sedation, slurred speech, cerebellar ataxia, and tremor. If phenytoin is stopped abruptly, this may result in increased seizure frequency, including status epilepticus.\nPhenytoin may accumulate in the cerebral cortex over long periods of time which can cause atrophy of the cerebellum. The degree of atrophy is related to the duration of phenytoin treatment and is not related to dosage of the medication.\nPhenytoin is known to be a causal factor in the development of peripheral neuropathy.\nBlood.\nFolate is present in food in a polyglutamate form, which is then converted into monoglutamates by intestinal conjugase to be absorbed by the jejunum. Phenytoin acts by inhibiting this enzyme, thereby causing folate deficiency, and thus megaloblastic anemia.\nOther side effects may include: agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, decreased white blood cell count, and a low platelet count.\nPregnancy.\nPhenytoin is a known teratogen, since children exposed to phenytoin are at a higher risk of birth defects than children born to women without epilepsy and to women with untreated epilepsy. The birth defects, which occur in approximately 6% of exposed children, include neural tube defects, heart defects and craniofacial abnormalities, including broad nasal bridge, cleft lip and palate, and smaller than normal head. The effect on IQ cannot be determined as no study involves phenytoin as monotherapy, however poorer language abilities and delayed motor development may have been associated with maternal use of phenytoin during pregnancy. This syndrome resembles the well-described fetal alcohol syndrome. and has been referred to as \"fetal hydantoin syndrome\". Some recommend avoiding polytherapy and maintaining the minimal dose possible during pregnancy, but acknowledge that current data fails to demonstrate a dose effect on the risk of birth defects. Data now being collected by the Epilepsy and Antiepileptic Drug Pregnancy Registry may one day answer this question definitively.\nCancer.\nThere is no good evidence to suggest that phenytoin is a human carcinogen. However, lymph node abnormalities have been observed, including malignancies.\nMouth.\nPhenytoin has been associated with drug-induced gingival enlargement (overgrowth of the gums), probably due to above-mentioned folate deficiency; indeed, evidence from a randomized controlled trial suggests that folic acid supplementation can prevent gingival enlargement in children who take phenytoin. Plasma concentrations needed to induce gingival lesions have not been clearly defined. Effects consist of the following: bleeding upon probing, increased gingival exudate, pronounced gingival inflammatory response to plaque levels, associated in some instances with bone loss but without tooth detachment.\nSkin.\nHypertrichosis, Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, purple glove syndrome, rash, exfoliative dermatitis, itching, excessive hairiness, and coarsening of facial features can be seen in those taking phenytoin.\nPhenytoin therapy has been linked to the life-threatening skin reactions Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). These conditions are significantly more common in patients with a particular HLA-B allele, HLA-B*1502. This allele occurs almost exclusively in patients with ancestry across broad areas of Asia, including South Asian Indians.\nPhenytoin is primarily metabolized to its inactive form by the enzyme CYP2C9. Variations within the CYP2C9 gene that result in decreased enzymatic activity have been associated with increased phenytoin concentrations, as well as reports of drug toxicities due to these increased concentrations. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) notes on the phenytoin drug label that since strong evidence exists linking HLA-B*1502 with the risk of developing SJS or TEN in patients taking carbamazepine, consideration should be given to avoiding phenytoin as an alternative to carbamazepine in patients carrying this allele.\nImmune system.\nPhenytoin has been known to cause drug-induced lupus.\nPhenytoin is also associated with induction of reversible IgA deficiency.\nPsychological.\nPhenytoin may increase risk of suicidal thoughts or behavior. People on phenytoin should be monitored for any changes in mood, the development or worsening depression, and/or any thoughts or behavior of suicide.\nBones.\nChronic phenytoin use has been associated with decreased bone density and increased bone fractures. Phenytoin induces metabolizing enzymes in the liver. This leads to increased metabolism of vitamin D, thus decreased vitamin D levels. Vitamin D deficiency, as well as low calcium and phosphate in the blood cause decreased bone mineral density.\nInteractions.\nPhenytoin is an inducer of the CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 families of the P450 enzyme responsible for the liver's degradation of various drugs.\nA 1981 study by the National Institutes of Health showed that antacids administered concomitantly with phenytoin \"altered not only the extent of absorption but also appeared to alter the rate of absorption. Antacids administered in a peptic ulcer regimen may decrease the AUC of a single dose of phenytoin. Patients should be cautioned against concomitant use of antacids and phenytoin.\"\nWarfarin and trimethoprim increase serum phenytoin levels and prolong the serum half-life of phenytoin by inhibiting its metabolism. Consider using other options if possible.\nIn general, phenytoin can interact with the following drugs:\nPharmacology.\nMechanism of action.\nPhenytoin is believed to protect against seizures by causing voltage-dependent block of voltage gated sodium channels. This blocks sustained high frequency repetitive firing of action potentials. This is accomplished by reducing the amplitude of sodium-dependent action potentials through enhancing steady-state inactivation. Sodium channels exist in three main conformations: the resting state, the open state, and the inactive state.\nPhenytoin binds preferentially to the inactive form of the sodium channel. Because it takes time for the bound drug to dissassociate from the inactive channel, there is a time-dependent block of the channel. Since the fraction of inactive channels is increased by membrane depolarization as well as by repetitive firing, the binding to the inactive state by phenytoin sodium can produce voltage-dependent, use-dependent and time-dependent block of sodium-dependent action potentials.\nThe primary site of action appears to be the motor cortex where spread of seizure activity is inhibited. Possibly by promoting sodium efflux from neurons, phenytoin tends to stabilize the threshold against hyperexcitability caused by excessive stimulation or environmental changes capable of reducing membrane sodium gradient. This includes the reduction of post-tetanic potentiation at synapses which prevents cortical seizure foci from detonating adjacent cortical areas. Phenytoin reduces the maximal activity of brain stem centers responsible for the tonic phase of generalized tonic-clonic seizures.\nPharmacokinetics.\nPhenytoin elimination kinetics show mixed-order, non-linear elimination behaviour at therapeutic concentrations. Where phenytoin is at low concentration it is cleared by first order kinetics, and at high concentrations by zero order kinetics. A small increase in dose may lead to a large increase in drug concentration as elimination becomes saturated. The time to reach steady state is often longer than 2 weeks.\nHistory.\nPhenytoin (diphenylhydantoin) was first synthesized by German chemist Heinrich Biltz in 1908.\nBiltz sold his discovery to Parke-Davis, which did not find an immediate use for it. In 1938, other physicians, including H. Houston Merritt and Tracy Putnam, discovered phenytoin's usefulness for controlling seizures, without the sedative effects associated with phenobarbital.\nAccording to \"Goodman and Gilman's Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics\":\nIn contrast to the earlier accidental discovery of the antiseizure properties of potassium bromide and phenobarbital, phenytoin was the product of a search among nonsedative structural relatives of phenobarbital for agents capable of suppressing electroshock convulsions in laboratory animals.\nIt was approved by the FDA in 1953 for use in seizures.\nJack Dreyfus, founder of the Dreyfus Fund, became a major proponent of phenytoin as a means to control nervousness and depression when he received a prescription for Dilantin in 1966. He has claimed to have supplied large amounts of the drug to Richard Nixon throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s, although this is disputed by former White House aides and Presidential historians.\nDreyfus' experience with phenytoin is outlined in his book, \"A Remarkable Medicine Has Been Overlooked\". Despite more than $70\u00a0million in personal financing, his push to see phenytoin evaluated for alternative uses has had little lasting effect on the medical community. This was partially because Parke-Davis was reluctant to invest in a drug nearing the end of its patent life, and partially due to mixed results from various studies.\nIn 2008, the drug was put on the FDA's Potential Signals of Serious Risks List to be further evaluated for approval. The list identifies medications with which the FDA has identified potential safety issues, but has not yet identified a causal relationship between the drug and the listed risk. To address this concern, the Warnings and Precautions section of the labeling for Dilantin injection was updated to include additional information about Purple glove syndrome in November 2011.\nSociety and culture.\nEconomics.\nPhenytoin is available as a generic medication.\nSince September 2012, the marketing licence in the UK has been held by Flynn Pharma Ltd, of Dublin, Ireland, and the product, although identical, has been called Phenytoin Sodium \"xx\"mg Flynn Hard Capsules. (The \"xx\"mg in the name refers to the strength\u2014for example \"Phenytoin sodium 25\u00a0mg Flynn Hard Capsules\"). The capsules are still made by Pfizer's Goedecke subsidiary's plant in Freiburg, Germany, and they still have Epanutin printed on them. After Pfizer's sale of the UK marketing licence to Flynn Pharma, the price of a 28-pack of 25\u00a0mg phenytoin sodium capsules marked Epanutin rose from 66p (about $0.88) to \u00a3 (about $25.06). Capsules of other strengths also went up in price by the same factor\u20142,384%, costing the UK's National Health Service an extra \u00a3 (about $68.44\u00a0million) a year. The companies were referred to the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) who found that they had exploited their dominant position in the market to charge \"excessive and unfair\" prices.\nThe CMA imposed a record \u00a3 fine on the manufacturer Pfizer, and a \u00a3 fine on the distributor Flynn Pharma and ordered the companies to reduce their prices.\nBrand names.\nPhenytoin is marketed under many brand names worldwide.\nIn the US, Dilantin is marketed by Viatris after Upjohn was spun off from Pfizer.\nResearch.\nTentative evidence suggests that topical phenytoin is useful in wound healing in people with chronic skin wounds. A meta-analysis also supported the use of phenytoin in managing various ulcers. Phenytoin is incorporated into compounded medications to optimize wound treatment, often in combination with misoprostol.\nSome clinical trials have explored whether phenytoin can be used as neuroprotector in multiple sclerosis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48393", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48393", "title": "Dilantin", "text": ""}
{"id": "48394", "revid": "482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48394", "title": "Phenytoin sodium", "text": ""}
{"id": "48395", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48395", "title": "Navier\u2013Stokes equations", "text": "Equations describing the motion of viscous fluid substances\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations ( ) are partial differential equations which describe the motion of viscous fluid substances. They were named after French engineer and physicist Claude-Louis Navier and the British physicist and mathematician Sir George Gabriel Stokes, Bt. They were developed over several decades of progressively building the theories, from 1822 (Navier) to 1842\u20131850 (Stokes).\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations mathematically express momentum balance for Newtonian fluids and make use of conservation of mass. They are sometimes accompanied by an equation of state relating pressure, temperature and density. They arise from applying Isaac Newton's second law to fluid motion, together with the assumption that the stress in the fluid is the sum of a diffusing viscous term (proportional to the gradient of velocity) and a pressure term\u2014hence describing \"viscous flow\". The difference between them and the closely related Euler equations is that Navier\u2013Stokes equations take viscosity into account while the Euler equations model only inviscid flow. As a result, the Navier\u2013Stokes are an elliptic equation and therefore have better analytic properties, at the expense of having less mathematical structure (e.g. they are never completely integrable).\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations are useful because they describe the physics of many phenomena of scientific and engineering interest. They may be used to model the weather, ocean currents, water flow in a pipe and air flow around a wing. The Navier\u2013Stokes equations, in their full and simplified forms, help with the design of aircraft and cars, the study of blood flow, the design of power stations, the analysis of pollution, and many other problems. Coupled with Maxwell's equations, they can be used to model and study magnetohydrodynamics.\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations are also of great interest in a purely mathematical sense. Despite their wide range of practical uses, it has not yet been proven whether smooth solutions always exist in three dimensions\u2014i.e., whether they are infinitely differentiable (or even just bounded) at all points in the domain. This is called the Navier\u2013Stokes existence and smoothness problem. The Clay Mathematics Institute has called this one of the seven most important open problems in mathematics and has offered a US$1\u00a0million prize for a solution or a counterexample.\nFlow velocity.\nThe solution of the equations is a flow velocity. It is a vector field\u2014to every point in a fluid, at any moment in a time interval, it gives a vector whose direction and magnitude are those of the velocity of the fluid at that point in space and at that moment in time. It is studied in three spatial dimensions and one time dimension, and higher-dimensional analogues are studied in both pure and applied mathematics. Once the velocity field is calculated, other quantities of interest such as pressure or temperature may be found using dynamical equations and relations. This is different from what one normally sees in classical mechanics, where solutions are typically trajectories of position of a particle or deflection of a continuum. Studying velocity instead of position makes more sense for a fluid, although for visualization purposes one can compute various trajectories. In particular, the streamlines of a vector field, interpreted as flow velocity, are the paths along which a massless fluid particle would travel. These paths are the integral curves whose derivative at each point is equal to the vector field, and they can represent visually the behavior of the vector field at a point in time.\nGeneral continuum equations.\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes momentum equation can be derived as a particular form of the Cauchy momentum equation, whose general convective form is:\nformula_1\nBy setting the Cauchy stress tensor formula_2 to be the sum of a viscosity term formula_3 (the deviatoric stress) and a pressure term formula_4 (volumetric stress), we arrive at:\nCauchy momentum equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(convective form)\"\nformula_5\nwhere\nIn this form, it is apparent that in the assumption of an inviscid fluid \u2013 no deviatoric stress \u2013 Cauchy equations reduce to the Euler equations.\nAssuming conservation of mass, with the known properties of divergence and gradient we can use the mass continuity equation, which represents the mass per unit volume of a homogenous fluid with respect to space and time (i.e., material derivative formula_15) of any finite volume (V) to represent the change of velocity in fluid media:\nformula_16where\nNote 1 \u2013 Refer to the mathematical operator del represented by the nabla (formula_25) symbol.\nto arrive at the conservation form of the equations of motion. This is often written:\nCauchy momentum equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(conservation form)\"\nformula_26\nwhere formula_27 is the outer product of the flow velocity (formula_22):formula_29\nThe left side of the equation describes acceleration, and may be composed of time-dependent and convective components (also the effects of non-inertial coordinates if present). The right side of the equation is in effect a summation of hydrostatic effects, the divergence of deviatoric stress and body forces (such as gravity).\nAll non-relativistic balance equations, such as the Navier\u2013Stokes equations, can be derived by beginning with the Cauchy equations and specifying the stress tensor through a constitutive relation. By expressing the deviatoric (shear) stress tensor in terms of viscosity and the fluid velocity gradient, and assuming constant viscosity, the above Cauchy equations will lead to the Navier\u2013Stokes equations below.\nConvective acceleration.\nA significant feature of the Cauchy equation and consequently all other continuum equations (including Euler and Navier\u2013Stokes) is the presence of convective acceleration: the effect of acceleration of a flow with respect to space. While individual fluid particles indeed experience time-dependent acceleration, the convective acceleration of the flow field is a spatial effect, one example being fluid speeding up in a nozzle.\nCompressible flow.\nRemark: here, the deviatoric stress tensor is denoted formula_3 as it was in the general continuum equations and in the incompressible flow section.\nThe compressible momentum Navier\u2013Stokes equation results from the following assumptions on the Cauchy stress tensor:\nSince the trace of the rate-of-strain tensor in three dimensions is the divergence (i.e. rate of expansion) of the flow:\nformula_31\nGiven this relation, and since the trace of the identity tensor in three dimensions is three:\nformula_32\nthe trace of the stress tensor in three dimensions becomes:\nformula_33\nSo by alternatively decomposing the stress tensor into isotropic and deviatoric parts, as usual in fluid dynamics:\nformula_34\nIntroducing the bulk viscosity formula_35,\nformula_36\nwe arrive to the linear constitutive equation in the form usually employed in thermal hydraulics:\nLinear stress constitutive equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(expression used for fluids)\"\nformula_37\nwhich can also be arranged in the other usual form:\nformula_38\nNote that in the compressible case the pressure is no more proportional to the isotropic stress term, since there is the additional bulk viscosity term:\nformula_39\nand the deviatoric stress tensor formula_40 is still coincident with the shear stress tensor formula_41 (i.e. the deviatoric stress in a Newtonian fluid has no normal stress components), and it has a compressibility term in addition to the incompressible case, which is proportional to the shear viscosity:\nformula_42\nBoth bulk viscosity formula_35 and dynamic viscosity formula_44 need not be constant \u2013 in general, they depend on two thermodynamics variables if the fluid contains a single chemical species, say for example, pressure and temperature. Any equation that makes explicit one of these transport coefficient in the conservation variables is called an equation of state.\nThe most general of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations become\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(convective form)\"\nformula_45\nin index notation, the equation can be written as\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(index notation)\"\nformula_46\nThe corresponding equation in conservation form can be obtained by considering that, given the mass continuity equation, the left side is equivalent to:\n formula_47\nto give finally:\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(conservative form)\"\nformula_48\nApart from its dependence of pressure and temperature, the second viscosity coefficient also depends on the process, that is to say, the second viscosity coefficient is not just a material property. Example: in the case of a sound wave with a definitive frequency that alternatively compresses and expands a fluid element, the second viscosity coefficient depends on the frequency of the wave. This dependence is called the \"dispersion\". In some cases, the second viscosity formula_35 can be assumed to be constant in which case, the effect of the volume viscosity formula_35 is that the mechanical pressure is not equivalent to the thermodynamic pressure: as demonstrated below.formula_51formula_52However, this difference is usually neglected most of the time (that is whenever we are not dealing with processes such as sound absorption and attenuation of shock waves, where second viscosity coefficient becomes important) by explicitly assuming formula_53. The assumption of setting formula_53 is called as the Stokes hypothesis. The validity of Stokes hypothesis can be demonstrated for monoatomic gas both experimentally and from the kinetic theory; for other gases and liquids, Stokes hypothesis is generally incorrect. With the Stokes hypothesis, the Navier\u2013Stokes equations become\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation\u00a0\u00a0\"(convective form, Stokes hypothesis)\"\nformula_55\nIf the dynamic \u03bc and bulk formula_56 viscosities are assumed to be uniform in space, the equations in convective form can be simplified further. By computing the divergence of the stress tensor, since the divergence of tensor formula_57 is formula_58 and the divergence of tensor formula_59 is formula_60, one finally arrives to the compressible Navier\u2013Stokes momentum equation:\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation with uniform shear and bulk viscosities \"(convective form)\"\nformula_61\nwhere formula_62 is the material derivative. formula_63 is the shear kinematic viscosity and formula_64 is the bulk kinematic viscosity. The left-hand side changes in the conservation form of the Navier\u2013Stokes momentum equation.\nBy bringing the operator on the flow velocity on the left side, one also has:\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation with uniform shear and bulk viscosities \"(convective form)\"\nformula_65\nThe convective acceleration term can also be written as\nformula_66\nwhere the vector formula_67 is known as the Lamb vector.\nFor the special case of an incompressible flow, the pressure constrains the flow so that the volume of fluid elements is constant: isochoric flow resulting in a solenoidal velocity field with formula_68.\nIncompressible flow.\nThe incompressible momentum Navier\u2013Stokes equation results from the following assumptions on the Cauchy stress tensor:\nThis is constitutive equation is also called the Newtonian law of viscosity.\nDynamic viscosity \u03bc need not be constant \u2013 in incompressible flows it can depend on density and on pressure. Any equation that makes explicit one of these transport coefficient in the conservative variables is called an equation of state.\nThe divergence of the deviatoric stress in case of uniform viscosity is given by:\nformula_69\nbecause formula_68 for an incompressible fluid.\nIncompressibility rules out density and pressure waves like sound or shock waves, so this simplification is not useful if these phenomena are of interest. The incompressible flow assumption typically holds well with all fluids at low Mach numbers (say up to about Mach 0.3), such as for modelling air winds at normal temperatures. the incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations are best visualized by dividing for the density:\nIncompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations with uniform viscosity \"(convective form)\"\nformula_71\nwhere formula_72 is called the kinematic viscosity. \nBy isolating the fluid velocity, one can also state:\nIncompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations with constant viscosity \"(alternative convective form)\"\nformula_73\nIf the density is constant throughout the fluid domain, or, in other words, if all fluid elements have the same density, formula_8, then we have\nIncompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations with constant density and viscosity \"(convective form)\"\nformula_75\nwhere formula_76 is called the unit pressure head.\nIn incompressible flows, the pressure field satisfies the Poisson equation,\nformula_77\nwhich is obtained by taking the divergence of the momentum equations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;A laminar flow example\nIt is well worth observing the meaning of each term (compare to the Cauchy momentum equation):\nformula_78\nThe higher-order term, namely the shear stress divergence formula_79, has simply reduced to the vector Laplacian term formula_80. This Laplacian term can be interpreted as the difference between the velocity at a point and the mean velocity in a small surrounding volume. This implies that \u2013 for a Newtonian fluid \u2013 viscosity operates as a \"diffusion of momentum\", in much the same way as the heat conduction. In fact neglecting the convection term, incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations lead to a vector diffusion equation (namely Stokes equations), but in general the convection term is present, so incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations belong to the class of convection\u2013diffusion equations.\nIn the usual case of an external field being a conservative field:\nformula_81\nby defining the hydraulic head:\nformula_82\none can finally condense the whole source in one term, arriving to the incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equation with conservative external field:\nformula_83\nThe incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations with uniform density and viscosity and conservative external field is the fundamental equation of hydraulics. The domain for these equations is commonly a 3 or fewer dimensional Euclidean space, for which an orthogonal coordinate reference frame is usually set to explicit the system of scalar partial differential equations to be solved. In 3-dimensional orthogonal coordinate systems are 3: Cartesian, cylindrical, and spherical. Expressing the Navier\u2013Stokes vector equation in Cartesian coordinates is quite straightforward and not much influenced by the number of dimensions of the euclidean space employed, and this is the case also for the first-order terms (like the variation and convection ones) also in non-cartesian orthogonal coordinate systems. But for the higher order terms (the two coming from the divergence of the deviatoric stress that distinguish Navier\u2013Stokes equations from Euler equations) some tensor calculus is required for deducing an expression in non-cartesian orthogonal coordinate systems.\nA special case of the fundamental equation of hydraulics is the Bernoulli's equation.\nThe incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equation is composite, the sum of two orthogonal equations,\nformula_84\nwhere formula_85 and formula_86 are solenoidal and irrotational projection operators satisfying formula_87, and formula_88 and formula_89 are the non-conservative and conservative parts of the body force. This result follows from the Helmholtz theorem (also known as the fundamental theorem of vector calculus). The first equation is a pressureless governing equation for the velocity, while the second equation for the pressure is a functional of the velocity and is related to the pressure Poisson equation.\nThe explicit functional form of the projection operator in 3D is found from the Helmholtz Theorem:\nformula_90\nwith a similar structure in 2D. Thus the governing equation is an integro-differential equation similar to Coulomb's and Biot\u2013Savart's law, not convenient for numerical computation.\nAn equivalent weak or variational form of the equation, proved to produce the same velocity solution as the Navier\u2013Stokes equation, is given by,\nformula_91\nfor divergence-free test functions formula_92 satisfying appropriate boundary conditions. Here, the projections are accomplished by the orthogonality of the solenoidal and irrotational function spaces. The discrete form of this is eminently suited to finite element computation of divergence-free flow, as we shall see in the next section. There, one will be able to address the question, \"How does one specify pressure-driven (Poiseuille) problems with a pressureless governing equation?\".\nThe absence of pressure forces from the governing velocity equation demonstrates that the equation is not a dynamic one, but rather a kinematic equation where the divergence-free condition serves the role of a conservation equation. This would seem to refute the frequent statements that the incompressible pressure enforces the divergence-free condition.\nWeak form of the incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations.\nStrong form.\nConsider the incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations for a Newtonian fluid of constant density formula_8 in a domain\nformula_94\nwith boundary\nformula_95\nbeing formula_96 and formula_97 portions of the boundary where respectively a Dirichlet and a Neumann boundary condition is applied (formula_98):\nformula_99\nformula_9 is the fluid velocity, formula_11 the fluid pressure, formula_102 a given forcing term, formula_103 the outward directed unit normal vector to formula_97, and formula_105 the viscous stress tensor defined as: \nformula_106\nLet formula_44 be the dynamic viscosity of the fluid, formula_108 the second-order identity tensor and formula_109 the strain-rate tensor defined as: \nformula_110\nThe functions formula_111 and formula_112 are given Dirichlet and Neumann boundary data, while formula_113 is the initial condition. The first equation is the momentum balance equation, while the second represents the mass conservation, namely the continuity equation. \nAssuming constant dynamic viscosity, using the vectorial identity\nformula_114\nand exploiting mass conservation, the divergence of the total stress tensor in the momentum equation can also be expressed as: \nformula_115\nMoreover, note that the Neumann boundary conditions can be rearranged as: \nformula_116\nWeak form.\nIn order to find the weak form of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations, firstly, consider the momentum equation \nformula_117\nmultiply it for a test function formula_118, defined in a suitable space formula_119, and integrate both members with respect to the domain formula_120:\nformula_121\nCounter-integrating by parts the diffusive and the pressure terms and by using the Gauss' theorem: \nformula_122\nUsing these relations, one gets: \nformula_123\nIn the same fashion, the continuity equation is multiplied for a test function q belonging to a space formula_124 and integrated in the domain formula_120:\nformula_126\nThe space functions are chosen as follows: \nformula_127\nConsidering that the test function v vanishes on the Dirichlet boundary and considering the Neumann condition, the integral on the boundary can be rearranged as: \nformula_128\nHaving this in mind, the weak formulation of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations is expressed as: \nformula_129\nDiscrete velocity.\nWith partitioning of the problem domain and defining basis functions on the partitioned domain, the discrete form of the governing equation is\nformula_130\nIt is desirable to choose basis functions that reflect the essential feature of incompressible flow \u2013 the elements must be divergence-free. While the velocity is the variable of interest, the existence of the stream function or vector potential is necessary by the Helmholtz theorem. Further, to determine fluid flow in the absence of a pressure gradient, one can specify the difference of stream function values across a 2D channel, or the line integral of the tangential component of the vector potential around the channel in 3D, the flow being given by Stokes' theorem. Discussion will be restricted to 2D in the following.\nWe further restrict discussion to continuous Hermite finite elements which have at least first-derivative degrees-of-freedom. With this, one can draw a large number of candidate triangular and rectangular elements from the plate-bending literature. These elements have derivatives as components of the gradient. In 2D, the gradient and curl of a scalar are clearly orthogonal, given by the expressions,\nformula_131\nAdopting continuous plate-bending elements, interchanging the derivative degrees-of-freedom and changing the sign of the appropriate one gives many families of stream function elements.\nTaking the curl of the scalar stream function elements gives divergence-free velocity elements. The requirement that the stream function elements be continuous assures that the normal component of the velocity is continuous across element interfaces, all that is necessary for vanishing divergence on these interfaces.\nBoundary conditions are simple to apply. The stream function is constant on no-flow surfaces, with no-slip velocity conditions on surfaces.\nStream function differences across open channels determine the flow. No boundary conditions are necessary on open boundaries, though consistent values may be used with some problems. These are all Dirichlet conditions.\nThe algebraic equations to be solved are simple to set up, but of course are non-linear, requiring iteration of the linearized equations.\nSimilar considerations apply to three-dimensions, but extension from 2D is not immediate because of the vector nature of the potential, and there exists no simple relation between the gradient and the curl as was the case in 2D.\nPressure recovery.\nRecovering pressure from the velocity field is easy. The discrete weak equation for the pressure gradient is,\nformula_132\nwhere the test/weight functions are irrotational. Any conforming scalar finite element may be used. However, the pressure gradient field may also be of interest. In this case, one can use scalar Hermite elements for the pressure. For the test/weight functions formula_133 one would choose the irrotational vector elements obtained from the gradient of the pressure element.\nNon-inertial frame of reference.\nThe rotating frame of reference introduces some interesting pseudo-forces into the equations through the material derivative term. Consider a stationary inertial frame of reference formula_134\u00a0, and a non-inertial frame of reference formula_135, which is translating with velocity formula_136 and rotating with angular velocity formula_137 with respect to the stationary frame. The Navier\u2013Stokes equation observed from the non-inertial frame then becomes\nNavier\u2013Stokes momentum equation in non-inertial frame\nformula_138\nHere formula_139 and formula_140 are measured in the non-inertial frame. The first term in the parenthesis represents Coriolis acceleration, the second term is due to centrifugal acceleration, the third is due to the linear acceleration of formula_135 with respect to formula_134 and the fourth term is due to the angular acceleration of formula_135 with respect to formula_134.\nOther equations.\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations are strictly a statement of the balance of momentum. To fully describe fluid flow, more information is needed, how much depending on the assumptions made. This additional information may include boundary data (no-slip, capillary surface, etc.), conservation of mass, balance of energy, and/or an equation of state.\nContinuity equation for incompressible fluid.\nRegardless of the flow assumptions, a statement of the conservation of mass is generally necessary. This is achieved through the mass continuity equation, as discussed above in the \"General continuum equations\" within this article, as follows:\nformula_145\nA fluid media for which the density (formula_18) is constant is called \"incompressible\". Therefore, the rate of change of density (formula_18) with respect to time formula_148 and the gradient of density formula_149 are equal to zero formula_150. In this case the general equation of continuity, formula_151, reduces to: formula_152. Furthermore, assuming that density (formula_18) is a non-zero constant formula_154 means that the right-hand side of the equation formula_150 is divisible by density (formula_18). Therefore, the continuity equation for an incompressible fluid reduces further to:formula_157This relationship, , identifies that the divergence of the flow velocity vector (formula_22) is equal to zero formula_150, which means that for an incompressible fluid the flow velocity field is a solenoidal vector field or a divergence-free vector field. Note that this relationship can be expanded upon due to its uniqueness with the vector Laplace operator formula_160, and vorticity formula_161 which is now expressed like so, for an incompressible fluid:formula_162\nStream function for incompressible 2D fluid.\nTaking the curl of the incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equation results in the elimination of pressure. This is especially easy to see if 2D Cartesian flow is assumed (like in the degenerate 3D case with formula_163 and no dependence of anything on formula_164), where the equations reduce to:\nformula_165\nDifferentiating the first with respect to formula_166, the second with respect to formula_167 and subtracting the resulting equations will eliminate pressure and any conservative force. \nFor incompressible flow, defining the stream function formula_168 through\nformula_169\nresults in mass continuity being unconditionally satisfied (given the stream function is continuous), and then incompressible Newtonian 2D momentum and mass conservation condense into one equation:\nformula_170\nwhere formula_171 is the 2D biharmonic operator and formula_172 is the kinematic viscosity, formula_173. We can also express this compactly using the Jacobian determinant:\nformula_174\nThis single equation together with appropriate boundary conditions describes 2D fluid flow, taking only kinematic viscosity as a parameter. Note that the equation for creeping flow results when the left side is assumed zero.\nIn axisymmetric flow another stream function formulation, called the Stokes stream function, can be used to describe the velocity components of an incompressible flow with one scalar function.\nThe incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equation is a differential algebraic equation, having the inconvenient feature that there is no explicit mechanism for advancing the pressure in time. Consequently, much effort has been expended to eliminate the pressure from all or part of the computational process. The stream function formulation eliminates the pressure but only in two dimensions and at the expense of introducing higher derivatives and elimination of the velocity, which is the primary variable of interest.\nProperties.\nNonlinearity.\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations are nonlinear partial differential equations in the general case and so remain in almost every real situation. In some cases, such as one-dimensional flow and Stokes flow (or creeping flow), the equations can be simplified to linear equations. The nonlinearity makes most problems difficult or impossible to solve and is the main contributor to the turbulence that the equations model.\nThe nonlinearity is due to convective acceleration, which is an acceleration associated with the change in velocity over position. Hence, any convective flow, whether turbulent or not, will involve nonlinearity. An example of convective but laminar (nonturbulent) flow would be the passage of a viscous fluid (for example, oil) through a small converging nozzle. Such flows, whether exactly solvable or not, can often be thoroughly studied and understood.\nTurbulence.\nTurbulence is the time-dependent chaotic behaviour seen in many fluid flows. It is generally believed that it is due to the inertia of the fluid as a whole: the culmination of time-dependent and convective acceleration; hence flows where inertial effects are small tend to be laminar (the Reynolds number quantifies how much the flow is affected by inertia). It is believed, though not known with certainty, that the Navier\u2013Stokes equations describe turbulence properly.\nThe numerical solution of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations for turbulent flow is extremely difficult, and due to the significantly different mixing-length scales that are involved in turbulent flow, the stable solution of this requires such a fine mesh resolution that the computational time becomes significantly infeasible for calculation or direct numerical simulation. Attempts to solve turbulent flow using a laminar solver typically result in a time-unsteady solution, which fails to converge appropriately. To counter this, time-averaged equations such as the Reynolds-averaged Navier\u2013Stokes equations (RANS), supplemented with turbulence models, are used in practical computational fluid dynamics (CFD) applications when modeling turbulent flows. Some models include the Spalart\u2013Allmaras, k\u2013\u03c9, k\u2013\u03b5, and SST models, which add a variety of additional equations to bring closure to the RANS equations. Large eddy simulation (LES) can also be used to solve these equations numerically. This approach is computationally more expensive\u2014in time and in computer memory\u2014than RANS, but produces better results because it explicitly resolves the larger turbulent scales.\nApplicability.\nTogether with supplemental equations (for example, conservation of mass) and well-formulated boundary conditions, the Navier\u2013Stokes equations seem to model fluid motion accurately; even turbulent flows seem (on average) to agree with real world observations.\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations assume that the fluid being studied is a continuum (it is infinitely divisible and not composed of particles such as atoms or molecules), and is not moving at relativistic velocities. At very small scales or under extreme conditions, real fluids made out of discrete molecules will produce results different from the continuous fluids modeled by the Navier\u2013Stokes equations. For example, capillarity of internal layers in fluids appears for flow with high gradients. For large Knudsen number of the problem, the Boltzmann equation may be a suitable replacement. \nFailing that, one may have to resort to molecular dynamics or various hybrid methods.\nAnother limitation is simply the complicated nature of the equations. Time-tested formulations exist for common fluid families, but the application of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations to less common families tends to result in very complicated formulations and often to open research problems. For this reason, these equations are usually written for Newtonian fluids where the viscosity model is linear; truly general models for the flow of other kinds of fluids (such as blood) do not exist.\nApplication to specific problems.\nThe Navier\u2013Stokes equations, even when written explicitly for specific fluids, are rather generic in nature and their proper application to specific problems can be very diverse. This is partly because there is an enormous variety of problems that may be modeled, ranging from as simple as the distribution of static pressure to as complicated as multiphase flow driven by surface tension.\nGenerally, application to specific problems begins with some flow assumptions and initial/boundary condition formulation, this may be followed by scale analysis to further simplify the problem.\nParallel flow.\nAssume steady, parallel, one-dimensional, non-convective pressure-driven flow between parallel plates, the resulting scaled (dimensionless) boundary value problem is:\nformula_175\nThe boundary condition is the no slip condition. This problem is easily solved for the flow field:\nformula_176\nFrom this point onward, more quantities of interest can be easily obtained, such as viscous drag force or net flow rate.\nRadial flow.\nDifficulties may arise when the problem becomes slightly more complicated. A seemingly modest twist on the parallel flow above would be the \"radial\" flow between parallel plates; this involves convection and thus non-linearity. The velocity field may be represented by a function \"f\"(\"z\") that must satisfy:\nformula_177\nThis ordinary differential equation is what is obtained when the Navier\u2013Stokes equations are written and the flow assumptions applied (additionally, the pressure gradient is solved for). The nonlinear term makes this a very difficult problem to solve analytically (a lengthy implicit solution may be found which involves elliptic integrals and roots of cubic polynomials). Issues with the actual existence of solutions arise for formula_178 (approximately; this is not \u221a2), the parameter formula_179 being the Reynolds number with appropriately chosen scales. This is an example of flow assumptions losing their applicability, and an example of the difficulty in \"high\" Reynolds number flows.\nConvection.\nA type of natural convection that can be described by the Navier\u2013Stokes equation is the Rayleigh\u2013B\u00e9nard convection. It is one of the most commonly studied convection phenomena because of its analytical and experimental accessibility.\nExact solutions of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations.\nSome exact solutions to the Navier\u2013Stokes equations exist. Examples of degenerate cases\u2014with the non-linear terms in the Navier\u2013Stokes equations equal to zero\u2014are Poiseuille flow, Couette flow and the oscillatory Stokes boundary layer. But also, more interesting examples, solutions to the full non-linear equations, exist, such as Jeffery\u2013Hamel flow, Von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n swirling flow, stagnation point flow, Landau\u2013Squire jet, and Taylor\u2013Green vortex. Time-dependent self-similar solutions of the three-dimensional non-compressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations in Cartesian coordinate can be given with the help of the Kummer's functions with quadratic arguments. For the compressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations the time-dependent self-similar solutions are however the Whittaker functions again with quadratic arguments when the polytropic equation of state is used as a closing condition. Note that the existence of these exact solutions does not imply they are stable: turbulence may develop at higher Reynolds numbers.\nUnder additional assumptions, the component parts can be separated.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;A two-dimensional example\nFor example, in the case of an unbounded planar domain with two-dimensional \u2014 incompressible and stationary \u2014 flow in polar coordinates (\"r\",\"\u03c6\"), the velocity components (\"ur\",\"u\u03c6\") and pressure p are:\nformula_180\nwhere A and B are arbitrary constants. This solution is valid in the domain \"r\" \u2265 1 and for \"A\" &lt; \u22122\"\u03bd\".\nIn Cartesian coordinates, when the viscosity is zero (\"\u03bd\" = 0), this is:\nformula_181\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;A three-dimensional example\nFor example, in the case of an unbounded Euclidean domain with three-dimensional \u2014 incompressible, stationary and with zero viscosity (\"\u03bd\" = 0) \u2014 radial flow in Cartesian coordinates (\"x\",\"y\",\"z\"), the velocity vector v and pressure p are:\nformula_182\nThere is a singularity at \"x\" = \"y\" = \"z\" = 0.\nA three-dimensional steady-state vortex solution.\nA steady-state example with no singularities comes from considering the flow along the lines of a Hopf fibration. Let formula_183 be a constant radius of the inner coil. One set of solutions is given by:\nformula_184\nfor arbitrary constants formula_185 and formula_186. This is a solution in a non-viscous gas (compressible fluid) whose density, velocities and pressure goes to zero far from the origin. (Note this is not a solution to the Clay Millennium problem because that refers to incompressible fluids where formula_187 is a constant, and neither does it deal with the uniqueness of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations with respect to any turbulence properties.) It is also worth pointing out that the components of the velocity vector are exactly those from the Pythagorean quadruple parametrization. Other choices of density and pressure are possible with the same velocity field:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Other choices of density and pressure\nViscous three-dimensional periodic solutions.\nTwo examples of periodic fully-three-dimensional viscous solutions are described in.\nThese solutions are defined on a three-dimensional torus formula_188 and are characterized by positive and negative helicity respectively.\nThe solution with positive helicity is given by:\nformula_189\nwhere formula_190 is the wave number and the velocity components are normalized so that the average kinetic energy per unit of mass is formula_191 at formula_192.\nThe pressure field is obtained from the velocity field as formula_193 (where formula_194 and formula_195 are reference values for the pressure and density fields respectively).\nSince both the solutions belong to the class of Beltrami flow, the vorticity field is parallel to the velocity and, for the case with positive helicity, is given by formula_196. \nThese solutions can be regarded as a generalization in three dimensions of the classic two-dimensional Taylor-Green Taylor\u2013Green vortex.\nWyld diagrams.\nWyld diagrams are bookkeeping graphs that correspond to the Navier\u2013Stokes equations via a perturbation expansion of the fundamental continuum mechanics. Similar to the Feynman diagrams in quantum field theory, these diagrams are an extension of Mstislav Keldysh's technique for nonequilibrium processes in fluid dynamics. In other words, these diagrams assign graphs to the (often) turbulent phenomena in turbulent fluids by allowing correlated and interacting fluid particles to obey stochastic processes associated to pseudo-random functions in probability distributions.\nRepresentations in 3D.\nNote that the formulas in this section make use of the single-line notation for partial derivatives, where, e.g. formula_197 means the partial derivative of formula_198 with respect to formula_199, and formula_200 means the second-order partial derivative of formula_201 with respect to formula_202.\nA 2022 paper provides a less costly, dynamical and recurrent solution of the Navier-Stokes equation for 3D turbulent fluid flows. On suitably short time scales, the dynamics of turbulence is deterministic.\nCartesian coordinates.\nFrom the general form of the Navier\u2013Stokes, with the velocity vector expanded as formula_203, sometimes respectively named formula_198, formula_205, formula_206, we may write the vector equation explicitly,\nformula_207\nformula_208\nformula_209\nNote that gravity has been accounted for as a body force, and the values of formula_210, formula_211, formula_212 will depend on the orientation of gravity with respect to the chosen set of coordinates.\nThe continuity equation reads:\nformula_213\nWhen the flow is incompressible, formula_8 does not change for any fluid particle, and its material derivative vanishes: formula_215. The continuity equation is reduced to:\nformula_216\nThus, for the incompressible version of the Navier\u2013Stokes equation the second part of the viscous terms fall away (see Incompressible flow).\nThis system of four equations comprises the most commonly used and studied form. Though comparatively more compact than other representations, this is still a nonlinear system of partial differential equations for which solutions are difficult to obtain.\nCylindrical coordinates.\nA change of variables on the Cartesian equations will yield the following momentum equations for formula_217, formula_218, and formula_219\nformula_220\nformula_221\nformula_222\nThe gravity components will generally not be constants, however for most applications either the coordinates are chosen so that the gravity components are constant or else it is assumed that gravity is counteracted by a pressure field (for example, flow in horizontal pipe is treated normally without gravity and without a vertical pressure gradient). The continuity equation is:\nformula_223\nThis cylindrical representation of the incompressible Navier\u2013Stokes equations is the second most commonly seen (the first being Cartesian above). Cylindrical coordinates are chosen to take advantage of symmetry, so that a velocity component can disappear. A very common case is axisymmetric flow with the assumption of no tangential velocity (formula_224), and the remaining quantities are independent of formula_218:\nformula_226\nSpherical coordinates.\nIn spherical coordinates, the formula_217, formula_218, and formula_229 momentum equations are (note the convention used: formula_229 is polar angle, or colatitude.)\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48396", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48396", "title": "Mathematical analysis", "text": "Branch of mathematics\nAnalysis is the branch of mathematics dealing with continuous functions, limits, and related theories, such as differentiation, integration, measure, infinite sequences, series, and analytic functions.\nThese theories are usually studied in the context of real and complex numbers and functions. Analysis evolved from calculus, which involves the elementary concepts and techniques of analysis.\nAnalysis may be distinguished from geometry; however, it can be applied to any space of mathematical objects that has a definition of nearness (a topological space) or specific distances between objects (a metric space).\nHistory.\nAncient.\nMathematical analysis formally developed in the 17th century during the Scientific Revolution, but many of its ideas can be traced back to earlier mathematicians. Early results in analysis were implicitly present in the early days of ancient Greek mathematics. For instance, an infinite geometric sum is implicit in Zeno's paradox of the dichotomy. (Strictly speaking, the point of the paradox is to deny that the infinite sum exists.) Later, Greek mathematicians such as Eudoxus and Archimedes made more explicit, but informal, use of the concepts of limits and convergence when they used the method of exhaustion to compute the area and volume of regions and solids. The explicit use of infinitesimals appears in Archimedes' \"The Method of Mechanical Theorems\", a work rediscovered in the 20th century. In Asia, the Chinese mathematician Liu Hui used the method of exhaustion in the 3rd century CE to find the area of a circle. From Jain literature, it appears that Hindus were in possession of the formulae for the sum of the arithmetic and geometric series as early as the 4th century BCE.\n\u0100c\u0101rya Bhadrab\u0101hu uses the sum of a geometric series in his Kalpas\u016btra in \u00a0BCE.\nMedieval.\nZu Chongzhi established a method that would later be called Cavalieri's principle to find the volume of a sphere in the 5th century. In the 12th century, the Indian mathematician Bh\u0101skara II used infinitesimal and used what is now known as Rolle's theorem.\nIn the 14th century, Madhava of Sangamagrama developed infinite series expansions, now called Taylor series, of functions such as sine, cosine, tangent and arctangent. Alongside his development of Taylor series of trigonometric functions, he also estimated the magnitude of the error terms resulting of truncating these series, and gave a rational approximation of some infinite series. His followers at the Kerala School of Astronomy and Mathematics further expanded his works, up to the 16th century.\nModern.\nFoundations.\nThe modern foundations of mathematical analysis were established in 17th century Europe. This began when Fermat and Descartes developed analytic geometry, which is the precursor to modern calculus. Fermat's method of adequality allowed him to determine the maxima and minima of functions and the tangents of curves. Descartes's publication of \"La G\u00e9om\u00e9trie\" in 1637, which introduced the Cartesian coordinate system, is considered to be the establishment of mathematical analysis. It would be a few decades later that Newton and Leibniz independently developed infinitesimal calculus, which grew, with the stimulus of applied work that continued through the 18th\u00a0century, into analysis topics such as the calculus of variations, ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier analysis, and generating functions. During this period, calculus techniques were applied to approximate discrete problems by continuous ones.\nModernization.\nIn the 18th century, Euler introduced the notion of a mathematical function. Real analysis began to emerge as an independent subject when Bernard Bolzano introduced the modern definition of continuity in 1816, but Bolzano's work did not become widely known until the 1870s. In 1821, Cauchy began to put calculus on a firm logical foundation by rejecting the principle of the generality of algebra widely used in earlier work, particularly by Euler. Instead, Cauchy formulated calculus in terms of geometric ideas and infinitesimals. Thus, his definition of continuity required an infinitesimal change in \"x\" to correspond to an infinitesimal change in \"y\". He also introduced the concept of the Cauchy sequence, and started the formal theory of complex analysis. Poisson, Liouville, Fourier and others studied partial differential equations and harmonic analysis. The contributions of these mathematicians and others, such as Weierstrass, developed the (\u03b5, \u03b4)-definition of limit approach, thus founding the modern field of mathematical analysis. Around the same time, Riemann introduced his theory of integration, and made significant advances in complex analysis.\nTowards the end of the 19th century, mathematicians started worrying that they were assuming the existence of a continuum of real numbers without proof. Dedekind then constructed the real numbers by Dedekind cuts, in which irrational numbers are formally defined, which serve to fill the \"gaps\" between rational numbers, thereby creating a complete set: the continuum of real numbers, which had already been developed by Simon Stevin in terms of decimal expansions. Around that time, the attempts to refine the theorems of Riemann integration led to the study of the \"size\" of the set of discontinuities of real functions.\nAlso, various pathological objects, (such as nowhere continuous functions, continuous but nowhere differentiable functions, and space-filling curves), commonly known as \"monsters\", began to be investigated. In this context, Jordan developed his theory of measure, Cantor developed what is now called naive set theory, and Baire proved the Baire category theorem. In the early 20th century, calculus was formalized using an axiomatic set theory. Lebesgue greatly improved measure theory, and introduced his own theory of integration, now known as Lebesgue integration, which proved to be a big improvement over Riemann's. Hilbert introduced Hilbert spaces to solve integral equations. The idea of normed vector space was in the air, and in the 1920s Banach created functional analysis.\nImportant concepts.\nMetric spaces.\nIn mathematics, a metric space is a set where a notion of distance (called a metric) between elements of the set is defined.\nMuch of analysis happens in some metric space; the most commonly used are the real line, the complex plane, Euclidean space, other vector spaces, and the integers. Examples of analysis without a metric include measure theory (which describes size rather than distance) and functional analysis (which studies topological vector spaces that need not have any sense of distance).\nFormally, a metric space is an ordered pair formula_1 where formula_2 is a set and formula_3 is a metric on formula_2, i.e., a function\nformula_5\nsuch that for any formula_6, the following holds:\nBy taking the third property and letting formula_11, it can be shown that formula_12 \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 (\"non-negative\").\nSequences and limits.\nA sequence is an ordered list. Like a set, it contains members (also called \"elements\", or \"terms\"). Unlike a set, order matters, and exactly the same elements can appear multiple times at different positions in the sequence. Most precisely, a sequence can be defined as a function whose domain is a countable totally ordered set, such as the natural numbers.\nOne of the most important properties of a sequence is \"convergence\". Informally, a sequence converges if it has a \"limit\". Continuing informally, a (singly-infinite) sequence has a limit if it approaches some point \"x\", called the limit, as \"n\" becomes very large. That is, for an abstract sequence (\"a\"\"n\") (with \"n\" running from 1 to infinity understood) the distance between \"a\"\"n\" and \"x\" approaches 0 as \"n\" \u2192 \u221e, denoted\nformula_13\nMain branches.\nReal analysis.\nReal analysis (traditionally, the \"theory of functions of a real variable\") is a branch of mathematical analysis dealing with the real numbers and real-valued functions of a real variable. In particular, it deals with the analytic properties of real functions and sequences, including convergence and limits of sequences of real numbers, the calculus of the real numbers, and continuity, smoothness and related properties of real-valued functions.\nComplex analysis.\nComplex analysis (traditionally known as the \"theory of functions of a complex variable\") is the branch of mathematical analysis that investigates functions of complex numbers. It is useful in many branches of mathematics, including algebraic geometry, number theory, applied mathematics; as well as in physics, including hydrodynamics, thermodynamics, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and particularly, quantum field theory.\nComplex analysis is particularly concerned with the analytic functions of complex variables (or, more generally, meromorphic functions). Because the separate real and imaginary parts of any analytic function must satisfy Laplace's equation, complex analysis is widely applicable to two-dimensional problems in physics.\nFunctional analysis.\nFunctional analysis is a branch of mathematical analysis, the core of which is formed by the study of vector spaces endowed with some kind of limit-related structure (e.g. inner product, norm, topology, etc.) and the linear operators acting upon these spaces and respecting these structures in a suitable sense. The historical roots of functional analysis lie in the study of spaces of functions and the formulation of properties of transformations of functions such as the Fourier transform as transformations defining continuous, unitary etc. operators between function spaces. This point of view turned out to be particularly useful for the study of differential and integral equations.\nFree analysis.\nFree or noncommutative analysis is a sub-branch of functional analysis that deals with spaces that are, in some ways, noncommutative. It is related to noncommutative function theory, which is a noncommutative generalization of complex analysis, as well as free probability theory and noncommutative geometry.\nIn free analysis, emphasis is placed on working with noncommutative variables and functions, especially over spaces or algebras that are noncommutative.\nHarmonic analysis.\nHarmonic analysis is a branch of mathematical analysis concerned with the representation of functions and signals as the superposition of basic waves. This includes the study of the notions of Fourier series and Fourier transforms (Fourier analysis), and of their generalizations. Harmonic analysis has applications in areas as diverse as music theory, number theory, representation theory, signal processing, quantum mechanics, tidal analysis, and neuroscience.\nDifferential equations.\nA differential equation is a mathematical equation for an unknown function of one or several variables that relates the values of the function itself and its derivatives of various orders. Differential equations play a prominent role in engineering, physics, economics, biology, and other disciplines.\nDifferential equations arise in many areas of science and technology, specifically whenever a deterministic relation involving some continuously varying quantities (modeled by functions) and their rates of change in space or time (expressed as derivatives) is known or postulated. This is illustrated in classical mechanics, where the motion of a body is described by its position and velocity as the time value varies. Newton's laws allow one (given the position, velocity, acceleration and various forces acting on the body) to express these variables dynamically as a differential equation for the unknown position of the body as a function of time. In some cases, this differential equation (called an equation of motion) may be solved explicitly.\nMeasure theory.\nA measure on a set is a systematic way to assign a number to each suitable subset of that set, intuitively interpreted as its size. In this sense, a measure is a generalization of the concepts of length, area, and volume. A particularly important example is the Lebesgue measure on a Euclidean space, which assigns the conventional length, area, and volume of Euclidean geometry to suitable subsets of the formula_14-dimensional Euclidean space formula_15. For instance, the Lebesgue measure of the interval formula_16 in the real numbers is its length in the everyday sense of the word\u2009\u2013\u2009specifically, 1.\nTechnically, a measure is a function that assigns a non-negative real number or +\u221e to (certain) subsets of a set formula_17. It must assign 0 to the empty set and be (countably) additive: the measure of a 'large' subset that can be decomposed into a finite (or countable) number of 'smaller' disjoint subsets, is the sum of the measures of the \"smaller\" subsets. In general, if one wants to associate a \"consistent\" size to \"each\" subset of a given set while satisfying the other axioms of a measure, one only finds trivial examples like the counting measure. This problem was resolved by defining measure only on a sub-collection of all subsets; the so-called \"measurable\" subsets, which are required to form a formula_18-algebra. This means that the empty set, countable unions, countable intersections and complements of measurable subsets are measurable. Non-measurable sets in a Euclidean space, on which the Lebesgue measure cannot be defined consistently, are necessarily complicated in the sense of being badly mixed up with their complement. Indeed, their existence is a non-trivial consequence of the axiom of choice.\nNumerical analysis.\nNumerical analysis is the study of algorithms that use numerical approximation (as opposed to general symbolic manipulations) for the problems of mathematical analysis (as distinguished from discrete mathematics).\nModern numerical analysis does not seek exact answers, because exact answers are often impossible to obtain in practice. Instead, much of numerical analysis is concerned with obtaining approximate solutions while maintaining reasonable bounds on errors.\nNumerical analysis naturally finds applications in all fields of engineering and the physical sciences, but in the 21st\u00a0century, the life sciences and even the arts have adopted elements of scientific computations. Ordinary differential equations appear in celestial mechanics (planets, stars and galaxies); numerical linear algebra is important for data analysis; stochastic differential equations and Markov chains are essential in simulating living cells for medicine and biology.\nVector analysis.\n\"Vector analysis\", also called \"vector calculus\", is a branch of mathematical analysis dealing with vector-valued functions.\nScalar analysis.\nScalar analysis is a branch of mathematical analysis dealing with values related to scale as opposed to direction. Values such as temperature are scalar because they describe the magnitude of a value without regard to direction, force, or displacement that value may or may not have.\nApplications.\nTechniques from analysis are also found in other areas such as:\nPhysical sciences.\nThe vast majority of classical mechanics, relativity, and quantum mechanics is based on applied analysis, and differential equations in particular. Examples of important differential equations include Newton's second law, the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, and the Einstein field equations.\nFunctional analysis is also a major factor in quantum mechanics.\nSignal processing.\nWhen processing signals, such as audio, radio waves, light waves, seismic waves, and even images, Fourier analysis can isolate individual components of a compound waveform, concentrating them for easier detection or removal. A large family of signal processing techniques consist of Fourier-transforming a signal, manipulating the Fourier-transformed data in a simple way, and reversing the transformation.\nOther areas of mathematics.\nTechniques from analysis are used in many areas of mathematics, including:"}
{"id": "48397", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48397", "title": "Isocyanate", "text": "Chemical group (\u2013N=C=O)\nIn organic chemistry, isocyanate is the functional group with the formula . Organic compounds that contain an isocyanate group are referred to as isocyanates. An organic compound with two isocyanate groups is known as a diisocyanate. Diisocyanates are manufactured for the production of polyurethanes, a class of polymers.\nIsocyanates should not be confused with cyanate esters and isocyanides, very different families of compounds. The cyanate (cyanate ester) functional group () is arranged differently from the isocyanate group (). Isocyanides have the connectivity , lacking the oxygen of the cyanate groups.\nStructure and bonding.\nIn terms of bonding, isocyanates are closely related to carbon dioxide (CO2) and carbodiimides (C(NR)2). The C\u2212N=C=O unit that defines isocyanates is planar, and the N=C=O linkage is nearly linear. In phenyl isocyanate, the C=N and C=O distances are respectively 1.195 and 1.173\u00a0\u00c5. The C\u2212N=C angle is 134.9\u00b0 and the N=C=O angle is 173.1\u00b0.\nProduction.\nIsocyanates are usually produced from amines by phosgenation, i.e. treating with phosgene:\nThese reactions proceed via the intermediacy of a carbamoyl chloride (). Owing to the hazardous nature of phosgene, the production of isocyanates requires special precautions. A laboratory-safe variation masks the phosgene as oxalyl chloride. Also, oxalyl chloride can be used to form acyl isocyanates from primary amides, which phosgene typically dehydrates to nitriles instead.\nAnother route to isocyanates entails addition of isocyanic acid to alkenes. Complementarily, alkyl isocyanates form by displacement reactions involving alkyl halides and alkali metal cyanates.\nAryl isocyanates can be synthesized from reductive carbonylation of nitro- and nitrosoarenes; a palladium catalyst is necessary to avoid side-reactions of the nitrene intermediate. \nThree rearrangement reactions involving nitrenes give isocyanates:\nAn isocyanate is also the immediate product of the Hofmann rearrangement, but typically hydrolyzes under reaction conditions.\nReactivity.\nWith nucleophiles.\nIsocyanates are electrophiles, and as such they are reactive toward a variety of nucleophiles including alcohols, amines, and even water. They are more reactive than structurally analogous isothiocyanates.\nUpon treatment with an alcohol, an isocyanate forms a urethane linkage:\nwhere R and R' are alkyl or aryl groups.\nIf a diisocyanate is treated with a compound containing two or more hydroxyl groups, such as a diol or a polyol, polymer chains are formed, which are known as polyurethanes.\nIsocyanates react with water to form carbon dioxide:\nThis reaction is exploited in tandem with the production of polyurethane to give polyurethane foams. The carbon dioxide functions as a blowing agent.\nIsocyanates also react with amines to give ureas:\nThe addition of an isocyanate to a urea gives a biuret:\nReaction between a di-isocyanate and a compound containing two or more amine groups produces long polymer chains known as polyureas.\nCarbodiimides are produced by the decarboxylation of alkyl and aryl isocyanate using phosphine oxides as a catalyst:\nCyclization.\nIsocyanates also can react with themselves. Aliphatic diisocyanates can trimerise to from substituted isocyanuric acid groups. This can be seen in the formation of polyisocyanurate resins (PIR) which are commonly used as rigid thermal insulation. Isocyanates participate in Diels\u2013Alder reactions, functioning as dienophiles.\nRearrangement reactions.\nIsocyanates are common intermediates in the synthesis of primary amines via hydrolysis:\nCommon isocyanates.\nThe global market for diisocyanates in the year 2000 was 4.4 million tonnes, of which 61.3% was methylene diphenyl diisocyanate (MDI), 34.1% was toluene diisocyanate (TDI), 3.4% was the total for hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) and isophorone diisocyanate (IPDI), and 1.2% was the total for various others. A monofunctional isocyanate of industrial significance is methyl isocyanate (MIC), which is used in the manufacture of pesticides.\nCommon applications.\nMDI is commonly used in the manufacture of rigid foams and surface coating. Polyurethane foam boards are used in construction for insulation. TDI is commonly used in applications where flexible foams are used, such as furniture and bedding. Both MDI and TDI are used in the making of adhesives and sealants due to weather-resistant properties. Isocyanates, both MDI and TDI are widely used in as spraying applications of insulation due to the speed and flexibility of applications. Foams can be sprayed into structures and harden in place or retain some flexibility as required by the application. HDI is commonly utilized in high-performance surface-coating applications, including automotive paints.\nHealth and safety.\nThe risks of isocyanates was brought to the world's attention with the 1984 Bhopal disaster, which caused the death of nearly 4000 people from the accidental release of methyl isocyanate. In 2008, the same chemical was involved in an explosion at a pesticide manufacturing plant in West Virginia.\nLD50s for isocyanates are typically several hundred milligrams per kilogram. Despite this low acute toxicity, an extremely low short-term exposure limit (STEL) of 0.07\u00a0mg/m3 is the legal limit for all isocyanates (except methyl isocyanate: 0.02\u00a0mg/m3) in the United Kingdom. These limits are set to protect workers from chronic health effects such as occupational asthma, contact dermatitis, or irritation of the respiratory tract.\nSince they are used in spraying applications, the properties of their aerosols have attracted attention. In the U.S., OSHA conducted a National Emphasis Program on isocyanates starting in 2013 to make employers and workers more aware of the health risks. \nPolyurethanes have variable curing times, and the presence of free isocyanates in foams vary accordingly.\nBoth the US National Toxicology Program (NTP) and International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) have evaluated TDI as a potential human carcinogen and Group 2B \"possibly carcinogenic to humans\". MDI appears to be relatively safer and is unlikely a human carcinogen. The IARC evaluates MDI as Group 3 \"not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in humans\".\nAll major producers of MDI and TDI are members of the International Isocyanate Institute, which promotes the safe handling of MDI and TDI.\nHazards.\nToxicity.\nIsocyanates can present respiratory hazards as particulates, vapors or aerosols. Autobody shop workers are a very commonly examined population for isocyanate exposure as they are repeatedly exposed when spray painting automobiles and can be exposed when installing truck bed liners. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis has slower onset and features chronic inflammation that can be seen on imaging of the lungs. Occupational asthma is a worrisome outcome of respiratory sensitization to isocyanates as it can be acutely fatal. Diagnosis of occupational asthma is generally performed using pulmonary function testing (PFT) and performed by pulmonology or occupational medicine physicians. Occupational asthma is much like asthma in that it causes episodic shortness of breath and wheezing. Both the dose and duration of exposure to isocyanates can lead to respiratory sensitization. Dermal exposures to isocyanates can sensitize an exposed person to respiratory disease.\nDermal exposures can occur via mixing, spraying coatings or applying and spreading coatings manually. Dermal exposures to isocyanates is known to lead to respiratory sensitization. Even when the right personal protective equipment (PPE) is used, exposures can occur to body areas not completely covered. Isocyanates can also permeate improper PPE, necessitating frequent changes of both disposable gloves and suits if they become over exposed.\nFlammability.\nMethyl isocyanate (MIC) is highly flammable. MDI and TDI are much less flammable. Flammability of materials is a consideration in furniture design. The specific flammability hazard is noted on the safety data sheet (SDS) for specific isocyanates.\nHazard minimization.\nIndustrial science attempts to minimize the hazards of isocyanates through multiple techniques. The EPA has sponsored ongoing research on polyurethane production without isocyanates. Where isocyanates are unavoidable but interchangeable, substituting a less hazardous isocyanate may control hazards. Ventilation and automation can also minimizes worker exposure to the isocyanates used. \nIf human workers must enter isocyanate-contaminated regions, personal protective equipment (PPE) can reduce their intake. In general, workers wear eye protection and gloves and coveralls to reduce dermal exposure For some autobody paint and clear-coat spraying applications, a full-face mask is required. \nThe US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires frequent training to ensure isocyanate hazards are appropriately minimized. Moreover, OSHA requires standardized isocyanate concentration measurements to avoid violating occupational exposure limits. In the case of MDI, OSHA expects sampling with glass-fiber filters at standard air flow rates, and then liquid chromatography.\nCombined industrial hygiene and medical surveillance can significantly reduce occupational asthma incidence. Biological tests exist to identify isocyanate exposure; the US Navy uses regular pulmonary function testing and screening questionnaires.\nEmergency management is a complex process of preparation and should be considered in a setting where a release of bulk chemicals may threaten the well-being of the public. In the Bhopal disaster, an uncontrolled MIC release killed thousands, affected hundreds of thousands more, and spurred the development of modern disaster preparation. \nOccupational exposure limits.\nExposure limits can be expressed as ceiling limits, a maximal value, short-term exposure limits (STEL), a 15-minute exposure limit or an 8-hour time-weighted average limit (TWA). Below is a sampling, not exhaustive, as less common isocyanates also have specific limits within the United States, and in some regions there are limits on total isocyanate, which recognizes some of the uncertainty regarding the safety of mixtures of chemicals as compared to pure chemical exposures. For example, while there is no OEL for HDI, NIOSH has a REL of 5\u00a0ppb for an 8-hour TWA and a ceiling limit of 20\u00a0ppb, consistent with the recommendations for MDI.\nRegulation.\nUnited States.\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is the regulatory body covering worker safety. OSHA puts forth permissible exposure limit (PEL) 20\u00a0ppb for MDI and detailed technical guidance on exposure assessment.\nThe National Institutes of Health (NIOSH) is the agency responsible for providing the research and recommendations regarding workplace safety, while OSHA is more of an enforcement body. NIOSH is responsible for producing the science that can result in recommended exposure limits (REL), which can be lower than the PEL. OSHA is tasked with enforcement and defending the enforceable limits (PELs). In 1992, when OSHA reduced the PEL for TDI to the NIOSH REL, the PEL reduction was challenged in court, and the reduction was reversed.\nThe Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is also involved in the regulation of isocyanates with regard to the environment and also non-worker persons that might be exposed.\nThe American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) is a non-government organization that publishes guidance known as threshold limit values (TLV) for . The TLV is not an OSHA-enforceable value, unless the PEL is the same.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) provides regulatory oversight of chemicals used within the European Union. ECHA has been implementing policy aimed at limiting worker exposure through elimination by lower allowable concentrations in products and mandatory worker training, an administrative control. Within the European Union, many nations set their own occupational exposure limits for isocyanates.\nInternational groups.\nThe United Nations, through the World Health Organization (WHO) together with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), collaborate on the International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS) to publish summary documents on chemicals. The IPCS published one such document in 2000 summarizing the status of scientific knowledge on MDI.\nThe IARC evaluates the hazard data on chemicals and assigns a rating on the risk of carcinogenesis. In the case of TDI, the final evaluation is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B). For MDI, the final evaluation is not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3).\nThe International Isocyanate Institute is an international industry consortium that seeks promote the safe utilization of isocyanates by promulgating best practices.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48398", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48398", "title": "Philosophical analysis", "text": "Various techniques typically used by philosophers in the analytic tradition\nPhilosophical analysis is any of various techniques, typically used by philosophers in the analytic tradition, in order to \"break down\" (i.e. analyze) philosophical issues. Arguably the most prominent of these techniques is the analysis of concepts, known as conceptual analysis.\nMethod of analysis.\nWhile analysis is characteristic of the analytic tradition in philosophy, what is to be analyzed (the \"analysandum\") often varies. In their papers, philosophers may focus on different areas. One might analyze linguistic phenomena such as sentences, or psychological phenomena such as sense data. However, arguably the most prominent analyses are written on concepts or propositions and are known as \"conceptual analysis\".\nA.C. Ewing distinguished between two forms of philosophical analysis. The first is \"what the persons who make a certain statement usually intend to assert\" and the second \"the qualities, relations and species of continuants mentioned in the statement\". As an illustration he takes the statement \"I see a tree\", this statement could be analysed in terms what the everyday person intends what they say this or it could be analysed metaphysically by asserting representationalism.\nConceptual analysis consists primarily in breaking down or analyzing concepts into their constituent parts in order to gain knowledge or a better understanding of a particular philosophical issue in which the concept is involved. For example, the problem of free will in philosophy involves various key concepts, including the concepts of freedom, moral responsibility, determinism, ability, etc. The method of conceptual analysis tends to approach such a problem by breaking down the key concepts pertaining to the problem and seeing how they interact. Thus, in the long-standing debate on whether free will is compatible with the doctrine of determinism, several philosophers have proposed analyses of the relevant concepts to argue for either compatibilism or incompatibilism.\nA famous example of conceptual analysis at its best is given by Bertrand Russell in his theory of descriptions. Russell attempted to analyze propositions that involved \"definite descriptions\", which pick out a unique individual (such as \"The tallest spy\"), and \"indefinite descriptions\", which pick out a set of individuals (such as \"a spy\"). In his analysis of definite descriptions, superficially, these descriptions have the standard subject-predicate form of a proposition: thus \"The present king of France is bald\" appears to be predicating \"baldness\" of the subject, \"the present king of France\". However, Russell noted that this is problematic, because there is no present king of France (France is no longer a monarchy). Normally, to decide whether a proposition of the standard subject-predicate form is true or false, one checks whether the subject is in the extension of the predicate. The proposition is then true if and only if the subject is in the extension of the predicate. The problem is that there is no present king of France, so the present king of France cannot be found on the list of bald things or non-bald things. So, it would appear that the proposition expressed by \"The present king of France is bald\" is neither true nor false. However, analyzing the relevant concepts and propositions, Russell proposed that what definite descriptions really express are not propositions of the subject-predicate form, but rather they express existentially quantified propositions. Thus, \"The present king of France\" is \"analyzed\", according to Russell's theory of descriptions, as \"There exists an individual who is currently the king of France, there is only one such individual, and that individual is bald.\" Now one can determine the truth value of the proposition. Indeed, it is false, because it is not the case that there exists a unique individual who is currently the king of France and is bald, since there is no present king of France.\nCriticism.\nWhile the method of analysis is characteristic of contemporary analytic philosophy, its status continues to be a source of great controversy even among analytic philosophers. Several current criticisms of the analytic method derive from W.V. Quine's famous rejection of the analytic\u2013synthetic distinction. While Quine's critique is well-known, it is highly controversial.\nFurther, the analytic method seems to rely on some sort of definitional structure of concepts, so that one can give necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of the concept. For example, the concept \"bachelor\" is often analyzed as having the concepts \"unmarried\" and \"male\" as its components. Thus, the definition or analysis of \"bachelor\" is thought to be an unmarried male. But one might worry that these so-called necessary and sufficient conditions do not apply in every case. Wittgenstein, for instance, argues that language (e.g., the word 'bachelor') is used for various purposes and in an indefinite number of ways. Wittgenstein's famous thesis states that meaning is determined by use. This means that, in each case, the meaning of 'bachelor' is determined by its use in a context. So if it can be shown that the word means different things across different contexts of use, then cases where its meaning cannot be essentially defined as 'unmarried man' seem to constitute counterexamples to this method of analysis. This is just one example of a critique of the analytic method derived from a critique of definitions. There are several other such critiques. This criticism is often said to have originated primarily with Wittgenstein's \"Philosophical Investigations\".\nA third critique of the method of analysis derives primarily from psychological critiques of intuition. A key part of the analytic method involves analyzing concepts via \"intuition tests\". Philosophers tend to motivate various conceptual analyses by appeal to their intuitions about thought experiments.\nIn short, some philosophers feel strongly that the analytic method (especially conceptual analysis) is essential to and defines philosophy. Yet, some philosophers argue that the method of analysis is problematic. Some, however, take the middle ground and argue that while analysis is largely a fruitful method of inquiry, philosophers should not limit themselves to only using the method of analysis.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48399", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48399", "title": "Trade deficit", "text": ""}
{"id": "48402", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48402", "title": "Internet backbone", "text": "Vital infrastructure of the networks of the Internet\nThe Internet backbone is the principal data routes between large, strategically interconnected computer networks and core routers of the Internet. These data routes are hosted by commercial, government, academic and other high-capacity network centers as well as the Internet exchange points and network access points, which exchange Internet traffic internationally. Internet service providers (ISPs) participate in Internet backbone traffic through privately negotiated interconnection agreements, primarily governed by the principle of settlement-free peering.\nThe Internet, and consequently its backbone networks, do not rely on central control or coordinating facilities, nor do they implement any global network policies. The resilience of the Internet results from its principal architectural features, such as the idea of placing as few network state and control functions as possible in the network elements, instead relying on the endpoints of communication to handle most of the processing to ensure data integrity, reliability, and authentication. In addition, the high degree of redundancy of today's network links and sophisticated real-time routing protocols provide alternate paths of communications for load balancing and congestion avoidance.\nThe largest providers, known as Tier 1 networks, have such comprehensive networks that they do not purchase transit agreements from other providers.\nInfrastructure.\nThe Internet backbone consists of many networks owned by numerous companies.\nFiber-optic communication remains the medium of choice for Internet backbone providers for several reasons. Fiber-optics allow for fast data speeds and large bandwidth, suffer relatively little attenuation \u2014 allowing them to cover long distances with few repeaters \u2014 and are immune to crosstalk and other forms of electromagnetic interference.\nThe real-time routing protocols and redundancy built into the backbone is also able to reroute traffic in case of a failure. The data rates of backbone lines have increased over time. In 1998, all of the United States' backbone networks had utilized the slowest data rate of 45 Mbit/s. However, technological improvements allowed for 41 percent of backbones to have data rates of 2,488\u00a0Mbit/s or faster by the mid 2000s.\nHistory.\nThe first packet-switched computer networks, the NPL network and the ARPANET were interconnected in 1973 via University College London. The ARPANET used a backbone of routers called Interface Message Processors. Other packet-switched computer networks proliferated starting in the 1970s, eventually adopting TCP/IP protocols or being replaced by newer networks.\nThe National Science Foundation created the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNET) in 1986 by funding six networking sites using interconnecting links, with peering to the ARPANET. In 1987, this new network was upgraded to T1 links for thirteen sites. These sites included regional networks that in turn connected over 170 other networks. IBM, MCI and Merit upgraded the backbone to bandwidth (T3) in 1991. The combination of the ARPANET and NSFNET became known as the Internet. Within a few years, the dominance of the NSFNet backbone led to the decommissioning of the redundant ARPANET infrastructure in 1990.\nIn the early days of the Internet, backbone providers exchanged their traffic at government-sponsored network access points (NAPs), until the government privatized the Internet and transferred the NAPs to commercial providers.\nModern backbone.\nBecause of the overlap and synergy between long-distance telephone networks and backbone networks, the largest long-distance voice carriers such as AT&amp;T Inc., Verizon, Sprint, and Lumen also own some of the largest Internet backbone networks. These backbone providers sell their services to Internet service providers.\nEach ISP has its own contingency network and is equipped with an outsourced backup. These networks are intertwined and crisscrossed to create a redundant network. Many companies operate their own backbones which are all interconnected at various Internet exchange points around the world. In order for data to navigate this web, it is necessary to have backbone routers\u2014routers powerful enough to handle information\u2014on the Internet backbone that are capable of directing data to other routers in order to send it to its final destination. Without them, information would be lost.\nEconomy of the backbone.\nPeering agreements.\nBackbone providers of roughly equivalent market share regularly create agreements called peering agreements, which allow the use of another's network to hand off traffic where it is ultimately delivered. Usually they do not charge each other for this, as the companies get revenue from their customers.\nRegulation.\nAntitrust authorities have acted to ensure that no provider grows large enough to dominate the backbone market. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission has decided not to monitor the competitive aspects of the Internet backbone interconnection relationships as long as the market continues to function well.\nTransit agreements.\nBackbone providers of unequal market share usually create agreements called transit agreements, and usually contain some type of monetary agreement.\nRegional backbone.\nEgypt.\nDuring the 2011 Egyptian revolution, the government of Egypt shut down the four major ISPs on January\u00a027,\u00a02011 at approximately 5:20\u00a0p.m.\u00a0EST. The networks had not been physically interrupted, as the Internet transit traffic through Egypt was unaffected. Instead, the government shut down the Border Gateway Protocol\u00a0(BGP) sessions announcing local routes. BGP is responsible for routing traffic between ISPs.\nOnly one of Egypt's ISPs was allowed to continue operations. The ISP Noor Group provided connectivity only to Egypt's stock exchange as well as some government ministries. Other ISPs started to offer free dial-up Internet access in other countries.\nEurope.\nEurope is a major contributor to the growth of the international backbone as well as a contributor to the growth of Internet bandwidth. In 2003, Europe was credited with 82 percent of the world's international cross-border bandwidth. The company Level\u00a03 Communications began to launch a line of dedicated Internet access and virtual private network services in 2011, giving large companies direct access to the tier\u00a03 backbone. Connecting companies directly to the backbone will provide enterprises faster Internet service which meets a large market demand.\nCaucasus.\nCertain countries around the Caucasus have very simple backbone networks. In 2011, a 75-year-old woman in Georgia pierced a fiber backbone line with a shovel and left the neighboring country of Armenia without Internet access for 12 hours. The country has since made major developments to the fiber backbone infrastructure, but progress is slow due to lack of government funding. \nJapan.\nJapan's internet backbone requires a high degree of efficiency to support high demand for the Internet and technology in general. Japan had over 104 million Internet users in 2024. Since Japan has a demand for fiber to the home, Japan is looking into tapping a fiber-optic backbone line of NTT, a domestic backbone carrier, in order to deliver this service at cheaper prices.\nChina.\nIn some instances, the companies that own certain sections of the Internet backbone's physical infrastructure depend on competition in order to keep the Internet market profitable. This can be seen most prominently in China. Since China Telecom and China Unicom have acted as the sole Internet service providers to China for some time, smaller companies cannot compete with them in negotiating the interconnection settlement prices that keep the Internet market profitable in China. This imposition of discriminatory pricing by the large companies then results in market inefficiencies and stagnation, and ultimately affects the efficiency of the Internet backbone networks that service the nation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48404", "revid": "33163510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48404", "title": "Ring (mathematics)", "text": "Algebraic structure with addition and multiplication\nIn mathematics, a ring is an algebraic structure consisting of a set with two binary operations typically called \"addition\" and \"multiplication\" and denoted like addition and multiplication of integers. They work similarly to integer addition and multiplication, except that multiplication in a ring does not need to be commutative. Ring elements may be numbers such as integers or complex numbers, but they may also be non-numerical objects such as polynomials, square matrices, functions, and power series.\nMore formally, a ring is a set that is endowed with two binary operations (\"addition\" and \"multiplication\") such that the ring is an abelian group with respect to addition. The multiplication is associative, is distributive over the addition operation, and has a multiplicative identity element. Some authors apply the term \"ring\" to a further generalization, often called a \"rng\", that omits the requirement for a multiplicative identity, and instead call the structure defined above a \"ring with identity\".\nA \"commutative ring\" is a ring with a commutative multiplication. This property has profound implications on ring properties. Commutative algebra, the theory of commutative rings, is a major branch of ring theory. Its development has been greatly influenced by problems and ideas of algebraic number theory and algebraic geometry. In turn, commutative algebra is a fundaments tool in these branches of mathematics.\nExamples of commutative rings include every field (such as the real or complex numbers), the integers, the polynomials in one or several variables with coefficients in another ring, the coordinate ring of an affine algebraic variety, and the ring of integers of a number field. Examples of noncommutative rings include the ring of \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" real square matrices with \"n\" \u2265 2, group rings in representation theory, operator algebras in functional analysis, rings of differential operators, and cohomology rings in topology.\nThe conceptualization of rings spanned the 1870s to the 1920s, with key contributions by Dedekind, Hilbert, Fraenkel, and Noether. Rings were first formalized as a generalization of Dedekind domains that occur in number theory, and of polynomial rings and rings of invariants that occur in algebraic geometry and invariant theory. They later proved useful in other branches of mathematics such as geometry and analysis.\nRings appear in the following chain of class inclusions:\n rngs \u2283 rings \u2283 commutative\u00a0rings \u2283 integral\u00a0domains \u2283 integrally\u00a0closed\u00a0domains \u2283 GCD\u00a0domains \u2283 unique\u00a0factorization\u00a0domains \u2283 principal\u00a0ideal\u00a0domains \u2283 Euclidean\u00a0domains \u2283 fields \u2283 algebraically\u00a0closed fields\nDefinition.\nA ring is a set R equipped with two binary operations + (addition) and \u22c5 (multiplication) satisfying the following three sets of axioms, called the ring axioms:\nIn notation, the multiplication symbol \u00b7 is often omitted, in which case \"a\" \u00b7 \"b\" is written as \"ab\".\nVariations on terminology.\nIn the terminology of this article, a ring is defined to have a multiplicative identity, while a structure with the same axiomatic definition but without the requirement for a multiplicative identity is instead called a \"rng\" (IPA: ) with a missing \"i\". For example, the set of even integers with the usual + and \u22c5 is a rng, but not a ring. As explained in \"\" below, many authors apply the term \"ring\" without requiring a multiplicative identity.\nAlthough ring addition is commutative, ring multiplication is not required to be commutative: ab need not necessarily equal \"ba\". Rings that also satisfy commutativity for multiplication (such as the ring of integers) are called \"commutative rings\". Books on commutative algebra or algebraic geometry often adopt the convention that \"ring\" means \"commutative ring\", to simplify terminology.\nIn a ring, multiplicative inverses are not required to exist. A nonzero commutative ring in which every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse is called a field.\nThe additive group of a ring is the underlying set equipped with only the operation of addition. Although the definition requires that the additive group be abelian, this can be inferred from the other ring axioms. The proof makes use of the \"1\", and does not work in a rng. (For a rng, omitting the axiom of commutativity of addition leaves it inferable from the remaining rng assumptions only for elements that are products: \"ab\" + \"cd\" = \"cd\" + \"ab\".)\nThere are a few authors who use the term \"ring\" to refer to structures in which there is no requirement for multiplication to be associative. For these authors, every algebra is a \"ring\".\nIllustration.\nThe most familiar example of a ring is the set of all integers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; consisting of the numbers\n formula_1\nThe axioms of a ring were elaborated as a generalization of familiar properties of addition and multiplication of integers.\nSome properties.\nSome basic properties of a ring follow immediately from the axioms:\nExample: Integers modulo 4.\nEquip the set formula_2 with the following operations:\nThen &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a ring: each axiom follows from the corresponding axiom for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; If x is an integer, the remainder of x when divided by 4 may be considered as an element of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and this element is often denoted by \"\"x\" mod 4\" or formula_9 which is consistent with the notation for 0, 1, 2, 3. The additive inverse of any formula_10 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is formula_11 For example, formula_12\nExample: 2-by-2 matrices.\nThe set of 2-by-2 square matrices with entries in a field F is\n formula_13\nWith the operations of matrix addition and matrix multiplication, formula_14 satisfies the above ring axioms. The element formula_15 is the multiplicative identity of the ring. If formula_16 and formula_17 then formula_18 while formula_19 this example shows that the ring is noncommutative.\nMore generally, for any ring R, commutative or not, and any nonnegative integer n, the square \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrices with entries in R form a ring; see \"Matrix ring\".\nHistory.\nDedekind.\nThe study of rings originated from the theory of polynomial rings and the theory of algebraic integers. In 1871, Richard Dedekind defined the concept of the ring of integers of a number field. In this context, he introduced the terms \"ideal\" (inspired by Ernst Kummer's notion of ideal number) and \"module\" and studied their properties. Dedekind did not use the term \"ring\" and did not define the concept of a ring in a general setting.\nHilbert.\nThe term \"Zahlring\" (number ring) was coined by David Hilbert in 1892 and published in 1897. According to Harvey Cohn, Hilbert used the term for a ring that had the property of \"circling directly back\" to an element of itself (in the sense of an equivalence). Specifically, in a ring of algebraic integers, all high powers of an algebraic integer can be written as an integral combination of a fixed set of lower powers, and thus the powers \"cycle back\". For instance, if \"a\"3 \u2212 4\"a\" + 1 = 0 then:\nformula_20\nand so on; in general, \"a\"\"n\" is going to be an integral linear combination of 1, \"a\", and \"a\"2.\nFraenkel and Noether.\nThe first axiomatic definition of a ring was given by Adolf Fraenkel in 1915, but his axioms were stricter than those in the modern definition. For instance, he required every non-zero-divisor to have a multiplicative inverse. In 1921, Emmy Noether gave a modern axiomatic definition of commutative rings (with and without 1) and developed the foundations of commutative ring theory in her paper \"Idealtheorie in Ringbereichen\".\nMultiplicative identity and the term \"ring\".\nFraenkel applied the term \"ring\" to structures with axioms that included a multiplicative identity, whereas Noether applied it to structures that did not.\nMost or all books on algebra up to around 1960 followed Noether's convention of not requiring a 1 for a \"ring\". Starting in the 1960s, it became increasingly common to see books including the existence of 1 in the definition of \"ring\", especially in advanced books by notable authors such as Artin, Bourbaki, Eisenbud, and Lang. There are also books published as late as 2022 that use the term without the requirement for a 1. Likewise, the Encyclopedia of Mathematics does not require unit elements in rings. In a research article, the authors often specify which definition of ring they use in the beginning of that article.\nGardner and Wiegandt assert that, when dealing with several objects in the category of rings (as opposed to working with a fixed ring), if one requires all rings to have a 1, then some consequences include the lack of existence of infinite direct sums of rings, and that proper direct summands of rings are not subrings. They conclude that \"in many, maybe most, branches of ring theory the requirement of the existence of a unity element is not sensible, and therefore unacceptable.\" Poonen makes the counterargument that the natural notion for rings would be the direct product rather than the direct sum. However, his main argument is that rings without a multiplicative identity are not totally associative, in the sense that they do not contain the product of any finite sequence of ring elements, including the empty sequence.\nAuthors who follow either convention for the use of the term \"ring\" may use one of the following terms to refer to objects satisfying the other convention:\nBasic concepts.\nProducts and powers.\nFor each nonnegative integer n, given a sequence &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of n elements of R, one can define the product &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; recursively: let \"P\"0 = 1 and let \"P\"\"m\" = \"P\"\"m\"\u22121\"a\"\"m\" for 1 \u2264 \"m\" \u2264 \"n\".\nAs a special case, one can define nonnegative integer powers of an element a of a ring: \"a\"0 = 1 and \"a\"\"n\" = \"a\"\"n\"\u22121\"a\" for \"n\" \u2265 1. Then \"a\"\"m\"+\"n\" = \"a\"\"m\"\"a\"\"n\" for all \"m\", \"n\" \u2265 0.\nElements in a ring.\nA left zero divisor of a ring R is an element a in the ring such that there exists a nonzero element b of R such that \"ab\" = 0. A right zero divisor is defined similarly.\nA nilpotent element is an element a such that \"an\" = 0 for some \"n\" &gt; 0. One example of a nilpotent element is a nilpotent matrix. A nilpotent element in a nonzero ring is necessarily a zero divisor.\nAn idempotent formula_23 is an element such that \"e\"2 = \"e\". One example of an idempotent element is a projection in linear algebra.\nA unit is an element a having a multiplicative inverse; in this case the inverse is unique, and is denoted by \"a\"\u20131. The set of units of a ring is a group under ring multiplication; this group is denoted by \"R\"\u00d7 or \"R\"* or \"U\"(\"R\"). For example, if R is the ring of all square matrices of size n over a field, then \"R\"\u00d7 consists of the set of all invertible matrices of size n, and is called the general linear group.\nSubring.\nA subset S of R is called a subring if any one of the following equivalent conditions holds:\nFor example, the ring &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of integers is a subring of the field of real numbers and also a subring of the ring of polynomials &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (in both cases, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; contains\u00a01, which is the multiplicative identity of the larger rings). On the other hand, the subset of even integers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; does not contain the identity element 1 and thus does not qualify as a subring of\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; one could call &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; a subrng, however.\nAn intersection of subrings is a subring. Given a subset E of R, the smallest subring of R containing E is the intersection of all subrings of R containing\u00a0E, and it is called \"the subring generated by\u00a0E\".\nFor a ring R, the smallest subring of R is called the \"characteristic subring\" of R. It can be generated through addition of copies of 1 and\u00a0\u22121. It is possible that \"n\" \u00b7 1 = 1 + 1 + ... + 1 (n times) can be zero. If n is the smallest positive integer such that this occurs, then n is called the \"characteristic\" of\u00a0R. In some rings, \"n\" \u00b7 1 is never zero for any positive integer n, and those rings are said to have \"characteristic zero\".\nGiven a ring R, let Z(\"R\") denote the set of all elements x in R such that x commutes with every element in R: \"xy\" = \"yx\" for any y in\u00a0R. Then Z(\"R\") is a subring of\u00a0R, called the center of\u00a0R. More generally, given a subset X of\u00a0R, let S be the set of all elements in R that commute with every element in\u00a0X. Then S is a subring of\u00a0R, called the centralizer (or commutant) of\u00a0X. The center is the centralizer of the entire ring\u00a0R. Elements or subsets of the center are said to be \"central\" in\u00a0R; they (each individually) generate a subring of the center.\nIdeal.\nLet R be a ring. A left ideal of R is a nonempty subset I of R such that for any x, y in I and r in R, the elements \"x\" + \"y\" and rx are in I. If R I denotes the R-span of I, that is, the set of finite sums\n formula_24\nthen I is a left ideal if \"RI\" \u2286 \"I\". Similarly, a right ideal is a subset I such that \"IR\" \u2286 \"I\". A subset I is said to be a two-sided ideal or simply ideal if it is both a left ideal and right ideal. A one-sided or two-sided ideal is then an additive subgroup of R. If E is a subset of R, then \"RE\" is a left ideal, called the left ideal generated by E; it is the smallest left ideal containing E. Similarly, one can consider the right ideal or the two-sided ideal generated by a subset of R.\nIf x is in R, then \"Rx\" and \"xR\" are left ideals and right ideals, respectively; they are called the principal left ideals and right ideals generated by x. The principal ideal \"RxR\" is written as (\"x\"). For example, the set of all positive and negative multiples of 2 along with 0 form an ideal of the integers, and this ideal is generated by the integer\u00a02. In fact, every ideal of the ring of integers is principal.\nLike a group, a ring is said to be simple if it is nonzero and it has no proper nonzero two-sided ideals. A commutative simple ring is precisely a field.\nRings are often studied with special conditions set upon their ideals. For example, a ring in which there is no strictly increasing infinite chain of left ideals is called a left Noetherian ring. A ring in which there is no strictly decreasing infinite chain of left ideals is called a left Artinian ring. It is a somewhat surprising fact that a left Artinian ring is left Noetherian (the Hopkins\u2013Levitzki theorem). The integers, however, form a Noetherian ring which is not Artinian.\nFor commutative rings, the ideals generalize the classical notion of divisibility and decomposition of an integer into prime numbers in algebra. A proper ideal P of R is called a prime ideal if for any elements formula_25 we have that formula_26 implies either formula_27 or formula_28 Equivalently, P is prime if for any ideals \"I\", \"J\" we have that \"IJ\" \u2286 \"P\" implies either \"I\" \u2286 \"P\" or \"J\" \u2286 \"P\". This latter formulation illustrates the idea of ideals as generalizations of elements.\nHomomorphism.\nA homomorphism from a ring (\"R\", +, \u22c5) to a ring (\"S\", \u2021, \u2217) is a function f from R to\u00a0S that preserves the ring operations; namely, such that, for all \"a\", \"b\" in R the following identities hold:\nformula_29\nIf one is working with rngs, then the third condition is dropped.\nA ring homomorphism f is said to be an isomorphism if there exists an inverse homomorphism to f (that is, a ring homomorphism that is an inverse function), or equivalently if it is bijective.\nExamples:\nGiven a ring homomorphism \"f\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"S\", the set of all elements mapped to 0 by f is called the kernel of\u00a0f. The kernel is a two-sided ideal of\u00a0R. The image of\u00a0f, on the other hand, is not always an ideal, but it is always a subring of\u00a0S.\nTo give a ring homomorphism from a commutative ring R to a ring A with image contained in the center of A is the same as to give a structure of an algebra over R to\u00a0A (which in particular gives a structure of an A-module).\nQuotient ring.\nThe notion of quotient ring is analogous to the notion of a quotient group. Given a ring (\"R\", +, \u22c5) and a two-sided ideal I of (\"R\", +, \u22c5), view I as subgroup of (\"R\", +); then the quotient ring \"R\" / \"I\" is the set of cosets of I together with the operations\n formula_31\nfor all \"a\", \"b\" in R. The ring \"R\" / \"I\" is also called a factor ring.\nAs with a quotient group, there is a canonical homomorphism \"p\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"R\" / \"I\", given by \"x\" \u21a6 \"x\" + \"I\". It is surjective and satisfies the following universal property: \nFor any ring homomorphism \"f\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"S\", invoking the universal property with \"I\" = ker \"f\" produces a homomorphism formula_34 that gives an isomorphism from \"R\" / ker \"f\" to the image of f.\nModules.\nThe concept of a \"module over a ring\" generalizes the concept of a vector space (over a field) by generalizing from multiplication of vectors with elements of a field (scalar multiplication) to multiplication with elements of a ring. More precisely, given a ring R, an R-module M is an abelian group equipped with an operation \"R\" \u00d7 \"M\" \u2192 \"M\" (associating an element of M to every pair of an element of R and an element of M) that satisfies certain axioms. This operation is commonly denoted by juxtaposition and called multiplication. The axioms of modules are the following: for all \"a\", \"b\" in R and all \"x\", \"y\" in M, \nM is an abelian group under addition.\nformula_35\nWhen the ring is noncommutative these axioms define \"left modules\"; \"right modules\" are defined similarly by writing xa instead of ax. This is not only a change of notation, as the last axiom of right modules (that is \"x\"(\"ab\") = (\"xa\")\"b\") becomes (\"ab\")\"x\" = \"b\"(\"ax\"), if left multiplication (by ring elements) is used for a right module.\nBasic examples of modules are ideals, including the ring itself.\nAlthough similarly defined, the theory of modules is much more complicated than that of vector space, mainly, because, unlike vector spaces, modules are not characterized (up to an isomorphism) by a single invariant (the dimension of a vector space). In particular, not all modules have a basis.\nThe axioms of modules imply that (\u22121)\"x\" = \u2212\"x\", where the first minus denotes the additive inverse in the ring and the second minus the additive inverse in the module. Using this and denoting repeated addition by a multiplication by a positive integer allows identifying abelian groups with modules over the ring of integers.\nAny ring homomorphism induces a structure of a module: if \"f\" : \"R\" \u2192 \"S\" is a ring homomorphism, then S is a left module over R by the multiplication: \"rs\" = \"f\"(\"r\")\"s\". If R is commutative or if \"f\"(\"R\") is contained in the center of S, the ring S is called a R-algebra. In particular, every ring is an algebra over the integers.\nConstructions.\nDirect product.\nLet R and S be rings. Then the product \"R\" \u00d7 \"S\" can be equipped with the following natural ring structure:\n formula_36\nfor all \"r\"1, \"r\"2 in R and \"s\"1, \"s\"2 in\u00a0S. The ring \"R\" \u00d7 \"S\" with the above operations of addition and multiplication and the multiplicative identity (1, 1) is called the direct product of R with\u00a0S. The same construction also works for an arbitrary family of rings: if Ri are rings indexed by a set I, then formula_37 is a ring with componentwise addition and multiplication.\nLet R be a commutative ring and formula_38 be ideals such that formula_39 whenever \"i\" \u2260 \"j\". Then the Chinese remainder theorem says there is a canonical ring isomorphism:\nformula_40\nA \"finite\" direct product may also be viewed as a direct sum of ideals. Namely, let formula_41 be rings, formula_42 the inclusions with the images formula_43 (in particular formula_43 are rings though not subrings). Then formula_43 are ideals of R and\nformula_46\nas a direct sum of abelian groups (because for abelian groups finite products are the same as direct sums). Clearly the direct sum of such ideals also defines a product of rings that is isomorphic to\u00a0R. Equivalently, the above can be done through central idempotents. Assume that R has the above decomposition. Then we can write\nformula_47\nBy the conditions on formula_48 one has that ei are central idempotents and \"eiej\" = 0, \"i\" \u2260 \"j\" (orthogonal). Again, one can reverse the construction. Namely, if one is given a partition of 1 in orthogonal central idempotents, then let formula_49 which are two-sided ideals. If each ei is not a sum of orthogonal central idempotents, then their direct sum is isomorphic to\u00a0R.\nAn important application of an infinite direct product is the construction of a projective limit of rings (see below). Another application is a restricted product of a family of rings (cf. adele ring).\nPolynomial ring.\nGiven a symbol t (called a variable) and a commutative ring\u00a0R, the set of polynomials\n formula_50\nforms a commutative ring with the usual addition and multiplication, containing R as a subring. It is called the polynomial ring over\u00a0R. More generally, the set formula_51 of all polynomials in variables formula_52 forms a commutative ring, containing formula_53 as subrings.\nIf R is an integral domain, then \"R\"[\"t\"] is also an integral domain; its field of fractions is the field of rational functions. If R is a Noetherian ring, then \"R\"[\"t\"] is a Noetherian ring. If R is a unique factorization domain, then \"R\"[\"t\"] is a unique factorization domain. Finally, R is a field if and only if \"R\"[\"t\"] is a principal ideal domain.\nLet formula_54 be commutative rings. Given an element x of\u00a0S, one can consider the ring homomorphism\n formula_55\n(that is, the substitution). If \"S\" = \"R\"[\"t\"] and \"x\" = \"t\", then \"f\"(\"t\") = \"f\". Because of this, the polynomial f is often also denoted by \"f\"(\"t\"). The image of the map &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is denoted by \"R\"[\"x\"]; it is the same thing as the subring of S generated by R and\u00a0x.\nExample: formula_56 denotes the image of the homomorphism\nformula_57\nIn other words, it is the subalgebra of \"k\"[\"t\"] generated by \"t\"2 and\u00a0\"t\"3.\nExample: let f be a polynomial in one variable, that is, an element in a polynomial ring R. Then \"f\"(\"x\" + \"h\") is an element in \"R\"[\"h\"] and \"f\"(\"x\" + \"h\") \u2013 \"f\"(\"x\") is divisible by h in that ring. The result of substituting zero to h in (\"f\"(\"x\" + \"h\") \u2013 \"f\"(\"x\")) / \"h\" is \"f' \"(\"x\"), the derivative of f at\u00a0x.\nThe substitution is a special case of the universal property of a polynomial ring. The property states: given a ring homomorphism formula_58 and an element x in S there exists a unique ring homomorphism formula_59 such that formula_60 and formula_61 restricts to \u03d5. For example, choosing a basis, a symmetric algebra satisfies the universal property and so is a polynomial ring.\nTo give an example, let S be the ring of all functions from R to itself; the addition and the multiplication are those of functions. Let x be the identity function. Each r in R defines a constant function, giving rise to the homomorphism \"R\" \u2192 \"S\". The universal property says that this map extends uniquely to\nformula_62\n(t maps to x) where formula_63 is the polynomial function defined by f. The resulting map is injective if and only if R is infinite.\nGiven a non-constant monic polynomial f in \"R\"[\"t\"], there exists a ring S containing R such that f is a product of linear factors in \"S\"[\"t\"].\nLet k be an algebraically closed field. The Hilbert's Nullstellensatz (theorem of zeros) states that there is a natural one-to-one correspondence between the set of all prime ideals in formula_64 and the set of closed subvarieties of kn. In particular, many local problems in algebraic geometry may be attacked through the study of the generators of an ideal in a polynomial ring. (cf. Gr\u00f6bner basis.)\nThere are some other related constructions. A formal power series ring formula_65 consists of formal power series\n formula_66\ntogether with multiplication and addition that mimic those for convergent series. It contains \"R\"[\"t\"] as a subring. A formal power series ring does not have the universal property of a polynomial ring; a series may not converge after a substitution. The important advantage of a formal power series ring over a polynomial ring is that it is local (in fact, complete).\nMatrix ring and endomorphism ring.\nLet R be a ring (not necessarily commutative). The set of all square matrices of size n with entries in R forms a ring with the entry-wise addition and the usual matrix multiplication. It is called the matrix ring and is denoted by M\"n\"(\"R\"). Given a right R-module U, the set of all R-linear maps from U to itself forms a ring with addition that is of function and multiplication that is of composition of functions; it is called the endomorphism ring of U and is denoted by End\"R\"(\"U\").\nAs in linear algebra, a matrix ring may be canonically interpreted as an endomorphism ring: formula_67 This is a special case of the following fact: If formula_68 is an R-linear map, then f may be written as a matrix with entries fij in \"S\" = End\"R\"(\"U\"), resulting in the ring isomorphism:\nformula_69\nAny ring homomorphism \"R\" \u2192 \"S\" induces M\"n\"(\"R\") \u2192 M\"n\"(\"S\").\nSchur's lemma says that if U is a simple right R-module, then End\"R\"(\"U\") is a division ring. If formula_70 is a direct sum of mi-copies of simple R-modules formula_71 then\nformula_72\nThe Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem states any semisimple ring (cf. below) is of this form.\nA ring R and the matrix ring M\"n\"(\"R\") over it are Morita equivalent: the category of right modules of R is equivalent to the category of right modules over M\"n\"(\"R\"). In particular, two-sided ideals in R correspond in one-to-one to two-sided ideals in M\"n\"(\"R\").\nLimits and colimits of rings.\nLet Ri be a sequence of rings such that Ri is a subring of \"R\"\"i\" + 1 for all i. Then the union (or filtered colimit) of Ri is the ring formula_73 defined as follows: it is the disjoint union of all Ri's modulo the equivalence relation \"x\" ~ \"y\" if and only if \"x\" = \"y\" in Ri for sufficiently large i.\nExamples of colimits:\nAny commutative ring is the colimit of finitely generated subrings.\nA projective limit (or a filtered limit) of rings is defined as follows. Suppose we are given a family of rings \"R\"\"i\", \"i\" running over positive integers, say, and ring homomorphisms \"R\"\"j\" \u2192 \"R\"\"i\", \"j\" \u2265 \"i\" such that \"R\"\"i\" \u2192 \"R\"\"i\" are all the identities and \"R\"\"k\" \u2192 \"R\"\"j\" \u2192 \"R\"\"i\" is \"R\"\"k\" \u2192 \"R\"\"i\" whenever \"k\" \u2265 \"j\" \u2265 \"i\". Then formula_79 is the subring of formula_80 consisting of (\"x\"\"n\") such that \"x\"\"j\" maps to \"x\"\"i\" under \"R\"\"j\" \u2192 \"R\"\"i\", \"j\" \u2265 \"i\".\nFor an example of a projective limit, see \"\".\nLocalization.\nThe localization generalizes the construction of the field of fractions of an integral domain to an arbitrary ring and modules. Given a (not necessarily commutative) ring R and a subset S of R, there exists a ring formula_81 together with the ring homomorphism formula_82 that \"inverts\" S; that is, the homomorphism maps elements in S to unit elements in formula_83 and, moreover, any ring homomorphism from R that \"inverts\" S uniquely factors through formula_84 The ring formula_85 is called the localization of R with respect to S. For example, if R is a commutative ring and f an element in R, then the localization formula_86 consists of elements of the form formula_87 (to be precise, formula_88)\nThe localization is frequently applied to a commutative ring R with respect to the complement of a prime ideal (or a union of prime ideals) in\u00a0R. In that case formula_89 one often writes formula_90 for formula_84 formula_90 is then a local ring with the maximal ideal formula_93 This is the reason for the terminology \"localization\". The field of fractions of an integral domain R is the localization of R at the prime ideal zero. If formula_94 is a prime ideal of a commutative ring\u00a0R, then the field of fractions of formula_95 is the same as the residue field of the local ring formula_90 and is denoted by formula_97\nIf M is a left R-module, then the localization of M with respect to S is given by a change of rings formula_98\nThe most important properties of localization are the following: when R is a commutative ring and S a multiplicatively closed subset\nIn category theory, a localization of a category amounts to making some morphisms isomorphisms. An element in a commutative ring R may be thought of as an endomorphism of any R-module. Thus, categorically, a localization of R with respect to a subset S of R is a functor from the category of R-modules to itself that sends elements of S viewed as endomorphisms to automorphisms and is universal with respect to this property. (Of course, R then maps to formula_85 and R-modules map to formula_85-modules.)\nCompletion.\nLet R be a commutative ring, and let I be an ideal of\u00a0R.\nThe completion of R at I is the projective limit formula_110 it is a commutative ring. The canonical homomorphisms from R to the quotients formula_111 induce a homomorphism formula_112 The latter homomorphism is injective if R is a Noetherian integral domain and I is a proper ideal, or if R is a Noetherian local ring with maximal ideal I, by Krull's intersection theorem. The construction is especially useful when I is a maximal ideal.\nThe basic example is the completion of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; at the principal ideal (\"p\") generated by a prime number p; it is called the ring of p-adic integers and is denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; The completion can in this case be constructed also from the p-adic absolute value on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; The p-adic absolute value on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a map formula_113 from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; given by formula_114 where formula_115 denotes the exponent of p in the prime factorization of a nonzero integer n into prime numbers (we also put formula_116 and formula_117). It defines a distance function on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the completion of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as a metric space is denoted by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; It is again a field since the field operations extend to the completion. The subring of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; consisting of elements x with is isomorphic to\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\nSimilarly, the formal power series ring \"R\"[{[\"t\"]}] is the completion of \"R\"[\"t\"] at (\"t\") (see also \"Hensel's lemma\")\nA complete ring has much simpler structure than a commutative ring. This owns to the Cohen structure theorem, which says, roughly, that a complete local ring tends to look like a formal power series ring or a quotient of it. On the other hand, the interaction between the integral closure and completion has been among the most important aspects that distinguish modern commutative ring theory from the classical one developed by the likes of Noether. Pathological examples found by Nagata led to the reexamination of the roles of Noetherian rings and motivated, among other things, the definition of excellent ring.\nRings with generators and relations.\nThe most general way to construct a ring is by specifying generators and relations. Let F be a free ring (that is, free algebra over the integers) with the set X of symbols, that is, F consists of polynomials with integral coefficients in noncommuting variables that are elements of X. A free ring satisfies the universal property: any function from the set X to a ring R factors through F so that \"F\" \u2192 \"R\" is the unique ring homomorphism. Just as in the group case, every ring can be represented as a quotient of a free ring.\nNow, we can impose relations among symbols in X by taking a quotient. Explicitly, if E is a subset of F, then the quotient ring of F by the ideal generated by E is called the ring with generators X and relations E. If we used a ring, say, A as a base ring instead of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; then the resulting ring will be over A. For example, if formula_118 then the resulting ring will be the usual polynomial ring with coefficients in A in variables that are elements of X (It is also the same thing as the symmetric algebra over A with symbols X.)\nIn the category-theoretic terms, the formation formula_119 is the left adjoint functor of the forgetful functor from the category of rings to Set (and it is often called the free ring functor.)\nLet \"A\", \"B\" be algebras over a commutative ring R. Then the tensor product of R-modules formula_120 is an R-algebra with multiplication characterized by formula_121 \nSpecial kinds of rings.\nDomains.\nA nonzero ring with no nonzero zero-divisors is called a domain. A commutative domain is called an integral domain. The most important integral domains are principal ideal domains, PIDs for short, and fields. A principal ideal domain is an integral domain in which every ideal is principal. An important class of integral domains that contain a PID is a unique factorization domain (UFD), an integral domain in which every nonunit element is a product of prime elements (an element is prime if it generates a prime ideal.) The fundamental question in algebraic number theory is on the extent to which the ring of (generalized) integers in a number field, where an \"ideal\" admits prime factorization, fails to be a PID.\nAmong theorems concerning a PID, the most important one is the structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain. The theorem may be illustrated by the following application to linear algebra. Let V be a finite-dimensional vector space over a field k and \"f\" : \"V\" \u2192 \"V\" a linear map with minimal polynomial q. Then, since \"k\"[\"t\"] is a unique factorization domain, q factors into powers of distinct irreducible polynomials (that is, prime elements):\nformula_122\nLetting formula_123 we make V a \"k\"[\"t\"]-module. The structure theorem then says V is a direct sum of cyclic modules, each of which is isomorphic to the module of the form formula_124 Now, if formula_125 then such a cyclic module (for pi) has a basis in which the restriction of f is represented by a Jordan matrix. Thus, if, say, k is algebraically closed, then all pi's are of the form \"t\" \u2013 \"\u03bbi\" and the above decomposition corresponds to the Jordan canonical form of f.\nIn algebraic geometry, UFDs arise because of smoothness. More precisely, a point in a variety (over a perfect field) is smooth if the local ring at the point is a regular local ring. A regular local ring is a UFD.\nThe following is a chain of class inclusions that describes the relationship between rings, domains and fields:\n rngs \u2283 rings \u2283 commutative\u00a0rings \u2283 integral\u00a0domains \u2283 integrally\u00a0closed\u00a0domains \u2283 GCD\u00a0domains \u2283 unique\u00a0factorization\u00a0domains \u2283 principal\u00a0ideal\u00a0domains \u2283 Euclidean\u00a0domains \u2283 fields \u2283 algebraically\u00a0closed fields\nDivision ring.\nA division ring is a ring such that every non-zero element is a unit. A commutative division ring is a field. A prominent example of a division ring that is not a field is the ring of quaternions. Any centralizer in a division ring is also a division ring. In particular, the center of a division ring is a field. It turned out that every \"finite\" domain (in particular finite division ring) is a field; in particular commutative (the Wedderburn's little theorem).\nEvery module over a division ring is a free module (has a basis); consequently, much of linear algebra can be carried out over a division ring instead of a field.\nThe study of conjugacy classes figures prominently in the classical theory of division rings; see, for example, the Cartan\u2013Brauer\u2013Hua theorem.\nA cyclic algebra, introduced by L. E. Dickson, is a generalization of a quaternion algebra.\nSemisimple rings.\nA \"semisimple module\" is a direct sum of simple modules. A \"semisimple ring\" is a ring that is semisimple as a left module (or right module) over itself.\nExamples.\nThe Weyl algebra over a field is a simple ring, but it is not semisimple. The same holds for a ring of differential operators in many variables.\nProperties.\nAny module over a semisimple ring is semisimple. (Proof: A free module over a semisimple ring is semisimple and any module is a quotient of a free module.)\nFor a ring R, the following are equivalent:\nSemisimplicity is closely related to separability. A unital associative algebra A over a field k is said to be separable if the base extension formula_127 is semisimple for every field extension \"F\" / \"k\". If A happens to be a field, then this is equivalent to the usual definition in field theory (cf. separable extension.)\nCentral simple algebra and Brauer group.\nFor a field k, a k-algebra is central if its center is k and is simple if it is a simple ring. Since the center of a simple k-algebra is a field, any simple k-algebra is a central simple algebra over its center. In this section, a central simple algebra is assumed to have finite dimension. Also, we mostly fix the base field; thus, an algebra refers to a k-algebra. The matrix ring of size n over a ring R will be denoted by \"R\"\"n\".\nThe Skolem\u2013Noether theorem states any automorphism of a central simple algebra is inner.\nTwo central simple algebras A and B are said to be \"similar\" if there are integers n and m such that formula_128 Since formula_129 the similarity is an equivalence relation. The similarity classes [\"A\"] with the multiplication formula_130 form an abelian group called the Brauer group of k and is denoted by Br(\"k\"). By the Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem, a central simple algebra is the matrix ring of a division ring; thus, each similarity class is represented by a unique division ring.\nFor example, Br(\"k\") is trivial if k is a finite field or an algebraically closed field (more generally quasi-algebraically closed field; cf. Tsen's theorem). formula_131 has order 2 (a special case of the theorem of Frobenius). Finally, if k is a nonarchimedean local field (for example, then formula_132 through the invariant map.\nNow, if F is a field extension of k, then the base extension formula_133 induces Br(\"k\") \u2192 Br(\"F\"). Its kernel is denoted by Br(\"F\" / \"k\"). It consists of [\"A\"] such that formula_127 is a matrix ring over F (that is, A is split by F.) If the extension is finite and Galois, then Br(\"F\" / \"k\") is canonically isomorphic to formula_135\nAzumaya algebras generalize the notion of central simple algebras to a commutative local ring.\nValuation ring.\nIf K is a field, a valuation v is a group homomorphism from the multiplicative group \"K\"\u2217 to a totally ordered abelian group G such that, for any \"f\", \"g\" in K with \"f\" + \"g\" nonzero, \"v\"(\"f\" + \"g\") \u2265 min{\"v\"(\"f\"), \"v\"(\"g\")}. The valuation ring of v is the subring of K consisting of zero and all nonzero f such that \"v\"(\"f\") \u2265 0.\nExamples:\nRings with extra structure.\nA ring may be viewed as an abelian group (by using the addition operation), with extra structure: namely, ring multiplication. In the same way, there are other mathematical objects which may be considered as rings with extra structure. For example:\n For example, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a \u03bb-ring with formula_142 the binomial coefficients. The notion plays a central rule in the algebraic approach to the Riemann\u2013Roch theorem.\nSome examples of the ubiquity of rings.\nMany different kinds of mathematical objects can be fruitfully analyzed in terms of some associated ring.\nCohomology ring of a topological space.\nTo any topological space X one can associate its integral cohomology ring\nformula_143\na graded ring. There are also homology groups formula_144 of a space, and indeed these were defined first, as a useful tool for distinguishing between certain pairs of topological spaces, like the spheres and tori, for which the methods of point-set topology are not well-suited. Cohomology groups were later defined in terms of homology groups in a way which is roughly analogous to the dual of a vector space. To know each individual integral homology group is essentially the same as knowing each individual integral cohomology group, because of the universal coefficient theorem. However, the advantage of the cohomology groups is that there is a natural product, which is analogous to the observation that one can multiply pointwise a k-multilinear form and an l-multilinear form to get a (\"k\" + \"l\")-multilinear form.\nThe ring structure in cohomology provides the foundation for characteristic classes of fiber bundles, intersection theory on manifolds and algebraic varieties, Schubert calculus and much more.\nBurnside ring of a group.\nTo any group is associated its Burnside ring which uses a ring to describe the various ways the group can act on a finite set. The Burnside ring's additive group is the free abelian group whose basis is the set of transitive actions of the group and whose addition is the disjoint union of the action. Expressing an action in terms of the basis is decomposing an action into its transitive constituents. The multiplication is easily expressed in terms of the representation ring: the multiplication in the Burnside ring is formed by writing the tensor product of two permutation modules as a permutation module. The ring structure allows a formal way of subtracting one action from another. Since the Burnside ring is contained as a finite index subring of the representation ring, one can pass easily from one to the other by extending the coefficients from integers to the rational numbers.\nRepresentation ring of a group ring.\nTo any group ring or Hopf algebra is associated its representation ring or \"Green ring\". The representation ring's additive group is the free abelian group whose basis are the indecomposable modules and whose addition corresponds to the direct sum. Expressing a module in terms of the basis is finding an indecomposable decomposition of the module. The multiplication is the tensor product. When the algebra is semisimple, the representation ring is just the character ring from character theory, which is more or less the Grothendieck group given a ring structure.\nFunction field of an irreducible algebraic variety.\nTo any irreducible algebraic variety is associated its function field. The points of an algebraic variety correspond to valuation rings contained in the function field and containing the coordinate ring. The study of algebraic geometry makes heavy use of commutative algebra to study geometric concepts in terms of ring-theoretic properties. Birational geometry studies maps between the subrings of the function field.\nFace ring of a simplicial complex.\nEvery simplicial complex has an associated face ring, also called its Stanley\u2013Reisner ring. This ring reflects many of the combinatorial properties of the simplicial complex, so it is of particular interest in algebraic combinatorics. In particular, the algebraic geometry of the Stanley\u2013Reisner ring was used to characterize the numbers of faces in each dimension of simplicial polytopes.\nCategory-theoretic description.\nEvery ring can be thought of as a monoid in Ab, the category of abelian groups (thought of as a monoidal category under the tensor product of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-modules). The monoid action of a ring R on an abelian group is simply an R-module. Essentially, an R-module is a generalization of the notion of a vector space \u2013 where rather than a vector space over a field, one has a \"vector space over a ring\".\nLet (\"A\", +) be an abelian group and let End(\"A\") be its endomorphism ring (see above). Note that, essentially, End(\"A\") is the set of all morphisms of A, where if f is in End(\"A\"), and g is in End(\"A\"), the following rules may be used to compute \"f\" + \"g\" and \"f\" \u22c5 \"g\":\n formula_145\nwhere + as in \"f\"(\"x\") + \"g\"(\"x\") is addition in A, and function composition is denoted from right to left. Therefore, associated to any abelian group, is a ring. Conversely, given any ring, (\"R\", +, \u22c5 ), (\"R\", +) is an abelian group. Furthermore, for every r in R, right (or left) multiplication by r gives rise to a morphism of (\"R\", +), by right (or left) distributivity. Let \"A\" = (\"R\", +). Consider those endomorphisms of A, that \"factor through\" right (or left) multiplication of R. In other words, let End\"R\"(\"A\") be the set of all morphisms m of A, having the property that \"m\"(\"r\" \u22c5 \"x\") = \"r\" \u22c5 \"m\"(\"x\"). It was seen that every r in R gives rise to a morphism of A: right multiplication by r. It is in fact true that this association of any element of R, to a morphism of A, as a function from R to End\"R\"(\"A\"), is an isomorphism of rings. In this sense, therefore, any ring can be viewed as the endomorphism ring of some abelian X-group (by X-group, it is meant a group with X being its set of operators). In essence, the most general form of a ring, is the endomorphism group of some abelian X-group.\nAny ring can be seen as a preadditive category with a single object. It is therefore natural to consider arbitrary preadditive categories to be generalizations of rings. And indeed, many definitions and theorems originally given for rings can be translated to this more general context. Additive functors between preadditive categories generalize the concept of ring homomorphism, and ideals in additive categories can be defined as sets of morphisms closed under addition and under composition with arbitrary morphisms.\nGeneralization.\nAlgebraists have defined structures more general than rings by weakening or dropping some of ring axioms.\nRng.\nA rng is the same as a ring, except that the existence of a multiplicative identity is not assumed.\nNonassociative ring.\nA nonassociative ring is an algebraic structure that satisfies all of the ring axioms except the associative property and the existence of a multiplicative identity. A notable example is a Lie algebra. There exists some structure theory for such algebras that generalizes the analogous results for Lie algebras and associative algebras.\nSemiring.\nA semiring (sometimes \"rig\") is obtained by weakening the assumption that (\"R\", +) is an abelian group to the assumption that (\"R\", +) is a commutative monoid, and adding the axiom that 0 \u22c5 \"a\" = \"a\" \u22c5 0 = 0 for all \"a\" in R (since it no longer follows from the other axioms).\nExamples:\nOther ring-like objects.\nRing object in a category.\nLet C be a category with finite products. Let pt denote a terminal object of C (an empty product). A ring object in C is an object R equipped with morphisms formula_147 (addition), formula_148 (multiplication), formula_149 (additive identity), formula_150 (additive inverse), and formula_151 (multiplicative identity) satisfying the usual ring axioms. Equivalently, a ring object is an object R equipped with a factorization of its functor of points formula_152 through the category of rings: formula_153\nRing scheme.\nIn algebraic geometry, a ring scheme over a base scheme S is a ring object in the category of S-schemes. One example is the ring scheme W\"n\" over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which for any commutative ring A returns the ring W\"n\"(\"A\") of p-isotypic Witt vectors of length n over A.\nRing spectrum.\nIn algebraic topology, a ring spectrum is a spectrum X together with a multiplication formula_154 and a unit map \"S\" \u2192 \"X\" from the sphere spectrum S, such that the ring axiom diagrams commute up to homotopy. In practice, it is common to define a ring spectrum as a monoid object in a good category of spectra such as the category of symmetric spectra.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecial types of rings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpecial references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48405", "revid": "51015252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48405", "title": "Caesar cipher", "text": "Simple and widely known encryption technique\nIn cryptography, a Caesar cipher, also known as Caesar's cipher, the shift cipher, Caesar's code, or Caesar shift, is one of the simplest and most widely known encryption techniques. It is a type of substitution cipher in which each letter in the plaintext is replaced by a letter some fixed number of positions down the alphabet. For example, with a left shift of 3, D would be replaced by A, E would become B, and so on. The method is named after Julius Caesar, who used it in his private correspondence.\nThe encryption step performed by a Caesar cipher is often incorporated as part of more complex schemes, such as the Vigen\u00e8re cipher, and still has modern application in the ROT13 system. As with all single-alphabet substitution ciphers, the Caesar cipher is easily broken and in modern practice offers essentially no communications security.\nExample.\nThe transformation can be represented by aligning two alphabets; the cipher is the plain alphabet rotated left or right by some number of positions. For instance, here is a Caesar cipher using a left rotation of three places, equivalent to a right shift of 23 (the shift parameter is used as the key):\nWhen encrypting, a person looks up each letter of the message in the \"plain\" line and writes down the corresponding letter in the \"cipher\" line.\n Plaintext: THE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS OVER THE LAZY DOG\n Ciphertext: QEB NRFZH YOLTK CLU GRJMP LSBO QEB IXWV ALD\nDeciphering is done in reverse, with a left shift of 3.\nThe encryption can also be represented using modular arithmetic by first transforming the letters into numbers, according to the scheme, A \u2192 0, B \u2192 1, ..., Z \u2192 25. Encryption of a letter \"x\" by a shift \"n\" can be described mathematically as,\n formula_1\nDecryption is performed similarly,\n formula_2\nThe replacement remains the same throughout the message, so the cipher is classed as a type of \"monoalphabetic substitution\", as opposed to \"polyalphabetic substitution\".\nHistory and usage.\nThe Caesar cipher is named after Julius Caesar, who, according to Suetonius, used it with a shift of three (A becoming D when encrypting, and D becoming A when decrypting) to protect messages of military significance. While Caesar's was the first recorded use of this scheme, other substitution ciphers are known to have been used earlier.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"If he had anything confidential to say, he wrote it in cipher, that is, by so changing the order of the letters of the alphabet, that not a word could be made out. If anyone wishes to decipher these, and get at their meaning, he must substitute the fourth letter of the alphabet, namely D, for A, and so with the others.\"\u2014\u200a\nHis nephew, Augustus, also used the cipher, but with a right shift of one, and it did not wrap around to the beginning of the alphabet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Whenever he wrote in cipher, he wrote B for A, C for B, and the rest of the letters on the same principle, using AA for Z.\"\u2014\u200a\nEvidence exists that Julius Caesar also used more complicated systems, and one writer, Aulus Gellius, refers to a (now lost) treatise on his ciphers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"There is even a rather ingeniously written treatise by the grammarian Probus concerning the secret meaning of letters in the composition of Caesar's epistles.\"\u2014\u200a\nIt is unknown how effective the Caesar cipher was at the time; there is no record at that time of any techniques for the solution of simple substitution ciphers. The earliest surviving records date to the 9th-century works of Al-Kindi in the Arab world with the discovery of frequency analysis.\nA piece of text encrypted in a Hebrew version of the Caesar cipher not to be confused with Atbash, is sometimes found on the back of Jewish mezuzah scrolls. When each letter is replaced with the letter before it in the Hebrew alphabet the text translates as \"YHWH, our God, YHWH\", a quotation from the main part of the scroll.\nIn the 19th century, the personal advertisements section in newspapers would sometimes be used to exchange messages encrypted using simple cipher schemes. David Kahn (1967) describes instances of lovers engaging in secret communications enciphered using the Caesar cipher in \"The Times\". Even as late as 1915, the Caesar cipher was in use: the Russian army employed it as a replacement for more complicated ciphers which had proved to be too difficult for their troops to master; German and Austrian cryptanalysts had little difficulty in decrypting their messages.\nCaesar ciphers can be found today in children's toys such as secret decoder rings. A Caesar shift of thirteen is also performed in the ROT13 algorithm, a simple method of obfuscating text widely found on Usenet and used to obscure text (such as joke punchlines and story spoilers), but not seriously used as a method of encryption.\nThe Vigen\u00e8re cipher uses a Caesar cipher with a different shift at each position in the text; the value of the shift is defined using a repeating keyword. If the keyword is as long as the message, is chosen at random, never becomes known to anyone else, and is never reused, this is the one-time pad cipher, proven unbreakable. However the problems involved in using a random key as long as the message make the one-time pad difficult to use in practice. Keywords shorter than the message (e.g., \"Complete Victory\" used by the Confederacy during the American Civil War), introduce a cyclic pattern that might be detected with a statistically advanced version of frequency analysis.\nIn April 2006, fugitive Mafia boss Bernardo Provenzano was captured in Sicily partly because some of his messages, clumsily written in a variation of the Caesar cipher, were broken. Provenzano's cipher used numbers, so that \"A\" would be written as \"4\", \"B\" as \"5\", and so on.\nIn 2011, Rajib Karim was convicted in the United Kingdom of \"terrorism offences\" after using the Caesar cipher to communicate with Bangladeshi Islamic activists discussing plots to blow up British Airways planes or disrupt their IT networks. Although the parties had access to far better encryption techniques (Karim himself used PGP for data storage on computer disks), they chose to use their own scheme (implemented in Microsoft Excel), rejecting a more sophisticated code program called Mujahedeen Secrets \"because 'kaffirs', or non-believers, know about it, so it must be less secure\".\nBreaking the cipher.\nThe Caesar cipher can be easily broken even in a ciphertext-only scenario. Since there are only a limited number of possible shifts (25 in English), an attacker can mount a brute force attack by deciphering the message, or part of it, using each possible shift. The correct description will be the one which makes sense as English text. An example is shown on the right for the ciphertext \"exxegoexsrgi\"; the candidate plaintext for shift four \"attackatonce\" is the only one which makes sense as English text. Another type of brute force attack is to write out the alphabet beneath each letter of the ciphertext, starting at that letter. Again the correct decryption is the one which makes sense as English text. This technique is sometimes known as \"completing the plain component\".\nAnother approach is to match up the frequency distribution of the letters. By graphing the frequencies of letters in the ciphertext, and by knowing the expected distribution of those letters in the original language of the plaintext, a human can easily spot the value of the shift by looking at the displacement of particular features of the graph. This is known as frequency analysis. For example, in the English language the plaintext frequencies of the letters E, T, (usually most frequent), and Q, Z (typically least frequent) are particularly distinctive. Computers can automate this process by assessing the similarity between the observed frequency distribution and the expected distribution. This can be achieved, for instance, through the utilization of the chi-squared statistic or by minimizing the sum of squared errors between the observed and known language distributions.\nThe unicity distance for the Caesar cipher is about 2, meaning that on average at least two characters of ciphertext are required to determine the key. In rare cases more text may be needed. For example, the words \"river\" and \"arena\" can be converted to each other with a Caesar shift, which means they can produce the same ciphertext with different shifts. However, in practice the key can almost certainly be found with at least 6 characters of ciphertext.\nWith the Caesar cipher, encrypting a text multiple times provides no additional security. This is because two encryptions of, say, shift \"A\" and shift \"B\", will be equivalent to a single encryption with shift \"A\" + \"B\". In mathematical terms, the set of encryption operations under each possible key forms a group under composition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48406", "revid": "1104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48406", "title": "Factor of production", "text": ""}
{"id": "48407", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48407", "title": "367", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 367 (CCCLXVII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lupicinus and Iovanus (or, less frequently, year 1120 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 367 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48408", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48408", "title": "368", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 368 (CCCLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Valens (or, less frequently, year 1121 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 368 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48409", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48409", "title": "369", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 369 (CCCLXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Galates and Victor (or, less frequently, year 1122 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 369 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48410", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48410", "title": "AD 365", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 365 (CCCLXV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in the West as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Valens (or, less frequently, year 1118 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 365 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48411", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48411", "title": "364", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 364 (CCCLXIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Varronianus (or, less frequently, year 1117 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 364 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nScience.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48412", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48412", "title": "363", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 363 (CCCLXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Iulianus and Sallustius (or, less frequently, year 1116 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 363 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48413", "revid": "50881758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48413", "title": "362", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 362 (CCCLXII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Mamertinus and Nevitta (or, less frequently, year 1115 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 362 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48414", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48414", "title": "361", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 361 (CCCLXI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Taurus and Florentius (or, less frequently, year 1114 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 361 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48415", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48415", "title": "AD 360", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 360 (CCCLX) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Iulianus (or, less frequently, year 1113 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 360 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48416", "revid": "19469161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48416", "title": "Gottlob Frege", "text": "German philosopher, logician, and mathematician (1848\u20131925)\nFriedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege (; ; 8 November 1848 \u2013 26 July 1925) was a German philosopher, logician, and mathematician. He was a mathematics professor at the University of Jena, and is understood by many to be the father of analytic philosophy, concentrating on the philosophy of language, logic, and mathematics. Though he was largely ignored during his lifetime, Giuseppe Peano (1858\u20131932), Bertrand Russell (1872\u20131970), and, to some extent, Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889\u20131951) introduced his work to later generations of philosophers. Frege is widely considered to be one of the greatest logicians since Aristotle, and one of the most profound philosophers of mathematics ever.\nHis contributions include the development of modern logic in the \"Begriffsschrift\" and work in the foundations of mathematics. His book the \"Foundations of Arithmetic\" is the seminal text of the logicist project, and is cited by Michael Dummett as where to pinpoint the linguistic turn. His philosophical papers \"On Sense and Reference\" and \"The Thought\" are also widely cited. The former argues for two different types of meaning and descriptivism. In \"Foundations\" and \"The Thought\", Frege argues for Platonism against psychologism or formalism, concerning numbers and propositions respectively. \nLife.\nChildhood (1848\u20131869).\nFrege was born in 1848 in Wismar, Mecklenburg-Schwerin (today part of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern in northern Germany). His father, Carl (Karl) Alexander Frege (1809\u20131866), was the co-founder and headmaster of a girls' high school until his death. After Carl's death, the school was led by Frege's mother Auguste Wilhelmine Sophie Frege (n\u00e9e Bialloblotzky, 12 January 1815 \u2013 14 October 1898); her mother was Auguste Amalia Maria Ballhorn, a descendant of Philipp Melanchthon and her father was Johann Heinrich Siegfried Bialloblotzky. Frege was a Lutheran.\nIn childhood, Frege encountered philosophies that would guide his future scientific career. For example, his father wrote a textbook on the German language for children aged 9\u201313, entitled (2nd ed., Wismar 1850; 3rd ed., Wismar and Ludwigslust: Hinstorff, 1862) (Help book for teaching German to children from 9 to 13 years old), the first section of which dealt with the structure and logic of language.\nFrege studied at Gro\u00dfe Stadtschule Wismar and graduated in 1869. Teacher of mathematics and natural science Gustav Adolf Leo Sachse (1843\u20131909), who was also a poet, played an important role in determining Frege's future scientific career, encouraging him to continue his studies at his own alma mater the University of Jena.\nStudies at University (1869\u20131874).\nFrege matriculated at the University of Jena in the spring of 1869 as a citizen of the North German Confederation. In the four semesters of his studies, he attended approximately twenty courses of lectures, most of them on mathematics and physics. His most important teacher was Ernst Karl Abbe (1840\u20131905; physicist, mathematician, and inventor). Abbe gave lectures on theory of gravity, galvanism and electrodynamics, complex analysis theory of functions of a complex variable, applications of physics, selected divisions of mechanics, and mechanics of solids. Abbe was more than a teacher to Frege: he was a trusted friend, and, as director of the optical manufacturer Carl Zeiss AG, he was in a position to advance Frege's career. After Frege's graduation, they came into closer correspondence.\nHis other notable university teachers were Christian Philipp Karl Snell (1806\u20131886; subjects: use of infinitesimal analysis in geometry, analytic geometry of planes, analytical mechanics, optics, physical foundations of mechanics); Hermann Karl Julius Traugott Schaeffer (1824\u20131900; analytic geometry, applied physics, algebraic analysis, on the telegraph and other electronic machines); and the philosopher Kuno Fischer (1824\u20131907; Kantian and critical philosophy).\nStarting in 1871, Frege continued his studies in G\u00f6ttingen, the leading university in mathematics in German-speaking territories, where he attended the lectures of Alfred Clebsch (1833\u20131872; analytic geometry), Ernst Christian Julius Schering (1824\u20131897; function theory), Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1804\u20131891; physical studies, applied physics), Eduard Riecke (1845\u20131915; theory of electricity), and Hermann Lotze (1817\u20131881; philosophy of religion). Many of the philosophical doctrines of the mature Frege have parallels in Lotze; it has been the subject of scholarly debate whether or not there was a direct influence on Frege's views arising from his attending Lotze's lectures.\nIn 1873, Frege attained his doctorate under Schering.\nFrege married Margarete Katharina Sophia Anna Lieseberg (15 February 1856 \u2013 25 June 1904) on 14 March 1887. The couple had at least two children, who died when young. Years later, they adopted a son, Alfred. Little else is known about Frege's family life, however.\nWork as a logician.\nThough his education and early mathematical work focused primarily on geometry, Frege's work soon turned to logic. His marked a turning point in the history of logic. The \"Begriffsschrift\" broke new ground, including a rigorous treatment of the ideas of functions and variables. Frege's goal was to show that mathematics grows out of logic, and in so doing, he devised techniques that separated him from the Aristotelian syllogistic but took him rather close to Stoic propositional logic.\n In effect, Frege invented axiomatic predicate logic, in large part thanks to his invention of quantified variables, which eventually became ubiquitous in mathematics and logic, and which solved the problem of multiple generality. Previous logic had dealt with the logical constants \"and\", \"or\", \"if... then...\", \"not\", and \"some\" and \"all\", but iterations of these operations, especially \"some\" and \"all\", were little understood: even the distinction between a sentence like \"every boy loves some girl\" and \"some girl is loved by every boy\" could be represented only very artificially, whereas Frege's formalism had no difficulty expressing the different readings of \"every boy loves some girl who loves some boy who loves some girl\" and similar sentences, in complete parallel with his treatment of, say, \"every boy is foolish\".\nA frequently noted example is that Aristotle's logic is unable to represent mathematical statements like Euclid's theorem, a fundamental statement of number theory that there are an infinite number of prime numbers. Frege's \"conceptual notation\", however, can represent such inferences. The analysis of logical concepts and the machinery of formalization that is essential to \"Principia Mathematica\" (3 vols., 1910\u20131913, by Bertrand Russell, 1872\u20131970, and Alfred North Whitehead, 1861\u20131947), to Russell's theory of descriptions, to Kurt G\u00f6del's (1906\u20131978) incompleteness theorems, and to Alfred Tarski's (1901\u20131983) theory of truth, is ultimately due to Frege.\nOne of Frege's stated purposes was to isolate genuinely logical principles of inference, so that in the proper representation of mathematical proof, one would at no point appeal to \"intuition\". If there was an intuitive element, it was to be isolated and represented separately as an axiom: from there on, the proof was to be purely logical and without gaps. Having exhibited this possibility, Frege's larger purpose was to defend the view that arithmetic is a branch of logic, a view known as logicism: unlike geometry, arithmetic was to be shown to have no basis in \"intuition\", and no need for non-logical axioms. Already in the 1879 \"Begriffsschrift\" important preliminary theorems, for example, a generalized form of law of trichotomy, were derived within what Frege understood to be pure logic.\nThis idea was formulated in non-symbolic terms in his \"The Foundations of Arithmetic\" (\"Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik\", 1884). Later, in his \"Basic Laws of Arithmetic\" (\"Grundgesetze der Arithmetik\", vol. 1, 1893; vol. 2, 1903; vol. 2 was published at his own expense), Frege attempted to derive, by use of his symbolism, all of the laws of arithmetic from axioms he asserted as logical. Most of these axioms were carried over from his \"Begriffsschrift\", though not without some significant changes. The one truly new principle was one he called the Basic Law V: the \"value-range\" of the function \"f\"(\"x\") is the same as the \"value-range\" of the function \"g\"(\"x\") if and only if \u2200\"x\"[\"f\"(\"x\") = \"g\"(\"x\")].\nThe crucial case of the law may be formulated in modern notation as follows. Let {\"x\"|\"Fx\"} denote the extension of the predicate \"Fx\", that is, the set of all Fs, and similarly for \"Gx\". Then Basic Law V says that the predicates \"Fx\" and \"Gx\" have the same extension if and only if \u2200x[\"Fx\" \u2194 \"Gx\"]. The set of Fs is the same as the set of Gs just in case every F is a G and every G is an F. (The case is special because what is here being called the extension of a predicate, or a set, is only one type of \"value-range\" of a function.)\nIn a famous episode, Bertrand Russell wrote to Frege, just as Vol. 2 of the \"Grundgesetze\" was about to go to press in 1903, showing that Russell's paradox could be derived from Frege's Basic Law V. It is easy to define the relation of \"membership\" of a set or extension in Frege's system; Russell then drew attention to \"the set of things \"x\" that are such that \"x\" is not a member of \"x\"\". The system of the \"Grundgesetze\" entails that the set thus characterised \"both\" is \"and\" is not a member of itself, and is thus inconsistent. Frege wrote a hasty, last-minute Appendix to Vol. 2, deriving the contradiction and proposing to eliminate it by modifying Basic Law V. Frege opened the Appendix with the exceptionally honest comment: \"Hardly anything more unfortunate can befall a scientific writer than to have one of the foundations of his edifice shaken after the work is finished. This was the position I was placed in by a letter of Mr. Bertrand Russell, just when the printing of this volume was nearing its completion.\" (This letter and Frege's reply are translated in Jean van Heijenoort 1967.)\nFrege's proposed remedy was subsequently shown to imply that there is but one object in the universe of discourse, and hence is worthless (indeed, this would make for a contradiction in Frege's system if he had axiomatized the idea, fundamental to his discussion, that the True and the False are distinct objects; see, for example, Dummett 1973), but recent work has shown that much of the program of the \"Grundgesetze\" might be salvaged in other ways:\nFrege's work in logic had little international attention until 1903, when Russell wrote an appendix to \"The Principles of Mathematics\" stating his differences with Frege. The diagrammatic notation that Frege used had no antecedents (and has had no imitators since). Moreover, until Russell and Whitehead's \"Principia Mathematica\" (3 vols.) appeared in 1910\u20131913, the dominant approach to mathematical logic was still that of George Boole (1815\u20131864) and his intellectual descendants, especially Ernst Schr\u00f6der (1841\u20131902). Frege's logical ideas nevertheless spread through the writings of his student Rudolf Carnap (1891\u20131970) and other admirers, particularly Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889\u20131951).\nPhilosopher.\nFrege is one of the founders of analytic philosophy, whose work on logic and language gave rise to the linguistic turn in philosophy. His contributions to the philosophy of language include:\nAs a philosopher of mathematics, Frege attacked the psychologistic appeal to mental explanations of the content of judgment of the meaning of sentences. His original purpose was very far from answering general questions about meaning; instead, he devised his logic to explore the foundations of arithmetic, undertaking to answer questions such as \"What is a number?\" or \"What objects do number-words ('one', 'two', etc.) refer to?\" But in pursuing these matters, he eventually found himself analysing and explaining what meaning is, and thus came to several conclusions that proved highly consequential for the subsequent course of analytic philosophy and the philosophy of language.\nSense and reference.\nFrege's 1892 paper, \"On Sense and Reference\" (\"\u00dcber Sinn und Bedeutung\"), introduced his influential distinction between \"sense\" (\"Sinn\") and \"reference\" (\"Bedeutung\", which has also been translated as \"meaning\", or \"denotation\"). While conventional accounts of meaning took expressions to have just one feature (reference), Frege introduced the view that expressions have two different aspects of significance: their sense and their reference.\n\"Reference\" (or \"Bedeutung\") applied to proper names, where a given expression (say the expression \"Tom\") simply refers to the entity bearing the name (the person named Tom). Frege also held that propositions had a referential relationship with their truth-value (in other words, a statement \"refers\" to the truth-value it takes). By contrast, the \"sense\" (or \"Sinn\") associated with a complete sentence is the thought it expresses. The sense of an expression is said to be the \"mode of presentation\" of the item referred to, and there can be multiple modes of representation for the same referent.\nThe distinction can be illustrated thus: In their ordinary uses, the name \"Charles Philip Arthur George Mountbatten-Windsor\", which for logical purposes is an unanalysable whole, and the functional expression \"the King of the United Kingdom\", which contains the significant parts \"the King of \u03be\" and \"United Kingdom\", have the same \"referent\", namely, the person best known as King Charles III. But the \"sense\" of the word \"United Kingdom\" is a part of the sense of the latter expression, but no part of the sense of the \"full name\" of King Charles.\nThese distinctions were disputed by Bertrand Russell, especially in his paper \"On Denoting\"; the controversy has continued into the present, fueled especially by Saul Kripke's famous lectures \"Naming and Necessity\".\nPolitical views and antisemitism.\nIn 1954 Dummett studied the transcriptions of Frege's \"Nachlass\" that had survived the Second World War, including fragments of a 1924 diary. Dummett, an anti-racism activist as well as a Frege scholar, later recounted how he had been deeply shocked to discover from this that the man he had \"revered\" as \"an absolutely rational man\" was, at the end of his life, a 'virulent anti-Semite' of \"extreme right-wing opinions\".\nThe diary fragments were finally published in 1994. with an English translation following in 1996. Written in the last year of his life, at the age of 76, it contains opposition to the parliamentary system, universal suffrage, democrats, socialism and liberals, and hostility toward Catholics and the French as well as the Jews. Frege thought Jews ought at least be deprived of certain political rights. And, although he had held friendly relations with Jews in real life (among his students was Gershom Scholem who greatly valued his teaching), Frege wrote that it would be best if Jews would \"get lost, or better would like to disappear from Germany.\" \nFrege confided \"that he had once thought of himself as a liberal and was an admirer of Bismarck\", but then sympathized with General Ludendorff. In an entry dated 5 May 1924 Frege expressed some agreement with an article published in Houston Stewart Chamberlain's \"Deutschlands Erneuerung\" which praised Adolf Hitler. Some interpretations have been written about that time.\nPersonality.\nFrege was described by his students as a highly introverted person, seldom entering into dialogues with others and mostly facing the blackboard while lecturing. He was, however, known to occasionally show wit and even bitter sarcasm during his classes.\nImportant works.\nLogic, foundation of arithmetic.\n\"Begriffsschrift: eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens\" (1879), Halle an der Saale: Verlag von Louis Nebert (http://).\n\"Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: Eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung \u00fcber den Begriff der Zahl\" (1884), Breslau: Verlag von Wilhelm Koebner (https://).\n\"Grundgesetze der Arithmetik\", Band I (1893); Band II (1903), Jena: Verlag Hermann Pohle (https://.\nPhilosophical studies.\n\"Function and Concept\" (1891)\n\"On Sense and Reference\" (1892)\n\"Concept and Object\" (1892)\n\"What is a Function?\" (1904)\n\"Logical Investigations\" (1918\u20131923). Frege intended that the following three papers be published together in a book titled \"Logische Untersuchungen\" (\"Logical Investigations\"). Though the German book never appeared, the papers were published together in \"Logische Untersuchungen\", ed. G. Patzig, Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht, 1966, and English translations appeared together in \"Logical Investigations\", ed. Peter Geach, Blackwell, 1975.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nSecondary.\nPhilosophy\nLogic and mathematics\nHistorical context"}
{"id": "48417", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48417", "title": "359", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 359 (CCCLIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Eusebius and Hypatius (or, less frequently, year 1112 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 359 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48418", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48418", "title": "Lucas Cranach", "text": ""}
{"id": "48419", "revid": "14604687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48419", "title": "Mary of Teck", "text": "Queen of the United Kingdom from 1910 to 1936\nMary of Teck (Victoria Mary Augusta Louise Olga Pauline Claudine Agnes; 26 May 1867\u00a0\u2013 24 March 1953) was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Empress of India, from 6 May 1910 until 20 January 1936 as the wife of King George V.\nBorn and raised in London, Mary was the daughter of Francis, Duke of Teck, a German nobleman, and Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge, a granddaughter of King George III. She was informally known as \"May\", after the month of her birth. At the age of 24, she was betrothed to her second cousin once removed Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale, who was second in line to the throne. Six weeks after the announcement of the engagement, he died unexpectedly during a pandemic. The following year, she became engaged to Albert Victor's only surviving brother, George, who subsequently became king. Before her husband's accession, she was successively Duchess of York, Duchess of Cornwall, and Princess of Wales.\nAs queen consort from 1910, Mary supported her husband through the First World War, his ill health, and major political changes arising from the aftermath of the war. After George's death in 1936, she became queen mother when her eldest son, Edward VIII, ascended the throne. To her dismay, he abdicated later the same year in order to marry twice-divorced American socialite Wallis Simpson. She supported her second son, George VI, until his death in 1952. Mary died the following year, ten weeks before her granddaughter Elizabeth II was crowned. An ocean liner, a battlecruiser, and a university were named in her honour.\nEarly life.\nVictoria Mary of Teck was born on 26 May 1867 at Kensington Palace, London, in the room where Queen Victoria, her first cousin once removed, had been born 48 years and two days earlier. Queen Victoria came to visit the baby, writing that she was \"a very fine one, with pretty little features and a quantity of hair\".\nHer father was Francis, Duke of Teck, the son of Duke Alexander of W\u00fcrttemberg by his morganatic wife, Countess Claudine Rh\u00e9dey von Kis-Rh\u00e9de. Her mother was Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge, a granddaughter of King George III and the third child and younger daughter of Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge, and Princess Augusta of Hesse-Kassel. The infant was baptised in the Chapel Royal of Kensington Palace on 27 July 1867 by Charles Thomas Longley, Archbishop of Canterbury. From an early age, she was known to her family, friends and the public by the diminutive name of \"May\", after her birth month.\nMay's upbringing was \"merry but fairly strict\". She was the eldest of four children and the only daughter. She \"learned to exercise her native discretion, firmness, and tact\" by resolving her three younger brothers' petty boyhood squabbles. They played with their cousins, the children of the Prince of Wales, who were similar in age. She grew up at Kensington Palace and White Lodge, in Richmond Park, which was granted by Queen Victoria on permanent loan. She was educated at home by her mother and governess (as were her brothers until they were sent to boarding schools). The Duchess of Teck spent an unusually long time with her children for a lady of her time and class, and enlisted May in various charitable endeavours, which included visiting the tenements of the poor.\nAlthough May was a great-grandchild of George III, she was only a minor member of the British royal family. Her father, the Duke of Teck, had no inheritance or wealth and carried the lower royal style of Serene Highness because his parents' marriage was morganatic. The Duchess of Teck was granted a parliamentary annuity of \u00a35,000 and received about \u00a34,000 a year from her mother, the Duchess of Cambridge, but she donated lavishly to dozens of charities. Prince Francis was deeply in debt and moved his family abroad with a small staff in 1883, in order to economise. They travelled throughout Europe, visiting their various relations. For a time they stayed in Florence, Italy, where May enjoyed visiting the art galleries, churches and museums. She was fluent in English, German, and French.\nIn 1885, the family returned to London and lived for some time in Chester Square. May was close to her mother and acted as an unofficial secretary, helping to organise parties and social events. She was also close to her aunt Augusta, Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and wrote to her every week. During the First World War, the Crown Princess of Sweden helped pass letters from May to Augusta, who lived in enemy territory in Germany until her death in 1916.\nEngagements.\nIn 1886, May was a debutante in her first season and was introduced at court. Her status as the only unmarried British princess who was not descended from Queen Victoria made her a suitable candidate for the royal family's most eligible bachelor, Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale, her second cousin once removed and the eldest son of the Prince of Wales.\nOn 3 December 1891 at Luton Hoo, then the country residence of Danish Ambassador Christian Frederick de Falbe, Albert Victor proposed marriage to May and she accepted. The choice of May as bride for the Duke owed much to Queen Victoria's fondness for her, as well as to her strong character and sense of duty. However, Albert Victor died six weeks later, in a recurrence of the worldwide 1889\u20131890 pandemic.\nAlbert Victor's brother, Prince George, Duke of York, now second in line to the throne, evidently became close to May during their shared period of mourning, and Queen Victoria still thought of her as a suitable candidate to marry a future king. The public was also anxious that the Duke of York should marry and settle the succession. In May 1893, George proposed, and May accepted. They were soon deeply in love, and their marriage was a success. George wrote to May every day they were apart and, unlike his father, never took a mistress.\nDuchess of York.\nMary married Prince George, Duke of York, in London on 6 July 1893 at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace. The couple lived in York Cottage on the Sandringham Estate in Norfolk, and in apartments in St James's Palace. York Cottage was a modest house for royalty, but it was a favourite of George, who liked a relatively simple life. They had six children: Edward, Albert, Mary, Henry, George, and John.\nThe children were put into the care of a nanny, as was usual in upper-class families at the time. The first nanny was dismissed for insolence and the second for abusing the children. This second woman, anxious to suggest that the children preferred her to anyone else, would pinch Edward and Albert whenever they were about to be presented to their parents so that they would start crying and be speedily returned to her. On discovery, she was replaced by her effective and much-loved assistant, Charlotte Bill.\nSometimes, Mary and George appear to have been distant parents. At first, they failed to notice the nanny's abuse of their sons Edward and Albert, and their youngest son, John, was housed in a private farm on the Sandringham Estate, in Charlotte Bill's care, perhaps to hide his epilepsy from the public. Despite Mary's austere public image and her strait-laced private life, she was a caring mother and comforted her children when they suffered from her husband's strict discipline.\nEdward wrote fondly of his mother in his memoirs: \"Her soft voice, her cultivated mind, the cosy room overflowing with personal treasures were all inseparable ingredients of the happiness associated with this last hour of a child's day\u00a0... Such was my mother's pride in her children that everything that happened to each one was of the utmost importance to her. With the birth of each new child, Mama started an album in which she painstakingly recorded each progressive stage of our childhood\". He expressed a less charitable view, however, in private letters to his wife after his mother's death: \"My sadness was mixed with incredulity that any mother could have been so hard and cruel towards her eldest son for so many years and yet so demanding at the end without relenting a scrap. I'm afraid the fluids in her veins have always been as icy cold as they are now in death.\"\nThe Duke and Duchess of York carried out a variety of public duties. In 1897, Mary became the patron of the London Needlework Guild in succession to her mother. The guild, initially established as The London Guild in 1882, was renamed several times and was named after Mary between 1914 and 2010. Samples of her own embroidery range from chair seats to tea cosies.\nOn 22 January 1901, Queen Victoria died, and Mary's father-in-law ascended the throne as Edward VII. For most of the rest of that year, George and Mary were known as the \"Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York\". For eight months they toured the British Empire, visiting Gibraltar, Malta, Egypt, Ceylon, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, Mauritius, South Africa and Canada. No royal had undertaken such an ambitious tour before. She broke down in tears at the thought of leaving her children, who were to be left in the care of their grandparents, for such a long time.\nPrincess of Wales.\nOn 9 November 1901, nine days after arriving back in Britain and on the King's 60th birthday, George was created Prince of Wales. The family moved their London residence from St James's Palace to Marlborough House. As Princess of Wales, Mary accompanied her husband on trips to Austria-Hungary and W\u00fcrttemberg in 1904. The following year, she gave birth to her last child, John. It was a difficult labour, and although she recovered quickly, her newborn son developed respiratory problems.\nFrom October 1905 the Prince and Princess of Wales undertook another eight-month tour, this time of India, and the children were once again left in the care of their grandparents. They passed through Egypt both ways and on the way back stopped in Greece. The tour was almost immediately followed by a trip to Spain for the wedding of King Alfonso XIII to Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, at which the bride and groom narrowly avoided assassination. Only a week after returning to Britain, Mary and George went to Norway for the coronation of George's brother-in-law and sister, King Haakon VII and Queen Maud.\nQueen and empress consort.\nOn 6 May 1910, Edward VII died. Mary's husband ascended the throne and she became queen consort. When her husband asked her to drop one of her two official names, Victoria Mary, she chose to be called Mary, preferring not to be known by the same style as her husband's grandmother, Queen Victoria. She was the first British queen consort born in Britain since Catherine Parr assumed the title in July 1543. Mary was crowned alongside her husband at a coronation on 22 June 1911 in Westminster Abbey. Later in the year, the King and Queen travelled to India for the Delhi Durbar held on 12 December 1911, and toured the sub-continent as Emperor and Empress of India, returning to Britain in February.\nThe beginning of Mary's period as consort brought her into conflict with her mother-in-law, Queen Alexandra. Although the two were on friendly terms, Alexandra could be stubborn; she demanded precedence over Mary at the funeral of Edward VII, was slow in leaving Buckingham Palace, and kept some of the royal jewels that should have been passed to the new queen.\nDuring the First World War, Queen Mary instituted an austerity drive at the palace, where she rationed food, and visited wounded and dying servicemen in hospital, which caused her great emotional strain. After three years of war against Germany, and with anti-German feeling in Britain running high, the Russian imperial family, which had been deposed by a revolutionary government, was refused asylum. News of the Tsar's abdication provided a boost to those in Britain who wished to replace their own monarchy with a republic. The war ended in 1918 with the defeat of Germany and the abdication and exile of the Kaiser, her husband's cousin.\nTwo months after the end of the war, Prince John died at the age of thirteen. Queen Mary described her shock and sorrow in her diary and letters, extracts of which were published after her death: \"our poor darling little Johnnie had passed away suddenly\u00a0... The first break in the family circle is hard to bear but people have been so kind &amp; sympathetic &amp; this has helped us [the King and me] much.\"\nThe Queen's staunch support of her husband continued during the later half of his reign. She advised him on speeches and used her extensive knowledge of history and royalty to advise him on matters affecting his position. He appreciated her discretion, intelligence, and judgement. She maintained an air of self-assured calm throughout all her public engagements in the years after the war, a period marked by civil unrest over social conditions, Irish independence, and Indian nationalism.\nIn the late 1920s, George became increasingly ill with lung problems, exacerbated by his heavy smoking. Mary paid particular attention to his care. During his illness in 1928, one of his doctors, Sir Farquhar Buzzard, was asked who had saved the King's life. He replied, \"The Queen\". In 1935, George and Mary celebrated their silver jubilee, with celebrations taking place throughout the British Empire. In his jubilee speech, George paid public tribute to his wife, having told his speechwriter, \"Put that paragraph at the very end. I cannot trust myself to speak of the Queen when I think of all I owe her.\"\nQueen mother.\nGeorge V died on 20 January 1936, after his physician, Lord Dawson of Penn, gave him an injection of morphine and cocaine that may have hastened his death. Mary's eldest son ascended the throne as Edward VIII. She was then to be known as \"Her Majesty Queen Mary\".\nWithin the year, Edward's intention to marry his twice-divorced American mistress, Wallis Simpson, led to his abdication. Mary disapproved of divorce as it was contrary to the teaching of the Anglican Church, and thought Simpson wholly unsuitable to be the wife of a king. After receiving advice from British prime minister Stanley Baldwin, as well as the Dominion governments, that he could not remain king and marry Simpson, Edward abdicated.\nThough loyal and supportive of her son, Mary could not comprehend why Edward would neglect his royal duties in favour of his personal feelings. Simpson had been presented formally to both King George V and Queen Mary at court, but Mary later refused to meet her either in public or privately. She saw it as her duty to provide moral support for her second son, the reserved Prince Albert, Duke of York. Albert ascended the throne on Edward's abdication, taking the name George VI. When Mary attended the coronation of George VI, she became the first British dowager queen to do so. Edward's abdication did not lessen her love for him, but she never wavered in her disapproval of his actions.\nAfter her reign, Mary returned to live in her main London residence Marlborough House, where she had also lived as Princess of Wales. Mary took an interest in the upbringing of her granddaughters Elizabeth and Margaret. She took them on various excursions in London, to art galleries and museums. (The princesses' own parents thought it unnecessary for them to be burdened with a demanding educational regime.) In May 1939, Mary was in a car crash: her car was overturned but she escaped with minor injuries and bruises.\nDuring the Second World War, George VI wished his mother to be evacuated from London. Although she was reluctant, she decided to live at Badminton House, Gloucestershire, with her niece Mary, Duchess of Beaufort, the daughter of her brother Adolphus. Her personal belongings were transported from London in seventy pieces of luggage. Her household, which comprised fifty-five servants, occupied most of the house, except for the Duke and Duchess's private suites, until after the war. The only people to complain about the arrangements were the royal servants, who found the house too small.\nFrom Badminton, in support of the war effort, Queen Mary visited troops and factories and directed the gathering of scrap materials. She was known to offer lifts to soldiers she spotted on the roads. In 1942, her son George, Duke of Kent, was killed in an air crash while on active service. Mary finally returned to Marlborough House in June 1945, after the war in Europe had resulted in the defeat of Nazi Germany.\nMary was an eager collector of objects and pictures with a royal connection. She paid above-market estimates when purchasing jewels from the estate of Dowager Empress Marie of Russia and paid almost three times the estimate when buying the family's Cambridge Emeralds from Lady Kilmorey, the mistress of her late brother Prince Francis. After Francis's death, Mary had intervened to ensure his will was sealed by a court to cover his affair with Kilmorey. This set a precedent for royal wills to be sealed. In 1924, the famous architect Sir Edwin Lutyens created Queen Mary's Dolls' House for her collection of miniature pieces. She has sometimes been criticised for her aggressive acquisition of \"objets d'art\" for the Royal Collection. On several occasions, she would express to hosts, or others, that she admired something they had in their possession, in the expectation that the owner would be willing to donate it.\nMary's extensive knowledge of, and research into, the Royal Collection helped in identifying artefacts and artwork that had gone astray over the years. The royal family had lent out many pieces over previous generations. Once she had identified unreturned items through old inventories, she would write to the holders, requesting that they be returned. In addition to being an avid collector, Mary also commissioned many gifts of jewellery, including rings which she presented to her ladies-in-waiting on the occasion of their engagements.\nFinal year and death.\nIn 1952, George VI died, the third of Mary's children to predecease her; her eldest granddaughter, Princess Elizabeth, ascended the throne as Queen Elizabeth II. The death of a third child profoundly affected her. Mary remarked to Princess Marie Louise: \"I have lost three sons through death, but I have never been privileged to be there to say a last farewell to them.\"\nOn the accession of Elizabeth II, there was some dispute regarding the dynasty to which descendants of Elizabeth and her husband Phillip would belong. Mary expressed to Prime Minister Winston Churchill her aversion to the idea of the House of Mountbatten succeeding the House of Windsor as the royal dynasty.\nMary died in her sleep at Marlborough House at 10.20 pm on 24 March 1953, aged 85, ten weeks before her granddaughter's coronation. She had let it be known that should she die, the coronation should not be postponed. Her remains lay in state at Westminster Hall, where large numbers of mourners filed past her coffin. She is buried beside her husband in the nave of St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.\nMary's will was sealed in London after her death. Her estate was valued at \u00a3406,407 (or \u00a3 in 2023 when adjusted for inflation).\nLegacy.\nActresses who have portrayed Queen Mary include Dame Flora Robson (in \"A King's Story\", 1965), Dame Wendy Hiller (on the London stage in \"Crown Matrimonial\", 1972), Greer Garson (in the television production of \"Crown Matrimonial\", 1974), Judy Loe (in \"Edward the Seventh\", 1975), Dame Peggy Ashcroft (in \"Edward &amp; Mrs. Simpson\", 1978), Phyllis Calvert (in \"The Woman He Loved\", 1988), Gaye Brown (in \"All the King's Men\", 1999), Miranda Richardson (in \"The Lost Prince\", 2003), Margaret Tyzack (in \"Wallis &amp; Edward\", 2005), Claire Bloom (in \"The King's Speech\", 2010), Judy Parfitt (in \"W.E.\", 2011), Valerie Dane (in the television version of \"Downton Abbey\", 2013), Dame Eileen Atkins (in \"Bertie and Elizabeth\", 2002 and \"The Crown\", 2016), Geraldine James (in the film version of \"Downton Abbey\", 2019), and Candida Benson (in \"The Crown\", 2022).\nMany places and buildings have been named in Mary's honour, including Queen Mary University of London, Queen Mary Reservoir in Surrey, and Queen Mary College in Lahore.\nSir Henry \"Chips\" Channon wrote that Queen Mary was \"above politics\u00a0... magnificent, humorous, worldly, in fact nearly sublime, though cold and hard. But what a grand Queen.\"\nTitles, honours and arms.\nQueen Mary's arms were the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom impaled with her family arms \u2013 the arms of her grandfather Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge, in the 1st and 4th quarters, and the arms of her father, Prince Francis, Duke of Teck, in the 2nd and 3rd quarters. The shield is surmounted by the imperial crown, and supported by the crowned lion of England and \"a stag Proper\" as in the arms of W\u00fcrttemberg.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48420", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48420", "title": "358", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 358 (CCCLVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Datianus and Cerealis (or, less frequently, year 1111 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 358 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48421", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48421", "title": "357", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 357 (CCCLVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Iulianus (or, less frequently, year 1110 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 357 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48422", "revid": "1318951989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48422", "title": "Jos\u00e9 Saramago", "text": "Portuguese novelist (1922\u20132010)\nJos\u00e9 de Sousa Saramago (; 16 November 1922 \u2013 18 June 2010) was a Portuguese writer. He was the recipient of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Literature for his \"parables sustained by imagination, compassion and irony [with which he] continually enables us once again to apprehend an elusory reality.\" His works, some of which can be seen as allegories, commonly present subversive perspectives on historic events, emphasizing the theopoetic human factor. In 2003 Harold Bloom described Saramago as \"the most gifted novelist alive in the world today\" and in 2010 said he considers Saramago to be \"a permanent part of the Western canon\", while James Wood praises \"the distinctive tone to his fiction because he narrates his novels as if he were someone both wise and ignorant.\"\nMore than two million copies of Saramago's books have been sold in Portugal alone and his work has been translated into 25 languages. A proponent of libertarian communism, Saramago criticized institutions such as the Catholic Church, the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. An atheist, he defended love as an instrument to improve the human condition. In 1992, the Government of Portugal under Prime Minister An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva ordered the removal of one of his works, \"The Gospel According to Jesus Christ\", from the Aristeion Prize's shortlist, claiming the work was religiously offensive. Feeling disheartened by what he perceived as political censorship of his work, Saramago went into exile on the Spanish island of Lanzarote, where he lived alongside his Spanish wife Pilar del R\u00edo until his death in 2010.\nSaramago was a founding member of the National Front for the Defense of Culture in Lisbon in 1992.\nBiography.\nEarly and middle life.\nSaramago was born in 1922 into a family of very poor landless peasants in Azinhaga, Portugal, a small village in Ribatejo Province, some one hundred kilometres northeast of Lisbon. His parents were Jos\u00e9 de Sousa and Maria da Piedade. \"Saramago\", the Portuguese word for \"Raphanus raphanistrum\" (wild radish), was the insulting nickname given to his father, and was accidentally incorporated into his name by the village clerk upon registration of his birth.\nIn 1924, Saramago's family moved to Lisbon, where his father started working as a policeman. A few months after the family moved to the capital, his brother Francisco, older by two years, died. He spent vacations with his grandparents in Azinhaga. When his grandfather suffered a stroke and was to be taken to Lisbon for treatment, Saramago recalled, \"He went into the yard of his house, where there were a few trees, fig-trees, olive trees. And he went one by one, embracing the trees and crying, saying goodbye to them because he knew he would not return. To see this, to live this, if that doesn't mark you for the rest of your life,\" Saramago said, \"you have no feeling.\" Although Saramago was a good pupil, his parents were unable to afford to keep him in grammar school, and instead moved him to a technical school at age 12.\nAfter graduating as a lathe operator, he worked as a car mechanic for two years. At this time Saramago had acquired a taste for reading and started to frequent a public library in Lisbon in his free time. He married Ilda Reis, a typist and later artist, in 1944 (they divorced in 1970). Their only daughter, Violante, was born in 1947. By this time he was working in the Social Welfare Service as a civil servant. Later he worked at the publishing company \"Est\u00fadios Cor\" as an editor and translator, and then as a journalist. By that time, in 1968, he met and became lover of writer Isabel da N\u00f3brega, the longtime partner of author and critic Jo\u00e3o Gaspar Sim\u00f5es. N\u00f3brega became Saramago's devoted literary mentor, to whom he would later dedicate \"Memorial do Convento\" and \"O Ano da Morte de Ricardo Reis\".\nAfter the democratic revolution in 1974, on 9 April 1975, during the rule of Vasco Gon\u00e7alves, Saramago became the assistant director of the newspaper \"Di\u00e1rio de Not\u00edcias\", and the editorial line became clearly pro-communist. A group of 30 journalists \u2013 half the editorial staff \u2013 handed the board a petition calling for the editorial line to be revised and for it to be published. A plenary was called and, following an angry intervention by Saramago, 24 journalists were expelled, accused of being right-wingers. After the Coup of 25 November 1975 that put an end to the communist PREC, Saramago, in turn, was fired from the newspaper.\nSaramago published his first novel, \"Land of Sin\", in 1947. It remained his only published literary work until a poetry book, \"Possible Poems\", was published in 1966. It was followed by another book of poems, \"Probably Joy\", in 1970, three collections of newspaper articles in 1971, 1973 and 1974 respectively, and the long poem \"The Year of 1993\" in 1975. A collection of political writing was published in 1976 under the title \"Notes\". After his dismissal from \"Di\u00e1rio de Not\u00edcias\" in 1975, Saramago embraced his writing more seriously and in following years he published a series of important works including \"Manual de Pintura e Caligrafia\" (1977), \"Objecto Quase\" (1978), \"Levantado do Ch\u00e3o\" (1980) and \"Viagem a Portugal\" (1981).\nLater life and international acclaim.\nSaramago did not achieve widespread recognition and acclaim until he was sixty, with the publication of his fourth novel, \"Memorial do Convento\" (1982). A baroque tale set during the Inquisition in 18th-century Lisbon, it tells of the love between a maimed soldier and a young clairvoyant, and of a renegade priest's heretical dream of flight. The novel's translation in 1988 as \"Baltasar and Blimunda\" (by Giovanni Pontiero) brought Saramago to the attention of an international readership. This novel won the Portuguese PEN Club Award.\nFollowing acclaimed novels such as \"The Year of the Death of Ricardo Reis\" and \"The History of the Siege of Lisbon\", Saramago was hailed by literary critics for his complex yet elegant style, his broad range of references and his wit.\nFor the former novel, Saramago received the British Independent Foreign Fiction Prize. The multilayered \"The History of the Siege of Lisbon\" deals with the uncertainty of historical events and includes the story of a middle-aged isolated proofreader who falls in love with his boss. Saramago acknowledged that there is a lot of himself in the protagonist of the novel, and dedicated the novel to his wife.\nIn 1986 Saramago met a Spanish intellectual and journalist, Pilar del R\u00edo, 27 years his junior, and he promptly ended his relationship with Isabel N\u00f3brega, his partner since 1968. They married in 1988 and remained together until his death in June 2010. Del R\u00edo is the official translator of Saramago's books into Spanish.\nSaramago joined the Portuguese Communist Party in 1969 and remained a member until the end of his life. He was a self-confessed pessimist. His views aroused considerable controversy in Portugal, especially after the publication of \"The Gospel According to Jesus Christ\". Members of the country's Catholic community were outraged by Saramago's representation of Jesus and particularly God as fallible, even cruel human beings. Portugal's social-democratic government, led by then-prime minister An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva, did not allow Saramago's work to compete for the Aristeion Prize, arguing that it offended the Catholic community. As a result, Saramago and his wife moved to Lanzarote, an island in the Canaries.\nIn 1998 Saramago was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature with the prize motivation: \"who with parables sustained by imagination, compassion and irony continually enables us once again to apprehend an elusory reality.\"\nSaramago was expected to speak as the guest of honour at the European Writers' Parliament in 2010, which was convened in Istanbul following a proposal he had co-authored. However, Saramago died before the event took place.\nDeath and funeral.\nSaramago suffered from leukemia. He died on 18 June 2010, aged 87, having spent the last few years of his life in Lanzarote, Spain. His family said that he had breakfast and chatted with his wife and translator Pilar del R\u00edo on Friday morning, after which he started feeling unwell and died. \"The Guardian\" described him as \"the finest Portuguese writer of his generation\", while Fernanda Eberstadt of \"The New York Times\" said he was \"known almost as much for his unfaltering Communism as for his fiction\".\nSaramago's English language translator, Margaret Jull Costa, paid tribute to his \"wonderful imagination,\" calling him \"the greatest contemporary Portuguese writer\". Saramago continued his writing until his death. His most recent publication, \"Claraboia\", was published posthumously in 2011. Saramago had suffered from pneumonia a year before his death. Assuming a full recovery, he was set to appear at the Edinburgh International Book Festival in August 2010.\nPortugal declared two days of mourning. There were tributes from senior international politicians: Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva (Brazil), Bernard Kouchner (France) and Jos\u00e9 Luis Rodr\u00edguez Zapatero (Spain), while Cuba's Ra\u00fal and Fidel Castro sent flowers.\nSaramago's funeral was held in Lisbon on 20 June 2010, in the presence of more than 20,000 people, many of whom had travelled hundreds of kilometres, but also notably in the absence of right-wing President of Portugal An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva, who was holidaying in the Azores as the ceremony took place. Cavaco Silva, the Prime Minister who removed Saramago's work from the shortlist of the Aristeion Prize, said he did not attend Saramago's funeral because he \"had never had the privilege to know him\". In an official press release, Cavaco Silva claimed having paid homage to the literary work of Saramago. Mourners, who questioned Cavaco Silva's absence in the presence of reporters, held copies of the red carnation, symbolic of Portugal's democratic revolution. Saramago's cremation took place in Lisbon, and his ashes were buried on the anniversary of his death, 18 June 2011, underneath a hundred-year-old olive tree on the square in front of the Jos\u00e9 Saramago Foundation (Casa dos Bicos).\nLost novel.\nThe Jos\u00e9 Saramago Foundation announced in October 2011 the publication of a \"lost novel\" published as \"Skylight\" (\"Claraboia\" in Portuguese). It was written in the 1950s and remained in the archive of a publisher to whom the manuscript had been sent. Saramago remained silent about the work up to his death. The book has been translated into several languages.\nStyle and themes.\nSaramago's experimental style often features long sentences, at times more than a page long. He used full stops sparingly, choosing instead a loose flow of clauses joined by commas. Many of his paragraphs extend for pages without pausing for dialogue (which Saramago chooses not to delimit by quotation marks); when the speaker changes, Saramago capitalizes the first letter of the new speaker's clause. His works often refer to his other works. In his novel \"Blindness\", Saramago completely abandons the use of proper nouns, instead referring to characters simply by some unique characteristic, an example of his style reflecting the recurring themes of identity and meaning found throughout his work.\nSaramago's novels often deal with fantastic scenarios. In his 1986 novel \"The Stone Raft\", the Iberian Peninsula breaks off from the rest of Europe and sails around the Atlantic Ocean. In his 1995 novel \"Blindness\", an entire unnamed country is stricken with a mysterious plague of \"white blindness\". In his 1984 novel \"The Year of the Death of Ricardo Reis\" (which won the PEN Award and the \"Independent\" Foreign Fiction Award), Fernando Pessoa's heteronym survives for a year after the poet himself dies. Additionally, his novel \"Death with Interruptions\" (also translated as \"Death at Intervals\") takes place in a country in which, suddenly, nobody dies, and concerns, in part, the spiritual and political implications of the event, although the book ultimately moves from a synoptic to a more personal perspective.\nSaramago addresses serious matters with empathy for the human condition and for the isolation of contemporary urban life. His characters struggle with their need to connect with one another, form relations and bond as a community, and also with their need for individuality, and to find meaning and dignity outside of political and economic structures.\nWhen asked to describe his daily writing routine in 2009, Saramago responded, \"I write two pages. And then I read and read and read.\"\nPersonal life.\nSaramago was an atheist. The Catholic Church criticised him on numerous occasions due to the content of some of his novels, mainly \"The Gospel According to Jesus Christ\" and \"Cain\", in which he uses satire and biblical quotations to present the figure of God in a comical way. \nThe Portuguese government lambasted his 1991 novel \"O Evangelho Segundo Jesus Cristo\" (\"The Gospel according to Jesus Christ\") and struck the writer's name from nominees for the European Literature Prize, saying the atheist work offended Portuguese Catholic convictions.\nThe book portrays a Christ who, subject to human desires, lives with Mary Magdalene and tries to back out of the crucifixion. Following the Swedish Academy's decision to present Saramago with the Nobel Prize in Literature, the Vatican questioned the decision on political grounds, though gave no comment on the aesthetic or literary components of Saramago's work. Saramago responded: \"The Vatican is easily scandalized, especially by people from outside. They should just focus on their prayers and leave people in peace. I respect those who believe, but I have no respect for the institution.\"\nSaramago was a member of the Communist Party of Portugal, and in his late years defined himself as a proponent of libertarian communism. \nHe ran in the 1989 Lisbon local election as part of the \"Coalition For Lisbon,\" and was elected alderman presiding officer of the Municipal Assembly of Lisbon. Saramago was also a candidate of the Democratic Unity Coalition in all elections of the European Parliament from 1989 to 2009, though he ran for positions of which it was thought he had no possibility of winning. He was a critic of European Union (EU) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) policies.\nMany of his novels are acknowledged as political satire of a subtle kind. It is in \"The Notebook\" that Saramago makes his political convictions most clear. The book, written from a Marxist perspective, is a collection of blog entries from September 2008 to August 2009. According to \"The Independent\", \"Saramago aims to cut through the web of 'organized lies' surrounding humanity, and to convince readers by delivering his opinions in a relentless series of unadorned, knock-down prose blows.\" His political engagement has led to comparisons with George Orwell.\nWhen speaking to \"The Observer\" in 2006, Saramago said he \"believe[s] that we all have some influence, not because of the fact that one is an artist, but because we are citizens. As citizens, we all have an obligation to intervene and become involved, it's the citizen who changes things. I can't imagine myself outside any kind of social or political involvement.\"\nDuring the Second Intifada, while visiting Ramallah in March 2002, Saramago said that \"what is happening in Palestine is a crime we can put on the same plane as what happened at Auschwitz ... A sense of impunity characterises the Israeli people and its army. They have turned into rentiers of the Holocaust.\" In an essay he wrote expanding on his views, Saramago wrote of Jews: \"educated and trained in the idea that any suffering that has been inflicted . . . on everyone else . . . will always be inferior to that which they themselves suffered in the Holocaust, the Jews endlessly scratch their own wound to keep it bleeding, to make it incurable, and they show it to the world as if it were a banner.\" Critics of these statements charged that they were antisemitic. Six months later, Saramago clarified. \"To have said that Israel's action is to be condemned, that war crimes are being perpetrated \u2013 really the Israelis are used to that. It doesn't bother them. But there are certain words they can't stand. And to say 'Auschwitz' there ... note well, I didn't say that Ramallah was the same as Auschwitz, that would be stupid. What I said was that the spirit of Auschwitz was present in Ramallah. We were eight writers. They all made condemning statements, Wole Soyinka, Breyten Breytenbach, Vincenzo Consolo and others. But the Israelis weren't bothered about those. It was the fact that I put my finger in the Auschwitz wound that made them jump.\"\nDuring the 2006 Lebanon War, Saramago joined Tariq Ali, John Berger, Noam Chomsky, and others in condemning what they characterized as \"a long-term military, economic and geographic practice whose political aim is nothing less than the liquidation of the Palestinian nation\".\nHe was also a supporter of Iberian Federalism. In a 2008 press conference for the filming of \"Blindness\" he asked, in reference to the Great Recession, \"Where was all that money poured on markets? Very tight and well kept; then suddenly it appears to save what? lives? no, banks.\" He added, \"Marx was never so right as now\", and predicted \"the worst is still to come.\"\nAwards and accolades.\nNobel Prize in Literature.\nThe Swedish Academy selected Saramago as the 1998 recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature. The announcement came when he was about to fly out of Germany after the Frankfurt Book Fair, and caught both him and his editor by surprise. The Nobel committee praised his \"parables sustained by imagination, compassion and irony\", and his \"modern skepticism\" about official truths. The choice of Saramago was generally well received internationally, but was heavily criticized by the bourgeois press in his home country and also by the Vatican City who questioned the decision on political grounds and called it \"yet another ideologically slanted award.\"\nAt the award ceremony in Stockholm on 10 December 1998, Kjell Espmark of the Swedish Academy described Saramago's writing as: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;literature characterised at one and the same time by sagacious reflection and by insight into the limitations of sagacity, by the fantastic and by precise realism, by cautious empathy and by critical acuity, by warmth and by irony. This is Saramago\u2019s unique amalgam.\nIn 2024, Saramago's widow Pilar del Rio and the Jos\u00e9 Saramago Foundation donated a number of Saramago's belongings to the Nobel Prize Museum in Stockholm, including a pair of his glasses, a stone found in Lanzarote he kept at his home, and a manuscript written in his youth.\nThe Jos\u00e9 Saramago Foundation.\nThe Jos\u00e9 Saramago Foundation was founded by Jos\u00e9 Saramago in June 2007, with the aim to defend and spread the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the promotion of culture in Portugal just like in all the countries, and protection of the environment. The Jos\u00e9 Saramago Foundation is located in the historic Casa dos Bicos in the city of Lisbon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48423", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48423", "title": "Sir Francis Bacon", "text": ""}
{"id": "48425", "revid": "1267529595", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48425", "title": "354", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 354 (CCCLIV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Constantius (or, less frequently, year 1107 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 354 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48426", "revid": "38763527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48426", "title": "353", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 353 (CCCLIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Magnentius and Decentius (or, less frequently, year 1106 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 353 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48427", "revid": "36476755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48427", "title": "352", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 352 (CCCLII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Decentius and Paulus (or, less frequently, year 1105 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 352 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48428", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48428", "title": "351", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 351 (CCCLI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Magnentius and Gaiso (or, less frequently, year 1104 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 351 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48429", "revid": "615903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48429", "title": "350", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 350 (CCCL) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sergius and Nigrinianus (or, less frequently, year 1103 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 350 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48430", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48430", "title": "349", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 349 (CCCXLIX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Limenius and Catullinus (or, less frequently, year 1102 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 349 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48431", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48431", "title": "348", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 348 (CCCXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Philippus and Salia (or, less frequently, year 1101 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 348 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48432", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48432", "title": "347", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 347 (CCCXLVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rufinus and Eusebius (or, less frequently, year 1100 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 347 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48433", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48433", "title": "346", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 346 (CCCXLVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Claudius (or, less frequently, year 1099 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 346 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48434", "revid": "1287502922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48434", "title": "345", "text": "Calendar year\nThe Year 345 (CCCXLV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Amantius and Albinus (or, less frequently, year 1098 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 345 for this year has been used ever since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nItaly.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48435", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48435", "title": "344", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 344 (CCCXLIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Leontius and Bonosus (or, less frequently, year 1097 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 344 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48436", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48436", "title": "Louis VII of France", "text": "King of the Franks from 1137 to 1180\nLouis VII (1120 \u2013 18 September 1180), called the Younger or the Young () to differentiate him from his father Louis VI, was King of France from 1137 to 1180. His first marriage was to Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine, one of the wealthiest and most powerful women in western Europe. The marriage temporarily extended the Capetian lands to the Pyrenees.\nLouis was the second son of Louis VI of France and Adelaide of Maurienne, and was initially prepared for a career in the Church. Following the death of his older brother, Philip, in 1131, Louis became heir apparent to the French throne and was crowned as his father's co-ruler. In 1137, he married Eleanor of Aquitaine and shortly thereafter became sole king following his father's death. During his march, as part of the Second Crusade in 1147, Louis stayed at the court of King G\u00e9za II of Hungary on the way to Jerusalem. During his stay in the Holy Land, disagreements with Eleanor led to a deterioration in their marriage. She persuaded him to stay in Antioch but Louis instead wanted to fulfil his vows of pilgrimage to Jerusalem. He was later involved in the failed siege of Damascus and eventually returned to France in 1149. Louis' reign saw the founding of the University of Paris. He and his counsellor, Abbot Suger, pushed for greater centralisation of the state and favoured the development of French Gothic architecture, notably the construction of Notre-Dame de Paris.\nLouis' marriage to Eleanor was annulled in 1152 after the couple had produced two daughters, but no male heir. Immediately after their annulment, Eleanor married Henry, Duke of Normandy and Count of Anjou, to whom she conveyed Aquitaine. Following Henry's accession as King Henry II of England, these territories formed the Angevin Empire. Later, Louis supported Henry and Eleanor's sons in their rebellion against their father to foment further disunity in the Angevin realms. His second marriage to Constance of Castile also produced two daughters, but his third wife, Adela of Champagne, gave birth to a son, Philip Augustus, in 1165. Louis died in 1180 and was succeeded by his son, Philip II.\nEarly life and education.\nLouis was born in 1120, the second son of Louis VI of France and Adelaide of Maurienne. The early education of the young Louis anticipated an ecclesiastical career. As a result, he became well learned and exceptionally devout, but his life course changed decisively after the accidental death of his older brother Philip in 1131, when Louis unexpectedly became the heir to the throne of France. In October 1131, his father had him anointed and crowned by Pope Innocent II in Reims Cathedral. He spent much of his youth in Saint-Denis, where he built a friendship with the abbot Suger, an advisor to his father who also served Louis during his early years as king.\nEarly reign.\nFollowing the death of Duke William X of Aquitaine, Louis VI moved quickly to have his son married to Eleanor of Aquitaine (who had inherited William's territory) on 25 July 1137. In this way, Louis VI sought to add the large, sprawling territory of the duchy of Aquitaine to his family's holdings in France. On 1 August 1137, shortly after the marriage, Louis VI died, and Louis became king. The pairing of the monkish Louis and the high-spirited Eleanor was doomed to failure; she reportedly once declared that she had thought to marry a king, only to find she had married a monk. There was a marked difference between the frosty, reserved culture of the northern court in the \u00cele-de-France, where Louis had been raised, and the rich, free-wheeling court life of the Aquitaine with which Eleanor was familiar. Louis and Eleanor had two daughters, Marie and Alix.\nIn the first part of his reign, Louis was vigorous and zealous in the exercise of his prerogatives. His accession was marked by no disturbances other than uprisings by the burgesses of Orl\u00e9ans and Poitiers, who wished to organise communes. He soon came into violent conflict with Pope Innocent II, however, when the archbishopric of Bourges became vacant. The king supported the chancellor Cadurc as a candidate to fill the vacancy against the pope's nominee Pierre de la Chatre, swearing upon relics that so long as he lived, Pierre should never enter Bourges. The pope thus imposed an interdict upon the king.\nLouis then became involved in a war with Theobald II of Champagne by permitting Raoul I of Vermandois, the seneschal of France, to repudiate his wife, Theobald II's sister, and to marry Petronilla of Aquitaine, sister of the queen of France. As a result, Champagne decided to side with the pope in the dispute over Bourges. The war lasted two years (1142\u201344) and ended with the occupation of Champagne by the royal army. Louis was personally involved in the assault and burning of the town of Vitry-en-Perthois. At least 1,500 people who had sought refuge in the church died in the flames. Condemned by the ecclesiastical authorities, Louis removed his armies from Champagne and returned them to Theobald. He accepted Pierre de la Chatre as archbishop of Bourges and shunned Raoul and Petronilla. Desiring to atone for his sins, he declared his intention of mounting a crusade on Christmas Day 1145 at Bourges. Bernard of Clairvaux assured its popularity by his preaching at Vezelay on Easter 1146.\nIn the meantime, Geoffrey V, Count of Anjou, completed his conquest of Normandy in 1144. In exchange for being recognised as Duke of Normandy by Louis, Geoffrey surrendered half of the county of Vexin\u2014a region vital to Norman security\u2014to Louis. Considered a clever move by Louis at the time, it would later prove yet another step towards Angevin rule.\nIn June 1147, in fulfillment of his vow to mount the Second Crusade, Louis and his queen set out from the Basilica of Saint-Denis, first stopping in Metz on the overland route to Syria. Soon they arrived in the Kingdom of Hungary, where they were welcomed by the king G\u00e9za II of Hungary, who was already waiting with King Conrad III of Germany. Due to his good relationships with Louis, G\u00e9za II asked the French king to be his son Stephen's godfather. Relations between the kingdoms of France and Hungary remained cordial long after this time: decades later, Louis's daughter Margaret was taken as wife by G\u00e9za's son B\u00e9la III of Hungary.\nAfter receiving provisions from G\u00e9za, the army continued its march to Constantinople. After meeting with Manuel and receiving some supplies, the French crusaders moved to join up with Conrad's army. Louis conferred with Conrad and decided to wait for the Germans to reorganize before joining him at Lopadium. Louis set out on what he assumed would be simpler paths into Philadelphia. Concerned about the winter shortage of supplies in hostile, Seljuk-held central Anatolia, Louis and Conrad made the decision to alter their journey by 11 November. After a month of travel Louis' army arrived at Ephesus. He chose, despite warning from Byzantine messengers, to march inland towards the Maender valley. Just beyond Laodicea, at Honaz, the French army was ambushed by Turks. In the resulting Battle of Mount Cadmus, the Turks first bombarded the French with arrows and heavy stones, then swarmed down from the mountains and massacred them. The historian Odo of Deuil gives this account:\nDuring the fighting the King Louis lost his small and famous royal guard, but he remained in good heart and nimbly and courageously scaled the side of the mountain by gripping the tree roots [...] The enemy climbed after him, hoping to capture him, and the enemy in the distance continued to fire arrows at him. But God willed that his cuirass should protect him from the arrows, and to prevent himself from being captured he defended the crag with his bloody sword, cutting off many heads and hands.\nAfter this battle, Louis refused to travel by land any further and boarded ships at Antalya. He finally reached Antioch in March 1148. His queen Eleanor supported her uncle, Raymond of Poitiers, and prevailed upon Louis to help Antioch against Aleppo. But Louis' interest lay in Jerusalem, and so he slipped out of Antioch in secret and went to Jerusalem. He united with King Conrad III of Germany and King Baldwin III of Jerusalem to lay siege to Damascus; this ended in disaster and the campaign was abandoned after just four days. Louis decided to leave the Holy Land, despite the protests of Eleanor, who still wanted to help her doomed uncle Raymond, after Easter of 1149. Departing from Acre, he returned to France via Italy, and after visiting Roger II of Sicily and Pope Eugene III, crossed the Alps and reached Paris in November.\nA shift in the status quo.\nThe expedition to the Holy Land came at a great cost to the royal treasury and military. It also precipitated a conflict with Eleanor that led to the annulment of their marriage. Perhaps the marriage to Eleanor might have continued if the royal couple had produced a male heir, but this had not occurred. The Council of Beaugency found an exit clause, declaring that Louis and Eleanor were too closely related for their marriage to be legal, thus the marriage was annulled on 21 March 1152. The pretext of kinship was the basis for annulment, but in fact, it owed more to the state of hostility between Louis and Eleanor, with a decreasing likelihood that their marriage would produce a male heir to the throne of France. On 18 May 1152, Eleanor married the Count of Anjou, the future King Henry II of England. She gave him the duchy of Aquitaine and bore him three daughters and five sons. Louis led an ineffective war against Henry for having married without the authorisation of his suzerain. The result was a humiliation for the enemies of Henry and Eleanor, who saw their troops routed, their lands ravaged, and their property stolen. Louis reacted by coming down with a fever and returned to the \u00cele-de-France.\nIn 1154, Louis married Constance of Castile, daughter of King Alfonso VII of Castile. She also failed to supply him with a son and heir, bearing only two daughters, Margaret and Alys. By 1157, Henry II of England began to believe that Louis might never produce a male heir, and that the succession of France would consequently be left in question. Determined to secure a claim for his family, he sent his chancellor, Thomas Becket, to press for a marriage between Margaret and Henry's heir, Henry the Young King. Louis agreed to this proposal, and by the Treaty of Gisors (1158) betrothed the young pair, giving as a dowry the Norman city of Gisors and the surrounding county of Vexin.\nLouis was devastated when Constance died in childbirth on 4 October 1160. As he was desperate for a son, he married Adela of Champagne just five weeks later. To counterbalance the advantage this would give the king of France, Henry II had the marriage of their children (Henry \"the Young King\" and Margaret) celebrated at once. Louis understood the danger of the growing Angevin power; however, through indecision and a lack of fiscal and military resources in comparison to Henry II, he failed to oppose Angevin hegemony effectively. One of his few successes was a trip to Toulouse in 1159 to aid Raymond V, Count of Toulouse, who had been attacked by Henry II: Louis entered into the city with a small escort, claiming to be visiting his sister, the countess. Henry declared that he could not attack the city while his liege lord was inside, and went home. In 1169, Louis was petitioned by the bishop of Le Puy to stop the Viscount of Polignac from attacking travelers through Auvergne. The viscount was besieged by Louis at Nonette and the county was turned into a pr\u00e9v\u00f4t.\nDiplomacy.\nLouis' reign saw Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I press his claims to Arles, in southeastern France. When a papal schism broke out in 1159, Louis took the side of Pope Alexander III, the enemy of Frederick I, and after two comical failures of Frederick I to meet Louis at Saint-Jean-de-Losne (on 29 August and 22 September 1162), Louis definitely gave himself up to the cause of Alexander III, who lived at Sens from 1163 to 1165. In return for his loyal support, the pope bestowed upon Louis the Golden Rose.\nMore important for English history would be Louis's support for Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, whom he tried to reconcile with Henry II. Louis sided with Becket as much to damage Henry as out of piety\u2014yet even he grew irritated with the stubbornness of the archbishop, asking when Becket refused Henry's conciliations, \"Do you wish to be more than a Saint?\"\nLouis also tried to weaken Henry by supporting his rebellious sons, and encouraged Plantagenet disunity by making Henry's sons, rather than Henry himself, the feudal overlords of the Angevin territories in France. But the rivalry among Henry's sons and Louis's own indecisiveness broke up the coalition (1173\u20131174) between them. Finally, in 1177, the pope intervened to bring the two kings to terms at Vitry-en-Perthois.\nIn 1165, Louis's third wife bore him a son and heir, Philip. Louis had him crowned at Reims in 1179, in the Capetian tradition (Philip would in fact be the last king so crowned). Already stricken with paralysis, Louis himself could not be present at the ceremony. He died on 18 September 1180 in Paris and was buried the next day at Barbeau Abbey, which he had founded. His remains were moved to the Basilica of Saint-Denis in 1817.\nMarriages and children.\nLouis's children by his three marriages:\nWith Eleanor of Aquitaine:\nWith Constance of Castile:\nWith Adela of Champagne:\nFictional portrayals.\nLouis is a character in Jean Anouilh's 1959 play \"Becket\". In the 1964 film adaptation, he was portrayed by John Gielgud, who was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He was also portrayed by Charles Kay in the 1978 BBC TV drama series \"The Devil's Crown\". He has a role in Sharon Kay Penman's novels \"When Christ and His Saints Slept\" and \"Devil's Brood.\" The early part of Norah Lofts' biography of Eleanor of Aquitaine deals considerably with Louis, seen through Eleanor's eyes and giving her side in their problematic relationship. Louis is one of the main characters in Elizabeth Chadwick's novel \"The Summer Queen\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48437", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48437", "title": "343", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 343 (CCCXLIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Memmius and Romulus (or, less frequently, year 1096 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 343 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48439", "revid": "43939503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48439", "title": "342", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 342 (CCCXLII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Claudius (or, less frequently, year 1095 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 342 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48440", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48440", "title": "341", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 341 (CCCXLI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcellinus and Probinus (or, less frequently, year 1094 \"ab Urbe condita\"). The denomination 341 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years or dates.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48441", "revid": "46967642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48441", "title": "2040", "text": ""}
{"id": "48442", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48442", "title": "Mitsubishi", "text": "Group of autonomous, Japanese multinational companies\nThe is a group of autonomous Japanese multinational companies.\nFounded by Yatar\u014d Iwasaki in 1870, the Mitsubishi Group traces its origins to the Mitsubishi \"zaibatsu\", a unified company that existed from 1870 to 1946. The company, along with other major \"zaibatsu\", was disbanded during the occupation of Japan following World War II by the order of the Allies. Despite the dissolution, the former constituent companies continue to share the Mitsubishi brand and trademark.\nWhile the group of companies engages in limited business cooperation, most notably through monthly \"Friday Conference\" executive meetings, they remain formally independent and are not under common control. The three main entities (\"gosanke\") are MUFG (the largest bank in Japan), Mitsubishi Corporation (a general trading company), and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (a diversified manufacturing company). A 2020 estimate concluded that all the Mitsubishi companies combined generate 7.7% of the total revenue of all publicly traded companies in Japan, and the group's assets amount to 433 trillion yen.\nHistory.\nThe Mitsubishi company was established as a shipping firm by Iwasaki Yatar\u014d (1834\u20131885) in 1870 under the name . In 1873, its name was changed to \"Mitsubishi Shokai\"; consists of two parts: \"mitsu\" (\u4e09) meaning \"three\" (as in the three oak leaves from the crest of the Yamauchi or Tosa family that ruled over Yatar\u014d's birthplace and employed him) and \"\"hishi\" (\u83f1, which becomes \"bishi\"\" under \"rendaku\") meaning \"water caltrop\", and hence \"rhombus\", which is reflected in the company's logo. It is also translated as \"three diamonds\".\nMitsubishi was established in 1870, two years after the Meiji Restoration, with shipping as its core business. Its diversification was mostly into related fields. It entered into coal-mining to gain the coal needed for ships, bought a shipbuilding yard from the government to repair the ships it used, founded an iron mill to supply iron to the shipbuilding yard, started a marine insurance business to cater for its shipping business, and so forth. Later, the managerial resources and technological capabilities acquired through the operation of shipbuilding were used to expand the business further into the manufacture of aircraft and equipment. The experience of overseas shipping led the firm to enter into a trading business.\nIn 1881, the company bought into coal mining by acquiring the Takashima Mine, followed by Hashima Island in 1890, using the production to fuel their extensive steamship fleet. They also diversified into shipbuilding, banking, insurance, warehousing, and trade. Later diversification carried the organization into such sectors as paper, steel, glass, electrical equipment, aircraft, oil, and real estate. As Mitsubishi built a broadly based conglomerate, it played a central role in the modernization of Japanese industry. In 1894, Hisaya Iwasaki succeeded his uncle Yanosuke as president. During his tenure until 1916, he modernised the Nagasaki Shipyard and developed Marunouchi as a business district.\nHisaya was succeeded by his cousin Koyata in 1916, and during his time as president the group saw a significant expansion. In 1917, he funded the establishment of an optics company and became the majority shareholder, which later became Nikon. During this era, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries was at the forefront of Japan's aircraft development. He reorganised the group into a form similar to what it is now, and he spun off each department into a subsidiary. Most of them later went public, as he thought that for the sake of the expansion of business, more core capital was needed.\nThe firm's prime real estate holdings in the Marunouchi district of Tokyo, acquired in 1890, were spun off in 1937 to form Mitsubishi Estate, now one of the largest real estate development companies in Japan.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the Second World War, which was often advertised in government propaganda as a total war, Mitsubishi was a key player in the nation's wartime economy. Educated in England and having many business friends and partners in the Anglosphere, Koyata was opposed to fighting a war against the Allies. However, he famously stated in his speech on 10 December 1941 that once the country had decided to wage a war with the United States and the British Empire, each member of the company ought to serve the country in fulfilling its only goal, but the company should not forget what it owed to people in these countries. \nArguably, one of the most tangible ways in which Mitsubishi was involved in the war was through its supply of ships, aircraft and other arms by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. The Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter, designed by Dr. Jiro Horikoshi was the primary fighter of the Imperial Navy. Production of these equipments made Mitsubishi factories one of the main targets for Allied attacks, and in one factory the death toll among its workers amounted to 494 in just a week. Mitsubishi Mining was involved in the forced labour of Allied prisoners of war and people from Japan's colonies and occupied territories such as Korea and parts of China. The company's Iizuka mine counted 19 deaths of Chinese labourers during the war. In 2015, Mitsubishi Materials (formerly Mitsubishi Mining) compensated 3,765 Chinese labourers who were conscripted to the company during the war and apologised to ex-American prisoners of war. Mitsubishi was involved in the opium trade in China during this period.\nPost-war era.\nDissolution and reorganisation of the unified Mitsubishi.\nAfter the Second World War, under the Allied Occupation's policy to dissolve \"zaibatsu\", the Mitsubishi conglomerate underwent significant restructuring. Until the Cold War made the Eastern Bloc more menacing than the possible revival of a strong Japan and Germany, the occupation forces\u2019 initial aim, just like in Germany, was to weaken the Japanese economy so that the country could never wage war against them. Under this policy, Mitsubishi as a group was dissolved. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Mitsubishi Chemical were split into three separate entities. On his deathbed, Koyata Iwasaki staunchly defended his actions, asserting that he had done his utmost for his country and had nothing to be ashamed of. Despite his resistance, he could not defy the tide of the times. His cousin, Hisaya Iwasaki, president of Mitsubishi Partnership Company at the time, expressed his frustration with the situation, noting that the company had been stripped bare, leaving only his ancestral land in Tosa and a mausoleum in Tokyo. His main residence in Shitaya was requisitioned by the American military, and Hisaya had to temporarily rent rooms in his former house.\nDue to the \"zaibatsu\" dissolution, Mitsubishi Estate was split into two companies, Kanto Real Estate and Yowa Real Estate. Yowa Real Estate owned a significant portion of the land between the Imperial Palace and Tokyo Station, including the Marunouchi Building. In 1952, an incident occurred where two men, Kuniichiro Fujiami and Shomitsu Tajima, who were closely linked to infamous yakuza, attempted to take over Yowa Real Estate by becoming majority shareholders, as the market capitalisation of the company was significantly less than its real estate holdings. They greenmailed, and other Mitsubishi companies had to buy the shares from them at an unjustly high price. This incident accelerated Mitsubishi's reintegration. In 1954, Mitsubishi Corporation was reformed, and the Mitsubishi Friday Club was established to foster camaraderie and information exchange among the chairpersons and presidents of major Mitsubishi companies. By 1964, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries also reemerged. The Friday Club symbolised the formation of an equal group of companies, rather than the revival of the pre-war Mitsubishi \"zaibatsu\" with Mitsubishi Headquarters at the apex.\nContemporary Mitsubishi Group.\nIn 1970, Mitsubishi companies established the Mitsubishi Foundation to commemorate the centennial anniversary of the founding of the first Mitsubishi company. The companies also individually maintain charitable foundations. Mitsubishi pavilions have been highlights of expositions in Japan since EXPO'70 in Osaka in the 1970s to 1980s.\nCompanies.\nBusiness form.\nThe Mitsubishi Group is made up of about 40 individual companies without a controlling parent company. Each of the Mitsubishi companies owns substantial (but usually not controlling) portions of the shares of the others.\nTwenty-nine of the group companies participate in the , a luncheon meeting of their most senior executives held on the second Friday of each month. The group began its tradition of monthly executive meetings in 1952, and over time the meetings became a venue for coordinating policy between the group companies. By the 1990s, this practice was criticized (particularly by non-Japanese investors) as a possible violation of antitrust law. Since 1993, the Friday Conference has officially been held as a social function, and not for the purpose of discussing or coordinating business strategy. Despite this, the Friday Conference has been a venue for informal cooperation and coordination between the group companies, most notably in bailing out Mitsubishi Motors during the mid-2000s.\nIn addition to the Friday Conference, the group companies' heads of general affairs hold a meeting on the third Monday of each month, and the group companies' legal and IP departments hold a trademark policy coordination meeting on the first Friday of each month.\nThe company briefly dabbled in television during the early 1990s, when it agreed a deal with Westinghouse Broadcasting International to become the Japanese distribution representative.\nCore members.\nThree of the group companies are informally known as the and hold a separate coordinating meeting prior to each Friday Conference:\nTen other \"major\" group companies participate in the coordinating meeting on a rotating basis (with six of the ten companies participating in any given month):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*MSSC\nRelated organizations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48443", "revid": "3131428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48443", "title": "Capabilities Maturity Model", "text": ""}
{"id": "48444", "revid": "28719809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48444", "title": "CMM", "text": "CMM may refer to\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48447", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48447", "title": "Tubulidentata", "text": ""}
{"id": "48449", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48449", "title": "Maria Theresa", "text": "Habsburg monarch from 1740 to 1780\nMaria Theresa (Maria Theresia Walburga Amalia Christina; 13 May 1717 \u2013 29 November 1780) was the ruler of the Habsburg monarchy from 1740 until her death in 1780, and the only woman to hold the position in her own right. She was the sovereign of Austria, Hungary, Croatia, Bohemia, Transylvania, Slavonia, Mantua, Milan, Moravia, Galicia and Lodomeria, Dalmatia, Austrian Netherlands, Carinthia, Carniola, Gorizia and Gradisca, Austrian Silesia, Tyrol, Styria and Parma. By marriage, she was Duchess of Lorraine, Grand Duchess of Tuscany, and Holy Roman Empress.\nMaria Theresa started her 40-year reign when her father, Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor, died on 20 October 1740. Charles VI paved the way for her accession with the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and spent his entire reign securing it through international diplomacy. He neglected the advice of Prince Eugene of Savoy, who believed that a strong military and a rich treasury were more important than mere signatures. Eventually, Charles VI left behind a weakened and impoverished state, particularly due to the War of the Polish Succession and the Russo-Turkish War (1735\u20131739). Moreover, upon his death, Saxony, Prussia, Bavaria, and France all repudiated the sanction they had recognised during his lifetime. Frederick II of Prussia (who became Maria Theresa's greatest rival for most of her reign) promptly invaded and took the affluent Habsburg province of Silesia in the eight-year conflict known as the War of the Austrian Succession. In defiance of the grave situation, she managed to secure the vital support of the Hungarians for the war effort. During the course of the war, Maria Theresa successfully defended her rule over most of the Habsburg monarchy, apart from the loss of Silesia and a few minor territories in Italy. Maria Theresa later unsuccessfully tried to recover Silesia during the Seven Years' War.\nAlthough she was expected to cede power to her husband, Emperor Francis I, and her eldest son, Emperor Joseph II, who were officially her co-rulers in Austria and Bohemia, Maria Theresa ruled as an autocratic sovereign with the counsel of her advisers. She promulgated institutional, financial, medical, and educational reforms, with the assistance of Wenzel Anton of Kaunitz-Rietberg, Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz, and Gerard van Swieten. She also promoted commerce and the development of agriculture, and reorganised Austria's ramshackle military, all of which strengthened Austria's international standing. A pious Catholic, she despised Freemasons, Jews and Protestants, and on certain occasions she ordered their expulsion to remote parts of the realm. She also advocated for the Catholic Church.\nBirth and early life.\nThe second and eldest surviving child of Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI and Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, Archduchess Maria Theresa was born on 13 May 1717 in Vienna, six months after the death of her elder brother, Archduke Leopold Johann, and was baptised on that same evening. The dowager empresses, her aunt Wilhelmine Amalia of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg and grandmother Eleonore Magdalene of Neuburg, were her godmothers. Most descriptions of her baptism stress that the infant was carried ahead of her cousins, Maria Josepha and Maria Amalia, the daughters of Charles VI's elder brother and predecessor, Joseph I, before the eyes of their mother, Wilhelmine Amalia. It was clear that Maria Theresa would outrank them, even though their grandfather, Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I, had had his sons sign the Mutual Pact of Succession, which gave precedence to the daughters of the elder brother. Her father was the only surviving male member of the House of Habsburg and hoped for a son who would prevent the extinction of his dynasty and succeed him. Thus, the birth of Maria Theresa was a great disappointment to him and the people of Vienna; Charles never managed to overcome this feeling.\nMaria Theresa replaced Maria Josepha as heir presumptive to the Habsburg realms the moment she was born; Charles VI had issued the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 which had placed his nieces behind his own daughters in the line of succession. Charles sought the other European powers' approval for disinheriting his nieces. They exacted harsh terms: in the Treaty of Vienna (1731), Great Britain demanded that Austria abolish the Ostend Company in return for its recognition of the Pragmatic Sanction. In total, Great Britain, France, Saxony, United Provinces, Spain, Prussia, Russia, Denmark, Sardinia, Bavaria, and the Diet of the Holy Roman Empire recognised the sanction. France, Spain, Saxony, Bavaria, and Prussia later reneged.\nLittle more than a year after her birth, Maria Theresa was joined by a sister, Maria Anna, and another one, named Maria Amalia, was born in 1724. The portraits of the imperial family show that Maria Theresa resembled Elisabeth Christine and Maria Anna. The Prussian ambassador noted that she had large blue eyes, fair hair with a slight tinge of red, a wide mouth and a notably strong body. Unlike many other members of the House of Habsburg, neither Maria Theresa's parents nor her grandparents were closely related to each other.\nMaria Theresa was a serious and reserved child who enjoyed singing and archery. She was barred from horse riding by her father, but she would later learn the basics for the sake of her Hungarian coronation ceremony. The imperial family staged opera productions, often conducted by Charles VI, in which she relished participating. Her education was overseen by Jesuits. Contemporaries thought her Latin to be quite good, but in all else, the Jesuits did not educate her well. Her spelling and punctuation were unconventional and she lacked the formal manner and speech which had characterised her Habsburg predecessors. Maria Theresa developed a close relationship with Countess Marie Karoline von Fuchs-Mollard, who taught her etiquette. She was educated in drawing, painting, music and dancing \u2013 the disciplines which would have prepared her for the role of queen consort. Her father allowed her to attend meetings of the council from the age of 14 but never discussed the affairs of state with her. Even though he had spent the last decades of his life securing Maria Theresa's inheritance, Charles never prepared his daughter for her future role as sovereign.\nMarriage.\nThe question of Maria Theresa's marriage was raised early in her childhood. Leopold Clement of Lorraine was first considered to be the appropriate suitor, and he was supposed to visit Vienna and meet the Archduchess in 1723. These plans were forestalled by his death from smallpox that year. Leopold Clement's younger brother, Francis Stephen, was invited to Vienna. Even though Francis Stephen was his favourite candidate for Maria Theresa's hand, the Emperor considered other possibilities. Religious differences prevented him from arranging his daughter's marriage to the Protestant prince Frederick of Prussia. In 1725, he betrothed her to Charles of Spain and her sister, Maria Anna, to Philip of Spain. However, other European powers compelled him to renounce the pact he had made with the Queen of Spain, Elisabeth Farnese, and the betrothal to Charles was broken off. Maria Theresa, who had become close to Francis Stephen, was relieved.\nFrancis Stephen remained at the imperial court until 1729, when he ascended the throne of Lorraine, but was not formally promised Maria Theresa's hand until 31 January 1736, during the War of the Polish Succession. Louis XV of France demanded that Maria Theresa's fianc\u00e9 surrender his ancestral Duchy of Lorraine to accommodate his father-in-law, Stanis\u0142aw I, who had been deposed as king of Poland. Francis Stephen was to receive the Grand Duchy of Tuscany upon the death of childless Grand Duke Gian Gastone de' Medici. The couple were married on 12 February 1736 at the Augustinian Church in Vienna. The Duchess of Lorraine's love for her husband was strong and possessive. The letters she sent to him shortly before their marriage expressed her eagerness to see him; his letters, on the other hand, were stereotyped and formal. She was very jealous of her husband and his infidelity was the greatest problem of their marriage, with Maria Wilhelmina, Princess of Auersperg, as his best-known mistress.\nUpon Gian Gastone's death on 9 July 1737, Francis Stephen ceded Lorraine and became grand duke of Tuscany. In 1738, Charles VI sent the young couple to make their formal entry into Tuscany. The Triumphal Arch of the Lorraine was erected at the Porta Galla in celebration, where it remains today. Their stay in Florence was brief. Charles VI soon recalled them, as he feared he might die while his heiress was miles away in Tuscany. In the summer of 1738, Austria suffered defeats during the ongoing Russo-Turkish War. The Turks reversed Austrian gains in Serbia, Wallachia, and Bosnia. The Viennese rioted at the cost of the war. Francis Stephen was popularly despised, as he was thought to be a cowardly French spy. The war was concluded the next year with the Treaty of Belgrade.\nAccession.\nCharles VI died on 20 October 1740, probably of mushroom poisoning. He had ignored the advice of Prince Eugene of Savoy who had urged him to concentrate on filling the treasury and equipping the army rather than on acquiring signatures of fellow monarchs. The Emperor, who spent his entire reign securing the Pragmatic Sanction, left Austria in an impoverished state, bankrupted by the recent Turkish war and the War of the Polish Succession; the treasury contained only 100,000 florins, which were claimed by his widow. The army had also been weakened due to these wars; instead of the full number of 160,000, the army had been reduced to about 108,000, and they were scattered in small areas from the Austrian Netherlands to Transylvania, and from Silesia to Tuscany. They were also poorly trained and discipline was lacking. Later Maria Theresa even made a remark: \"as for the state in which I found the army, I cannot begin to describe it.\"\nMaria Theresa found herself in a difficult situation. She did not know enough about matters of state and she was unaware of the weakness of her father's ministers. She decided to rely on her father's advice to retain his counselors and to defer to her husband, whom she considered to be more experienced, on other matters. Both decisions later gave cause for regret. Ten years later, Maria Theresa recalled in her \"Political Testament\" the circumstances under which she had ascended: \"I found myself without money, without credit, without army, without experience and knowledge of my own and finally, also without any counsel because each one of them at first wanted to wait and see how things would develop.\"\nShe dismissed the possibility that other countries might try to seize her territories and immediately started ensuring the imperial dignity for herself; since a woman could not be elected Holy Roman Empress, Maria Theresa wanted to secure the imperial office for her husband, but Francis Stephen did not possess enough land or rank within the Holy Roman Empire. In order to make him eligible for the imperial throne and to enable him to vote in the imperial elections as king of Bohemia (which she could not do because of her sex), Maria Theresa made Francis Stephen co-ruler of the Austrian and Bohemian lands on 21 November 1740. It took more than a year for the Diet of Hungary to accept Francis Stephen as co-ruler, since they asserted that the sovereignty of Hungary could not be shared. Despite her love for him and his position as co-ruler, Maria Theresa never allowed her husband to decide matters of state and often dismissed him from council meetings when they disagreed.\nThe first display of the new queen's authority was the formal act of homage of the Lower Austrian Estates to her on 22 November 1740. It was an elaborate public event which served as a formal recognition and legitimation of her accession. The oath of fealty to Maria Theresa was taken on the same day in the Ritterstube of the Hofburg.\nWar of the Austrian Succession.\nImmediately after her accession, a number of European sovereigns who had recognised Maria Theresa as heir broke their promises. Queen Elisabeth of Spain and Elector Charles Albert of Bavaria, married to Maria Theresa's deprived cousin Maria Amalia and supported by Empress Wilhelmine Amalia, coveted portions of her inheritance. Maria Theresa did secure recognition from King Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia, who had not accepted the Pragmatic Sanction during her father's lifetime, in November 1740.\nIn December, Frederick II of Prussia invaded the Duchy of Silesia and requested that Maria Theresa cede it, threatening to join her enemies if she refused. Maria Theresa decided to fight for the mineral-rich province. Frederick even offered a compromise: he would defend Maria Theresa's rights if she agreed to cede to him at least a part of Silesia. Francis Stephen was inclined to consider such an arrangement, but the Queen and her advisers were not, fearing that any violation of the Pragmatic Sanction would invalidate the entire document. Maria Theresa's firmness soon assured Francis Stephen that they should fight for Silesia, and she was confident that she would retain \"the jewel of the House of Austria\". The resulting war with Prussia is known as the First Silesian War. The invasion of Silesia by Frederick was the start of a lifelong enmity; she referred to him as \"that evil man\".\nAs Austria was short of experienced military commanders, Maria Theresa released Marshal Wilhelm Reinhard von Neipperg, who had been imprisoned by her father for his poor performance in the Turkish War. Neipperg took command of the Austrian troops in March. The Austrians suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Mollwitz in April 1741. France drew up a plan to partition Austria between Prussia, Bavaria, Saxony and Spain: Bohemia and Upper Austria would be ceded to Bavaria, whose elector would become emperor, whereas Moravia and Upper Silesia would be granted to the Electorate of Saxony, Lower Silesia and Glatz to Prussia, and the entire Austrian Lombardy to Spain. Marshal Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, duc de Belle-Isle joined Frederick at Olm\u00fctz. Vienna was in a panic, as none of Maria Theresa's advisors had expected France to betray them. Francis Stephen urged Maria Theresa to reach a rapprochement with Prussia, as did Great Britain. Maria Theresa reluctantly agreed to negotiations.\nContrary to all expectations, the young Queen gained significant support from Hungary. Her coronation as queen of Hungary \"suo jure\" took place in St. Martin's Cathedral, Pressburg (today's Bratislava), on 25 June 1741. She had spent months honing the equestrian skills necessary for the ceremony and negotiating with the Hungarian Diet. To appease those who considered her gender to be a serious obstacle, Maria Theresa assumed masculine titles. Thus, in nomenclature, Maria Theresa was archduke and king; normally, however, she was styled as queen.\nBy July, attempts at conciliation had completely collapsed. Maria Theresa's ally, Augustus III of Poland, now became her enemy, and George\u00a0II declared the Electorate of Hanover to be neutral. Therefore, she needed troops from Hungary in order to support the war effort. Although she had already won the admiration of the Hungarians, the number of volunteers was only in the hundreds. Since she required them in thousands or even tens of thousands, she decided to appear before the Hungarian Diet on 11 September 1741 while wearing the Holy Crown of Hungary. She began addressing the Diet in Latin, and she asserted that \"the very existence of the Kingdom of Hungary, of our own person and children, and our crown, are at stake. Forsaken by all, we place our sole reliance in the fidelity and long-tried valor of the Hungarians.\" The response was rather boorish, with the Queen being questioned and even heckled by members of the Diet; someone cried that she \"better apply to Satan than the Hungarians for help.\" However, she managed to show her gift for theatrical displays by holding her son and heir, Joseph, while weeping, and she dramatically consigned the future king to the defense of the \"brave Hungarians\". This act managed to win the sympathy of the members, and they declared that they would die for Maria Theresa.\nIn 1741, the Austrian authorities informed Maria Theresa that the Bohemian populace would prefer Charles Albert, Elector of Bavaria, to her as sovereign. Maria Theresa, desperate and burdened by pregnancy, wrote plaintively to her sister: \"I don't know if a town will remain to me for my delivery.\" She bitterly vowed to spare nothing and no one to defend her kingdom when she wrote to the Bohemian chancellor, Count Philip Kinsky: \"My mind is made up. We must put everything at stake to save Bohemia.\" On 26 October, the Elector of Bavaria captured Prague and declared himself king of Bohemia. Maria Theresa, then in Hungary, wept on learning of the loss of Bohemia. Charles Albert was unanimously elected Holy Roman Emperor as Charles VII on 24 January 1742, which made him the only non-Habsburg to be in that position since 1440. The Queen, who regarded the election as a catastrophe, caught her enemies unprepared by insisting on a winter campaign; the same day he was elected emperor, Austrian troops under Ludwig Andreas von Khevenh\u00fcller captured Munich, Charles Albert's capital.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShe has, as you well know, a terrible hatred for France, with which nation it is most difficult for her to keep on good terms, but she controls this passion except when she thinks to her advantage to display it. She detests Your Majesty, but acknowledges your ability. She cannot forget the loss of Silesia, nor her grief over the soldiers she lost in wars with you.\nPrussian ambassador's letter to Frederick the Great\nThe Treaty of Breslau of June 1742 ended hostilities between Austria and Prussia. With the First Silesian War at an end, the Queen soon made the recovery of Bohemia her priority. French troops fled Bohemia in the winter of the same year. On 12 May 1743, Maria Theresa was crowned Queen of Bohemia in St. Vitus Cathedral \"suo jure\".\nPrussia became anxious at Austrian advances on the Rhine frontier, and Frederick again invaded Bohemia, beginning a Second Silesian War; Prussian troops sacked Prague in August 1744. The French plans fell apart when Charles VII died in January 1745. The French overran the Austrian Netherlands in May.\nFrancis Stephen was elected Holy Roman Emperor on 13 September 1745. Prussia recognised Francis as emperor, and Maria Theresa once again recognised the loss of Silesia (with the exception of Austrian Silesia by the Treaty of Dresden in December 1745, ending the Second Silesian War). The wider war dragged on for another three years, with fighting in northern Italy and the Austrian Netherlands; however, the core Habsburg domains of Austria, Hungary and Bohemia remained in Maria Theresa's possession. The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748), which concluded the eight-year conflict, recognised Prussia's possession of Silesia, and Maria Theresa ceded the Duchy of Parma to Philip of Spain. France had successfully conquered the Austrian Netherlands, but Louis XV, wishing to prevent potential future wars with Austria, returned them to Maria Theresa.\nSeven Years' War.\nFrederick of Prussia's invasion of Saxony in August 1756 began a Third Silesian War and sparked the wider Seven Years' War. Maria Theresa and Prince Kaunitz wished to exit the war with possession of Silesia. Before the war started, Kaunitz had been sent as an ambassador to Versailles from 1750 to 1753 to win over the French. Meanwhile, the British rebuffed requests from Maria Theresa to aid her in reclaiming Silesia, and Frederick II himself managed to secure the Treaty of Westminster (1756) with them. Subsequently, Maria Theresa sent Georg Adam, Prince of Starhemberg, to negotiate an agreement with France, and the result was the First Treaty of Versailles of 1 May 1756. Thus, the efforts of Kaunitz and Starhemberg managed to pave a way for a Diplomatic Revolution; previously, France was one of Austria's archenemies together with Russia and the Ottoman Empire, but after the agreement, they were united by a common cause against Prussia. However, historians have blamed this treaty for France's devastating defeats in the war, since Louis XV was required to deploy troops in Germany and to provide subsidies of 25\u201330\u00a0million pounds a year to Maria Theresa that were vital for the Austrian war effort in Bohemia and Silesia.\nOn 1 May 1757, the Second Treaty of Versailles was signed, whereby Louis XV promised to provide Austria with 130,000 men in addition to 12\u00a0million florins yearly. They would also continue the war in Continental Europe until Prussia could be compelled to abandon Silesia and Glatz. In return, Austria would cede several towns in the Austrian Netherlands to the son-in-law of Louis XV, Philip of Parma, who in turn would grant his Italian duchies to Maria Theresa.\nMaximilian von Browne commanded the Austrian troops. Following the indecisive Battle of Lobositz in 1756, he was replaced by Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine, Maria Theresa's brother-in-law. However, he was appointed only because of his familial relations; he turned out to be an incompetent military leader, and he was replaced by Leopold Joseph von Daun, Franz Moritz von Lacy and Ernst Gideon von Laudon. Frederick himself was startled by Lobositz; he eventually re-grouped for another attack in June 1757. The Battle of Kol\u00edn that followed was a decisive victory for Austria. Frederick lost one third of his troops, and before the battle was over, he had left the scene. Subsequently, Prussia was defeated at Hochkirch in Saxony on 14 October 1758, at Kunersdorf in Brandenburg on 12 August 1759, and at Landeshut near Glatz in June 1760. Hungarian and Croat light hussars led by Count Hadik raided Berlin in 1757. Austrian and Russian troops even occupied Berlin for several days in August 1760. However, these victories did not enable the Habsburgs to win the war, as the French and Habsburg armies were destroyed by Frederick at Rossbach in 1757. After the defeat in Torgau on 3 November 1760, Maria Theresa realised that she could no longer reclaim Silesia without Russian support, which vanished after the death of Empress Elizabeth in early 1762. In the meantime, France was losing badly in America and India, and thus they had reduced their subsidies by 50%. Since 1761, Kaunitz had tried to organise a diplomatic congress to take advantage of the accession of George III of Great Britain, as he did not really care about Germany. Finally, the war was concluded by the Treaty of Hubertusburg and Paris in 1763. Austria had to leave the Prussian territories that were occupied. Although Silesia remained under the control of Prussia, a new balance of power was created in Europe, and Austrian position was strengthened by it thanks to its alliance with the Bourbons in Madrid, Parma and Naples. Maria Theresa herself decided to focus on domestic reforms and refrain from undertaking any further military operations.\nFamily life.\nChildbearing.\nMaria Theresa gave birth to sixteen children in nineteen years from 1737 to 1756. Thirteen survived infancy, but only ten survived into adulthood. The first child, Maria Elisabeth (1737\u20131740), was born a little less than a year after the wedding. The child's sex caused great disappointment and so would the births of Maria Anna, the eldest surviving child, and Maria Carolina (1740\u20131741). While fighting to preserve her inheritance, Maria Theresa gave birth to a son, Joseph, named after Saint Joseph, to whom she had repeatedly prayed for a male child during the pregnancy. Maria Theresa's favourite child, Maria Christina, was born on her 25th\u00a0birthday, four days before the defeat of the Austrian army at Chotusitz. Five more children were born during the war: (the second) Maria Elisabeth, Charles, Maria Amalia, Leopold and (the second) Maria Carolina (b. &amp; d. 1748). During this period, there was no rest for Maria Theresa during pregnancies or around the births; the war and child-bearing were carried on simultaneously. Five children were born during the peace between the War of the Austrian Succession and the Seven Years' War: Maria Johanna, Maria Josepha, (the third) Maria Carolina, Ferdinand and Maria Antonia. She delivered her last child, Maximilian Francis, during the Seven Years' War, aged 39. Maria Theresa asserted that, had she not been almost always pregnant, she would have gone into battle herself.\nIllnesses and deaths.\nFour of Maria Theresa's children died before reaching adolescence. Her eldest daughter Maria Elisabeth died from stomach cramps at the age of three. Her third child, the first of three daughters named Maria Carolina, died shortly after her first birthday. The second Maria Carolina was born feet first in 1748. As it became evident that she would not survive, preparations were hastily made to baptize her while still living; according to traditional Catholic belief, unbaptized infants would be condemned to eternity in limbo. Maria Theresa's physician Gerard van Swieten assured her that the infant was still living when baptized, but many at court doubted this.\nMaria Theresa's mother, Empress Elisabeth Christine, died in 1750. Four years later, Maria Theresa's governess, Marie Karoline von Fuchs-Mollard, died. She showed her gratitude to Countess Fuchs by having her buried in the Imperial Crypt along with the members of the imperial family.\nSmallpox was a constant threat to members of the royal family. Maria Theresa's daughter Maria Christina survived a bout of the disease in July 1749, as did Maria Theresa's eldest son Joseph in January 1757. In January 1761, the disease killed her second son Charles at the age of fifteen. In December 1762, her twelve-year-old daughter Johanna likewise died in agony from the disease. In November 1763, Joseph's first wife, Isabella of Parma, died from the disease. Joseph's second wife, Maria Josepha of Bavaria, likewise caught the disease in May 1767 and died a week later. Maria Theresa ignored the risk of infection and embraced her daughter-in-law before the sick chamber was sealed to outsiders.\nMaria Theresa in fact contracted smallpox from Maria Josepha. Throughout the city prayers were made for her recovery, and the sacrament was displayed in all churches. Joseph slept in one of his mother's antechambers and hardly left her bedside. On 1 June, Maria Theresa was given the last rites. When the news came in early June that she had survived the crisis, there was huge rejoicing at the court and amongst the populace of Vienna.\nIn October 1767, Maria Theresa's sixteen-year-old daughter Josepha also showed signs of the disease. It was assumed that she had caught the infection when she went with her mother to pray in the Imperial Crypt next to the unsealed tomb of Empress Maria Josepha. Archduchess Josepha started showing smallpox rash two days after visiting the crypt and soon died. Maria Carolina was to replace her as the pre-determined bride of King Ferdinand IV of Naples. Maria Theresa blamed herself for her daughter's death for the rest of her life because, at the time, the concept of an extended incubation period was largely unknown and it was believed that Josepha had caught smallpox from the body of the late empress. The last in the family to be infected with the illness was the twenty-four-year-old Elisabeth, Maria Theresa's sixth child. Although she recovered, she was badly scarred with pock marks from the illness. Maria Theresa's losses to smallpox, especially in the epidemic of 1767, were decisive in her sponsoring trials to prevent the illness through inoculation, and subsequently insisting on members of the imperial family receiving inoculation.\nDynastic marriage policy.\nShortly after giving birth to the younger children, Maria Theresa was confronted with the task of marrying off the elder ones. She led the marriage negotiations along with the campaigns of her wars and the duties of state. She used them as pawns in dynastic games and sacrificed their happiness for the benefit of the state. A devoted but self-conscious mother, she wrote to all of her children at least once a week and believed herself entitled to exercise authority over her children regardless of their age and rank.\nIn April 1770, Maria Theresa's youngest daughter, Maria Antonia, married Louis, Dauphin of France, by proxy in Vienna. Maria Antonia's education was neglected, and when the French showed an interest in her, her mother went about educating her as best she could about the court of Versailles and the French. Maria Theresa kept up a fortnightly correspondence with Maria Antonia, now called Marie Antoinette, in which she often reproached her for laziness and frivolity and scolded her for failing to conceive a child.\nMaria Theresa was not just critical of Marie Antoinette. She disliked Leopold's reserve and often blamed him for being cold. She criticized Maria Carolina for her political activities, Ferdinand for his lack of organization, and Maria Amalia for her poor French and haughtiness. The only child she did not constantly scold was Maria Christina, who enjoyed her mother's complete confidence, though she failed to please her mother in one aspect \u2013 she did not produce any surviving children.\nOne of Maria Theresa's greatest wishes was to have as many grandchildren as possible, but she had only about two dozen at the time of her death, of which all the eldest surviving daughters were named after her, with the exception of Princess Carolina of Parma, her eldest granddaughter by Maria Amalia.\nReligious views and policies.\nLike all members of the House of Habsburg, Maria Theresa was a Catholic, and a devout one. She believed that religious unity was necessary for a peaceful public life and explicitly rejected the idea of religious toleration. She even advocated for a state church and contemporary travelers criticized her regime as bigoted, intolerant and superstitious. However, she never allowed the church to interfere with what she considered to be prerogatives of a monarch and kept Rome at arm's length. She controlled the selection of archbishops, bishops and abbots. Overall, the ecclesiastical policies of Maria Theresa were enacted to ensure the primacy of state control in church-state relations. She was also influenced by Jansenist ideas. One of the most important aspects of Jansenism was the advocacy of maximum freedom of national churches from Rome. Although Austria had always stressed the rights of the state in relation to the church, Jansenism provided new theoretical justification for this.\nMaria Theresa promoted the Greek Catholics and emphasized their equal status with Latin Church Catholics. Although Maria Theresa was a very pious person, she also enacted policies that suppressed exaggerated display of piety, such as the prohibition of public flagellantism. Furthermore, she significantly reduced the number of religious holidays and monastic orders.\nJesuits.\nHer relationship with the Jesuits was complex. Members of this order educated her, served as her confessors, and supervised the religious education of her eldest son. The Jesuits were powerful and influential in the early years of Maria Theresa's reign. However, the Queen's ministers convinced her that the order posed a danger to her monarchical authority. Not without much hesitation and regret, she issued a decree that removed them from all the institutions of the monarchy, and carried it out thoroughly. She forbade the publication of Pope Clement XIII's Apostolicum pascendi bull, which was in favour of the Jesuits, and promptly confiscated their property when Pope Clement XIV suppressed the order.\nJews.\nMaria Theresa regarded both the Jews and Protestants as dangerous to the state and actively tried to suppress them. She was probably the most anti-Jewish monarch of her time, having inherited the traditional prejudices of her ancestors and acquired new ones. This was a product of commonplace antisemitism and was not kept secret in her time. In 1777, she wrote of the Jews: \"I know of no greater plague than this race, which on account of its deceit, usury and avarice is driving my subjects into beggary. Therefore as far as possible, the Jews are to be kept away and avoided.\" Her hatred was so deep that she was willing to tolerate Protestant businessmen and financiers in Vienna, such as the Swiss-born Johann von Fries, since she wanted to break free from the Jewish financiers.\nIn December 1744, she proposed to her ministers the expulsion of around 10,000 Jews from Prague amid accusations that they were disloyal at the time of the Bavarian-French occupation during the War of the Austrian Succession. The order was then expanded to all Jews of Bohemia and major cities of Moravia. Her first intention was to deport all Jews by 1 January, but having accepted the advice of her ministers, had the deadline postponed. The expulsion was executed only for Prague and only retracted in 1748 due to economic considerations and pressures from other countries, including Great Britain.\nIn the third decade of her reign, Maria Theresa issued edicts that offered some state protection to her Jewish subjects. She forbade the forcible conversion of Jewish children to Christianity in 1762, and in 1763 she forbade Catholic clergy from extracting surplice fees from her Jewish subjects. In 1764, she ordered the release of those Jews who had been jailed for a blood libel in the village of Orkuta. Notwithstanding her continuing strong dislike of Jews, Maria Theresa supported Jewish commercial and industrial activity in Austria. There were also parts of the realm where the Jews were treated better, such as Trieste, Gorizia and Vorarlberg.\nProtestants.\nIn contrast to Maria Theresa's efforts to expel the Jews, she aimed to convert the Protestants (whom she regarded as heretics) to Catholicism. Commissions were formed to seek out secret Protestants and intern them in workhouses, where they would be given the chance to subscribe to approved statements of Catholic faith. If they accepted, they were to be allowed to return to their homes. However, any sign of a return to Protestant practice was treated harshly, often by exile. Maria Theresa exiled Protestants from Austria to Transylvania, including 2,600 from Upper Austria in the 1750s. Her son and co-ruler Joseph regarded his mother's religious policies as \"unjust, impious, impossible, harmful and ridiculous\". Despite her policies, practical, demographic and economic considerations prevented her from expelling the Protestants \"en masse\". In 1777, she abandoned the idea of expelling Moravian Protestants after Joseph, who was opposed to her intentions, threatened to abdicate as emperor and co-ruler. In February 1780, after a number of Moravians publicly declared their faith, Joseph demanded a general freedom to worship. However, Maria Theresa refused to grant this for as long as she lived. In May 1780, a group of Moravians who had assembled for a worship service on the occasion of her birthday were arrested and deported to Hungary. Freedom of religion was granted only in the Patent of Toleration issued by Joseph immediately after Maria Theresa's death.\nEastern Orthodox Christians.\nThe policies of Maria Theresa's government toward their Eastern Orthodox subjects were marked by special interests, relating not only to complex religious situations in various southern and eastern regions of the Habsburg monarchy, inhabited by Eastern Orthodox Christians, mainly Serbs and Romanians, but also regarding the political aspirations of the Habsburg court toward several neighbouring lands and regions in Southeastern Europe still held by the declining Ottoman Empire and inhabited by an Eastern Orthodox population.\nMaria Theresa's government confirmed (1743) and continued to uphold old privileges granted to their Eastern Orthodox subjects by previous Habsburg monarchs (emperors Leopold I, Joseph I and Charles VI), but at the same time, new reforms were enforced, establishing much firmer state control over the Serbian Orthodox Metropolitanate of Karlovci. Those reforms were initiated by royal patents, known as \"Regulamentum privilegiorum\" (1770) and \"Regulamentum Illyricae Nationis\" (1777), and finalized in 1779 by the Declaratory Rescript of the Illyrian Nation, a comprehensive document that regulated all major issues relating to the religious life of their Eastern Orthodox subjects and the administration of the Serbian Metropolitanate of Karlovci. Maria Theresa's rescript of 1779 was kept in force until 1868.\nReforms.\nInstitutional.\nMaria Theresa was as conservative in matters of state as in those of religion, but she implemented significant reforms to strengthen Austria's military and bureaucratic efficiency. She employed Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz, who modernised the empire by creating a standing army of 108,000 men, paid for with 14 million florins extracted from crown lands. The central government was responsible for funding the army, although Haugwitz instituted taxation of the nobility, who had never before had to pay taxes. Moreover, after Haugwitz was appointed the head of the new central administrative agency, dubbed the Directory, (\"Directorium in publicis et cameralibus\") in 1749, he initiated a radical centralization of state institutions down to the level of the District Office (\"Kreisamt\"). Thanks to this effort, by 1760 there was a class of government officials numbering around 10,000. However, the Duchy of Milan, the Austrian Netherlands and Hungary were almost completely untouched by this reform. In the case of Hungary, Maria Theresa was particularly mindful of her promise that she would respect the privileges in the kingdom, including the immunity of nobles from taxation.\nIn light of the failure to reclaim Silesia during the Seven Years' War, the governing system was once again reformed to strengthen the state. The Directory was transformed into the United Austrian and Bohemian Chancellery in 1761, which was equipped with a separate, independent judiciary and separate financial bodies. She also refounded the \"Hofkammer\" in 1762, which was a ministry of finances that controlled all revenues from the monarchy. In addition to this, the \"Hofrechenskammer\", or exchequer, was tasked with the handling of all financial accounts. Meanwhile, in 1760, Maria Theresa created the Council of State (\"Staatsrat\"), composed of the state chancellor, three members of the high nobility and three knights, which served as a committee of experienced people who advised her. The council of state lacked executive or legislative authority; nevertheless, it showed the difference between the form of government employed by Maria Theresa and that of Frederick II of Prussia. Unlike the latter, Maria Theresa was not an autocrat who acted as her own minister. Prussia would adopt this form of government only after 1807.\nMaria Theresa doubled the state revenue from 20 to 40 million florins between 1754 and 1764, though her attempt to tax clergy and nobility was only partially successful. These financial reforms greatly improved the economy. After Kaunitz became the head of the new \"Staatsrat\", he pursued a policy of \"aristocratic enlightenment\" that relied on persuasion to interact with the estates, and he was also willing to retract some of Haugwitz's centralization to curry favour with them. Nonetheless, the governing system remained centralised, and a strong institution made it possible for Kaunitz to increase state revenues substantially. In 1775, the Habsburg monarchy achieved its first balanced budget, and by 1780, the Habsburg state revenue had reached 50 million florins.\nMedicine.\nAfter Maria Theresa recruited Gerard van Swieten from the Netherlands, he also employed a fellow Dutchman named Anton de Haen, who founded the Viennese Medicine School (\"Wiener Medizinische Schule\"). Maria Theresa also banned the creation of new burial grounds without prior government permission, thus countering wasteful and unhygienic burial customs.\nAfter the smallpox epidemic of 1767, she promoted inoculation, which she had learned of through her correspondence with Maria Antonia, Electress of Saxony (who in turn probably knew of it through her own correspondence with Frederick the Great). After unsuccessfully inviting the Sutton brothers from England to introduce their technique in Austria, Maria Theresa obtained information on current practices of smallpox inoculation in England. She overrode the objections of Gerard van Swieten (who doubted the effectiveness of the technique), and ordered that it be tried on thirty-four newborn orphans and sixty-seven orphans between the ages of five and fourteen years. The trial was successful, establishing that inoculation was effective in protecting against smallpox, and safe (in the case of the test subjects). The Empress therefore ordered the construction of an inoculation centre, and had herself and two of her children inoculated. She promoted inoculation in Austria by hosting a dinner for the first sixty-five inoculated children in Sch\u00f6nbrunn Palace, waiting on the children herself. Maria Theresa was responsible for changing Austrian physicians' negative view of inoculation.\nIn 1770, she enacted a strict regulation of the sale of poisons, and apothecaries were obliged to keep a poison register recording the quantity and circumstances of every sale. If someone unknown tried to purchase a poison, that person had to provide two character witnesses before a sale could be effectuated. Three years later, she prohibited the use of lead in any eating or drinking vessels; the only permitted material for this purpose was pure tin.\nLaw.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShe is most unusually ambitious and hopes to make the House of Austria more renowned than it has ever been.\nPrussian ambassador's letter to Frederick II of Prussia\nThe centralization of the Habsburg government necessitated the creation of a unified legal system. Previously, various lands in the Habsburg realm had their own laws. These laws were compiled and the resulting \"Codex Theresianus\" could be used as a basis for legal unification. In 1769, the \"Constitutio Criminalis Theresiana\" was published, and this was a codification of the traditional criminal justice system since the Middle Ages. This criminal code allowed the possibility of establishing the truth through torture, and it also criminalised witchcraft and various religious offenses. Although this law came into force in Austria and Bohemia, it was not valid in Hungary.\nMaria Theresa is credited, however, in ending the witch hunts in Zagreb, opposing the methods used against Magda Logomer (also called Herrucina), who was the last prosecuted witch in Zagreb following her intervention.\nShe was particularly concerned with the sexual morality of her subjects. Thus, she established a Chastity Commission (\"Keuschheitskommission\") in 1752 to clamp down on prostitution, homosexuality, adultery and even sex between members of different religions. This Commission cooperated closely with the police, and the Commission even employed secret agents to investigate private lives of men and women with bad reputations. They were authorised to raid banquets, clubs, and private gatherings, and to arrest those suspected of violating social norms. The punishments included whipping, deportation, or even the death penalty.\nIn 1776, Austria outlawed torture, at the particular behest of Joseph II. Much unlike Joseph, but with the support of religious authorities, Maria Theresa was opposed to the abolition of torture. Born and raised between Baroque and Rococo eras, she found it difficult to fit into the intellectual sphere of the Enlightenment, which is why she only slowly followed humanitarian reforms on the continent.\nFrom an institutional perspective, in 1749, she founded the Supreme Judiciary as a court of final appeal for all hereditary lands.\nEducation.\nThroughout her reign, Maria Theresa made the promotion of education a priority. Initially this was focused on the wealthier classes. She permitted non-Catholics to attend university and allowed the introduction of secular subjects (such as law), which influenced the decline of theology as the main foundation of university education. Furthermore, educational institutions were created to prepare officials for work in the state bureaucracy: the Theresianum was established in Vienna in 1746 to educate nobles' sons, a military school named the Theresian Military Academy was founded in Wiener Neustadt in 1751, and an Oriental Academy for future diplomats was created in 1754.\nIn the 1770s, reform of the schooling system for all levels of society became a major policy. Stollberg-Rilinger notes that the reform of the primary schools in particular was the most long-lasting success of Maria Theresa's later reign, and one of the few policy agendas in which she was not in open conflict with her son and nominal co-ruler Joseph II. The need for the reform became evident after the census of 1770\u20131771, which revealed the widespread illiteracy of the populace. Maria Theresa thereupon wrote to her rival Frederick II of Prussia to request him to allow the Silesian school reformer Johann Ignaz von Felbiger to move to Austria. Felbiger's first proposals were made law by December 1774. Austrian historian Karl Vocelka observed that the educational reforms enacted by Maria Theresa were \"really founded on Enlightenment ideas,\" although the ulterior motive was still to \"meet the needs of an absolutist state, as an increasingly sophisticated and complicated society and economy required new administrators, officers, diplomats and specialists in virtually every area.\"\nMaria Theresa's reform established secular primary schools, which children of both sexes from the ages of six to twelve were required to attend. The curriculum focused on social responsibility, social discipline, work ethic and the use of reason rather than mere rote learning. Education was to be multilingual; children were to be instructed first in their mother tongue and then in later years in German. Prizes were given to the most able students to encourage ability. Attention was also given to raising the status and pay of teachers, who were forbidden to take on outside employment. Teacher training colleges were established to train teachers in the latest techniques.\nThe education reform was met with considerable opposition. Predictably, some of this came from peasants who wanted the children to work in the fields instead. Maria Theresa crushed the dissent by ordering the arrest of all those opposed. However, much of the opposition came from the imperial court, particularly amongst aristocrats who saw their power threatened by the reformers or those who feared that that greater literacy would expose the population to Protestant or Enlightenment ideas. Felbiger's reforms were nevertheless pushed through, as a result of the consistent support of Maria Theresa and her minister Franz Sales Greiner. The reform of the primary schools largely met Maria Theresa's aim of raising literacy standards, as evidenced by the higher proportions of children who attended school; this was particularly the case in the Archdiocese of Vienna, where school attendance increased from 40% in 1780 to a sensational 94% by 1807. Nevertheless, high rates of illiteracy persisted in some parts of Austria, half of the population was illiterate well into the 19th century, The teacher training colleges (in particular the Vienna Normal School) produced hundreds of new teachers who spread the new system over the following decades. However, the number of secondary schools decreased, since the quantity of new schools founded failed to make up for the numbers of Jesuit schools abolished. As a result, secondary schooling became more exclusive.\nCensorship.\nHer regime was also known for institutionalising censorship of publications and learning. English author Sir Nathaniel Wraxall once wrote from Vienna: \"[T]he injudicious bigotry of the Empress may chiefly be attributed the deficiency [in learning]. It is hardly credible how many books and productions of every species, and in every language, are proscribed by her. Not only Voltaire and Rousseau are included in the list, from the immoral tendency or licentious nature of their writings; but many authors whom we consider as unexceptionable or harmless, experience a similar treatment.\" The censorship particularly affected works that were deemed to be against the Catholic religion. Ironically, for this purpose, she was aided by Gerard van Swieten who was considered to be an \"enlightened\" man.\nEconomy.\nMaria Theresa endeavoured to increase the living standards and quality of life of the people, since she could see a causal link between peasant living standards, productivity and state revenue. The Habsburg government under her rule also tried to strengthen its industry through government interventions. After the loss of Silesia, they implemented subsidies and trade barriers to encourage the move of Silesian textile industry to northern Bohemia. In addition, they cut back guild privileges, and internal duties on trade were either reformed or removed (such as the case for the Austrian-Bohemian lands in 1775).\nIn the late part of her reign, Maria Theresa undertook reform of the system of serfdom, which was the basis for agriculture in eastern parts of her lands (particularly Bohemia, Moravia, Hungary and Galicia). Although Maria Theresa had initially been reluctant to meddle in such affairs, government interventions were made possible by the perceived need for economic power and the emergence of a functioning bureaucracy. The census of 1770\u20131771 gave the peasants opportunity to express their grievances directly to the royal commissioners and made evident to Maria Theresa the extent to which their poverty was the result of the extreme demands for forced labour (called \"robota\" in Czech) by the landlords. On some estates, the landlords demanded that the peasants work up to seven days per week in tilling the nobles' land, so that the only time available for the peasants to till their own land was at night.\nAn additional prompt to reform was the famine which afflicted the empire in the early 1770s. Bohemia was particularly hard hit. Maria Theresa was increasingly influenced by the reformers Franz Anton von Blanc and Tobias Philipp von Gebler, who called for radical changes to the serf system to allow the peasants to make a living. In 1771\u20131778, Maria Theresa issued a series of \"Robot Patents\" (i.e. regulations regarding forced labour), which regulated and restricted peasant labour only in the German and Bohemian parts of the realm. The goal was to ensure that peasants not only could support themselves and their family members, but also help cover the national expenditure in peace or war.\nBy late 1772, Maria Theresa had decided on more radical reform. In 1773, she entrusted her minister Franz Anton von Raab with a model project on the crown lands in Bohemia: he was tasked to divide up the large estates into small farms, convert the forced labour contracts into leases, and enable the farmers to pass the leaseholds onto their children. Raab pushed the project through so successfully that his name was identified with the program, which became known as \"Raabisation\". After the success of the program on the crown lands, Maria Theresa had it also implemented on the former Jesuit lands, as well as crown lands in other parts of her empire.\nHowever, Maria Theresa's attempts to extend the Raab system to the great estates belonging to the Bohemian nobles were fiercely resisted by the nobles. They claimed that the crown had no right to interfere with the serf system, since the nobles were the original owners of the land and had allowed the peasants to work it on stipulated conditions. The nobles also claimed that the system of forced labour had no connection with the peasants' poverty, which was a result of the peasants' own wastefulness and the increased royal taxes. Somewhat surprisingly, the nobles were supported by Maria Theresa's son and co-ruler Joseph II, who had earlier called for the abolition of serfdom. In a letter to his brother Leopold, of 1775, Joseph complained that his mother intended to \"abolish serfdom entirely and arbitrarily destroy the centuries-old property relations.\" He complained that \"no consideration was being taken for the landlords, who were threatened with the loss of more than half their income. For many of them, who are carrying debts, this would mean financial ruin.\" By 1776, the court was polarized: on one side was a small reform party (including Maria Theresa, Raab, Blanc, Gebler and Greiner); on the conservative side were Joseph and the rest of the court. Joseph argued that it was difficult to find a middle way between the interests of the peasants and nobles; he suggested instead that the peasants negotiate with their landlords to reach an outcome. Joseph's biographer Derek Beales calls this change of course \"puzzling\". In the ensuing struggle, Joseph forced Blanc to leave the court. Because of the opposition, Maria Theresa was unable to carry out the planned reform and had to settle on a compromise. The system of serfdom was only abolished after Maria Theresa's death, in the Serfdom Patent (1781) issued (in another change of course) by Joseph II as sole ruler.\nLate reign.\nEmperor Francis died on 18 August 1765, while he and the court were in Innsbruck celebrating the wedding of his second surviving son, Leopold. Maria Theresa was devastated. Their eldest son, Joseph, became Holy Roman Emperor. Maria Theresa abandoned all ornamentation, had her hair cut short, painted her rooms black and dressed in mourning for the rest of her life. She completely withdrew from court life, public events, and theater. Throughout her widowhood, she spent the whole of August and the eighteenth of each month alone in her chamber, which negatively affected her mental health. She described her state of mind shortly after Francis's death: \"I hardly know myself now, for I have become like an animal with no true life or reasoning power.\"\nUpon his accession to the imperial throne, Joseph ruled less land than his father had in 1740, since he had given up his rights over Tuscany to Leopold, and thus he only controlled Falkenstein and Teschen. Believing that the Emperor must possess enough land to maintain his standing as emperor, Maria Theresa, who was used to being assisted in the administration of her vast realms, declared Joseph to be her new co-ruler on 17 September 1765. From then on, mother and son had frequent ideological disagreements. The 22\u00a0million florins that Joseph inherited from his father was injected into the treasury. Maria Theresa had another loss in February 1766 when Haugwitz died. She gave her son absolute control over the military following the death of Leopold Joseph von Daun.\nAccording to Austrian historian Robert A. Kann, Maria Theresa was a monarch of above-average qualifications but intellectually inferior to Joseph and Leopold. Kann asserts that she nevertheless possessed qualities appreciated in a monarch: warm heart, practical mind, firm determination and sound perception. Most importantly, she was ready to recognise the mental superiority of some of her advisers and to give way to a superior mind while enjoying support of her ministers even if their ideas differed from her own. Joseph, however, was never able to establish rapport with the same advisers, even though their philosophy of government was closer to Joseph's than to Maria Theresa's.\nThe relationship between Maria Theresa and Joseph was not without warmth but was complicated and their personalities clashed. Despite his intellect, Maria Theresa's force of personality often made Joseph cower. Sometimes, she openly admired his talents and achievements, but she was also not hesitant to rebuke him. She even wrote: \"We never see each other except at dinner ... His temper gets worse every day ... Please burn this letter ... I just try to avoid public scandal.\" In another letter, also addressed to Joseph's companion, she complained: \"He avoids me ... I am the only person in his way and so I am an obstruction and a burden ... Abdication alone can remedy matters.\" After much contemplation, she chose not to abdicate. Joseph himself often threatened to resign as co-regent and emperor, but he, too, was induced not to do so. Her threats of abdication were rarely taken seriously; Maria Theresa believed that her recovery from smallpox in 1767 was a sign that God wished her to reign until death. It was in Joseph's interest that she remained sovereign, for he often blamed her for his failures and thus avoided taking on the responsibilities of a monarch.\nJoseph and Prince Kaunitz arranged the First Partition of Poland despite Maria Theresa's protestations. Her sense of justice pushed her to reject the idea of partition, which would hurt the Polish people. She even once argued, \"What right have we to rob an innocent nation that it has hitherto been our boast to protect and support?\" The duo argued that it was too late to abort now. Besides, Maria Theresa herself agreed with the partition when she realised that Frederick II of Prussia and Catherine II of Russia would do it with or without Austrian participation. Maria Theresa claimed and eventually took Galicia and Lodomeria; in the words of Frederick, \"the more she cried, the more she took\".\nA few years after the partition, Russia defeated the Ottoman Empire in the Russo-Turkish War (1768\u20131774). Following the signing of the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca in 1774 that concluded the war, Austria entered into negotiations with the Sublime Porte. Thus, in 1775, the Ottoman Empire ceded the northwestern part of Moldavia (subsequently known as Bukovina) to Austria. Subsequently, on 30 December 1777, Maximilian III Joseph, Elector of Bavaria died without leaving any children. As a result, his territories were coveted by ambitious men, including Joseph, who tried to swap Bavaria for the Austrian Netherlands. This alarmed Frederick II of Prussia, and thus the War of the Bavarian Succession erupted in 1778. Maria Theresa very unwillingly consented to the occupation of Bavaria, and a year later she made peace proposals to Frederick II despite Joseph's objections. Although Austria managed to gain the Innviertel area, this \"Potato War\" caused a setback to the financial improvement that the Empress had made. The 500,000 florins in annual revenue from 100,000 inhabitants of Innviertel were not comparable to the 100,000,000 florins that were spent during the war.\nIt is unlikely that Maria Theresa ever completely recovered from the smallpox attack in 1767, as 18th-century writers asserted. She suffered from shortness of breath, fatigue, cough, distress, necrophobia and insomnia. She later developed edema.\nMaria Theresa fell ill on 24 November 1780. Her physician, Dr. St\u00f6rk, thought her condition serious, although her son Joseph was confident that she would recover in no time. By 26 November, she asked for the last rites, and on 28 November, the doctor told her that the time had come. On 29 November, she died surrounded by her remaining children. Her body is buried in the Imperial Crypt in Vienna next to her husband in a coffin she had inscribed during her lifetime.\nHer longtime rival Frederick the Great, on hearing of her death, said that she had honored her throne and her sex, and although he had fought against her in three wars, he never considered her his enemy. With her death, the House of Habsburg died out and was replaced by the House of Habsburg-Lorraine. Joseph II, already co-sovereign of the Habsburg dominions, succeeded her and introduced sweeping reforms in the empire; Joseph produced nearly 700 edicts per year (or almost two per day), whereas Maria Theresa issued only about 100 edicts annually.\nLegacy.\nMaria Theresa understood the importance of her public \"persona\" and was able to simultaneously evoke both esteem and affection in her subjects; a notable example was how she projected dignity and simplicity to awe the people in Pressburg before she was crowned as Queen (Regnant) of Hungary. Her 40-year reign was considered to be very successful when compared to other Habsburg rulers. Her reforms had transformed the empire into a modern state with a significant international standing. She centralised and modernised its institutions, and her reign was considered as the beginning of the era of \"enlightened absolutism\" in Austria, with a brand new approach toward governing: the measures undertaken by rulers became more modern and rational, and thoughts were given to the welfare of the state and the people. Many of her policies were not in line with the ideals of the Enlightenment (such as her support of torture), and she was still very much influenced by Catholicism from the previous era. Vocelka even stated that \"taken as a whole the reforms of Maria Theresa appear more absolutist and centralist than enlightened, even if one must admit that the influence of enlightened ideas is visible to a certain degree.\" Despite being among the most successful Habsburg monarchs and remarkable leaders of the 18th century, Maria Theresa has not captured the interest of contemporary historians or media, perhaps due her hardened nature.\nMemorials and honours.\nA number of streets and squares were named after her throughout the empire as well as statues and monuments built. In Vienna a large bronze monument was built in her honour at Maria-Theresien-Platz in 1888. The Maria Theresia Garden Square (Uzhhorod) was constructed in her memory as recently as 2013.\nThe city of Subotica was renamed in her honor in 1779, as Maria-Theresiapolis, sometimes spelled as Maria-Theresiopel or Theresiopel.\nA number of her descendants were named in her honour. These include: \n* Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria (1762\u20131770),\n* Maria Theresa of Austria (1767\u20131827),\n* Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily,\n* Maria Theresa of Austria-Este, Queen of Sardinia,\n* Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se of France,\n* Maria Theresa of Austria (1801\u20131855),\n* Maria Teresa of Savoy (1803\u20131879),\n* Maria Theresa of Austria (1816\u20131867),\n* Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria-Este (1817\u20131886),\n* Maria Theresa of Austria-Este (1849\u20131919),\n* Princess Maria Teresa of Bourbon-Two Sicilies (1867\u20131909), and\n* Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria (1862\u20131933). Her granddaughter Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily became Holy Roman Empress as well in 1792.\nIn media.\nShe has appeared as the main figure in a number of films and series such as the 1951 \"Maria Theresa\" and \"Maria Theresia\", an Austria-Czech television miniseries from 2017. In the 2006 film \"Marie Antoinette\", Marianne Faithfull portrayed Maria Theresa opposite Kirsten Dunst in the title role.\nYears before, she appeared as a minor character in the 1938 film \"Marie Antoinette\", starring Norma Shearer, in which she was portrayed by Alma Kruger.\nShe has appeared in the German documentary \"Die Deutschen\" season 1, episode 6 \"Preu\u00dfens Friedrich und die Kaiserin\" in 2008.\nTitles, styles, honours, and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nHer title after the death of her husband was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Her Imperial and Royal Apostolic Majesty, Maria Theresa, by the Grace of God, Dowager Empress of the Romans, Queen of Hungary, of Bohemia, of Dalmatia, of Croatia, of Slavonia, of Galicia, of Lodomeria, etc.; Archduchess of Austria; Duchess of Burgundy, of Styria, of Carinthia and of Carniola; Grand Princess of Transylvania; Margravine of Moravia; Duchess of Brabant, of Limburg, of Luxemburg, of Guelders, of W\u00fcrttemberg, of Upper and Lower Silesia, of Milan, of Mantua, of Parma, of Piacenza, of Guastalla, of Auschwitz, of Zator; Princess of Swabia; Princely Countess of Habsburg, of Flanders, of Tyrol, of Hainault, of Kyburg, of Gorizia and of Gradisca; Margravine of Burgau, of Upper and Lower Lusatia; Countess of Namur; Lady of the Wendish Mark and of Mechlin; Dowager Duchess of Lorraine and Bar, Dowager Grand Duchess of Tuscany, etc.\"\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48451", "revid": "41467619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48451", "title": "Lycia", "text": "Ancient geopolitical region of Anatolia (Turkey)\nLycia (; Lycian: \ud800\ude97\ud800\ude95\ud800\ude90\ud800\ude8e\ud800\ude86\ud800\ude96 \"Trm\u0303mis\"; , ; ) was a historical region in Anatolia from 15\u201314th centuries BC (as Lukka) to 546\u00a0BC. It bordered the Mediterranean Sea in what is today the provinces of Antalya and Mu\u011fla in Turkey as well some inland parts of Burdur Province. The region was known to history from the Late Bronze Age records of ancient Egypt and the Hittite Empire.\nLycia was populated by speakers of Luwic languages. Written records began to be inscribed in stone in the Lycian language after Lycia's involuntary incorporation into the Achaemenid Empire in the Iron Age. At that time (546\u00a0BC) the Luwian speakers were displaced as Lycia received an influx of Persian speakers.\nThe many cities in Lycia were wealthy as shown by their elaborate architecture starting at least from the 5th century BC and extending to the Roman period.\nLycia fought for the Persians in the Persian Wars, but on the defeat of the Achaemenid Empire by the Greeks, it became intermittently a free agent. After a brief membership in the Athenian Empire, it seceded and became independent (its treaty with Athens had omitted the usual non-secession clause), was under the Persians again, revolted again, was conquered by Mausolus of Caria, returned to the Persians, and finally fell under Macedonian hegemony upon the defeat of the Persians by Alexander the Great. Due to the influx of Greek speakers and the sparsity of the remaining Lycian speakers, Lycia was rapidly Hellenized under the Macedonians, and the Lycian language disappeared from inscriptions and coinage.\nOn defeating Antiochus III the Great in 188 BC, the Roman Republic gave Lycia to Rhodes for 20\u00a0years, taking it back in 168\u00a0BC. In these latter stages of the Roman Republic, Lycia came to enjoy freedom as a Roman protectorate. The Romans validated home rule officially under the Lycian League in 168\u00a0BC. This native government was an early federation with republican principles; these later came to the attention of the framers of the United States Constitution, particularly James Madison, influencing their thoughts.\nDespite home rule, Lycia was not a sovereign state and had not been since its defeat by the Carians. In 43\u00a0AD the Roman emperor Claudius dissolved the league, and Lycia was incorporated into the Roman province of Lycia et Pamphylia. In 395, the province was assigned to the Eastern Roman Empire. It lost the region to the Sultanate of Rum in the early 13th century, which itself collapsed in 1308. It was then absorbed by the Beylik of Teke and came under the rule of the Ottoman Empire in 1423. Lycia was inherited by the Turkish Republic after the Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire.\nGeography.\nThe borders of Lycia varied over time, but at its centre was the Teke peninsula of southwestern Turkey, which juts southward into the Mediterranean Sea, bounded on the west by the Gulf of Fethiye, and on the east by the Gulf of Antalya. Lycia comprised what is now the westernmost portion of Antalya Province, the easternmost portion of Mu\u011fla Province, and the southernmost portion of Burdur Province. In ancient times the surrounding districts were, from west to east, Caria, Pisidia, and Pamphylia, all equally as ancient, and each speaking its own Anatolian language.\nThe name of the Teke Peninsula comes from the former name of Antalya Province, which was Teke Province, named from the Turkish tribe that settled in the region.\nPhysical geography.\nFour ridges extend from northeast to southwest, roughly, forming the western extremity of the Taurus Mountains. Furthest west of the four are Boncuk Da\u011flari, or 'the Boncuk Mountains', extending from about Altinyayla, Burdur, southwest to about Oren north of Fethiye. This is a fairly low range peaking at about . To the west of it the steep gorges of Dalaman \u00c7ayi ('the Dalaman River'), the ancient Indus, formed the traditional border between Caria and Lycia. The stream, long, enters the Mediterranean to the west of modern-day Dalaman. Upstream it is dammed in four places, after an origin in the vicinity of Sarikavak in Denizli Province.\nThe next ridge to the east is Akda\u011flari, 'the White Mountains', about long, with a high point at Uyluktepe, \"Uyluk Peak\", of . This massif may have been ancient Mount Cragus. Along its western side flows E\u015fen \u00c7ayi, \"the Esen River\", anciently the Xanthos, Lycian Ar\u00f1na, originating in the Boncuk Mountains, flowing south, and transecting the several-mile-long beach at Patara. The Xanthos Valley was the country called T\u0157mmis in dynastic Lycia, from which the people were the Termilae or Tremilae, or Kragos in the coin inscriptions of Greek Lycia: Kr or Ksan Kr. The name of western Lycia was given by Charles Fellows to it and points of Lycia west of it.\nThe next ridge to the east, Beyda\u011flari, 'the Bey Mountains', peaks at Kizlarsevrisi, , the highest point of the Teke Peninsula. It is most likely the ancient Masicytus range. Between Beyda\u011flari and Akda\u011flari is an upland plateau, Elmali, where ancient Milyas was located. The elevation of the town of Elmali, which means 'Apple Town,' from the density of fruit-bearing groves in the region, is , which is the highest part of the valley below it. Fellows considered the valley to be central Lycia.\nThe Ak\u00e7ay, or 'White River', the ancient Aedesa, brought water from the slopes to the plain, where it pooled in two lakes below the town, Karag\u00f6l and Avlang\u00f6l. Currently the two lakes are dry, the waters being captured on an ongoing basis by irrigation systems for the trees. The Aedesa once drained the plain through a chasm to the east, but now flows entirely through pipelines covering the same route, but emptying into the water supplies of Arycanda and Arif. An effort has been made to restore some of the cedar forests cleared in antiquity.\nThe easternmost ridge extends along the east coast of the Teke Peninsula, and is called, generally, Tahtali Da\u011flari, \"The Tahtali Mountains.\" The high point within them is Tahtali Da\u011f, elevation , dubbed \"Mount Olympus\" in antiquity by the Greeks, remembering Mount Olympus in Greece. These mountains create a rugged coastline called by Fellows eastern Lycia. Much of it has been reserved as Olimpos Beyda\u011flari Parki. Within the park on the slopes of Mount Olympus is a U-shaped outcrop, Yanarta\u015f, above Cirali, from which methane gas, naturally perpetually escaping from below through the rocks, feeds eternal flames. This is the location of ancient Mount Chimaera.\nThrough the cul-de-sac between Bayda\u011flari and Tahtalida\u011flari, the Alakir \u00c7ay ('Alakir River'), the ancient Limyra, flows to the south trickling from the broad valley under superhighway D400 near downtown Kumluca across a barrier beach into the Mediterranean. This configuration is entirely modern. Upstream the river is impounded behind Alakir Dam to form an urban-size reservoir. Below the reservoir a braided stream alternates with a single, small channel flowing through irrigated land. The wide bed gives an indication of the former size of the river. Upstream from the reservoir the stream lies in an unaltered gorge, flowing from the slopes of Bayda\u011flari. The ancient route to Antalya goes up the valley and over the cul-de-sac, as the coast itself is impassible except by boat. The valley was the seat of ancient Solymus, home of the Solymi.\nDemography.\nThere are at least 381 ancient settlements in the broader region of Lycia-Pamphylia, with the vast majority of these in Lycia. These are situated either along the coastal strip in the protecting coves or on the slopes and hills of the mountain ranges. They are often difficult to access, which in ancient times was a defensive feature. The rugged coastline favored well-defended ports from which, in troubled times, Lycian pirate fleets sallied forth.\nThe principal cities of ancient Lycia were Xanthos, Patara, Myra, Pinara, Tlos and Olympos (each entitled to three votes in the Lycian League) and Phaselis. Cities such as Telmessos and Krya were sometimes listed by Classical authors as Carian and sometimes as Lycian.\nModern Tourism.\nAlthough the 2nd-century BC dialogue \"Er\u014dtes\" found the cities of Lycia \"interesting more for their history than for their monuments, since they have retained none of their former splendor,\" many relics of the Lycians remain visible today. These relics include the distinctive rock-cut tombs in the sides of cliffs. The British Museum in London contains one of the best collections of Lycian artifacts. Letoon, an important center in Hellenic times of worship for the goddess Leto and her twin children, Apollo and Artemis, and nearby Xanthos, ancient capital of Lycia, constitute a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nTurkey's first waymarked long-distance footpath, the Lycian Way, follows part of the coast of the region. The establishment of the path was a private initiative by a British/Turkish woman called Kate Clow. It is intended to support sustainable tourism in smaller mountain villages which are in the process of depopulation. Since it is mainly walked in March \u2013 June and Sept\u2013Nov, it also has lengthened the tourism season. The Turkish Culture and Tourism Ministry promotes the Lycian coast as part of the Turkish Riviera or the Turquoise Coast, but the most important part of this is further west near Bodrum. This coast features rocky or sandy beaches at the bases of cliffs and settlements in protected coves that cater to the yachting industry.\nYe\u015fil\u00fcz\u00fcml\u00fc village is a popular touristic attraction among the tourists beyond the Lycian Way due to its historic architecture and narrow cobblestone streets. The village is also located near the Cadyanda ruins, which date back to 3000 BCE, that are also popular among the tourists. The inhabitants are also known for their weavings called \"Dastar\", which Turkish Patent Institute granted a geographical indication status in 2019.\nAncient language.\nThe eponymous inhabitants of Lycia, the Lycians, spoke Lycian, a member of the Luwian branch of the Anatolian languages, a subfamily of the Indo-European family. Lycian has been attested only between about 500\u00a0BC and no later than 300\u00a0BC, in a unique alphabet devised for the purpose from the Greek alphabet of Rhodes. However, the Luwian languages originated in Anatolia during the 2nd millennium BC. The country was known by the name of Lukka then, and was sometimes under Hittite rule.\nAt about 535\u00a0BC, before the first appearance of attested Lycian, the Achaemenid Empire overran Lycia. Despite its resistance, because of which the population of Xanthos was decimated, Lycia became part of the Persian Empire. The first coins with Lycian letters on them appeared not long before 500 BC. Lycia prospered under a monarchy set up by the Persians. Subsequently, the Lycians were verbose in stone, carving memorial, historical and governmental inscriptions. Not all of these can yet be entirely understood, due to remaining ignorance of the language. The term \"dynastic period\" is used. If the government was any sort of federal democracy, there is no evidence of it, as the term \"dynastic\" suggests.\nLycia hosted a small enclave of Dorian Greeks for some centuries and Rhodes was mainly inhabited by Dorians at the time. After the defeat of the Persians by the Greeks, Lycia became open to further Greek settlement. During this period, inscriptions in Lycian diminished, while those in Greek multiplied. Complete assimilation to Greek occurred sometime in the 4th century, after Lycia had come under the control of Alexander the Great and his fellow Macedonians. There is no agreement yet on which inscription in the Lycian language is the very last, but nothing dated after the year 300 BC has yet been found.\nSubsequently, the Lycians were vassalized by the Roman Republic, which allowed the Lycians home rule under their own language, which at that point was Greek. Lycia continued to exist as a vassal state under the Roman Empire until its final division after the death of Theodosius I at which point it became a part of the Byzantine Empire under Arcadius. After the fall of the Byzantines in the 15th century, Lycia fell under the control of the Ottoman Empire; Turkish colonization of the area soon followed. Turkish and Greek settlements existed side-by-side, each speaking their own language.\nAll Greek-speaking enclaves in Anatolia were exchanged for Turkish speakers in Greece during the final settlement of the border with Greece at the beginning of the Turkish Republic in 1923. The Turks had won wars against both Greece and Armenia in the preceding few years, settling the issue of whether the coast of Anatolia was going to be Greek or Turkish. The intent of the Treaty of Lausanne (1923) was to define borders that would not leave substantial populations of one country in another. Some population transfers were enforced. Former Greek villages still stand as ghost towns in Lycia.\nHistory.\nBronze Age.\nDuring the Late Bronze Age, Lycia was part of the \"Lukka lands\" known from Hittite and ancient Egyptian records. The toponyms Lukka and Lycia are believed to be cognate, as are the names of numerous Lukkan and Lycian settlements.\nThe Lukka lands were never a unified kingdom, instead having a decentralized political structure.\nArchaeological remains of the Lukka people are sparse. The Lukka people were famously fractious, with Hittite and Egyptian records describing them as raiders, rebels, and pirates. \nLukka people fought against the Hittites as part of the Assuwa confederation, later fought for the Hittites in the Battle of Kadesh, and are listed among the groups known to modern scholars as the Sea People.\nDynastic period.\nAcquisition by Cyrus the Great (circa 540 BC).\nHerodotus writes more credibly of contemporaneous events, especially where they concerned his native land. Asia Minor had been partly conquered by Iranian peoples, first the Scythians, later the Medes. The latter were defeated by the Persians, who incorporated them and their lands into the new Persian Empire. Cyrus the Great, founder of the Achaemenid dynasty, resolved to complete the conquest of Anatolia as a prelude to operations further west, to be carried out by his successors. He assigned the task to Harpagus, a Median general, who proceeded to subdue the various states of Anatolia, one by one, some by convincing them to submit, others through military action.\nArriving at the southern coast of Anatolia in 546\u00a0BC, the army of Harpagus encountered no problem with the Carians and their immediate Greek neighbors and alien populations, who submitted peacefully. In the Xanthos Valley an army of Xanthian Greeks sallied out to meet them, fighting determinedly, although vastly outnumbered. Driven into the citadel, they collected all their property, dependents and slaves into a central building, and burned them up. Then, after taking an oath not to surrender, they died to a man fighting the Persians, foreshadowing and perhaps setting an example for Spartan conduct at the Battle of Thermopylae a few generations later.\nArchaeological evidence indicates there was a major fire on the acropolis of Xanthos in the mid-6th century BC but, as Antony Keen points out, there is no way to connect that fire with the event presented by Herodotus. It might have been another fire. The Caunians, says Herodotus, followed a similar example immediately after. If there was an attempt by any of the states of Lycia to join forces, as happened in Greece 50\u00a0years later, there is no record of it, suggesting that no central government existed. Each country awaited its own fate alone.\nHerodotus also says or implies that 80 Xanthian families were away at the time, perhaps with the herd animals in alpine summer pastures (pure speculation), but helped repopulate the place. However, he reports, the Xanthians of his time were mainly descended from non-Xanthians. Looking for any nuance that might shed light on the repopulation of Xanthos, Keen interprets Herodotus' \"those Lycians who now say that they are Xanthians\" to mean that Xanthos was repopulated by other Lycians (and not by Iranians or other foreigners). Herodotus said nothing of the remainder of Lycia; presumably, that is true because they submitted without further incident. Lycia was well populated and flourished as a Persian satrapy; moreover, they spoke mainly Lycian.\nThe Harpagid theory.\nThe Harpagid Theory was initiated by Charles Fellows, discoverer of the Xanthian Obelisk, and person responsible for the transportation of the Xanthian Marbles from Lycia to the British Museum. Fellows could not read the Lycian inscription, except for one line identifying a person of illegible name, to whom the monument was erected, termed the son of Arppakhu in Lycian, equivalent to Greek Harpagos. Concluding that this person was the conqueror of Lycia in 546, Fellows conjectured that Harpagos had been made permanent satrap of Lycia for his services; moreover, the position was hereditary, creating a Harpagid Dynasty. This theory prevailed nearly without question for several generations.\nTo the inscriptions of the Xanthian Obelisk were added those of the Letoon trilingual, which gave a sequel, as it were, to the names on the obelisk. Studies of coin legends, initiated by Fellows, went on. Currently, most (but not all) of the Harpagid Theory has been rejected. The Achaemenids utilized no permanent satrapies; the political circumstances changed too often. The conqueror of new lands was seldom made their satrap; he went on to other conquests. It was not the Persian custom to grant hereditary satrapies; satrap was only a step in the \"cursus honorum\". And finally, a destitute mountain country would have been a poor reward for Cyrus' best general. The main evidence against the Harpagid Theory (as Keen calls it) is the reconstruction of the name of the Xanthian Obelisk's deceased as Lycian Kheriga, Greek Gergis (Nereid Monument), a king reigning approximately 440\u2013410\u00a0BC, over a century later than the conqueror of Lycia.\nThe next logical possibility is that Kheriga's father, Arppakhu, was a descendant of the conqueror. In opposition, Keen reconstructs the dynastic sequence from coin inscriptions as follows. Kheriga had two grandfathers, Kuprlli and Kheriga. The younger Kheriga was the successor of Kuprlli. The latter's son, therefore, Kheziga, who was Kheriga's uncle, must have predeceased Kuprlli. Arppakhu is listed as regnant on two other inscriptions, but he did not succeed Kuprlli. He must therefore have married a daughter of Kuprlli, and have also predeceased the long-lived Kuprlli. The latter then was too old to reign de facto. On the contemporaneous deaths of both him and his son-in-law, Kheriga, named after his paternal grandfather, acquired the throne.\nKuprlli was the first king recorded for certain (there was an earlier possible) in the coin legends. He reigned approximately 480\u2013440. Harpagos was not related by blood. The conqueror, therefore, was not the founder of the line, which was not Harpagid. An Iranian family, however, producing some other Harpagids, did live in Lycia and was of sufficient rank to marry the king's daughter. As to whether the Iranian family were related to any satrap, probably not. Herodotus said that Satrapy 1 (the satrapies were numbered) consisted of Ionia, Magnesia, Aeolia, Caria, Lycia, Milya, and Pamphylia, who together paid a tax of 400 silver talents. This satrapy was later broken up and recombined. Keen hypothesizes that since Caria had responsibility for the King's Highway through Lycia, Lycia and Caria were a satrapy.\nThe Lycian monarchy.\nThe Achaemenid Persian policy toward Lycia was hands-off. There was not even a satrap stationed in the country. The reason for this tolerance after such a determined initial resistance is that the Iranians were utilizing another method of control: the placement of aristocratic Persian families in a region to exercise putative home rule. There is some evidence that the Lycian population was not as docile as the Persian hand-off policy would suggest. A section of the Persepolis Administrative Archives called the Persepolis Fortification Tablets, regarding the redistribution of goods and services in the Persepolis palace economy, mentions some redistributed prisoners of war, among whom were the Turmirla or Turmirliya, Lycian Trm\u0303mili, \"Lycians.\" They lived during the reign of Darius I (522\u2013486), the tablets dating from 509.\nFor closer attention to their conquered, the Persian government preferred to establish a client state, setting up a monarchy under their control. The term \"dynast\" has come into use among English-speaking scholars, but that is not a native term. The Lycian inscriptions indicate the monarch was titled x\u00f1tawati, more phonetically kh\u00f1tawati. The holders of this title can be traced in coin legends, having been given the right to coin. Lycia had a single monarch, who ruled the entire country from a palace at Xanthos. The monarchy was hereditary, hence the term \"dynast.\" It was utilized by Persia as a means of transmitting Persian policy. It must have been they who put down local resistance and transported the prisoners to Persepolis, or ordered them transported. Some members of the dynasty were Iranian, but mainly it was native Lycian. If the survivors of 546 were in fact herdsmen (speculation), then all the Xanthian nobility had perished, and the Persians must have designated some other Lycian noble, whom they could trust.\nThe first dynast is believed to be the person mentioned in the last line of the Greek epigram inscribed on the Xanthian Obelisk, which says \"this monument has brought glory to the family (genos) of ka[]ika,\" which has a letter missing. It is probably not *karikas, for Kherika, as the latter is translated in the Letoon trilingual as Gergis. A more likely possibility is *kasikas for Kheziga, the same as Kheriga's uncle, the successor to Kuprlli, who predeceased him.\nHerodotus mentioned that the leader of the Lycian fleet under Xerxes in the Second Persian War of 480\u00a0BC was \"Kuberniskos Sika\", previously interpreted as \"Cyberniscus, the son of Sicas,\" two non-Lycian names. A slight regrouping of the letters obtains \"kubernis kosika\", \"Cybernis, son of Cosicas,\" where Cosicas is for Kheziga. Cybernis went to the bottom of the Straits of Salamis with the entire Lycian fleet in the Battle of Salamis, but he may be commemorated by the Harpy Tomb. According to this theory, Cybernis was the KUB of the first coin legends, dated to the window, 520\u2013500. The date would have been more towards 500.\nThere is a gap, however, between him and Kuprlli, who should have had a father named the same as his son, Kheziga. The name Kubernis does not appear again. Keen suggests that Darius I created the kingship on reorganizing the satrapies in 525, and that on the intestate death of Kubernis in battle, the Persians chose another relative named Kheziga, who was the father of Kuprlli. The Lycian dynasty may therefore be summarized as follows:\nClassical period.\nAlly of Athens in the Delian League (c. 470\u2013430 BC).\nFollowing the Achaemenid defeat in the Greco-Persian War (479 BC), the Lycians may have temporarily joined the Greek side during the counter-attacks of the Spartan Pausanias in the Eastern Mediterranean circa 478 BC. However, the Lycian were still on the Persian side during the expeditions of Kimon circa 470 BC, who finally persuaded the Lycian to join the Athenian alliance, the Delian League: Diodorus relates that Kimon \"persuaded those of Lycia and took them into his allegiance\".\nAs the power of Athens weakened and Athens and Sparta fought the Peloponnesian Wars (431\u2013404 BC), the majority of Lycian cities defaulted from the Delian League, with the exception of Telmessos and Phaselis. In 429\u00a0BC, Athens sent an expedition against Lycia to try to force it to rejoin the League. This failed when Lycia's leader Gergis/Kheriga of Xanthos defeated Athenian General Melesander.\nRenewed Achaemenid control (c. 430\u2013333 BC).\nThe Lycians once again fell under Persian domination, and by 412\u00a0BC, Lycia is documented as fighting on the winning side of Persia. The Persian satraps were re-installed, but (as the coinage of the time attests) they allowed local dynasts the freedom to rule.\nThe last known dynast of Lycia was Perikles. He ruled 380\u2013360 BC over eastern Lycia from Limyra, at a time when Western Lycia was directly under Persian domination. Pericles took an active part in the Revolt of the Satraps against Achaemenid power, but lost his territory when defeated.\nAfter Perikles, Persian rule was reestablished firmly in Lycia in 366 or 362 BC. Control was taken by Mausolus, the satrap of nearby Caria, who moved the satrap's residence to Halicarnassus. Lycia was also ruled directly by the Carian dynast Pixodarus, son of Hecatomnus, as shown in the Xanthos trilingual inscription.\nLycia was also ruled by men such as Mithrapata (late 4th century BC), whose name was Persian. Persia held Lycia until it was conquered by Alexander III (the Great) of Macedon during 334\u2013333\u00a0BC.\nDuring the Alexander the Great period, Nearchus was appointed viceroy of Lycia and of the land adjacent to it as far as mount Taurus.\nAlthough many of the first coins in Antiquity illustrated the images of various gods, the first portraiture of actual rulers appears with the coinage of Lycia in the late 5th century BC. No ruler had dared to illustrate his own portrait on coinage until that time. The Achaemenids had been the first to illustrate the person of their king or a hero in a stereotypical undifferentiated manner, showing a bust or the full body, but never an actual portrait, on their Sigloi and Daric coinage from circa 500 BC. From the time of Alexander the Great, portraiture of the issuing ruler would then become a standard, generalized, feature of coinage.\nHellenistic period (333\u2013168 BC).\nAfter the death of Alexander the Great in 323\u00a0BC, his generals fought amongst themselves over the succession. Lycia fell into the hands of the general Antigonus by 304\u00a0BC. In 301\u00a0BC Antigonus was killed by an alliance of the other successors of Alexander, and Lycia became a part of the kingdom of Lysimachus, who ruled until he was killed in battle in 281\u00a0BC.\nControl then passed to the Ptolemaic Kingdom, centre on Egypt. Ptolemy II Philadelphos (ruled 285\u2013246 BC), who supported the Limyrans of Lycia when they were threatened by the Galatians (a Celtic tribe that had invaded Asia Minor). The citizens of Limyra in return dedicated a monument to Ptolemy, called the \"Ptolemaion\" circa 270 BC. By 240\u00a0BC Lycia was firmly part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom, centred on Egypt, and remained in their control through 200\u00a0BC.\nIt had apparently come under Seleucid control by 190\u00a0BC, when the Seleucids' defeat in the Battle of Magnesia resulted in Lycia being awarded to Rhodes in the Peace of Apamea in 188\u00a0BC.\nIn 181 BC, at the end of the Roman-Seleucid War, the consul Gnaeus Manlius Vulso decided to fight the Galatian War (189 BC) against the Galatians. He was supported by Attalus II, the king of Pergamon. The two leaders marched inland and reached Pamphylia levying soldiers from local rulers. They then got to the territory of Cibyra, ruled by another tyrant called Moagetes. When Roman envoys went to the city he begged them not to ravage his lands as he was a friend of Rome and promised a paltry sum of money, fifteen talents. Moagetes sent his envoys to Manlius' camp. Polybius had Manlius say that he was the worst enemy of Rome and that he deserved punishment rather than friendship. Moagetes and his friends went to meet Manlius dressed in humble clothing, bewailing the weakness of his town and begging to accept the fifteen talents. Manlius was 'amazed at his impudence' and said that if he did not pay 500 talents, he would lay his lands to waste and sack the city. Moagetes successfully persuaded him to reduce the sum to 100 talents and promised an amount of grain, and Manlius moved on. Polybius described Moagetes as \"cruel and treacherous man and worthy of more than a passing notice.\"\nLycian League.\nThe Lycian League of independent city-states was the first such democratic union in history and the league remained strong in spite of the mountainous terrain, invasions of foreign powers and attempts of tyrants to take power.\nFormation.\nThe Lycian League (\"Lykiakon systema\" in Strabo's Greek \u2014 literally a \"standing together\") is first known from two inscriptions of the early 2nd century BC in which it honors two citizens. Bryce hypothesizes that it was formed as an agent to convince Rome to rescind the annexation of Lycia to Rhodes. It is not known for certain whether it was formed before or after Lycia was removed from Rhodian control. According to Livy, the consul Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus put Lycia under Rhodian control in 190 BC. He wrote that a Lycian embassy complained about the cruel tyranny of the Rhodians and that when they were under king Antiochus III the Great they had been in liberty in comparison. It was slavery, rather that just political oppression: \"they, their wives and children were the victims of violence; their oppressors vented their rage on their persons and their backs, their good name was besmirched and dishonoured, their condition rendered detestable in order that their tyrants might openly assert a legal right over them and reduce them to the status of slaves bought with money.. the senate gave them a letter to and to the Rhodians that ...it was not the pleasure of the senate that either the Lycians or any other men born free should be handed over as slaves to the Rhodians or any one else. The Lycians possessed the same rights under the suzerainty and protection of Rhodes that friendly states possessed under the suzerainty of Rome.\"\nPolybius wrote that the Romans sent envoys to Rhodes to say that \"the Lycians had not been handed over to Rhodes as a gift, but to be treated like friends and allies.\" The Rhodians claimed that king Eumenes of Pergamon had stirred up the Lycians against them. In 169 BC, during the Third Macedonian War, the relationship between Rome and Rhodes became strained and the Roman senate issued a decree which gave the Carians and the Lycians their freedom. Polybius recorded a decree \"freeing\" the Carians and Lycians in 168\u20137 BC.\nStrabo wrote that there were twenty-three cities which came together for a general assembly and had a share in its votes \"after choosing whatever city they approve of\". The last statement is unclear. The largest cities had three votes, the medium-sized ones two, and the rest one. He noted that the League did not have freedom over matters of war and peace: \"Formerly they deliberated about war and peace, and alliances, but this is not now permitted, as these things are under the control of the Romans. It is only done by their consent, or when it may be for their own advantage.\" However, they had the freedom to choose a Lyciarch as the head of the league and to designate general courts. He also noted \"since they lived under such a good government, they remained ever free under the Romans, thus retaining their ancestral usages [i.e ancestral laws and customs].\"\nComposition.\nStrabo wrote that according to a source the six largest were Xanthos, Patara, Pinara, Olympos, Myra, and Tlos. Tlos was near the pass that leads over into Cibyra. The names of the other cities has been identified by a study of the coins and mention in other texts. The coins recognize two districts, termed, for want of a better term, \"monetary districts:\" Masicytus and Cragus, both named after mountain ranges, in the shadow of which, presumably, the communities lived and conducted business. Where coinage before the Lycian League had often been stamped LY for Lycia, it was now stamped KP (kr) or MA.\nIn 81 BC Lucius Licinius Murena, the Roman commander who fought the Second Mithridatic War (83\u201381 BC) in Anatolia deposed Moagetes, a tyrant of the tetrapolis (four towns) in the Cibyratis (northern Lycia). It had been formed by the city of Cibyra Megale, (Greater Cibyra, as opposed to Cibyra Mikra, Little Cibyra, of the coast, not too far from modern Side). It was in the Cibyratis region, in today's Turkish Lake Region. According to Strabo, Cibyra had two votes, while the other three cities had one and the tetrarchy was ruled by a benign tyrant. When Murena ended the tyranny he included the cities of Balbura and Bubon within the territory of the Lycians.\nRoman period.\nLycia was granted autonomy as a protectorate of Rome in 168\u00a0BC and remained so until becoming a Roman province in 43\u00a0AD under Claudius.\nWhen Rome got involved in the eastern Mediterranean the Lycians allied with Rome. An inscription found in Tyberissos provides the first record of such an alliance treaty (foedus). The dating is uncertain. It precedes the treaty of 46 BC (see below) and could go back to the second or first century BC. The context in which this treaty was made in unknown. It could have been concluded during the expansionist moves by Antiochus III the Great, the Seleucid king, in Anatolia prior to the Roman-Seleucid War (192\u2013188 BC), or during or after this war. Alternatively, it could have been concluded in the context of the Mithridatic Wars in Anatolia in the first century BC. The preamble stated: \"There will be peace and loyal alliance between the People of the Romans and the cities of Lycia and the assembly of the Lycians by land and sea for all time.\" There were four clauses which stipulated that: 1) the Lycian League was not to allow enemies of Rome to cross all territory over which they had authority so that they could bring war on Rome or her subjects and was not to give them aid; 2) Rome was not to allow enemies of the Lycians to pass through territory they controlled or had authority over so that they might bring war on the Lycian League or the people subject to them and was not to give them aid; 3) if anyone started a war against the Lycian people first, Rome was to come to her aid as soon as possible and if anyone started a war against Rome, the Lycian league was to aid Rome as soon as possible provided that this was allowed to Rome and the Lycian League in accordance with the agreements and oath; 4) Additions and subtractions to the agreements were possible if each side agreed though a joint decision.\nAn inscription found on a statue-base found in Thespiae attests that in 46 BC Julius Caesar signed a treaty with the Lycian league. It had nine articles. The first article stipulated \"Friendship, alliance and peace both by land and sea in perpetuity \"Let the Lycians observe the power and preeminence of the Romans as is proper in all circumstances.\" The other articles stipulated: 2) Neutrality of each party to the other's enemy; 3) mutual help in case of an attack on either party; 4) anyone charged with import or export of contraband goods was to be charged by the highest official of the two parties; 5) Romans accused of a capital crime in Lycia were to be judged in Rome by her own laws and Lycians accused of these crimes were to be judged in Lycia by her own laws; 6) Romans in a dispute with Lycians were to be judged in Lycia according to her own laws, if Lycians were brought to court by Romans the case was to be heard by whatever official the disputants chose for the case to be dealt with justly; 7) No person was to be taken as a surety, Roman and Lycian war prisoners were to be returned to their own countries, captured horses, slaves or ships were to be restored; 8) named cities, ports and territories which were restored to the Lycians were to belong to them; 9) both parties agreed to abide by the terms of this oath and the treaty. Details could be amended if both parties agreed.\nIn 43 AD the emperor Claudius annexed Lycia. Cassius Dio wrote that Claudius \"reduced the Lycians to servitude because they had revolted and slain some Romans and he incorporated them in the prefecture of Pamphylia\". He also provided some details of the investigation of this affair conducted in the senate. Suetonius wrote that Claudius \"deprived the Lycians of their independence because of deadly intestine feuds\". In an inscription found at Perge which has been dated to late 46/early 45 BC the Lycians, who described themselves as \"faithful allies\", praised Claudius for freeing them from disturbances, lawlessness and brigandage and for the restoration of the ancestral laws. It makes a reference to the transfer of power from the multitude to the councillors, selected from among the best. Therefore, it seems that there might have been a revolutionary popular uprising which could have overturned the established order. The annexation of Lycia seems to fit the common reason for annexing Roman client states or allies in this period: the loss on stability due to internal strife or, in some cases, the weakening or end of a ruling dynasty. The restoration of ancestral law was probably linked to the Roman practice of respecting and guaranteeing the ancestral laws, customs and privileges of city-states or leagues of city-states it made alliance agreements with in the eastern Mediterranean. Lycia was annexed, but the Lycian League was retained as so were self-governance regarding most local matters according to local traditional laws and the League's authority over local courts. The treaty concluded by Caesar in 46 BC had already established a framework for the distinction of judicial areas under the competence of the Lycian League and those under the Roman praetor peregrino (chief justice for foreigners) and could be used to define the assignment of legal areas between the Roman provincial governor and the League. The Romans re-established stability in Lycia and retained friendly relations with the Lycians and Lycian rights to their traditional laws, customs and privileges.\nIn 74 AD the emperor Vespasian joined the Roman provinces of Lycia and Pamphylia into the province of Lycia et Pamphylia. Cassius Dio's statement that Claudius incorporated Lycia into Phampylia (which he had as governed by a prefect, rather than a propraetor, see above) is refuted by the existence of legati Augusti pro praetore Lyciae (imperial provincial governors of Lycia with propraetorial rank). The adoptive son and heir of Augustus, Gaius Caesar, died in Lycia in 4\u00a0AD after being wounded during a campaign in Artagira, Armenia.\nByzantine era.\nDuring the Byzantine period Lycia and Pamphylia came under the command of the Karabisianoi (the mainstay of the Byzantine navy from the mid-7th century until the early 8th century). After the Karabisianoi were disbanded (between c. 719/720 and c. 727) they became the Theme of the Cibyrrhaeots.\nTurkish era.\nLycia was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire and eventually became part of Turkey. After World War I, Lycia was assigned to the kingdom of Italy according to the terms of the Treaty of S\u00e8vres and , but in 1923 was assigned to Turkey.\nDuring this period, Lycia hosted both Turkish and Greek communities. The substantial Christian community of Greeks lived in Lycia until the 1920s, when they were forced to migrate to Greece after the population exchange between Greece and Turkey following the Greco-Turkish War (1919\u20131922). The abandoned Greek villages in the region are a striking reminder of this exodus. Abandoned Greek houses can still be seen in the region, and Kaya is a Greek ghost town. A small population of Turkish farmers moved into the region when the Lycian Greeks migrated. The region is now one of the key centres of domestic and foreign tourism in Turkey.\nIn Greek mythology.\nAccording to Herodotus, the earliest known name for the area was Milyas, and its original inhabitants, who spoke the Milyan language, were the Milyae (), or Milyans, also known by the exonyms (), Solymi, and Solymians.\nIn Greek mythology, Solymus or Solymos was the ancestral hero and eponym of the Solymi. He was a son of either Zeus or Ares; his mother's name is variously given as Chaldene, Caldene (\"daughter of Pisidus\"), Calchedonia, or Chalcea \"the nymph\". Meanwhile, Europa had (at least) two sons, Sarpedon and Minos, who vied for the kingship of their native land, Crete. Minos drove Sarpedon and his people, the Termilae, into exile and they settled in Milyas. Subsequently, Lycus of Athens (son of Pandion II), who was driven into exile by his brother, King Aegeus, settled in Milyas among the Termilae. The name Lycia was adopted subsequently in honor of Lycus. (It had in fact been around much longer under the name Lukka, probably derived from the same root as Latin \"lucus\" (grove, bright space)). Herodotus ends his tale with the observation that the Lycians were matrilineal.\nLycia appears elsewhere in Greek myth, such as in the story of Bellerophon, who eventually succeeded to the throne of the Lycian king Iobates (or Amphianax). Lycia was frequently mentioned by Homer as an ally of Troy. In Homer's Iliad, the Lycian contingent was said to have been led by two esteemed warriors: Sarpedon (son of Zeus and Laodamia) and Glaucus (son of Hippolochus).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48452", "revid": "49350947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48452", "title": "340", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 340 (CCCXL) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Acindynus and Valerius (or, less frequently, year 1093 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 340 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48453", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48453", "title": "Myra", "text": "Ancient town in Lycia\nMyra (; , \"M\u00fdra\") was a city in Lycia. The city was probably founded by Lycians, and was located on the river Myros (; Turkish: \"Demre \u00c7ay\"), in the fertile alluvial plain between, the Massikytos range (; Turkish: \"Alaca Da\u011f\") and the Aegean Sea. By the 3rd century BC the city was Hellenized. Following the wars of the diadochi the area came under the loose control of the Ptolemies, the Seleucids, and finally the Romans.\nThe region remained under Roman control until it was conquered by the Seljucks and later the Ottomans. During the Ottoman rule the small Turkish town of Kale was established in the area of Myra in the present-day Antalya Province of Turkey. Kale was renamed to Demre in 2005.\nHistory.\nAlthough some scholars equate Myra with the town, of Mira, in Arzawa, there is no proof for the connection. There is no substantiated written reference for Myra before it was listed as a member of the Lycian League (168 BC\u2013AD 43); according to Strabo (14:665), it was one of the largest towns of the alliance.\nThe ancient Lycian citizens worshiped Artemis Eleutheria, who was the protective goddess of the town. Zeus, Athena and Tyche were venerated as well. Pliny the Elder writes that in Myra there was the spring of Apollo called Curium and when summoned three times by the pipe the fishes come to give oracular responses. In the Roman period, Myra formed a part of the Greek speaking world that rapidly embraced Christianity. One of its early Lycian bishops was Saint Nicholas.\nIn the early Roman Empire its population may have been about 5,000 though it was considered a metropolis.\nAlluvial silts mostly cover the ruins of the Lycian and Roman towns. The acropolis on the Demre-plateau, the Roman theatre and the Roman baths (\"eski hamam\") have been partly excavated. The semi-circular theatre was destroyed in an earthquake in 141, but rebuilt afterward.\nThere are two necropoleis of Lycian rock-cut tombs in the form of temple fronts carved into the vertical faces of cliffs at Myra: the river necropolis and the ocean necropolis. The ocean necropolis is just northwest of the theatre. The best-known tomb in the river necropolis, up the Demre Cayi from the theatre, is the \"Lion's tomb\", also called the \"Painted Tomb\". When the traveler Charles Fellows saw the tombs in 1840 he found them still colorfully painted red, yellow and blue.\nAndriake was the harbor of Myra in ancient times, but silted up later on. The main structure there surviving to the present day is a granary (horrea) built during the reign of the Roman emperor Hadrian (117\u2013138 AD). Beside this granary is a large heap of \"Murex\" shells, evidence that Andriake had an ongoing operation to produce purple dye.\nExcavations have been carried out at Andriake since 2009. The granary was turned into the Museum of Lycian Civilizations. The granary has seven rooms and measures 56 meters long and 32 meters wide. Artifacts found during the excavations in the Lycian League were placed in the museum. The structures in the harbor market as well as the agora, synagogue, and a six-meter deep, 24-meter long and 12-meter wide cistern were restored. A 16-meter-long Roman-era boat, a crane, and a cargo car were placed in front of the museum.\nIn 1923, its Greek inhabitants was required to leave by the population exchange between Greece and Turkey, at which time its church was finally abandoned.\nMentions in New Testament.\nThe author of the Acts of the Apostles (probably Luke the Evangelist) and Paul the Apostle changed ships here during their journey from Caesarea to Rome for Paul's trial, arriving in a coastal trading vessel and changing to a sea-faring skiff secured by the Roman centurion responsible for Paul's transportation to Rome.\nBishopric.\nThe \"Acta Pauli\" probably testify to the existence of a Christian community at Myra in the 2nd century. Le Quien opens his list of the bishops of this city with St. Nicander, martyred under Domitian in 95, who, according to the Greek Menologion, was ordained bishop by Saint Titus. In 325, Lycia again became a Roman province distinct from that of Pamphylia, with Myra as its capital. Ecclesiastically, it thus became the metropolitan see of the province. The bishop of Myra at that time was Saint Nicholas. The 6th-century \"Index\" of Theodorus Lector is the first document that lists him among the fathers of the First Council of Nicaea in 325. Many other bishops of Myra are named in extant documents, including Petrus, the author of theological works in defence of the Council of Chalcedon quoted by Saint Sophronius of Jerusalem and by Photius (\"Bibliotheca\", Codex 23). Theodorus and Nicolaus were both at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787, the former recanting his previous iconoclast position, the latter being the orthodox bishop whom the iconoclasts had expelled. The \"Notitia Episcopatuum\" of Pseudo-Epiphanius, composed in about 640 under the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius, reports that Myra at that time had 36 suffragan sees. The early 10th-century \"Notitia\" attributed to Emperor Leo VI the Wise lists only 33.\nMyra is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see both in the Latin Church and as a bishopric of the Melkite Greek Catholic Church in particular. Latin bishops are no longer appointed to this see, though Melkite bishops are.\nArab and Turkic invasions.\nMyra was besieged and sacked by Abbasid troops in 809, but soon return to Roman control. Early in the reign of emperor Alexius I Comnenus (ruled between 1081 and 1118), Myra was once more overtaken by Islamic invaders, this time the Seljuk Turks. Sailors from Bari, itself a former Roman possession in Italy that had only recently being conquered by Normans, exploited the situation and stole the relics of Saint Nicholas taking them to Bari.\nThe city was brought back once more under Roman control during the Komnenian restoration, before it was eventually lost at some point after the Fourth Crusade.\nChurch of St. Nicholas at Myra.\nThe earliest church of St. Nicholas at Myra was built at the time of Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire in the 6th century. The present-day church was constructed mainly from the 8th century onward; an Eastern Orthodox Church monastery was added in the second half of the 11th century.\nIn 1863, Emperor Alexander II of Russia purchased the building and began restoration, but the work was never completed. In 1923 the church was abandoned when the city's Christian inhabitants were forced to leave for Greece by the Population exchange between Greece and Turkey. In 1963 the eastern and southern sides of the church were excavated. In 1968 the former \"confessio\" (tomb) of St. Nicholas was roofed over.\nThe floor of the church is made of \"opus sectile\", a mosaic of coloured marble, and there are some remains of frescoes on the walls. A marble sarcophagus had been reused to bury the Saint; but his bones were stolen in 1087 by merchants from Bari, and are now held in that city, in the Basilica of Saint Nicholas.\nThe church is currently undergoing restoration. In 2007 the Turkish Ministry of Culture gave permission for the Divine Liturgy to be celebrated in the church for the first time in centuries. On 6 December 2011 Metropolitan Chrysostomos, who has the title of Myra, accordingly officiated.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeologists first detected the ancient city in 2009 using ground-penetrating radar that revealed anomalies whose shape and size suggested walls and buildings. Over the next two years they excavated a small, stunning 13th-century chapel sealed in an uncanny state of preservation. Carved out of one wall is a cross that, when sunlit, beams its shape onto the altar. In February 2021, Akdeniz University researchers led by Nevzat \u00c7evik announced the discovery of dozens of\u00a02,200-year-old terracotta sculptures with inscriptions. Archaeologists also revealed some material remains of the Hellenistic theater made of ceramic, bronze, lead, and silver. The figurines with partly preserved paint contained the appearances of men, women, cavalry, animals, some Greek deities and the names of artists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48455", "revid": "94147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48455", "title": "339", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 339 (CCCXXXIX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Claudius (or, less frequently, year 1092 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 339 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48456", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48456", "title": "338", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 338 (CCCXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ursus and Polemius (or, less frequently, year 1091 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 338 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48457", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48457", "title": "337", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 337 (CCCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Felicianus and Titianus (or, less frequently, year 1090 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 337 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48458", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48458", "title": "336", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 336 (CCCXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Nepotianus and Facundus (or, less frequently, year 1089 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 336 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48459", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48459", "title": "335", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 335 (CCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Albinus (or, less frequently, year 1088 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 335 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48460", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48460", "title": "334", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 334 (CCCXXXIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Optatus and Caesonius (or, less frequently, year 1087 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 334 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48461", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48461", "title": "333", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 333 (CCCXXXIII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Dalmatius and Zenophilus (or, less frequently, year 1086 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 333 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48462", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48462", "title": "332", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 332 (CCCXXXII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pacatianus and Hilarianus (or, less frequently, year 1085 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 332 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48463", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48463", "title": "Sucralose", "text": "Non-nutritive sweetener\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSucralose is an artificial sweetener and sugar substitute. In the European Union, it is also known under the E\u00a0number E955. It is produced by chlorination of sucrose, selectively replacing three of the hydroxy groups\u2014in the C1 and C6 positions of the fructose portion and the C4 position of the glucose portion\u2014to give a 1,6-dichloro-1,6-dideoxyfructose\u20134-chloro-4-deoxygalactose disaccharide. Sucralose is about 600 times sweeter than sucrose (table sugar), 3 times as sweet as both aspartame and acesulfame potassium, and 2 times as sweet as sodium saccharin.\nThe commercial success of sucralose-based products stems from its favorable comparison to other low-calorie sweeteners in terms of taste, stability, and safety.\nUses.\nSucralose is used in many food and beverage products because it is a non-nutritive sweetener ( per typical one-gram serving), does not promote dental cavities, is safe for consumption by diabetics and nondiabetics and does not affect insulin levels. The powdered form of the sucralose-based sweetener product Splenda contains the bulking agents \u2013 dextrose and maltodextrin. Sucralose content is about 1.1% and remainder is bulking agents. \nSucralose is used as a replacement for (or in combination with) other artificial or natural sweeteners such as aspartame, acesulfame potassium or high-fructose corn syrup. It is used in products such as candy, breakfast bars, coffee pods, and soft drinks. It is also used in canned fruits wherein water and sucralose take the place of much higher-energy corn syrup-based additives. Sucralose mixed with dextrose or maltodextrin (both made from corn) as bulking agents is sold internationally by McNeil Nutritionals under the Splenda brand name. \nCooking.\nThis mixture of granulated sucralose includes fillers, all of which rapidly dissolve in water. Sucralose is not hygroscopic when humidity is below 80%, which can lead to baked goods that are noticeably drier and manifest a less dense texture than those made with sucrose.\nSafety evaluation.\nSucralose has been accepted as safe by several food safety regulatory bodies worldwide, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee Report on Food Additives, the European Union's Scientific Committee on Food, Health Protection Branch of Health and Welfare Canada, and Food Standards Australia New Zealand.\nAt normal baking temperatures, sucralose is mostly heat-stable, indicating that it retains its sweetness and is suitable as a sugar substitute for use in baked goods. However, there is concern about the possible formation of dioxins when sucralose is heated. Especially when heating sucralose above 120\u00a0\u00b0C, chlorinated organic compounds such as polychlorinated dibenzo-\"p\"-dioxins (PCDD), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF), or chloropropanol might form.\nMaximum acceptable daily intake.\nVarious assessments have reported different amounts of maximum acceptable daily intake (ADI), usually measured as mg per kg of body weight. According to the Canadian Diabetes Association, the amount of sucralose that can be consumed over a person's lifetime without any adverse effects is 9\u00a0milligrams per kilogram of body weight per day. The FDA approval process indicated that consuming sucralose in typical amounts as a sweetener was safe. The intake at which adverse effects are seen is 1500\u00a0mg per kilogram of body weight per day, providing a large margin of safety compared to the estimated daily intake. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) proposed an ADI of 5\u00a0mg per kilogram of body weight, while the FDA established it as 15\u00a0mg per kilogram of body weight, that is, 350\u20131050\u00a0mg per day for a person of 70\u00a0kg.\nMetabolism.\nMost ingested sucralose is directly excreted in the feces, while about 11\u201327% is absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract (gut). The amount absorbed from the gut is largely removed from the blood by the kidneys and eliminated via urine, with 20\u201330% of absorbed sucralose being metabolized.\nPossible health effects.\nIn reviewing a 1987 food additive petition by McNeil Nutritionals, the FDA stated that \"in the 2-year rodent bioassays\u00a0... there was no evidence of carcinogenic activity for either sucralose or its hydrolysis products\".\nIn 2023, the World Health Organization conditionally recommended against the use of non-sugar sweeteners, including sucralose, for weight management or preventative care.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], reviews of numerous safety and toxicology studies on sucralose concluded that it is not toxic or carcinogenic, even at levels of daily consumption much larger than those typically used.\nHistory.\nSucralose was discovered in 1975 by scientists from Tate &amp; Lyle, working with researchers Leslie Hough and Shashikant Phadnis at Queen Elizabeth College (now part of King's College London). While researching novel uses of sucrose and its synthetic derivatives, mixing sulfuryl chloride with sugar, Phadnis was told to \"test\" a chlorinated sugar compound. According to an anecdotal account, Phadnis thought Hough asked him to \"taste\" it, so he did and found the compound to be exceptionally sweet.\nTate &amp; Lyle patented the substance in 1976; as of 2008, the only remaining patents concerned specific manufacturing processes.\nA Duke University animal study funded by the Sugar Association found evidence that doses of Splenda (containing ~1% sucralose and ~99% maltodextrin by weight) between 100 and 1000\u00a0mg/kg BW/day, containing sucralose at 1.1 to 11\u00a0mg/kg BW/day, fed to rats reduced gut microbiota, increased the pH level in the intestines, contributed to increases in body weight, and increased levels of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). These effects have not been reported in humans. An expert panel, including scientists from Duke University, Rutgers University, New York Medical College, Harvard School of Public Health, and Columbia University reported in \"Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology\" that the Duke study was \"not scientifically rigorous and is deficient in several critical areas that preclude reliable interpretation of the study results\".\nSucralose was first approved for use in Canada in 1991. Subsequent approvals came in Australia in 1993, in New Zealand in 1996, in the United States in 1998, and in the European Union in 2004. By 2008, it had been approved in over 80 countries, including Mexico, Brazil, China, India, and Japan. In 2006, the FDA amended the regulations for foods to include sucralose as a \"non-nutritive sweetener\" in food. In May 2008, Fusion Nutraceuticals launched a generic product to the market, using Tate &amp; Lyle patents.\nIn April 2015, PepsiCo announced that it would be moving from aspartame to sucralose for most of its diet drinks in the U.S. due to sales of Diet Pepsi falling by more than 5% in the U.S. The company stated that its decision was a commercial one, responding to consumer preferences.\nIn February 2018, PepsiCo went back to using aspartame in Diet Pepsi because of an 8% drop in sales for the previous year.\nChemistry and production.\nSucralose is a disaccharide composed of 1,6-dichloro-1,6-dideoxyfructose and 4-chloro-4-deoxygalactose. It is synthesized by the selective chlorination of sucrose in a multistep route that substitutes three specific hydroxyl groups with chlorine atoms. This chlorination is achieved by selective protection of one of the primary alcohols as an ester (acetate or benzoate), followed by chlorination with an excess of any of several chlorinating agent to replace the two remaining primary alcohols and one of the secondary alcohols, and then by hydrolysis of the ester.\nStorage.\nSucralose is stable when stored under normal conditions of temperature, pressure and humidity. Upon prolonged heating during storage at elevated temperatures (38\u00a0\u00b0C, 100\u00a0\u00b0F), sucralose may break down, releasing carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and minor amounts of hydrogen chloride.\nResearch.\nNo evidence of an effect of sucralose on long-term weight loss or body mass index has been found, with cohort studies showing a minor effect on weight gain and heart disease risks.\nEnvironmental effects.\nThe majority of ingested sucralose is not metabolized by the human body, but is instead excreted unchanged. It is an emerging environmental contaminant that can not be removed in conventional waste water treatment process.\nAccording to one study, sucralose is digestible by a number of microorganisms and is broken down once released into the environment. However, measurements by the Swedish Environmental Research Institute have shown that sewage treatment has little effect on sucralose, which is present in wastewater effluents at levels of several \u03bcg/L (ppb). No ecotoxicological effects are known at such levels, but the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency warns that a continuous increase in levels may occur if the compound is only slowly degraded in nature. When heated to very high temperatures (over 350\u00a0\u00b0C or 662\u00a0\u00b0F) in metal containers, sucralose can produce polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and other persistent organic pollutants in the resulting smoke.\nSucralose has been detected in natural waters, but research indicates that the levels found in the environment are far below those required to cause adverse effects to certain kinds of aquatic life.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48464", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48464", "title": "Frederick Augustus I of Saxony", "text": "Ruler of Saxony from 1763 to 1827\nFrederick Augustus I (; ; ; 23 December 1750 \u2013 5 May 1827) was a member of the House of Wettin who reigned as the last Elector of Saxony from 1763 to 1806 (as Frederick Augustus III) and as the first King of Saxony from 1806 to 1827. He was also Duke of Warsaw from 1807 to 1815 (in 1812\u20131813 he was proclaimed, but unrecognized, King of Poland by the General Confederation of the Kingdom of Poland), a short-lived disputed Grand Duke of Lithuania in 1812, and a legitimate candidate to the Polish throne.\nThroughout his political career Frederick Augustus tried to rehabilitate and recreate the Polish state that was torn apart and ceased to exist after the final partition of Poland in 1795. However he did not succeed, for which he blamed himself for the rest of his life. Nevertheless, his efforts at reestablishing an independent Polish nation did endear him to the Polish people.\nThe Augustusplatz in Leipzig is named after him.\nElector of Saxony and King Designate of Poland.\nFamily background.\nFrederick Augustus was the second (but eldest surviving) son of Frederick Christian, Elector of Saxony and Maria Antonia Walpurgis, Princess of Bavaria. Because he was underage at the time of his father's death of smallpox in 1763, his mother served as Regent until 1768. His uncle, Prince Francis Xavier, functioned as his representative. Through his father's side, he was descended from two kings of Poland, and through his mother's side Siemowit, the first confirmed Duke of Poland.\nRenunciation of the Polish throne.\nTwo of Frederick Augustus' predecessors as Elector of Saxony had been kings of Poland, but due to his young age he was not considered eligible during the 1764 Polish\u2013Lithuanian royal election. However, when a constitution was ratified by the Polish Sejm, Frederick Augustus was named successor to King Stanis\u0142aw II August. At the same time, the head of the Saxon Royal House was established as heir to the Polish throne through Article VII of that very constitution. Frederick Augustus declined to accept the crown upon Stanis\u0142aw's death in 1798 because he feared becoming entangled in disputes with Austria, Prussia and Russia, which had begun to partition Poland in 1772. In fact, by then the title would have been in name only - a full partition of Poland among those neighboring powers had already taken place in 1795.\nForeign policy up to the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn August 1791, Frederick Augustus arranged a meeting with Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II and King Frederick William II of Prussia at Pillnitz Castle. The move was intended partly to offer support for the French monarchy in the face of revolutionary agitation in France. The Declaration of Pillnitz warned of the possibility of military action against the French revolutionary government, a provocation that provided the latter with grounds to declare war on Austria in April 1792. Frederick Augustus himself did not sign the Declaration.\nSaxony wanted nothing to do with the defensive alliance against France formed between Austria and Prussia. Nonetheless, a declaration of a Reichskrieg by the Reichstag of the Holy Roman Empire issued in March 1793, obliged Frederick Augustus to take part. There was great concern in Saxony in April 1795 when Prussia suddenly concluded a separate peace with France in order to facilitate the Third Partition of Poland. Saxony dropped out of the coalition against France in August 1796 after France had advanced east into the German lands and additional conditions for the Holy Roman Empire to conclude a separate peace were agreed.\nBoth the peace agreement with France and Saxony's participation in the Congress of Rastatt in 1797 served to demonstrate Frederick Augustus' loyalty to the conventional constitutional principles of the Holy Roman Empire. The Congress of Rastatt was supposed to authorize the surrender to France of the territories on the left bank of the Rhine in return for compensation for the rulers relinquishing territory. However, at Rastatt and again in 1803 at the issuance of the Final Report of the Empire Delegation, the law of the Holy Roman Empire that laid out the new order of the Empire, Saxony refused to agree to territorial adjustments, since these were designed to benefit Bavaria, Prussia, W\u00fcrttemberg, and Baden.\nForeign policy until the peace with Napoleon.\nFrederick Augustus also did not participate in the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine, which led to the final dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. With respect to the Prussian idea of a north German empire, within which Saxony was supposed to be raised to a kingdom, he appeared reserved. However, after September 1806, in response to the Berlin Ultimatum, which demanded the withdrawal of French troops from the left bank of the Rhine, Napoleon advanced as far as Thuringia. At that point, Frederick Augustus joined with Prussia. However, at the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt in 1806 Napoleon inflicted a crushing defeat on the Prusso\u2013Saxon troops. The Prussian government and army then withdrew headlong to the east. Frederick Augustus, left without any information concerning Prussian intentions, and with Napoleon's troops about to occupy Saxony, was forced to conclude peace. On 11 December 1806 in Pozna\u0144 a treaty was signed by authorized representatives of both sides. According to its terms, Saxony was forced to join the Confederation of the Rhine and to surrender parts of Thuringia to the recently organized Kingdom of Westphalia. As compensation, Saxony was given the area around Cottbus and was raised to the status of a kingdom alongside the Confederation states of Bavaria and W\u00fcrttemberg.\nKing of Saxony and Grand Duke of Warsaw.\nElevation to Saxon-Polish ruler.\nFrederick Augustus was proclaimed King of Saxony on 20 December 1806. After the Treaty of Tilsit, which Frederick William III of Prussia and Tsar Alexander I of Russia concluded with Napoleon in July 1807, Frederick Augustus was also named Grand Duke of Warsaw. Although he had rejected the offer of the throne of Poland in 1795 by the Sejm, he could not refuse a Polish title a second time.\nArticle V of the Constitution of the Duchy of Warsaw, which Napoleon dictated to Saxony, was linked to the Polish Constitution of 1791 and joined the Duchy of Warsaw hereditarily to the Royal House of Saxony. Geopolitically the Duchy of Warsaw comprised the areas of the 2nd and 3rd Prussian partitions (1795), with the exception of Danzig, which was made into the Free City of Danzig under joint French and Saxon \"protection\", and the district around Bia\u0142ystok, which was given to Russia. The area under Prussian control was made up of territory from the former Prussian provinces of New East Prussia, Southern Prussia, New Silesia, and West Prussia. In addition, the new state was given the area along the Note\u0107 river and the \"Land of Che\u0142mno\".\nAltogether, the Duchy had an initial area of around 104,000\u00a0km2, with a population of approximately 2,600,000. The bulk of its inhabitants were Poles.\nIn 1809, Austria was successfully defeated by Polish\u2013Saxon troops when it attempted to take possession of the Duchy and for its part had to cede to the Duchy of Warsaw Polish regions absorbed up to 1795, among them the old Polish royal city of Krak\u00f3w. In July 1812 Frederick Augustus ratified a proclamation of the Sejm of the Duchy of Warsaw that restored the Kingdom of Poland. Napoleon lodged a protest against this action.\nEvents during the War of Liberation.\nIn 1813 during the German Campaign of 1813, Saxony found itself in a more difficult situation than many other warring states. The country was still solidly in Napoleon's grip and at the same time had become the central arena of the war. In the autumn of 1813 at the start of the Battle of Leipzig (Battle of Nations) the local population of Saxony, which tallied about 2 million, saw almost a million soldiers brought to its territories. Napoleon openly threatened to consider Saxony as enemy territory and treat it accordingly should Frederick Augustus change sides. Frederick Augustus' room for maneuver was consequently greatly limited. He did not want to put the country's well-being into play frivolously. At the same time, he still remembered vividly the way in which Prussia had simply abandoned him in 1806.\nIn this difficult situation the King attempted to enter cautiously into an alliance with the Sixth Coalition in 1813 without risking a public break with Napoleon and a declaration of war. As the Prussian and Russian troops entered Saxony in the spring, the King first moved to the south in order to avoid a direct encounter and pursued an alliance with Austria secretly from Regensburg. The Saxon-Austrian Pact was concluded on 20 April and the King made the Prussian and Russian allies aware of it at the same time. Napoleon, from whom Frederick Augustus was not able to keep the diplomatic maneuvers concealed, summoned the King urgently to Saxony after he had defeated the Prusso-Russian troops at L\u00fctzen on 2 May. Frederick Augustus decided to comply with the ultimatum presented to him. With no prospect of concrete assistance from Austria, and in view of the defeat of the Prussian \u2013 Russian coalition, which now sent peace signals to France, he felt he had no choice.\nFrederick Augustus' decision brought the country scarcely any relief. Napoleon, angered at the near defection of the King and at the same time dependent upon the full mobilization of all available forces against the Coalition troops, harshly demanded the full resources of Saxony. In addition, the country suffered under the changing fortunes of war and associated movements and quartering. At the end of August the Allies failed again to defeat Napoleon at the Battle of Dresden. Meanwhile, Saxony became the principal arena of war and Dresden the midpoint of the French army movements. Not until 9 September in Teplitz did Austria conclude its alliance with Prussia and Russia. In September, as Napoleon's troops in Saxony formed up to retreat before the expanded Coalition, there came the first defections to the Allies within the Royal Saxon Army.\nFrederick Augustus was mistrustful of Prussia in view of the experiences of the spring and arguably disappointed as well by Austria's decision not to join the Coalition immediately, especially while the country was exposed as before to French domination. Thus he chose not to break with Napoleon. At the Battle of Leipzig [Battle of Nations] the Saxon as well as the Polish troops fought on the side of Napoleon. In view of the apparent defeat of the French, even larger Saxon troop formations went over to the Coalition during the battle, whereas the Polish troops were largely annihilated.\nSettlement of Saxon affairs at the Congress of Vienna.\nAt the deliberations of the Congress of Vienna in 1814 and 1815, Frederick Augustus' position was doomed by his country's difficult geographic position, the changing fortunes of war, a lack of assistance from Austria, and his own vacillations. The Prussian-Russian alliance had never had honorable intentions in bringing Saxony into the anti-Napoleon alliance in the first place. Even before Prussia declared war on France on 17 March 1813, it had agreed to an alliance with Russia to the detriment of Saxony and Poland in the Treaty of Kalisz on 22 February: the Duchy of Warsaw would predominantly come under Russian rule, whereas Prussia would be compensated for relinquished Polish territories with the annexation of Saxon territory. Prussia's appetite for the economically and culturally more developed territories of Saxony originated in the old dream of annexation that Frederick II had developed in his political testament of 1752 and had already tried to realize in the Seven Years' War. It did not originate from any necessity to overcome Napoleonic rule in central Europe.\nAfter the Battle of Leipzig the Prussian-Russian alliance showed no interest in an alliance with the Saxon king in the wider struggle against Napoleon irrespective of offers of support from Frederick Augustus. Rather, the King was made captive and taken to Friedrichsfelde near Berlin and placed under Russian-Prussian custody in the name of a \"General Government of High Allied Powers.\"\nIt was the forceful manner of Prussian minister Baron von Stein rather than the government administered by Russian Prince Repnin until November 1814 or the subsequent Prussian force of occupation (lasting to June 1815), which were responsible for the low morale in Saxony at the end of the Napoleonic Wars. In contrast to the representatives of France, Frederick Augustus was denied participation at the Congress of Vienna as punishment for his supposed role as the quasi-deputy of his former ally Napoleon. Certainly this treatment of the Saxon king was owing to nothing other than the intention of Prussia and Russia to carry out the annexation plans agreed to in Kalisz. That Saxony was not completely abandoned can be attributed to the fear of Austria and France of an overly-strengthened Prussia. Because the Saxon question threatened to break up the Congress, the allies finally agreed to divide Saxony (7 January 1815) with the mediation of the Tsar.\nAcceptance of the post-war order of the Congress of Vienna.\nAfter his release from a Prussian prison in February 1815, at first Frederick Augustus delayed his agreement to the division of his country. However, having no other option, he finally gave in, and on 18 May consented to the peace treaty laid before him by Prussia and Russia. With the signing of the treaty on 21 May 1815, 57% of Saxon territory and 42% of the Saxon population was turned over to Prussia.\nPlaces and areas that had been connected to the Saxon landscape for hundreds of years became completely foreign, absorbed in part into artificially created administrative regions. Examples include Wittenberg, the old capital of the Saxon Electoral State during the Holy Roman Empire, and seat of the National University made famous by Martin Luther and Melanchthon (which was already done away with in 1817 by means of a merger with the Prussian University of Halle), and Torgau, birthplace and place of residence of the Elector Frederick the Wise, which was incorporated into one of the new hybrids created by Prussia under the name Province of Saxony. Lower Lusatia, which like Upper Lusatia had preserved its constitutional autonomy under Saxon rule, was incorporated into the Province of Brandenburg and ceased to exist as a state. Upper Lusatia was arbitrarily divided: the area assigned to Prussia, including G\u00f6rlitz, was added to the Province of Silesia; these areas also lost their constitutional autonomy.\nOn 22 May 1815 Frederick Augustus abdicated as ruler of the Duchy of Warsaw, whose territory was annexed mainly to Russia, but also partly to Prussia and Austria. In the area assigned to Russia, a Kingdom of Poland was created to join in a hereditary union with the Russian throne. The old royal city of Krak\u00f3w no longer belonged to the new kingdom, and became a separate republic. The internal autonomy that it enjoyed at first was abolished in 1831 after the Polish Uprising.\nKing of Saxony.\nStanding among the Saxon people upon his return.\nWhen Frederick returned home to Saxony in July 1815 he was greeted enthusiastically throughout the land. Numerous expressions of loyalty also reached the king from the ceded territories, where the populace regarded the new rulers coolly; shortly thereafter the notion of being \"mandatory-Prussian\" began to circulate. In Li\u00e8ge Province, where the majority of the regiments of the Saxon Army had been stationed since the beginning of 1815, there was a revolt at the end of April. At the behest of the Prussian king, Generalfeldmarschall Bl\u00fccher was to discharge the soldiers who came from the annexed territories, but Frederick Augustus' men had not yet made their departure, and the Saxon soldiers rioted over it. Bl\u00fccher had to flee the city and was able to put down the revolt only by calling up additional Prussian troops.\nPublic opinion in Saxony lay decisively on Frederick Augustus' side at the time of his return. There was a feeling that Prussian policies were too ruthless both against the country and the king. The avarice of special interests in Berlin came across all too clearly as the rewards of the War of Liberation were distributed.\nFinal years.\nThe last twelve years of Frederick Augustus' government passed for the most part quietly. The king's conservative character, which in foreign policy up to 1806 had manifested itself in unconditional loyalty to Saxon interests, hardened even more after the experience of Napoleonic hegemony. With respect to political reform the King achieved little. Until his death in 1827, which fell on the anniversary of Napoleon's death, little was altered in the constitutional configuration of the Saxon state. Undoubtedly, the king avoided making such a move out of respect for the rights of the remaining Lusatian upper classes. Just as little came of the desire of many people to transform the existing political system to accommodate a genuine legislature. There was scarcely any lessening of admiration for the old king who had overseen the destiny of Saxony for more than half a century. During his lifetime he gained the epithet \"The Just\". Resentment over the delayed economic and social rebuilding of the country was to be felt by his brother, King Anthony.\nFrederick Augustus was entombed in the Roman Catholic Cathedral of Dresden.\nMarriage and issue.\nIn Mannheim on 17 January 1769 (by proxy) and again in Dresden on 29 January 1769 (in person), Frederick Augustus married the Countess Palatine (\"Pfalzgr\u00e4fin\") Amalie of Zweibr\u00fccken-Birkenfeld, sister of King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria. During their marriage, Amalia gave birth to four children, but only one daughter survived to adulthood:\nFrederick Augustus had an illegitimate daughter, born out of an affair with the daughter of a Jewish court financier in Dresden.\nWithout surviving male issue, Frederick Augustus was succeeded as King of Saxony by his younger brother Anthony.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48465", "revid": "1318186511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48465", "title": "Splenda", "text": "Brand of sugar substitute\nSplenda is a global brand of sugar substitutes and reduced-calorie food products. While the company is known for its original formulation containing sucralose, it also manufactures items using natural sweeteners such as stevia, monk fruit and allulose. It is owned by the American company Heartland Food Products Group. The high-intensity sweetener ingredient sucralose used in Splenda Original is manufactured by the British company Tate &amp; Lyle.\nSucralose was discovered by Tate &amp; Lyle and researchers at Queen Elizabeth College, University of London, in 1976. While researching new insecticides, Shashikant Phadnis at Queen Elizabeth College misheard the instruction of his advisor Leslie Hough to \"test\" the chemical as \"taste,\" due to his misunderstanding of the foreign accent, so he accidentally tasted the chemical and found it to be extremely sweet. Tate &amp; Lyle subsequently developed sucralose-based Splenda products in partnership with Johnson &amp; Johnson subsidiary McNeil Nutritionals, LLC. The Splenda brand was transferred to Heartland Food Products Group after its purchase of the line with investor Centerbridge Partners in 2015.\nSince its approval by the United States government in 1998 and introduction there in 1999, sucralose has overtaken Equal in the $1.5-billion artificial sweetener market, holding a 62% market share. Splenda sales were $212 million in 2006 in the U.S., while Equal's totaled $48.7 million. According to a 2012 article in \"The New Zealand Herald,\" it is \"the category leader in table-top sweetener in the U.S. Splenda is the most commonly used sugar substitute, with tens of millions of U.S. consumers per year (as of 2025).\nProducts.\nSplenda is available in a variety of products:\nEnergy (caloric) content.\nThe energy content of a single-serving (1\u00a0g packet) of Splenda is 3.36\u00a0kcal, which is 31% of a single-serving (2.8\u00a0g packet) of granulated sugar (10.8\u00a0kcal). In the United States, it is legally labelled \"zero calories\"; U.S. FDA regulations allow this \"if the food contains less than 5 Calories per reference amount customarily consumed and per labeled serving\". Splenda powder consists of predominantly fillers as bulking agents \u2013 dextrose and maltodextrin. Sucralose content is about 1.1% and remainder is bulking agents. \nCooking.\nUnlike other artificial sweeteners, sucralose is heat-stable up to 450\u00a0\u00b0F (232\u00a0\u00b0C), so Splenda can be used as a replacement for table sugar in cooking and baking, and there are Splenda products packaged specifically for this purpose. In product testing by \"Cook's Illustrated\", the major drawback to cooking with Splenda was found to be that it does not produce the browning or caramelization the way table sugar does. However, \"Cook's Illustrated\" also found that desserts baked with Splenda were \"lacking the artificial flavors that just about every other sugar substitute brings with it.\"\nHealth and safety regulation.\nSplenda usually contains 95% dextrose (D-glucose) and maltodextrin (by volume) which the body readily metabolizes, combined with a small amount of mostly indigestible sucralose. Sucralose is made by replacing three select hydrogen-oxygen groups on sucrose (table sugar) molecules with three chlorine atoms. The tightly bound chlorine atoms create a molecular structure that is stable under intense conditions. Sucralose itself is recognized as safe to ingest as a diabetic sugar substitute, but the sugars or other carbohydrates used as bulking agents in Splenda products should be evaluated individually. The recommended amount of sucralose that can be consumed on a daily basis over a person's lifetime without any adverse effects is 900\u00a0mg/kg BW/day, or about 60\u00a0g for a 70\u00a0kg (150\u00a0lb) person.\nA repeated dose study of sucralose in human subjects concluded that \"there is no indication that adverse effects on human health would occur from frequent or long-term exposure to sucralose at the maximum anticipated levels of intake\". Conversely, a Duke University animal study funded by the Sugar Association found evidence that doses of Splenda between 100 and 1000\u00a0mg/kg BW/day, containing sucralose at 1.1 to 11\u00a0mg/kg BW/day, fed to rats reduced fecal microflora, increased the pH level in the intestines, contributed to increases in body weight, and increased levels of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). These effects have not been reported in humans. In response, McNeil Nutritionals, along with an expert panel that included scientists from Duke University, Rutgers University, New York Medical College, Harvard School of Public Health, and Columbia University reported in \"Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology\" that the Duke study was \"not scientifically rigorous and is deficient in several critical areas that preclude reliable interpretation of the study results\". The other ingredients in Splenda\u2014dextrose and maltodextrin\u2014are listed as generally recognized as safe because of their long history of safe consumption.\nSucralose may not be completely biologically inert, and a study showed that cooking with sucralose at high temperatures could cause it to degrade into potentially toxic compounds. However, only a very small amount (approximately 2\u20138% of sucralose consumed) is metabolized by the body, on average. \nMarketing controversy.\nIn 2006, Merisant, the maker of Equal, filed suit against McNeil Nutritionals in U.S. District Court, Philadelphia, alleging that Splenda's tagline; \"made from sugar, so it tastes like sugar\" is misleading. McNeil argued during the trial that it had never deceived consumers or set out to deceive them, since the product is in fact made from sugar. Merisant asked that McNeil be ordered to surrender profits and modify its advertising. The case ended with an agreement reached outside of court, with undisclosed settlement conditions. In 2004, Merisant filed a complaint with the Better Business Bureau regarding McNeil's advertising. McNeil alleged that Merisant's complaint was in retaliation for a ruling in federal court in Puerto Rico, which forced Merisant to stop packaging Equal in packages resembling Splenda's. McNeil filed suit in Puerto Rico seeking a ruling which would declare its advertising to not be misleading. Following Merisant's lawsuit in Philadelphia, McNeil agreed to a jury trial and to the dismissal of its lawsuit in Puerto Rico. However, on May 11, 2007, the parties reached a settlement on the case, the terms of which were not disclosed.\nIn 2007, Merisant France prevailed in the Commercial Court of Paris against subsidiaries of McNeil Nutritionals LLC. The court awarded Merisant $54,000 in damages and ordered the defendants to cease advertising claims found to violate French consumer protection laws, including the slogans; \"because it comes from sugar, sucralose tastes like sugar\" and \"With sucralose: comes from sugar and tastes like sugar\".\nA Sugar Association complaint to the Federal Trade Commission stated that \"Splenda is not a natural product. It is not cultivated or grown and it does not occur in nature.\" McNeil Nutritionals, the manufacturer of Splenda, has responded that its \"advertising represents the products in an accurate and informative manner and complies with applicable advertising rules in the countries where Splenda brand products are marketed.\" \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48466", "revid": "4217794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48466", "title": "Splendar", "text": ""}
{"id": "48467", "revid": "31", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48467", "title": "Richard M. Stallman", "text": ""}
{"id": "48468", "revid": "50592914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48468", "title": "Academy Award for Best Story", "text": "Academy Award\nThe Academy Award for Best Story was an Academy Award given from the beginning of the Academy Awards until 1956. The award co-existed with the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. The Oscar for Best Story most closely resembles the usage of modern film treatments, or prose documents that describe the entire plot and characters, but typically lack most dialogue. A separate screenwriter would convert the story into a full screenplay.\nAs an example, at the 1944 Academy Awards, producer and director Leo McCarey won Best Story for \"Going My Way\" while screenwriters Frank Butler and Frank Cavett won Best Screenplay. The elimination of this category in 1956 reflected the decline of Hollywood's studio system and the emergence of independent screenwriters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48469", "revid": "30696796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48469", "title": "James Louis Sobieski", "text": "James Louis Henry Sobieski (Polish: \"Jakub Ludwik Henryk Sobieski\"; French: \"Jacques Louis Henri de Sobieski\"; 2 November 1667 \u2013 19 December 1737) was a crown prince (kr\u00f3lewicz) of Poland in years 1674\u20131696 and duke on O\u0142awa in years 1691\u20131737, son of King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania John III Sobieski and Marie Casimire d'Arquien.\nHe was prepared by his parents to succeed John III on the Polish throne. Due to the Polish nobility's reluctance to accept hereditary succession, his efforts to claim the Polish crown after his father's death and during the Second Northern War came to nothing. Through his marriage to Hedwig Elisabeth of Neuburg, the daughter of the Count Palatine of Neuburg, he became connected to the ruling families of Europe. He was proposed as a candidate for several European principalities but ultimately received the Duchy of O\u0142awa from the Emperor. Toward the end of his life, he returned to the family estate in \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiew in the Kingdom of Poland, where he died.\nBiography.\nJakub Ludwik Henry Sobieski was born on 2 November 1667 in Paris, France. He was given the first name Jakub in honor of his grandfather Jakub Sobieski, while his middle names \"Louis\" Henry were a gesture to his godparents, Louis XIV and Henrietta Maria of France.\nHealth problems were a constant for Jakub in his youth, and there is a wealth of correspondence exchanged between his parents on the subject. He likely had a spinal deformation, which was likely not very severe because Jakub was known as a good dancer and a proficient equestrian. His mother Maria Kazimiera repeatedly expressed her worry over her son's precarious health in her letters which survived to the present day. Father Kostrzycki became Jakub's guardian and educator in 1671.\nPrince of Poland and Lithuania.\nWith his father's election as King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania in 1674, the education of Prince Jakub Sobieski became a state matter. As the son of the new monarch, he had every right to receive a proper education. Nonetheless, a fair number of deputies protested and were unwilling to grant royal rights to the Sobieski family. It is worth noting that relatively strong opposition to the king and his family arose within the szlachta's ranks during the peak of the king's popularity, immediately following his victory in the Battle of Khotyn. The general disdain that the nobility projected towards Jakub and his father Jan would be a constant impediment in the careers of both men in the decades to come.\nDynastic plans in Silesia and Ducal Prussia.\nThe young prince was also drawn into his parents' dynastic plans, which only further inflamed the aristocracy's antipathy towards the Sobieski family. Despite efforts by his parents at the Vienna court, they were unable to secure for Jakub rule over the Duchies of Legnica, Brzeg, Wo\u0142\u00f3w, and O\u0142awa in Silesia after the Piast dynasty died out in 1675. This led Jakub' father Jan III Sobieski to put a plan together to seize power in Ducal Prussia and elevate his son. The secret treaty of Jawor\u00f3w signed in 1675 between the Polish king-Lithuanian grand duke and France committed Poland to aid France against Brandenburg-Prussia in exchange for French monetary subsidies and support for Polish claims over Ducal Prussia. The French promised to mediate between Poland and the Ottoman Empire so that Polish forces could be diverted from the southern border.\nThe treaty failed however, as French diplomats were unable to improve the relations between Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Ottomans. The Truce of \u017burawno signed the following year was unfavorable to Poland-Lithuania. France eventually concluded the Treaty of Nijmegen with Prussia in 1679. This cooled France's relations with Poland, as Sobieski abandoned his pro-French stance. The Polish-French alliance had completely fallen apart by 1683 when some of the pro-French faction members within Poland were accused of plotting to overthrow Sobieski, and French ambassador Nicolas-Louis de l'Hospital, Bishop of Beauvais and Marquis of Vitry were forced to leave the country.\nThe failure of this plan prompted the king to promote Prince Jakub through participation in the war against the Ottoman Empire. In this way, King Jan was aiming to gain social acceptance for an increased role for the prince, who he hoped would become the second most important person in the Commonwealth after himself. These efforts culminated in the fifteen-year-old prince fighting alongside his father against the Turks at the Battle of Vienna in 1683. In line with his parents' ambitions for him, Prince Jakub was a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece a Catholic order of chivalry which has been referred to as the most elite brotherhood in the Christian faith.\nAttempt to seize the Moldavian throne.\nBetween 1685 and 1693 the Principality of Moldavia was ruled by Hospodar Constantin Cantemir. The first of the Cantemir dynasty on the Moldavian throne, Constantin was an illiterate from petty nobility who once served as an officer in the Polish Army whereas his predecessors had mostly been members of the powerful boyar families. Constantin's reign was characterized by clashes between two powerful factions of boyars, a pro-Polish-Lithuanian and a pro-Ottoman camp. While Kantemir himself officially sided with the pro-Ottomans, he nonetheless informally cooperated to some extent with the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Sensing weakness, Polish King and Lithuanian Grand Duke John III Sobieski had the Commonwealth's troops enter Moldavia twice in 1686 and 1691 to try to put his son Jakub on the Moldavian throne, utilizing the Armenian monastery of Suceava as a base of operations. These efforts were unsuccessful, and Kantemir ordered the execution of the leader of the pro-Polish party.\nDuke of O\u0142awa.\nHe was initially engaged to Ludwika Karolina Radziwi\u0142\u0142 but the marriage never materialized. On 25 March 1691 Jakub Ludwik married Hedwig Elisabeth Amelia of Neuburg (1673\u20131722), the daughter of the Elector Palatine Philip William. In celebration of their wedding the opera \"Per goder in amor ci vuol costanza\" was created by librettist Giovanni Battista Lampugnani and composer Viviano Augustini. The couple had five daughters, two of whom would have progeny. As part of his wife's dowry, he received the Principality of O\u0142awa.\nCandidacy for the Polish-Lithuanian Crown.\nWith the death of Jakub Louis' father in 1696, no fewer than eighteen candidates stood for the vacant Polish-Lithuanian throne. Family rivalries prevented the election of Jakub Ludwik Sobieski even though Austria supported his candidacy. Jakub Ludwik Sobieski's own mother, Marie Casimire, favored her son-in-law, Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria. The powerful King Louis XIV of France supported Fran\u00e7ois Louis, Prince of Conti (1664\u20131709).\nIn the end, Frederick Augustus, Elector of Saxony, who renounced Lutheranism and converted to Catholicism in order to qualify, was crowned as Augustus II, King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania on 1 September 1697. It was the first time that a deceased monarch's son had not been elected to succeed him, the previous king's heir had been debarred from the throne by military force, and a German became king (which went against a tradition of avoiding German hegemony). Augustus II's first act as king was to expel the prince of Conti from the country.\nExile in O\u0142awa and imprisonment.\nAfter the coronation of King Augustus II, Sobieski began negotiations to reconcile with the new Polish king nad Lithuanian grand duke. During the talks Jakub was accused of trying to organize a rebellion against the new monarch, and as a result, lost substantial land holdings. Offended, Sobieski refused to pay homage to Augustus and left the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth for O\u0142awa in Silesia.\nIn 1704 Jakub Ludwik Sobieski and his brother Alexander were seized by Augustus II's troops in the vicinity of Wroc\u0142aw and imprisoned over fears by Augustus that Sobieski may try to gain the Polish-Lithuanian throne. The brothers remained in prison in Pleissenburg and K\u00f6nigstein for two years before finally being released after the Treaty of Altranst\u00e4dt where he signed a formal agreement to never again make any attempt to become King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania.\nReturn to Poland-Lithuania.\nJakub Sobieski received a favorable sentence during the Silent Sejm in 1717, which enabled him to return to the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and recover his family property which had been confiscated by King Augustus. He returned to Poland and reconciled with the king, and subsequently settled in the Sobieski's ancestral castle in \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiew. After falling out of favor with Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI for allowing his daughter Maria Clementina Sobieska to marry James Francis Edward Stuart he lost the principality of O\u0142awa in 1719, but was able to regain his Silesian holdings in 1722. Sobieski would return to O\u0142awa periodically between 1722 and 1734. He spent the last years of his life managing his properties, travelling between his residences in Ukraine and Silesia, while devoting himself to philanthropy.\nDeath.\nJakub Ludwik Sobieski died of a stroke on 19 December 1737 in \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiew (now Ukraine) and is buried there. His oldest surviving daughter Maria Karolina, inherited his vast land holdings which included 11 cities and 140 villages.\nSobieski's Legacy in O\u0142awa.\nThe connection to the Polish-Lithuanian state which Sobieski's rule brought to O\u0142awa set this part of Lower Silesia on a different trajectory, and thanks to it the Polish language was preserved here long after Jakub' death in 1737. After the end of the Silesian Wars in 1763, the city along with most of Silesia was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia, which immediately set out to Germanize their subjects. Yet the population remained Polish speaking in the vicinity of O\u0142awa. Julius Roger in his ethnographic book on Silesian folk songs recorded a Polish tune from O\u0142awa in 1863. In his book \"Schlesien: eine Landeskunde f\u00fcr das deutsche Volk\" published in 1896, outstanding German geographer Joseph Partsch expresses his surprise that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\"it is difficult to understand how it could have happened that on the west side of the Odra River, in the O\u0142awa district and in the vicinity of parts of Wroc\u0142aw and Strzelin, that a completely dense territory of Polish-speaking residents could survive, in an area which contains many important roads that extends on all sides from the great transport center which is Wroc\u0142aw\" ...\nAfter World War II German Silesia was ceded to the Polish People's Republic. Since then, a number of sites within O\u0142awa have been renamed to commemorate Jakub Sobieski.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
