{"id": "46924", "revid": "14264656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46924", "title": "Caesarean section", "text": "Surgical procedure to deliver a baby\nCaesarean section, also known as C-section, cesarean, or caesarean delivery, is the surgical procedure by which one or more babies are delivered through an incision in the mother's abdomen. It is often performed because vaginal delivery would put the mother or child at risk (of paralysis or even death). Reasons for the operation include, but are not limited to, obstructed labor, twin pregnancy, high blood pressure in the mother, breech birth, shoulder presentation, and problems with the placenta or umbilical cord. A caesarean delivery may be performed based upon the shape of the mother's pelvis or history of a previous C-section. A trial of vaginal birth after C-section may be possible. The World Health Organization recommends that caesarean section be performed only when medically necessary.\nA C-section typically takes between 45 minutes to an hour to complete. It may be done with a spinal block, where the woman is awake, or under general anesthesia. A urinary catheter is used to drain the bladder, and the skin of the abdomen is then cleaned with an antiseptic. An incision of about is then typically made through the mother's lower abdomen. The uterus is then opened with a second incision and the baby delivered. The incisions are then stitched closed. A woman can typically begin breastfeeding as soon as she is out of the operating room and awake. Often, several days are required in the hospital to recover sufficiently to return home.\nC-sections result in a small overall increase in poor outcomes in low-risk pregnancies. They also typically take about six weeks to heal from, longer than vaginal birth. The increased risks include breathing problems in the baby and amniotic fluid embolism and postpartum bleeding in the mother. Established guidelines recommend that caesarean sections not be used before 39 weeks of pregnancy without a medical reason. The method of delivery does not appear to affect subsequent sexual function.\nIn 2012, about 23 million C-sections were done globally. The international healthcare community has previously considered the rate of 10% and 15% ideal for caesarean sections. Some evidence finds a higher rate of 19% may result in better outcomes. More than 45 countries globally have C-section rates less than 7.5%, while more than 50 have rates greater than 27%. Efforts are being made to both improve access to and reduce the use of C-section. In the United States as of 2017, about 32% of deliveries are by C-section.\nThe surgery has been performed at least as far back as 715 BC following the death of the mother, with the baby occasionally surviving. A popular idea is that the Roman statesman Julius Caesar was born via caesarean section and is the namesake of the procedure, but if this is the true etymology, it is based on a misconception: until the modern era, C-sections seem to have been invariably fatal to the mother, and Caesar's mother Aurelia not only survived her son's birth but lived for nearly 50 years afterward. There are many ancient and medieval legends, oral histories, and historical records of laws about C-sections around the world, especially in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. The first recorded successful C-section (where both the mother and the infant survived) was allegedly performed on a woman in Switzerland in 1500 by her husband, Jacob Nufer, though this was not recorded until 8 decades later. With the introduction of antiseptics and anesthetics in the 19th century, the survival of both the mother and baby, and thus the procedure, became significantly more common.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nCaesarean section (C-section) is recommended when vaginal delivery might pose a risk to the mother or baby. C-sections are also carried out for personal and social reasons on maternal request in some countries.\nMedical uses.\nComplications of labor and factors increasing the risk associated with vaginal delivery include:\nOther complications of pregnancy, pre-existing conditions, and concomitant diseases, include:\nOther\nPrevention.\nThe prevalence of caesarean section is generally agreed to be higher than needed in many countries, and physicians are encouraged to actively lower the rate, as a caesarean rate higher than 10\u201315% is not associated with reductions in maternal or infant mortality rates, although some evidence support that a higher rate of 19% may result in better outcomes.\nSome of these efforts include emphasizing a long latent phase of labor is not abnormal and not a justification for C-section; a new definition of the start of active labor from a cervical dilatation of 4\u00a0cm to a dilatation of 6\u00a0cm; and allowing women who have previously given birth to push for at least 2 hours, with 3 hours of pushing for women who have not previously given birth, before labor arrest is considered. Physical exercise during pregnancy decreases the risk. Additionally, results from a 2021 systematic review of the evidence on outpatient cervical ripening found that in women with low-risk pregnancies, the risk of caesarean delivery with harm to the mother or child was not significantly different from when done in an inpatient setting.\nRisks.\nAdverse outcomes in low-risk pregnancies occur in 8.6% of vaginal deliveries and 9.2% of caesarean section deliveries.\nMother.\nIn those who are low risk, the risk of death for caesarean sections is 13 per 100,000 vs. for vaginal birth 3.5 per 100,000 in the developed world. The United Kingdom National Health Service gives the risk of death for the mother as three times that of a vaginal birth.\nIn Canada, the difference in serious morbidity or mortality for the mother (e.g. cardiac arrest, wound hematoma, or hysterectomy) was 1.8 additional cases per 100. The difference in in-hospital maternal death was not significant.\nA caesarean section is associated with risks of postoperative adhesions, incisional hernias (which may require surgical correction), and wound infections. If a caesarean is performed in an emergency, the risk of the surgery may be increased due to several factors. The patient's stomach may not be empty, increasing the risk of anaesthesia. Other risks include severe blood loss (which may require a blood transfusion) and post-dural-puncture spinal- headaches.\nWound infections occur after caesarean sections at a rate of 3\u201315%. The presence of chorioamnionitis and obesity predisposes the woman to develop a surgical site infection.\nWomen who had caesarean sections are more likely to have problems with later pregnancies, and women who want larger families should not seek an elective caesarean unless medical indications to do so exist. The risk of placenta accreta, a potentially life-threatening condition that is more likely to develop where a woman has had a previous caesarean section, is 0.13% after two caesarean sections, but increases to 2.13% after four and then to 6.74% after six or more. Along with this is a similar rise in the risk of emergency hysterectomies at delivery.\nMothers can experience an increased incidence of postnatal depression, and can experience significant psychological trauma and ongoing birth-related post-traumatic stress disorder after obstetric intervention during the birthing process. Factors like pain in the first stage of labor, feelings of powerlessness, intrusive emergency obstetric intervention are important in the subsequent development of psychological issues related to labor and delivery.\nSubsequent pregnancies.\nWomen who have had a caesarean for any reason are somewhat less likely to become pregnant again as compared to women who have previously delivered only vaginally.\nWomen who had just one previous caesarean section are more likely to have problems with their second birth. Delivery after previous caesarean section is by either of two main options:\nBoth have higher risks than a vaginal birth with no previous caesarean section. A vaginal birth after caesarean section (VBAC) confers a higher risk of uterine rupture (5 per 1,000), blood transfusion or endometritis (10 per 1,000), and perinatal death of the child (0.25 per 1,000). Furthermore, 20% to 40% of planned VBAC attempts end in caesarean section being needed, with greater risks of complications in an emergency repeat caesarean section than in an elective repeat caesarean section. On the other hand, VBAC confers less maternal morbidity and a decreased risk of complications in future pregnancies than elective repeat caesarean section.\nAdhesions.\nSeveral steps can be taken during abdominal or pelvic surgery to minimize postoperative complications, such as developing adhesions. Such techniques and principles may include:\nDespite these proactive measures, adhesion formation is a recognized abdominal or pelvic surgery complication. To prevent adhesions from forming after caesarean section, adhesion barrier can be placed during surgery to minimize the risk of adhesions between the uterus and ovaries, the small bowel, and almost any tissue in the abdomen or pelvis. This is not current UK practice, as there is no compelling evidence to support the benefit of this intervention.\nAdhesions can cause long-term problems, such as:\nThe risk of adhesion formation is one reason why vaginal delivery is usually considered safer than elective caesarean section where there is no medical indication for section for either maternal or fetal reasons.\nChild.\nNon-medically indicated (elective) childbirth before 39 weeks gestation \"carry significant risks for the baby with no known benefit to the mother.\" Newborn mortality at 37 weeks may be up to 3 times the number at 40 weeks and is elevated compared to 38 weeks gestation. These early-term births were associated with more death during infancy, compared to those occurring at 39 to 41 weeks (full-term). Researchers in one study and another review found many benefits to going full term, but no adverse effects in the health of the mothers or babies.\nThe American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and medical policymakers review research studies and find more incidence of suspected or proven sepsis, RDS, hypoglycemia, need for respiratory support, need for NICU admission, and need for hospitalization &gt; 4\u20135 days. In the case of caesarean sections, rates of respiratory death were 14 times higher in pre-labor at 37 compared with 40 weeks gestation, and 8.2 times higher for pre-labor caesarean at 38 weeks. In this review, no studies found decreased neonatal morbidity due to non-medically indicated (elective) delivery before 39 weeks.\nFor otherwise healthy twin pregnancies where both twins are head down a trial of vaginal delivery is recommended at between 37 and 38 weeks. Vaginal delivery, in this case, does not worsen the outcome for either infant as compared with caesarean section. There is some controversy on the best method of delivery where the first twin is head first and the second is not, but most obstetricians will recommend normal delivery unless there are other reasons to avoid vaginal birth. When the first twin is not head down, a caesarean section is often recommended. Regardless of whether the twins are delivered by section or vaginally, the medical literature recommends delivery of dichorionic twins at 37 weeks, and monochorionic twins (identical twins sharing a placenta) by 36 weeks due to the increased risk of stillbirth in monochorionic twins who remain in utero after 37 weeks. The consensus is that late preterm delivery of monochorionic twins is justified because the risk of stillbirth for post-37-week delivery is significantly higher than the risks posed by delivering monochorionic twins near term (i.e., 36\u201337 weeks).\nThe consensus concerning monoamniotic twins (identical twins sharing an amniotic sac), the highest risk type of twins, is that they should be delivered by caesarean section at or shortly after 32 weeks since the risks of intrauterine death of one or both twins are higher after this gestation than the risk of complications of prematurity.\nIn a research study widely publicized, singleton children born earlier than 39 weeks may have developmental problems, including slower learning in reading and math.\nOther risks include:\nBirth by caesarean section also seems to be associated with worse health outcomes later in life, including overweight or obesity, problems in the immune system, and poor digestive system. However, caesarean deliveries are found to not affect a newborn's risk of developing food allergies. This finding contradicts a previous study that claims babies born via caesarean section have lower levels of \"Bacteroides\" that is linked to peanut allergy in infants.\nClassification.\nCaesarean sections have been classified in various ways by different perspectives. One way to discuss all classification systems is to group them by their focus either on the urgency of the procedure (most common), characteristics of the mother, or as a group based on other, less commonly discussed factors.\nBy urgency.\nConventionally, caesarean sections are classified as being either an elective surgery or an emergency operation. Classification is used to help communication between the obstetric, midwifery and anaesthetic team for discussion of the most appropriate method of anaesthesia. The decision whether to perform general anesthesia or regional anesthesia (spinal or epidural anaesthetic) is important and is based on many indications, including how urgent the delivery needs to be as well as the medical and obstetric history of the woman. Regional anaesthetic is almost always safer for the woman and the baby but sometimes general anaesthetic is safer for one or both, and the classification of urgency of the delivery is an important issue affecting this decision.\nA planned caesarean (or elective/scheduled caesarean), arranged ahead of time, is most commonly arranged for medical indications which have developed before or during the pregnancy, and ideally after 39 weeks of gestation. In the UK, this is classified as a 'grade 4' section (delivery timed to suit the mother or hospital staff) or as a 'grade 3' section (no maternal or fetal compromise but early delivery needed).\nEmergency caesarean sections are performed in pregnancies in which a vaginal delivery was planned initially, but an indication for caesarean delivery has since developed. In the UK they are further classified as grade 2 (delivery required within 90 minutes of the decision but no immediate threat to the life of the woman or the fetus) or grade 1 (delivery required within 30 minutes of the decision: immediate threat to the life of the mother or the baby or both.)\nElective caesarean sections may be performed based on an obstetrical or medical indication, or because of a medically non-indicated maternal request. Among women in the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Australia, about 7% preferred caesarean section as a method of delivery. In cases without medical indications the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the UK Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists recommend a planned vaginal delivery. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends that if after a woman has been provided information on the risk of a planned caesarean section and she still insists on the procedure it should be provided. If provided this should be done at 39 weeks of gestation or later. There is no evidence that ECS can reduce mother-to-child hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus transmission.\nBy characteristics of the mother.\nCaesarean delivery on maternal request.\nCaesarean delivery on maternal request (CDMR) is a medically unnecessary caesarean section, where the conduct of a childbirth via a caesarean section is requested by the pregnant patient even though there is not a medical indication to have the surgery. Systematic reviews have found no strong evidence about the impact of caesareans for nonmedical reasons. Recommendations encourage counseling to identify the reasons for the request, addressing anxieties and information, and encouraging vaginal birth. Elective caesareans at 38 weeks in some studies showed increased health complications in the newborn. For this reason ACOG and NICE recommend that elective caesarean sections should not be scheduled before 39 weeks gestation unless there is a medical reason. Planned caesarean sections may be scheduled earlier if there is a medical reason.\nAfter previous caesarean.\nMothers who have previously had a caesarean section are more likely to have a caesarean section for future pregnancies than mothers who have never had a caesarean section. There is a discussion about the circumstances under which women should have a vaginal birth after a previous caesarean.\nVaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC) is the practice of birthing a baby vaginally after a previous baby has been delivered by caesarean section (surgically). According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), successful VBAC is associated with decreased maternal morbidity and a decreased risk of complications in future pregnancies. According to the American Pregnancy Association, 90% of women who have undergone caesarean deliveries are candidates for VBAC. Approximately 60\u201380% of women opting for VBAC will successfully give birth vaginally, which is comparable to the overall vaginal delivery rate in the United States in 2010.\nTwins.\nFor otherwise healthy twin pregnancies where both twins are head down a trial of vaginal delivery is recommended between 37 and 38 weeks. Vaginal delivery in this case does not worsen the outcome for either infant as compared with caesarean section. There is controversy on the best method of delivery where the first twin is head first and the second is not. When the first twin is not head down at the point of labor starting, a caesarean section should be recommended. Although the second twin typically has a higher frequency of problems, it is unknown if a planned caesarean section affects this. It is estimated that 75% of twin pregnancies in the United States were delivered by caesarean section in 2008.\nBreech birth.\nA breech birth is the birth of a baby from a breech presentation, in which the baby exits the pelvis with the buttocks or feet first as opposed to the normal head-first presentation. In breech presentation, fetal heart sounds are heard just above the umbilicus.\nBabies are usually born head first. If the baby is in another position the birth may be complicated. In a 'breech presentation', the unborn baby is bottom-down instead of head-down. Babies born bottom-first are more likely to be harmed during a normal (vaginal) birth than those born head-first. For instance, the baby might not get enough oxygen during the birth. Having a planned caesarean may reduce these problems. A review looking at planned caesarean section for singleton breech presentation with planned vaginal birth, concludes that in the short term, births with a planned caesarean were safer for babies than vaginal births. Fewer babies died or were seriously hurt when they were born by caesarean. There was tentative evidence that children who were born by caesarean had more health problems at age two. Caesareans caused some short-term problems for mothers such as more abdominal pain. They also had some benefits, such as less urinary incontinence and less perineal pain.\nThe bottom-down position presents some hazards to the baby during the process of birth, and the mode of delivery (vaginal versus caesarean) is controversial in the fields of obstetrics and midwifery.\nThough vaginal birth is possible for the breech baby, certain fetal and maternal factors influence the safety of vaginal breech birth. The majority of breech babies born in the United States and the UK are delivered by caesarean section as studies have shown increased risks of morbidity and mortality for vaginal breech delivery, and most obstetricians counsel against planned vaginal breech birth for this reason. As a result of reduced numbers of actual vaginal breech deliveries, obstetricians and midwives are at risk of de-skilling in this important skill. All those involved in delivery of obstetric and midwifery care in the UK undergo mandatory training in conducting breech deliveries in the simulation environment (using dummy pelvises and mannequins to allow the practice of this important skill) and this training is carried out regularly to keep skills up to date.\nResuscitative hysterotomy.\nA resuscitative hysterotomy, also known as a peri-mortem caesarean delivery, is an emergency caesarean delivery carried out where maternal cardiac arrest has occurred, to assist in resuscitation of the mother by removing the aortocaval compression generated by the gravid uterus. Unlike other forms of caesarean section, the welfare of the fetus is a secondary priority only, and the procedure may be performed even before the limit of fetal viability if it is judged to be of benefit to the mother.\nOther ways, including the surgery technique.\nThere are several types of caesarean section (CS). An important distinction lies in the type of incision (longitudinal or transverse) made on the uterus, apart from the incision on the skin: the vast majority of skin incisions are a transverse suprapubic approach known as a Pfannenstiel incision but there is no way of knowing from the skin scar which way the uterine incision was conducted.\nThe EXIT procedure is a specialized surgical delivery procedure used to deliver babies who have airway compression.\nThe Misgav Ladach method is a modified caesarean section that has been used nearly globally since the 1990s. It was described by Michael Stark, the president of the New European Surgical Academy, at the time he was the director of Misgav Ladach, a general hospital in Jerusalem. The method was presented during a FIGO conference in Montr\u00e9al in 1994 and then distributed by the University of Uppsala, Sweden, in more than 100 countries. This method is based on minimalistic principles. He examined all steps in caesarean sections in use, analyzed them for their necessity, and, if found necessary, for their optimal performance. For the abdominal incision, he used the modified Joel Cohen incision and compared the longitudinal abdominal structures to strings on musical instruments. As blood vessels and muscles have lateral sway, it is possible to stretch rather than cut them. The peritoneum is opened by repeat stretching, no abdominal swabs are used, the uterus is closed in one layer with a big needle to reduce the amount of foreign body as much as possible, the peritoneal layers remain unsutured and the abdomen is closed with two layers only. Women undergoing this operation recover quickly and can look after the newborns soon after surgery. Many publications are showing the advantages over traditional caesarean section methods. There is also an increased risk of abruptio placentae and uterine rupture in subsequent pregnancies for women who underwent this method in prior deliveries.\nSince 2015, the World Health Organization has endorsed the Robson classification as a holistic means of comparing childbirth rates between different settings, to allow more accurate comparison of caesarean section rates.\nTechnique.\nAntibiotic prophylaxis is used before an incision. The uterus is incised, and this incision is extended with blunt pressure along a cephalad-caudad axis. The infant is delivered, and the placenta is then removed. The surgeon then decides about uterine exteriorization. Single-layer uterine closure is used when the mother does not want a future pregnancy. When subcutaneous tissue is 2\u00a0cm thick or more, surgical suture is used. Discouraged practices include manual cervical dilation, any subcutaneous drain, or supplemental oxygen therapy with intent to prevent infection.\nCaesarean section can be performed with single or double layer suturing of the uterine incision. Single layer closure compared with double layer closure has been observed to result in reduced blood loss during the surgery. It is uncertain whether this is the direct effect of the suturing technique or if other factors such as the type and site of abdominal incision contribute to reduced blood loss. Standard procedure includes the closure of the peritoneum. Research questions whether this is needed, with some studies indicating peritoneal closure is associated with longer operative time and hospital stay. The Misgav Ladach method is a surgery technical that may have fewer secondary complications and faster healing, due to the insertion into the muscle.\nAnesthesia.\nBoth general and regional anaesthesia (spinal, epidural or combined spinal and epidural anaesthesia) are acceptable for use during caesarean section. Evidence does not show a difference between regional anaesthesia and general anaesthesia concerning major outcomes in the mother or baby. Regional anaesthesia may be preferred as it allows the mother to be awake and interact immediately with her baby. Compared to general anaesthesia, regional anaesthesia is better at preventing persistent postoperative pain 3 to 8 months after caesarean section. Other advantages of regional anesthesia may include the absence of typical risks of general anesthesia: pulmonary aspiration (which has a relatively high incidence in patients undergoing anesthesia in late pregnancy) of gastric contents and esophageal intubation. One trial found no difference in satisfaction when general anaesthesia was compared with either spinal anaesthesia.\nRegional anaesthesia is used in 95% of deliveries, with spinal and combined spinal and epidural anaesthesia being the most commonly used regional techniques in scheduled caesarean section. Regional anaesthesia during caesarean section is different from the analgesia (pain relief) used in labor and vaginal delivery. The pain that is experienced because of surgery is greater than that of labor and therefore requires a more intense nerve block.\nGeneral anesthesia may be necessary because of specific risks to the mother or child. Patients with heavy, uncontrolled bleeding may not tolerate the hemodynamic effects of regional anesthesia. General anesthesia is also preferred in very urgent cases, such as severe fetal distress when there is no time to perform a regional anesthesia.\nPrevention of complications.\nPostpartum infection is one of the main causes of maternal death and may account for 10% of maternal deaths globally. A caesarean section greatly increases the risk of infection and associated morbidity, estimated to be between 5 and 20 times as high, and routine use of antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent infections was found by a meta-analysis to substantially reduce the incidence of febrile morbidity. Infection can occur in around 8% of women who have caesareans, largely endometritis, urinary tract infections and wound infections. Preventative antibiotics in women undergoing caesarean section decreased wound infection, endometritis, and serious infectious complications by about 65%. Side effects and effects on the baby are unclear.\nWomen who have caesareans can recognize the signs of fever that indicate the possibility of wound infection. Taking antibiotics before skin incision rather than after cord clamping reduces the risk for the mother, without increasing adverse effects for the baby. Moderate certainty evidence suggests that chlorhexidine gluconate as a skin preparation is slightly more effective in the prevention of surgical site infections than povidone-iodine but further research is needed.\nSome doctors believe that during a caesarean section, mechanical cervical dilation with a finger or forceps will prevent the obstruction of blood and lochia drainage, and thereby benefit the mother by reducing the risk of death. The evidence as of 2018[ [update]] neither supported nor refuted this practice for reducing postoperative morbidity, pending further large studies.\nHypotension (low blood pressure) is common in women who have spinal anaesthesia; intravenous fluids such as crystalloids, or compressing the legs with bandages, stockings, or inflatable devices may help to reduce the risk of hypotension but the evidence is still uncertain about their effectiveness.\nSkin-to-skin contact.\nThe WHO and UNICEF recommend that infants born by Caesarean section should have skin-to-skin contact (SSC) as soon as the mother is alert and responsive. Immediate SSC following a spinal or epidural anesthetic is possible because the mother remains alert; however, after a general anaesthetic, the father or other family member may provide SSC until the mother is able.\nIt is known that during the hours of labor before a vaginal birth, a woman's body begins to produce oxytocin which aids in the bonding process, and it is thought that SSC can trigger its production as well. Indeed, women have reported that they felt that SSC had helped them to feel close to and bond with their infant. A review of literature also found that immediate or early SSC increased the likelihood of successful breastfeeding and that newborns were found to cry less and relax quicker when they had SSC with their father as well.\nRecovery.\nIt is common for women who undergo caesarean section to have reduced or absent bowel movements for hours to days. During this time, women may experience abdominal cramps, nausea, and vomiting. This usually resolves without treatment. Poorly controlled pain following non-emergency caesarean section occurs in between 13% and 78% of women. Following caesarean delivery, complementary and alternative therapies (e.g., acupuncture) may help to relieve pain, though evidence supporting the efficacy of such treatments is extremely limited. Abdominal, wound, and back pain can continue for months after a caesarean section. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be helpful. For the first couple of weeks after a caesarean, women should avoid lifting anything heavier than their baby. To minimize pain during breastfeeding, women should experiment with different breastfeeding holds including the football hold and side-lying hold. Women who have had a caesarean are more likely to experience pain that interferes with their usual activities than women who have vaginal births, although by six months there is generally no longer a difference. Pain during sexual intercourse is less likely than after vaginal birth; by six months there is no difference.\nThere may be a somewhat higher incidence of postnatal depression in the first weeks after childbirth for women who have caesarean sections, but this difference does not persist. Some women who have had caesarean sections, especially emergency caesareans, experience post-traumatic stress disorder.\nA woman who undergoes caesarean section has 18.3% chance of chronic surgical pain at three months and 6.8% chance of surgical pain at 12 months.\nIn recent meta-analyses, caesarean section has been associated with a lower risk of urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse compared to vaginal delivery. Women who have vaginal births, after a previous caesarean, are more than twice as likely to subsequently have pelvic floor surgery as those who have another caesarean.\nFrequency.\nGlobal rates of caesarean section are increasing. It doubled from 2003 to 2018 to reach 21%, and is increasing annually by 4%. The trend toward increasing rates is particularly strong in the middle and high-income countries.101 In southern Africa, the cesarean rate is less than 5%; while the rate is almost 60% in some parts of Latin America. The Canadian rate was 26% in 2005\u20132006. Australia has a high caesarean section rate, at 31% in 2007. At one time a rate of 10% to 15% was thought to be ideal; a rate of 19% may result in better outcomes. The World Health Organization officially withdrew its previous recommendation of a 15% C-section rate in June 2010. Their official statement read, \"There is no empirical evidence for an optimum percentage. What matters most is that all women who need caesarean sections receive them.\"\nMore than 50 nations have rates greater than 27%. Another 45 countries have rates of less than 7.5%. There are efforts to both improve access to and reduce the use of C-sections. Globally, 1% of all caesarean deliveries are carried out without medical need. Overall, the caesarean section rate was 25.7% for 2004\u20132008.\nThere is no significant difference in caesarean rates when comparing midwife continuity care to conventional fragmented care. More emergency caesareans\u2014about 66%\u2014are performed during the day rather than the night.\nThe rate has risen to 46% in China and to levels of 25% and above in many Asian, European and Latin American countries. In Brazil and Iran the caesarean section rate is greater than 40%. Brazil has one of the highest caesarean section rates in the world, with rates in the public sector of 35\u201345%, and 80\u201390% in the private sector.\nEurope.\nAcross Europe, there are differences between countries: in Italy, the caesarean section rate is 40%, while in the Nordic countries it is 14%. In the United Kingdom, in 2008, the rate was 24%. In Ireland the rate was 26.1% in 2009.\nIn Italy, the incidence of caesarean sections is particularly high, although it varies from region to region. In Campania, 60% of 2008 births reportedly occurred via caesarean sections. In the Rome region, the mean incidence is around 44%, but can reach as high as 85% in some private clinics.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, cesarean deliveries began rising in the 1960s and started becoming routine in the 1960s and 1970s.101\nIn the United States, the rate of C-sections is around 33%, varying from 23% to 40% depending on the state. One of three women who gave birth in the US delivered by caesarean in 2011. In 2012, close to 23 million C-sections were carried out globally.\nWith nearly 1.3 million stays, caesarean section was one of the most common procedures performed in U.S. hospitals in 2011. It was the second-most common procedure performed for people ages 18 to 44 years old. Caesarean rates in the U.S. have risen considerably since 1996. The rate has increased in the United States, to 33% of all births in 2012, up from 21% in 1996. In 2010, the caesarean delivery rate was 32.8% of all births (a slight decrease from 2009's high of 32.9% of all births). A study found that in 2011, women covered by private insurance were 11% more likely to have a caesarean section delivery than those covered by Medicaid. The increase in use has not resulted in improved outcomes, resulting in the position that C-sections may be done too frequently. It is believed that the high rate of induced deliveries has also led to the high rate of c-sections because they are twice as likely to lead to one.\nHospitals and doctors make more money from C-section births than vaginal deliveries. Economists have calculated that hospitals may make a few thousand dollars more and doctors a few hundred. It has been found that for-profit hospitals do more c-sections than non-profit hospitals. One study looked at the rate of c-sections done for women who were themselves doctors. It found that there was a 10 percent decrease in the rate of c-sections vs the general population. But if the hospital paid their doctors a flat salary removing the incentive to do the surgical procedures, which take more time, the rate of c-sections done on women who were themselves physicians exceeded that of the procedure done on non-medically knowledgeable mothers, suggesting that some women who needed c-sections were not getting them.\nConcerned over the rising number of cesarean deliveries and hospital costs, in 2009 Minnesota introduced a blended payment rate for either vaginal or cesarean uncomplicated births (i.e., a similar payment regardless of delivery mode). As a result, the prepolicy cesarean rate of 22.8% dropped by 3.24 percentage points. The cost of childbirth hospitalizations in Minnesota dropped by $425.80 at the time the policy was initiated and continued to drop by $95.04 per quarter with no significant effects on maternal morbidity.\nThe rise of cesarean births in the United States has coincided with counter-movements emphasizing natural childbirth with a lesser degree of medical intervention.\nChina.\nThe rate of cesarean sections began to sharply increase in China in the 1990s.101 This increase was driven by the expansion of China's modern hospital infrastructure, and occurred first in urban areas.101 The rise in cesarean deliveries has also resulted in social critique of the medical establishment over the medical necessity of performing cesarean sections.\nHistory.\nThere are many conflicting stories of the first successful caesarean section in which both mother and baby survived. It is, however, known that the procedure had been attempted for hundreds of years before it became accepted at the beginning of the twentieth century. While forceps have gone through periods of high popularity, today they are only used in approximately 10% of deliveries. The C-section has become the more popular solution for difficult deliveries. In 2005, one-third of babies were born via C-section.\nHistorically, caesarean sections performed upon a live woman usually resulted in the death of the mother. It was considered an extreme measure, performed only when the mother was already dead or considered to be beyond help. By way of comparison, see the resuscitative hysterotomy or perimortem caesarean section.\nAccording to the ancient Chinese \"Records of the Grand Historian\", Luzhong (), a sixth-generation descendant of the mythical Yellow Emperor, had six sons, all born by \"cutting open the body\". The sixth son Jilian founded the House of Mi that ruled the State of Chu (c.\u20091030\u2013223 BC).\nThe Sanskrit medical treatise \"Sushruta Samhita\", composed in the early 1st millennium CE, mentions post-mortem caesarean sections. The first available non-mythical record of a C-section is that of the mother of Bindusara (born c.\u2009320 BC, ruled 298\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009272 BC), the second Mauryan \"Samrat\" (emperor) of India, who accidentally consumed poison and died when she was close to delivering him. Chanakya, Chandragupta's teacher and adviser, made up his mind that the baby should survive. He cut open the belly of the queen and took out the baby, thus saving the baby's life.\nAn early account of caesarean section in Iran (Persia) is mentioned in the book of \"Shahnameh\", written around 1000 AD, and relates to the birth of Rostam, the legendary hero of that country. According to the \"Shahnameh\", the Simurgh instructed Zal upon how to perform a caesarean section, thus saving Rudaba and the child Rostam. In Persian literature caesarean section is known as \"Rostamina\" ().\nIn the Irish mythological text the Ulster Cycle, the character Furbaide Ferbend is said to have been born by posthumous caesarean section, after his mother was murdered by his evil aunt Medb.\nThe Babylonian Talmud, an ancient Jewish religious text, mentions a procedure similar to the caesarean section. The procedure is termed . It also discusses at length the permissibility of performing a C-section on a dying or dead mother. Rabbinical reports from the 2nd century AD about discussions that took place even earlier suggested that Jewish women regularly survived the operation in Roman times, but this conflicts with the general view that caesarean sections were always fatal to the mother in the pre-modern era.\nPliny the Elder theorized that Julius Caesar's (born 100 BC) name came from an ancestor who was born by caesarean section, but the truth of this is debated (see the discussion of the etymology of \"Caesar\"). Some popular misconceptions involve Caesar himself being born from the procedure; which is considered false because the procedure was lethal to mothers in ancient Rome and Caesar's mother Aurelia Cotta lived until he was an adult. The Ancient Roman caesarean section was first performed to remove a baby from the womb of a mother who died during childbirth, a practice sometimes called the \"Caesarean law\".\nThe Spanish saint Raymond Nonnatus (1204\u20131240) received his surname\u2014from the Latin ('not born')\u2014because he was born by caesarean section. His mother died while giving birth to him.\nThere is some indirect evidence that the first caesarean section that was survived by both the mother and child was performed in Prague in 1337. The mother was Beatrice of Bourbon, the second wife of the King of Bohemia John of Luxembourg. Beatrice gave birth to the king's son Wenceslaus I, later the Duke of Luxembourg, Brabant, and Limburg, and who became the half brother of the later King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor, Charles IV.\nIn an account from the 1580s, Jacob Nufer, a veterinarian in Siegershausen, Switzerland, is supposed to have operated on his wife after a prolonged labour, with her surviving. His wife allegedly bore five more children, including twins, and the baby delivered by caesarean section purportedly lived to the age of 77.\nFor most of the time since the 16th century, the procedure had a high mortality rate by modern standards. Key steps in reducing mortality were:\nIndigenous people in the Great Lakes region of Africa, including Rwanda and Uganda, performed caesarean sections which in one account by Robert William Felkin from 1879 resulted in the survival of both mother and child. Banana wine was used, although the site of the incision was then also washed with water and, post-operation, covered with a paste made by chewing two different roots. From the well-developed nature of the medical procedures employed he concluded that these procedures had been employed for some time. James Barry was the first European doctor to carry out a successful caesarean in Africa, while posted to Cape Town between 1817 and 1828.\nThe first successful caesarean section to be performed in the United States took place in Rockingham County, Virginia in 1794. The procedure was performed by Dr. Jesse Bennett on his wife Elizabeth.\nCaesarius of Terracina.\nThe patron saint of caesarean section is Caesarius, a young deacon martyred at Terracina, who has replaced and Christianized the pagan figure of Caesar. The martyr (Saint Cesareo in Italian) is invoked for the success of this surgical procedure, because it was considered the new \"Christian Caesar\" \u2013 as opposed to the \"pagan Caesar\" \u2013 in the Middle Ages it began to be invoked by pregnant women to wish a physiological birth, for the success of the expulsion of the baby from the uterus and, therefore, for their salvation and that of the unborn. The practice continues, in fact, the martyr Caesarius is invoked by the future mothers who, due to health problems or that of the baby, must give birth to their child by caesarean section.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the term is not definitively known. Roman \"Lex Regia\" (royal law), later the (imperial law), of Numa Pompilius (715\u2013673 BC), required the child of a mother who had died during childbirth to be cut from her womb.\nThere was a cultural taboo that mothers should not be buried pregnant, that may have reflected a way of saving some fetuses. Roman practice required a living mother to be in her tenth month of pregnancy before resorting to the procedure, reflecting the knowledge that she could not survive the delivery.\nSpeculations that the Roman dictator Julius Caesar was born by the method now known as C-section are false. Although caesarean sections were performed in Roman times, no classical source records a mother surviving such a delivery, while Caesar's mother lived for years after his birth. As late as the 12th century, scholar and physician Maimonides expresses doubt over the possibility of a woman's surviving this procedure and again becoming pregnant. The term has also been explained as deriving from the verb \"caedere\", 'to cut', with children delivered this way referred to as . Pliny the Elder refers to a certain Julius Caesar (an ancestor of the famous Roman statesman) as , 'cut from the womb' giving this as an explanation for the cognomen \"Caesar\" which was then carried by his descendants. Nonetheless, the false etymology has been widely repeated until recently. For example, the first (1888) and second (1989) editions of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" say that caesarean birth \"was done in the case of Julius C\u00e6sar\". More recent dictionaries are more diffident: the online edition of the OED (2021) mentions \"the traditional belief that Julius C\u00e6sar was delivered this way\", and \"Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary\" (2003) says \"from the legendary association of such a delivery with the Roman cognomen \"Caesar\"\".\nThe word \"Caesar\", meaning either Julius Caesar or an emperor in general, is also borrowed or calqued in the name of the procedure in many other languages in Europe and beyond.\nFinally, the Roman \"praenomen\" (given name) Caeso was said to be given to children who were born via C-section. While this was probably just folk etymology made popular by Pliny the Elder, it was well known by the time the term came into common use.\nSpelling.\nThe term \"caesarean\" is spelled in various accepted ways, as discussed at Wiktionary. The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) of the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM) uses \"cesarean section\", while some other American medical works, e.g. \"Saunders Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary\", use \"caesarean\", as do most British works. The online versions of the US-published \"Merriam-Webster Dictionary\" and \"American Heritage Dictionary\" list \"cesarean\" first and other spellings as \"variants\".\nSociety and culture.\nCourt cases.\n\"In re A.C.\", 573 A.2d 1235 (1990), was a District of Columbia Court of Appeals case. It was the first American appellate court case decided against a forced Caesarean section, although the decision was issued after the fatal procedure was performed. Physicians performed a Caesarean section upon patient Angela Carder (n\u00e9e Stoner) without informed consent in an unsuccessful attempt to save the life of her baby. The case stands as a landmark in United States case law establishing the rights of informed consent and bodily integrity for pregnant women.\nIn Illinois, \"In re Baby Boy Doe\", 632 N.E.2d 326 (Ill. App. Ct. 1994) was a court case holding that courts may not balance whatever rights a fetus may have against the rights of a competent woman, whose choice to refuse medical treatment as invasive as a Cesarean section must be honored even if the choice may be harmful to the fetus.\n\"Pemberton v. Tallahassee Memorial Regional Center\", 66 F. Supp. 2d 1247 (N.D. Fla. 1999), is a case in the United States regarding reproductive rights. Pemberton had a previous Caesarean section (vertical incision), and with her second child attempted to have a VBAC (vaginal birth after c-section). When a doctor she had approached about a related issue at the Tallahassee Memorial Regional Center found out, he and the hospital sued to force her to get a c-section. The court held that the rights of the fetus at or near birth outweighed the rights of Pemberton to determine her own medical care. She was physically forced to stop laboring, and taken to the hospital, where a c-section was performed. Her suit against the hospital was dismissed. The court held that a cesarean section at the end of a full-term pregnancy was here deemed to be medically necessary by doctors to avoid a substantial risk that the fetus would die during delivery due to uterine rupture, a risk of 4\u20136% according to the hospital's doctors and 2% according to Pemberton's doctors. Furthermore, the court held that a state's interest in preserving the life of an unborn child outweighed the mother's constitutional interest in bodily integrity. The court held that \"Roe v. Wade\" was not applicable, because bearing an unwanted child is a greater intrusion on the mother's constitutional interests than undergoing a cesarean section to deliver a child that the mother affirmatively desires to deliver. The court further distinguished \"In re A.C.\" by stating that it left open the possibility that a non-consenting patient's interest would yield to a more compelling countervailing interest in an \"extremely rare and truly exceptional case.\" The court then held this case to be such.\nPresence of father.\nIn many hospitals, the mother's partner is encouraged to attend the surgery to support her and share the experience. While traditionally there has been an opaque surgical drape obstructing the parents' view, some patients and doctors are opting for a \"gentle C-section\" using a clear drape, allowing the parents to watch the delivery and see their infant immediately.\nSpecial cases.\nIn Judaism, there is a dispute among the \"poskim\" (Rabbinic authorities) as to whether the first-born son from a caesarean section has the laws of a \"bechor\". Traditionally, a male child delivered by caesarean is not eligible for the \"Pidyon HaBen\" dedication ritual.\nIn rare cases, caesarean sections can be used to remove a dead fetus; otherwise, the woman has to labour and deliver a baby known to be a stillbirth. A late-term abortion using caesarean section procedures is termed a hysterotomy abortion and is very rarely performed.\nThe mother may perform a caesarean section on herself; there have been successful cases, such as In\u00e9s Ram\u00edrez P\u00e9rez of Mexico who, on 5 March 2000, took this action. She survived, as did her son, Orlando Ruiz Ram\u00edrez.\nIn 2024, a female western lowland gorilla had a successful cesarean section after zoo veterinarians diagnosed her with pre-eclampsia. The premature gorilla infant survived, as a result of similar methods used with human infants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46925", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46925", "title": "Greyhawk", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional campaign setting\nGreyhawk, also known as the World of Greyhawk, is a fictional world designed as a campaign setting for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" fantasy roleplaying game. Although not the first campaign world developed for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"\u2014Dave Arneson's \"Blackmoor\" campaign predated it by about a year\u2014the world of Greyhawk closely identified with early development of the game beginning in 1972, and after being published it remained associated with \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" publications until 2008.\nThe world itself started as simply a dungeon under a castle designed by Gary Gygax for the amusement of his children and friends, but it was rapidly expanded to include not only a complex multi-layered dungeon environment, but also the nearby city of Greyhawk, and eventually an entire world. In addition to the campaign world, which was published in several editions over twenty years, Greyhawk was also used as the setting for many adventures published in support of the game, as well as for RPGA's massively shared \"Living Greyhawk\" campaign from 2000 to 2008.\nSetting.\nThe World of Greyhawk is located on a planet called \"Oerth.\" Oerth has an axial tilt of 30 degrees, which causes greater seasonal temperature variation than on Earth and is controlled by wizardly and divine magic that shifts weather patterns to be more favorable to the populace. Castle Greyhawk was the most famous dungeon in Oerth, the home campaign world of Gary Gygax. Players in the earliest days of this campaign mostly stayed within Castle Greyhawk's dungeons, but Gygax envisioned the rest of his world as a sort of parallel Earth, and the original Oerth (pronounced 'Oith', as with a Brooklyn accent) looked much like the real-world Earth but filled with imaginary cities and countries. Several years later, when TSR produced the original \"World of Greyhawk\" folio (1980), Gygax was asked to produce a map of the world and decided to create something new which still featured many of the locales from his original world of Oerth but with new geography. Gygax also connected Dave Arneson's Blackmoor to his world by including a country by that name in Oerth. In his later novel \"Dance of Demons\" (1988), Gygax destroyed Greyhawk's Oerth and replaced it with a new fantasy world of Yarth.\nThe \"Flanaess\" is the eastern part of the continent of Oerik, one of the four continents of Oerth, acting as the setting of dozens of adventures published between the 1970s and 2000s. In late 1972, Dave Arneson demonstrated a new type of game to a group of gamers in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, including game designer Gygax. Gygax agreed to develop a set of rules with Arneson and get the game published; the game eventually became known as \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Gygax designed a set of dungeons underneath the ruins of Castle Greyhawk as a testing ground for new rules, character classes and spells. In those early days, there was no Flanaess; the world map of Oerth was developed by Gygax as circumstances dictated, the new cities and lands simply drawn over a map of North America. Gygax and Kuntz further developed this campaign setting, and by 1976, the lands within a radius of 50 miles had been mapped in depth, and the lands within a radius of approximately 500 miles were in outline form. \nFollowing yet more work, in 1978 Gygax agreed to publish his world and decided to redevelop Oerth from scratch. Once he had sketched out the entire planet to his satisfaction, one hemisphere of Oerth was dominated by a massive continent called Oerik. Gygax decided to concentrate his first efforts on the continent of Oerik and asked TSR's printing house about the maximum size of paper they could handle; the answer was 34 x 22 inches (86\u00a0cm x 56\u00a0cm). He found that, using the scale he desired, he could fit only the northeast corner of Oerik on two of the sheets. This corner of Oerik became known as \"the Flanaess\", so named in Gygax's mind because of the peaceful people known as the Flannae who had once lived there. Gygax also added many more new regions, countries and cities, bringing the number of political states to 60.\nNeeding original placenames for all of the geographical and political places on his map, Gygax sometimes resorted to wordplay based on the names of friends and acquaintances. For instance, Perrenland was named after Jeff Perren, who co-wrote the rules for \"Chainmail\" with Gygax; Urnst was a homophone of Ernst (his son Ernie); and Sunndi was a near-homophone of Cindy, another of Gygax's children.\nFrom Gygax's prototype map, Darlene Pekul, a freelance artist in Lake Geneva, developed a full color map on a hex grid. Gygax was so pleased with the result that he quickly switched his home Greyhawk campaign over to the new world he had created. Ultimately, the original Castle Greyhawk was never published for public play, instead with many of the elements of Gygax's original campaign becoming the seed for other adventures.\nDevelopment history.\nEarly development.\nIn the late 1960s, Gary Gygax, a military history buff and pulp fantasy fan, was a central, founding figure in the Castle &amp; Crusade Society. The C&amp;C Society, as it was known, served enthusiasts of miniature wargaming in the Middle Ages and published an occasional newsletter known as the \"Domesday Book\".\nFollowing up on a promise he made in \"Domesday Book\" #5, Gygax presented the \"Great Kingdom\" map c. June 1971 in Domesday #9, to be used as a game setting for the Society. Members thereafter began claiming territories, including member Dave Arneson, who was an officer of the organization, and frequent contributor to the newsletter. Arneson claimed a territory he named Blackmoor, a setting he had already begun developing in his home campaign, and Gygax reserved for himself a territory on lake Nyr Div.\nIn addition to historically-based medieval wargaming, both Gygax and Arneson were enthusiasts of adding fantasy elements to their games. To this end, Gygax created a fantasy supplement for the \"Chainmail\" ruleset for medieval miniatures that he was co-writing with Jeff Perren. Released in the late spring of 1971, this booklet included rules for fantasy monsters, wizards and magical weapons.\nAround the same time, in Minneapolis\u2013St. Paul, Dave Arneson, impressed by the \"Braunstein\" role-playing games of fellow wargamer David Wesely, developed the Barony of Blackmoor as a setting for Braunstein style games. Arneson based his game around the village, castle and dungeons of Blackmoor. The castle itself was represented on the table by an actual plastic kit model of a medieval castle. Arneson informed the players that instead of controlling regiments, they would each take one individual character into the castle of the Barony of Blackmoor to explore its dangerous dungeons. Arneson drew from numerous sources but quickly incorporated the fantasy supplement of Chainmail into his games.\nAfter about a year and half of play, Arneson (Blackmoor) and fellow gamer David Megarry (Dungeon! boardgame) traveled to Lake Geneva in November or December 1972 to pitch their respective games to Gygax, who at that time was a representative of the Guidon Games company. Gygax was immediately intrigued by the concept of individual characters exploring a dungeon setting. He and Arneson agreed to co-develop a set of rules, and Gygax quickly developed a castle and dungeon of his own, \"Castle Greyhawk\", set within his portion of the Great Kingdom map. Castle Greyhawk is sometimes considered the first dungeon in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and pioneered the roots of the mega-dungeon format of gaming.\nTwo of his children, Ernie and Elise, were the first players, and during their first session, as Tenser and Ahlissa, they fought and destroyed the first monsters of the Greyhawk dungeon; Gygax recalled them as being either giant centipedes or a nest of scorpions. During the same session, Ernie and Elise also found the first treasure, a chest of 3,000 copper coins which was too heavy to carry, much to the children's chagrin. After his children had gone to bed, Gygax immediately began working on a second level for the dungeon. At the next play session, Ernie and Elise were joined by Gygax's friends: Don Kaye, Rob Kuntz, and Terry Kuntz.\nAbout a month after his first session, Gygax created the nearby city of Greyhawk, where the players' characters could sell their treasure and find a place to rest.\nHome campaign (1972\u20131979).\nAs Gygax and Arneson worked to develop and publish the rules for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" through TSR, Gygax continued to design and present the dungeons and environs of Castle Greyhawk to his circle of friends and family, using them as playtesters for new rules and concepts. As the players began to explore more of the world outside of the castle and city, Gygax developed other regions and cities for them. With play sessions occurring seven or more times a week, Gygax did not have the time or inclination to create the map for a whole new world; he simply drew his world over a map of North America, adding new cities and regions as his world slowly grew through ongoing adventures. The city and castle of Greyhawk were placed near the real-world position of Chicago, his birthplace; various other places were clustered around it. For instance, the rival city of Dyvers he placed in the area of real-world Milwaukee.\nGygax also continued to develop the dungeons underneath the castle. By the time he was finished, the complex labyrinth encompassed thirteen levels filled with devious traps, secret passageways, hungry monsters, and glittering treasure. Although details of these original Greyhawk dungeons have never been published in detail, Gygax gave some glimpses of them in an article he wrote for the European fanzine \"Europa\" in 1975:\nBefore the rules for \"D&amp;D\" were published, \"Old Greyhawk Castle\" was 13 levels deep. The first level was a simple maze of rooms and corridors, for none of the \"participants\" had ever played such a game before. The second level had two unusual items, a Nixie pool and a fountain of snakes. The third featured a torture chamber and small cells and prison rooms. The fourth was a level of crypts and undead. The fifth was centered around a strange font of black fire and gargoyles. The sixth was a repeating maze with dozens of wild hogs... in inconvenient spots, naturally backed up by appropriate numbers of Wereboars. The seventh was centered around a circular labyrinth and a street of masses of ogres. The eighth through tenth levels were caves and caverns featuring Trolls, giant insects and a transporter nexus with an evil Wizard (with a number of tough associates) guarding it. The eleventh level was the home of the most powerful wizard in the castle: He had Balrogs as servants. The remainder of the level was populated by Martian White Apes, except the sub-passage system underneath the corridors which was full of poisonous critters with no treasure. Level twelve was filled with Dragons.\nThe bottom level, number thirteen, contained an inescapable slide which took the players clear through 'to China', from whence they had to return via \"Outdoor Adventure\". It was quite possible to journey downward by an insidious series of slanting passages which began on the second level, but the likelihood of following such a route unknowingly did not become too great until the seventh or eighth level...\nSide levels included a barracks with Orcs, Hobgoblins, and Gnolls continually warring with each other, a museum, a huge arena, an underground lake, a Giant's home, and a garden of fungi.\nAnyone who made it to the bottom level alive met Zagyg, the insane architect of the dungeons. \"Zagyg\" is a reverse homophone of \"Gygax\", and it was Gygax's inside joke that the person who had designed the dungeon\u2014himself\u2014must be insane. Only three players ever made it to the bottom level and met Zagyg, all of them during solo adventures: Rob Kuntz (playing Robilar), Gygax's son Ernie (playing Tenser), and Rob's brother Terry (playing Terik). Their reward was to be instantly transported to the far side of the world, where they each faced a long solo trek back to the city of Greyhawk. Terik and Tenser managed to catch up to Robilar along the way, and the three journeyed back to Greyhawk together.\nBy this time, a dozen players crowded Gygax's basement every night, with over 20 at times on weekends and the effort needed to plan their adventures took up much of Gygax's spare time. He had been very impressed with Rob Kuntz's imaginative play as a player, and appointed Rob to be co-Dungeon Master of Greyhawk. This freed up Gygax to work on other projects, and also gave him an opportunity to participate as a player, creating characters like Yrag and Mordenkainen.\nIn order to make room for Rob Kuntz's dungeons, Gygax scrapped his bottom level and integrated Rob's work into the Greyhawk dungeons. Gygax and Kuntz continued to develop new levels for their players, and by the time the Greyhawk home campaign drew to a close in 1985, the castle dungeons encompassed more than fifty levels.\nSignificant player characters.\nWhile many players participating in the Gygax and Kuntz home campaign were occasional players, sometimes not even naming their characters, others played far more frequently, and several of their characters became well known to the general gaming world before publication of the Greyhawk campaign setting. Some of these characters became known when Gygax mentioned them in his various columns, interviews, and publications. In other cases, when Gygax created a new magical spell for the game, he would sometimes use the name of a wizard character from his home campaign to add verisimilitude to the spell name, such as \"Melf's acid arrow\", Melf being a character created by his son Luke. Some of the characters who became synonymous with Greyhawk at that time included:\nGreyhawk firsts.\nThe first publication to mention Greyhawk.\nGary Gygax wrote a short story titled \"The Expedition Into the Black Reservoir\", subtitled \"A Dungeon Adventure at Greyhawk Castle\", which was published in the August 1974 issue of Chicago small press magazine \"El Conquistador\".\nThe first mention of Oerth.\nIn the first issue of \"The Dragon\" published in June 1976, Gygax prefaced Chapter 1 of his serialized novella \"The Gnome Cache\" with a note that the story's setting, Oerth, was very similar to Earth in terms of geography.\nThe first deities of Greyhawk.\nOne facet of culture that Gygax did not address during the first few years of his home campaign was organized religion. Since his campaign was largely built around the needs of lower-level characters, he did not think specific deities were necessary, since direct interaction between a god and a low-level character was very unlikely. Some of his players took matters into their own hands, calling upon Norse or Greek gods such as Odin or Zeus, or even Conan's Crom in times of dire need. However, some of the players wanted Gygax to create and customize a specific deity so that cleric characters could receive their powers from someone less ambiguous than \"the gods\". Gygax jokingly created two gods: Saint Cuthbert\u2014who brought non-believers around to his point of view with whacks of his cudgel \u2014and Pholtus, whose fanatical followers refused to believe that any other gods existed. Because both of these deities represented aspects of Good, Gygax eventually created a few evil deities to provide some villainy.\nIn Chapter 2 of \"The Gnome Cache\", which appeared in the second issue of \"The Dragon\", a shrine to St. Cuthbert (spelled \"St. Cuthburt\") was mentioned, which was the first published reference to a Greyhawk deity.\nThe first Greyhawk novel.\nIn 1976, Gygax invited the science fiction/fantasy writer Andre Norton to play \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" in his Greyhawk world. Norton subsequently wrote \"Quag Keep\", which involved a group of gamers who travel from the real world to Greyhawk. It was the first novel to be set, at least partially, in the Greyhawk setting, and according to \"Alternative Worlds\", the first to be based on \"D&amp;D\". \"Quag Keep\" was excerpted in issue #12 of \"The Dragon\" (February 1978) just prior to the book's release.\nThe first Greyhawk adventures published by TSR.\nFrom 1976 to 1979, Gygax also shared some glimpses of his home campaign with other gamers when he set several TSR \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" adventures in the world of Greyhawk:\nIn addition, Lawrence Schick set his 1979 TSR adventure S2 \"White Plume Mountain\" in Greyhawk.\nDespite fan curiosity, the original Castle Greyhawk was never officially published outside of Gygax's home campaign.\n\"The World of Greyhawk\" folio edition (1980).\nIn 1975, Gygax and Kuntz published a booklet called \"Supplement I: Greyhawk\", an expansion of the rules for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" based on their play experiences in the Greyhawk campaign. Although it detailed new spells and character classes that had been developed in the dungeons of Greyhawk, it did not contain any details of their Greyhawk campaign world. The only two references to Greyhawk were an illustration of a large stone head in a dungeon corridor titled \"The Great Stone Face, Enigma of Greyhawk\" and mention of a fountain on the second level of the dungeons that continuously issued an endless number of snakes.\nThe 2004 publication \"\" suggested that details of Gygax's Greyhawk campaign were published in this booklet, but Gygax had no plans in 1975 to publish details of the Greyhawk world, since he believed that new players of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" would rather create their own worlds than use someone else's. In addition, he did not want to publish all the material he had created for his players; he thought he would be unlikely to recoup a fair investment for the thousands of hours he had spent on it. Since his secrets would be revealed to his players, he would be forced to recreate a new world for them afterward.\nWith the release of the \"AD&amp;D Players Handbook\" in 1978, many players were intrigued by the connection of Greyhawk characters to magical spells such as \"Tenser's floating disc\", \"Bigby's crushing hand\", and \"Mordenkainen's faithful hound\". The \"AD&amp;D Dungeon Masters Guide\", released the following year, also made references to the dungeons of Castle Greyhawk. Players' curiosity was further piqued by the ten \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" modules set in Greyhawk that were published between 1976 and 1979. Several of Gygax's regular columns in \"Dragon\" magazine also mentioned details of his home campaign and characters that inhabited his world. Gygax was surprised when he found out that players wanted to use Greyhawk as their campaign world.\nDevelopment of geography.\nRather than using his own version of the Great Kingdom map, which included local areas based on real-world maps, Gygax decided to create an entirely new and greatly expanded version of Oerth. Needing many more original names for all of the geographical and political places on his map for the new and expanded areas, Gygax sometimes resorted to wordplay. He had previously used Perrenland on the Great Kingdom map, named after Jeff Perren, who co-wrote the rules for \"Chainmail\" with Gygax, but for the new Greyhawk map he added many more such names of friends and acquaintances. For instance, Urnst was a homophone of Ernst (his son Ernie) and Sunndi was a near-homophone of Cindy, another of Gygax's children.\nGygax gave only the most basic descriptions of each state; he expected that DMs would customize the setting in order to make it an integral part of their own individual campaigns. His map included arctic wastes, desert, temperate forests, tropical jungles, mountainous cordillera, seas and oceans, rivers, archipelagos and volcanoes.\nDevelopment of history and politics.\nGygax set out to create a fractious place where chaos and evil were in the ascendant and courageous champions would be needed. In order to explain how his world had arrived at this state, he wrote an outline of a thousand years of history. As a military history buff, he was very familiar with the concept of waves of cultural invasions, such the Picts of Great Britain being invaded by the Celts, who were in turn invaded by the Romans. In creating a similar pattern of history for his world, Gygax decided that a thousand years before his campaign began, the northeast corner of the continent had been occupied by a peaceful but primitive people called the Flannae, whose name was the root for the name of that part of Oerik, the \"Flanaess\". At that time, far to the west of the Flanaess, two peoples were at war, the Bakluni and the Suloise. The war reached its climax when both sides used powerful magic to obliterate each other, in an event called the Twin Cataclysms. Refugees of these disasters were forced out of their lands, and the Suloise invaded the Flanaess, forcing the Flannae to flee to the outer edges of the continent. Several centuries later, a new invader appeared, the Oeridians, and they in turn forced the Suloise southward. One tribe of the Oeridians, the Aerdi, began to set up an empire. Several centuries later, the Aerdi's Great Kingdom ruled most of the Flanaess. The Aerdi overkings marked the beginning of what they believed would be perpetual peace with Year 1 of a new calendar, the Common Year (CY) Reckoning. However, several centuries later, the Empire became decadent, with their rulers losing their sanity, turning to evil, and enslaving their people. When the overking Ivid V came to the throne, the oppressed peoples rebelled.\nIt was at this point, in the year 576 CY, that Gygax set the world of Greyhawk. As Gygax wrote in his \"World of Greyhawk\" folio: \"The current state of affairs in the Flanaess is confused indeed. Humankind is fragmented into isolationist realms, indifferent nations, evil lands, and states striving for good\". Gygax did not issue monthly or yearly updates to the state of affairs as presented in the folio since he saw 576 CY as a common starting point for every home campaign; because each would be moving forward at its own pace, there would be no practical way to issue updates that would be relevant to every Dungeon Master.\nGygax was also aware that different players would be using his world for different reasons. When he was the Dungeon Master of his home campaign, he found that his players were more interested in dungeon-delving than politics, but when he switched roles and became a player, often going one-on-one with Rob Kuntz as Dungeon Master, Gygax immersed his own characters in politics and large-scale battles. Knowing that there would be some players looking for a town in which to base their campaign, and others interested in politics or warfare, Gygax tried to include as much detail as possible about each region, including a short description of the region and its people, the title of its ruler, the racial makeup of its people, its resources and major cities, and its allies and enemies.\nFor the same reason that he had created a variety of geographical, political and racial settings, he also strove to create a world with some good, some evil, and some undecided areas. He felt that some players would be happiest playing in a mainly good country and fighting the evil that arose to threaten it; others might want to be a part of an evil country; and still others might take a neutral stance and simply try to collect gold and treasure from both sides.\nPublication.\nTSR originally intended to publish \"The World of Greyhawk\" (TSR 9025) early in 1979, but it was not released until August 1980. \"The World of Greyhawk\" consisted of a 32-page folio (the first edition is often called the \"World of Greyhawk folio\" to distinguish it from later editions) and a 34\" x 44\" (86\u00a0cm x 112\u00a0cm) two-piece color map of the Flanaess. Reviewers were generally impressed, but some remarked on the lack of a pantheon of Greyhawk-specific deities, as well as the lack of any mention of the infamous dungeons of Castle Greyhawk.\nGame designer Jim Bambra found the original set \"disappointing\", because \"there is only so much information you can cram into a 32-page booklet, particularly when covering such a large area\".\nBetween editions (1980\u20131983).\nBefore the folio edition was released, Gygax planned to publish supplementary information, using his column \"From the Sorcerer's Scroll\" that appeared on a semi-regular basis in TSR's \"Dragon Magazine\".\nIn the May 1980 issue, Gygax gave a quick overview of the development of his new \"The World of Greyhawk\" folio. For players who planned to use large scale army tactics, he gave details of the private armies that were commanded by some prominent Greyhawk characters from his original home game: Bigby, Mordenkainen, Robilar, Tenser and Erac's Cousin. Gygax also mentioned some of the planned Greyhawk publications he was overseeing: a large-scale map of the city of Greyhawk; some adventure modules set in Greyhawk; a supplementary map of lands outside the Flanaess; all fifty levels of Castle Greyhawk's dungeon; and miniatures army combat rules. None of these projects, other than a few of the adventure modules, were published by TSR.\nAlthough Gygax originally intended to immediately publish more details of Greyhawk in \"Dragon\" on a regular basis, other projects intervened, and it was not until the August 1981 issue of \"Dragon\" that Len Lakofka, in his column \"Leomund's Tiny Hut\", outlined methods for determining a character's place of birth and languages spoken. Gygax added an addendum concerning the physical appearances of the main Greyhawk races. In the November 1981 issue, Gygax gave further details of racial characteristics and modes of dress.\nIn the December 1982 issue, David Axler contributed a system for determining weather in the world of Greyhawk. Gygax later said he thought a system of fourteen charts for determining the weather was too cumbersome, and he personally did not use it in his home campaign.\nMore information about every political region.\nThe folio edition had thirty two pages, and information about each region was condensed into a short paragraph or two. Gygax realized that some players needed more in-depth information about the motivations and aspirations of each region, and the history of interactions with surrounding regions. With this in mind, Gygax decided to publish a much longer description of each region in \"Dragon\". The first two articles, covering seventeen regions, appeared in the December 1981 and January 1982 issues. Due to his involvement in many other TSR projects, Gygax handed responsibility for completion of this project to Rob Kuntz, who covered the remaining forty three regions in the March, July and September 1982 issues.\nDeities of Greyhawk.\nIn the August 1982 issue of \"Dragon\", Gygax gave advice on how to adapt deities from the previously published \"Deities and Demigods\" for worship by non-human races in the Greyhawk world. A few months later, he published a five-part series of articles in the November 1982 through March 1983 issues of \"Dragon\" that outlined a pantheon of deities custom-made for humans in the world of Greyhawk. In addition to his original Greyhawk deities, St. Cuthbert and Pholtus, Gygax added seventeen more deities. Although later versions of the campaign setting would assign most of these deities to worship by specific races of humans, at this time they were generally worshiped by all humans of the Flanaess.\nShortly after the release of the folio edition, TSR released the adventure module C1 \"The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan\", designed to familiarize players with the Olman race of the Amedio Jungle. Largely based on Aztec and Incan cultures, this adventure introduced the first published deities of the Greyhawk campaign: Mictlantecuhtli, god of death, darkness, murder and the underworld; Tezcatlipoca, god of sun, moon, night, scheming, betrayals and lightning; and Quetzalcoatl, god of air, birds and snakes. This area was further explored in \"The Scarlet Brotherhood\" (1999), which expanded the Olman pantheon, and newly introduced the Touv people, including their nine gods.\nNon-player characters of Greyhawk.\nAlso included in the March 1983 issue of \"Dragon\" was an article detailing four unique Greyhawk characters. The first two \"quasi-deities\"\u2014Heward and Keoghtom\u2014had been created by Gygax as non-player characters (NPCs). The third, Murlynd, was a character that had been created by Gygax's childhood friend Don Kaye before Kaye's untimely death in 1975. The fourth, a \"hero-deity\" named Kelanen, was developed to illustrate the \"principle of advancement of power\".\nTSR Greyhawk adventures published after the folio edition.\nOf the ten adventures set in Greyhawk published by TSR before the folio edition, all but one had been written by Gygax. However, the new availability of information about Gygax's campaign world and TSR's desire to make it central to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" encouraged many new writers to set their adventures in Greyhawk. This, combined with the fact that Gygax was increasingly involved in other areas of the company, meant that of the seventeen Greyhawk adventures published in the two years after the folio edition, only four were written or co-written by Gygax:\nIn 1981, TSR also published the \"super-modules\" D1-2 \"Descent into the Depths of the Earth\" and G1-2-3 \"Against the Giants\", both being compilations of previously published modules from the \"Drow\" series and the \"Giant\" series respectively.\nNumerous projects were planned to add more depth and detail to the setting after the publication of the initial folio, but many of these projects never appeared for various reasons.\n\"World of Greyhawk\" boxed set (1983).\nIn 1983, TSR published an expanded boxed set of the campaign world, \"World of Greyhawk\", which is usually called the \"Greyhawk boxed set\" to differentiate it from other editions. According to game designer Jim Bambra, \"the second edition was much larger than the first and addressed itself to making the World of Greyhawk setting a more detailed and vibrant place\". This edition quadrupled the number of pages from the original edition to 128, adding significantly greater detail. One major addition was a pantheon of deities: in addition to the nineteen deities outlined by Gygax in his \"Dragon\" article, another thirty-one new deities were added, though only three received full write-ups of their abilities and worshipers. This brought the number of Greyhawk deities to an even fifty. For the next eight years, Greyhawk would be primarily defined by the information in this publication.\nAfter publication of the boxed set (1984\u20131985).\nPublication of the \"World of Greyhawk\" was the first step in Gygax's vision for Oerth. Over the next few years, he planned to unveil other areas of the continent of Oerik, giving each new area the same in-depth treatment of history, geography, and politics as had been accorded the Flanaess. Gygax had also mapped out the other hemisphere of Oerth in his personal notes. Part of this would be Gygax's work, but Len Lakofka and Fran\u00e7ois Froideval had also created material that Gygax wanted to place on Oerth. Frank Mentzer, Creative Consultant at TSR at the time, wrote four RPGA tournament adventures taken from his home campaign setting of \"Aquaria\" (published by TSR as the first four of the R-series modules: R1 \"To the Aid of Falx\", R2 \"The Investigation of Hydell\", R3 \"The Egg of the Phoenix\", and R4 \"Doc's Island\"). Mentzer envisioned them as the first part of a new \"Aqua-Oeridian\" campaign set somewhere on Oerth outside of the Flanaess.\nHowever, by this time, Gygax was in Hollywood on a semi-permanent basis, approving scripts for the Saturday morning \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" cartoon series and trying to land a deal for a \"D&amp;D\" film. Not only was Gygax's own output of Greyhawk-related materials greatly reduced, but the company began to shift its focus and resources away from Greyhawk to a new campaign setting called \"Dragonlance\".\nThe success of the Dragonlance series of modules and books pushed aside the World of Greyhawk setting, as TSR concentrated on expanding and defining the world of Krynn. One of the factors that contributed to the success of the \"Dragonlance\" setting when it was published in 1984 was a series of concurrent novels by Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weis. Gygax realized that novels set in Greyhawk could have a similar benefit for his campaign world and wrote \"Saga of Old City\", the first in a series of novels that would be published under the banner \"Greyhawk Adventures\". The protagonist was Gord the Rogue, and this first novel told of his rise from the Slum Quarters of the city of Greyhawk to become a world traveler and thief extraordinaire. The novel was designed to promote sales of the boxed set by providing colorful details about the social customs and peoples of various cities and countries around the Flanaess.\nBefore \"Saga of Old City\" was released in November 1985, Gygax wrote a sequel, \"Artifact of Evil\". He also wrote a short story, \"At Moonset Blackcat Comes\", that appeared in the special 100th issue of \"Dragon\" in August of the same year. This introduced Gord the Rogue to gamers just before \"Saga of Old City\" was scheduled to be released.\nGreyhawk modules.\nIn the two years after the Greyhawk boxed set appeared, TSR published eight adventures set in Greyhawk. Five were written or co-written by Gygax, and the other three were from TSR's United Kingdom division:\nBoth of the EX adventures, although nominally set in Greyhawk, transported characters through a planar gate into an alternate reality.\n\"Dragon\" articles.\nFrom 1983 to 1985, the only notable supplement for the Greyhawk world was a five-part article by Len Lakofka in the June\u2013October and December 1984 issues of \"Dragon\" that detailed the Suel gods who had been briefly mentioned in the boxed set. In the December 1984 issue, Gygax mentioned clerics of non-human races and indicated that the twenty four demihuman and humanoid deities that had been published in the February\u2013June 1982 issues of \"Dragon\" were now permitted in Greyhawk; this increased the number of Greyhawk deities from fifty to seventy four.\nOther than those articles, Greyhawk was only mentioned in passing in three other issues until Gygax's \"Gord the Rogue\" short story in the August 1985 issue \"Dragon\". Gygax then provided some errata for the boxed set in the September 1985 issue, which was the last mention of the Greyhawk world in \"Dragon\" for almost two years.\nGygax departs.\nShortly after the release of the boxed set, Gygax discovered that while he had been in Hollywood, TSR had run into serious financial difficulties. Returning to Lake Geneva, Gygax managed to get TSR back on firm financial footing, but different visions of TSR's future caused a power struggle within the company, and Gygax was forced out of TSR on December 31, 1985.\nGreyhawk without Gygax (1986\u20131987).\nAfter Gygax left TSR, the continued development of Greyhawk became the work of many writers and creative minds. Rather than continuing forward with Gygax's plan for an entire planet, the setting was never expanded beyond the Flanaess, nor would other authors' work be linked to unexplored areas of the continent Oerik. According to Gygax, TSR's stewardship turned Greyhawk into something very different from what he had envisioned.\nIn 1986, in the months following Gygax's ousting, TSR turned away from development of Greyhawk and focused its energies on a new campaign setting called \"Forgotten Realms\". In 1986 and 1987, only three Greyhawk modules were released, A1-4 \"Scourge of the Slave Lords\", S1-4 \"Realms of Horror\" and GDQ1-7 \"Queen of the Spiders\", all being collections of previously published modules rather than new material.\nGreyhawk novels continue without Gord the Rogue.\nGygax's novel \"Saga of Old City\", released in November 1985, and \"Artifact of Evil\", released two months after Gygax's departure from TSR, proved to be popular titles, and in 1987, TSR hired Rose Estes to continue the series, albeit without Gord the Rogue, to whom Gygax had retained all rights. From 1987 to 1989, Estes produced five more novels under the \"Greyhawk Adventures\" banner: \"Master Wolf\", \"The Price of Power\", \"The Demon Hand\", \"The Name of the Game\", and \"The Eyes Have It\". A sixth book, \"Dragon in Amber\", appeared in 1990 book catalogs, but was never written, and the series was discontinued.\nThe dungeons of Greyhawk revealed.\nIn its 1986 Summer Mail Order Hobby Shop catalog, TSR had listed a new Greyhawk adventure called WG7 \"Shadowlords\", a high-level adventure to be written by Gary Gygax and Skip Williams. This adventure was canceled after Gygax left TSR, and the catalog number WG7 was reassigned to a new adventure, \"Castle Greyhawk\", released in 1988. It was the first new Greyhawk adventure in three years, but it had nothing to do with Gygax's original Castle Greyhawk. Instead, it was a compilation of twelve humorous dungeon levels, each one written by a freelance author. The puns and jokes often referenced modern culture\u2014the Amazing Driderman, King Burger, Bugsbear Bunny, and the crew of \"\"\u2014and the module also included an appearance by Gygax's Mordenkainen in a film studio.\nGreyhawk revived (1988\u20131990).\nBy 1988, with the first series of \"Dragonlance\" adventures drawing to a close, and \"Forgotten Realms\" doing very well, TSR turned back to \"Greyhawk\". In the January 1988 issue of \"Dragon\", Jim Ward - one of the original players in the dungeons of \"Greyhawk\", creator of the wizard Drawmij, and now working for TSR in the post-Gygax era - requested player-input about what should be included in a hardcover sourcebook for \"Greyhawk\". He received over five hundred letters in response. In the August 1988 issue of \"Dragon\", he outlined the ideas from readers that had been included, and \"Greyhawk Adventures\" appeared shortly afterward as a response to requests from \"Greyhawk\" fans. The book's title was borrowed from Rose Estes's \"Greyhawk Adventures\" line of novels and used the same front-cover banner design. It was the thirteenth and final hardcover book published for the 1st edition \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" rules.\nThe contents were designed to give Dungeon Masters ideas and play-opportunities unique to the \"Greyhawk\" world, including new monsters, magical spells and items, a variety of geographical features, profiles of prominent citizens, and the avatars of deities. In the time since Gygax had left TSR, no original \"Greyhawk\" material had been published, and many letter-writers had requested ideas for new adventures. Ward responded by including six plot-outlines that could be inserted into a \"Greyhawk\" campaign.\n\"The City of Greyhawk\" boxed set.\nThe publication of \"Greyhawk Adventures\" came just as TSR released the 2nd edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". TSR released \"The City of Greyhawk\" boxed set in 1989 under the \"Greyhawk Adventures\" banner. Written by Carl Sargent and Rik Rose, this was not the city created by Gygax and Kuntz, but a new plan built from references made in previously published material.\nThis release remolded Gary Gygax's old Circle of Eight into a new plot-device. Instead of a group of eight companions based in the Obsidian Citadel who left periodically to fight evil, the Circle became eight wizards led by a ninth wizard, Gygax's former character Mordenkainen. In addition to Mordenkainen, seven of the wizards were previously existing characters from Gygax's original home game: Bigby, Otiluke, Drawmij, Tenser, Nystul, Otto, and Rary. The eighth was new: the female wizard Jallarzi Sallavarian. The Circle's mandate was to act as neutral referees between Good and Evil, never letting one side or the other gain the upper hand for long. In addition, Sargent and Rose took Gygax's original Obsidian Citadel, re-purposed it as Mordenkainen's castle, and placed it in an unspecified location in the Yatil Mountains.\nThe following year, in conjunction with this boxed set, TSR published a trilogy of \"World of Greyhawk\" Adventure (WGA) modules by Richard and Anne Brown - WGA1 \"Falcon's Revenge\", WGA2 \"Falconmaster\", and WGA3 \"Flames of the Falcon\" - set in the city, and centered on a mysterious villain called The Falcon. A fourth WGA module, WGA4 \"Vecna Lives!\" by David Cook, was published the same year, and featured the first appearance by Vecna, formerly a mythic lich in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" lore, now promoted to demigod-status.\nModules released under the \"Greyhawk Adventures\" banner.\nTSR also released five new \"World of Greyhawk\" (WG) adventures, which used the \"Greyhawk Adventures\" banner:\nIn 1990, TSR also published WGR1 \"Greyhawk Ruins\", a module and sourcebook about Castle Greyhawk by TSR writers Blake Mobley and Timothy Brown. Although this was not the Castle Greyhawk of Gygax and Kuntz, it was the first serious attempt to publish details of the castle.\nA new vision of the Flanaess (1991\u20131997).\nGame designer Rick Swan noted the apparent lack of a central vision for Greyhawk material, describing the Greyhawk setting up to this point as \"a crazy quilt, where odd-shaped scraps of material are randomly sewn together and everybody hopes for the best. How else to explain a setting that encompasses everything from the somber A1-4 \"Scourge of the Slave Lords\" adventure to the King Kong-inspired WG6 \"Isle of the Ape\" to the cornball humor of WG7 \"Castle Greyhawk\"? It makes for an interesting mess, but it's a mess nonetheless... \"The City of Greyhawk\" [is] the most credible attempt at smoothing out the rough spots\".\nIn 1990, TSR decided that the decade-old world of Greyhawk needed to be refreshed. Rather than follow through with Gary Gygax's plan to develop new regions beyond the boundaries of the Flanaess, the decision was made to stay within the Flanaess and reinvigorate it by moving the campaign time line forward a decade, from 576\u00a0CY to 586\u00a0CY. The main story vehicle would be a war fomented by an evil half-demon named Iuz that involved the entire Flanaess, which would allow TSR to radically alter the pattern of regions, alliances, and rulers from Gygax's original setting.\nThe \"Greyhawk Wars\".\nIn order to move players from Gygax's familiar \"World of Greyhawk\" to their new vision, TSR planned a trilogy of modules that would familiarize players with events and conditions leading up to the coming war, and then take them through the war itself. Once players completed the war via the three modules, a new boxed set would be published to introduce the new storyline and the new Flanaess. Two \"World of Greyhawk Swords\" modules, WGS1 \"Five Shall Be One\" by Carl Sargent and WGS2 \"Howl from the North\" by Dale Henson, were released in 1991. These described events leading up to the war.\nThe third module was reworked into \"Greyhawk Wars\", a strategy war game that led players through the events, strategies, and alliances of the actual war. A booklet included with the game, \"Greyhawk Wars Adventurer's Book\", described the event of the war. In 582 CY (six years after Gygax's original setting of 576 CY), a regional conflict started by Iuz gradually widened until it was a war that affected almost every nation in the Flanaess. A peace treaty was signed in the city of Greyhawk two years later, which is why the conflict became known as the \"Greyhawk Wars\". On the day of the treaty-signing, Rary\u2014once a minor spellcaster created and then discarded by Brian Blume, but now elevated by TSR to the Circle of Eight\u2014attacked his fellow Circle members, aided and abetted by Robilar. After the attack, Tenser and Otiluke were dead, while Robilar and Rary fled to the deserts of the Bright Lands. Rob Kuntz, original creator of Robilar, objected to this storyline, since he believed that Robilar would never attack his old adventuring companion Mordenkainen. Although Kuntz did not own the creative rights to Robilar and no longer worked at TSR, he unofficially suggested an alternate storyline that Robilar had been visiting another plane and in his absence, a clone or evil twin of Robilar was responsible for the attack.\n\"From the Ashes\".\nIn 1992, after the two \"World of Greyhawk Swords\" prequel modules and the \"Greyhawk Wars\" game had been on the market for some months, TSR released the new Greyhawk setting, \"From the Ashes\", a boxed set primarily written by Carl Sargent that described the Flanaess in the aftermath of the \"Greyhawk Wars\". It contained a large 4-color hex map of the area around the city of Greyhawk; two full-color, 32\"x21\" fold-out poster maps of the continent (east and west), and 20 \"quick adventure cards\", and two 96-page books.\nThe first book, \"Atlas of the Flanaess\", was a replacement for Gygax's original \"World of Greyhawk\" boxed set, with some changes. Many human gods from previous editions were not included, although one new demigod, Mayaheine, was added. This had the net effect of reducing the total number of human deities from fifty to twenty-eight. Deities of other races were increased from twenty-four to thirty-eight, but unlike the full descriptions that were given to the human gods, these were simply listed by name. Like Gygax's original boxed set, each region was given a two to three hundred word description, although some details included in the older edition, such as trade goods, total population and racial mixes, were not included in this edition. A number of regions\u2014Ahlissa, Almor, Medegia and South Province\u2014no longer existed after the Wars or had been folded into other regions. One new region\u2014the Olman Islands\u2014was detailed. This had the net effect of reducing the total number of regions from sixty to fifty eight. Darlene's map of the Flanaess included in Gygax's setting was reproduced as an 11\"x17\" black-and-white map printed on the inside cover of the \"Atlas\".\nThe second book, the \"Campaign Book\", was designed to supplement, rather than replace, the four-year-old \"City of Greyhawk\" boxed set. It included updates to the city and its environs, and gave details of some new non-player characters and possible adventure hooks.\nIn Gygax's setting, the major conflict had been between the Great Kingdom and the lands that were trying to free themselves from the evil overking. In Sargent's world, the Great Kingdom storyline was largely replaced by the major new conflict between the land of Iuz and the regions that surrounded it. Southern lands outside of Iuz's were threatened by the Scarlet Brotherhood, while other countries had been invaded by monsters or taken over by agents of evil. Overall, the vision was of a darker world where good folk were being swamped by a tide of evil.\nGame designer Rick Swan concurred with this multi-step approach, writing that \"Greyhawk Wars\" \"took another step in the right direction by shaking things up with a much-needed dose of epic conflict... veteran designer Carl Sargent has continued the overhaul with the ambitious \"From the Ashes\". By combining heroic tradition with elements of dark fantasy, he's come up with a Greyhawk campaign that is both familiar and refreshingly unexpected\".\nSargent tried to generate interest for this grimmer vision of the Flanaess by following up with an article in \"Dragon\"'s March 1993 issue, writing, \"...the powers of evil have waxed strong. The hand of Iuz, the Old One, extends across the central Flanaess, and the cruel Scarlet Brotherhood extends its power and influence around the southern lands bordering the Azure Sea. The \"World of Greyhawk\" setting has become a truly exciting world again...\"\nThe boxed set was supported by the publication of two new source books in 1993, also written by Sargent. WGR4 \"The Marklands\" provided information about the good realms of Furyondy, Highfolk, and Nyrond that opposed Iuz, while WGR5 \"Iuz the Evil\" detailed information about the lands of Iuz, and emphasized the prominent new role that Iuz now played in the world order.\nIn addition, a number of adventures were also published, as much to provide more source material as for adventure:\nAs Gygax had done ten years before, Sargent also used the pages of \"Dragon\" to promote his new world. He was working on a new source book, \"Ivid the Undying\", and excerpted parts of it in the April, June and August 1994 issues.\nTSR drops Greyhawk.\nIn late 1994, TSR canceled Sargent's new book just as it was being readied for publication, and stopped work on all other Greyhawk projects. Nothing more about Greyhawk was ever published by TSR, with one exception: in May 1995, a \"Dragon\" column devoted to industry gossip noted that the manuscript of \"Ivid the Undying\" had been released by TSR as a computer text file. Using this file, several people have reconstructed the book as it might have appeared in published form.\nBy the end of 1996, TSR found itself heavily in debt and unable to pay its printers. Just as bankruptcy in 1997 seemed inevitable, Wizards of the Coast stepped in and, fueled by income from its collectible card game \"\", bought TSR and all its properties.\nWizards of the Coast (1998\u20132008).\nAfter Wizards of the Coast (WotC) and TSR merged, the determination was made that TSR had created too many settings for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game, and several of them were eliminated. However, WotC's CEO, Peter Adkison, was a fan of both \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and Greyhawk, and two major initiatives were created: a revival of Greyhawk, and a new third edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" rules. A team of people was put together to revive the moribund Greyhawk setting by pulling together all the previously published information about it. Once that was done, the decision was made to update Carl Sargent's storyline, using similar prequel adventures to pave the way for the updated campaign setting.\nFirst, Roger E. Moore created \"Return of the Eight\" in 1998. In the adventure, set in 586 CY, the same year as the \"From the Ashes\" boxed set, the players meet the surviving members of the Circle of Eight, which is called the Circle of Five because it is missing Tenser, Otiluke and Rary. If the players successfully finish the adventure, Tenser is rescued from death, though he refuses to rejoin the Circle, and the Circle is reconstituted as Eight with the addition of three new wizards: Alhamazad the Wise, Theodain Eriason and Warnes Starcoat.\nNext, the \"Greyhawk Player's Guide\", by Anne Brown, was released. This 64-page booklet moved the storyline ahead five years to 591 CY, and it mostly condensed and reiterated material that had been released in Gygax's and Sargent's boxed sets. New material included important non-player characters, a guide to roleplaying in the Flanaess, and some new sights. The list of deities was both shrunk and expanded; the thirty-eight non-human deities in the \"From the Ashes\" boxed set were eliminated and non-human concerns assigned to a handful of human deities, but the list of human deities was expanded from twenty-four to fifty-four.\nWith the groundwork for a new storyline prepared, TSR/WotC released the new campaign setting as a 128-page source book, \"\", by Roger E. Moore. Taking its lead from the \"Greyhawk Player's Guide\", the new campaign world was set in 591 CY. Unlike the darker feel of \"From the Ashes\", where the Flanaess was overrun by evil, Moore returned to Gygax's world of adventure.\nThe \"Lost Tombs\" trilogy of modules\u2014\"The Star Cairns\" and \"Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad\", by Sean K. Reynolds, and \"The Doomgrinder\", by Steve Miller\u2014were the first to be published in the new setting.\n\"25th anniversary of D&amp;D\".\nThe year 1999 marked twenty-five years since the publication of the original \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" rules, and WotC sought to lure older gamers back to Greyhawk by producing a series of nostalgia-tinged \"Return to...\" adventures that evoked the best-known Greyhawk modules from 20 years before, under the banner \"25th Anniversary of D&amp;D\":\nIn conjunction with the publication of the \"Return to\" adventures, WotC also produced a series of companion novels known as the \"Greyhawk Classics\" series: \"Against the Giants\", \"White Plume Mountain\", \"Descent into the Depths of the Earth\", \"Expedition to the Barrier Peaks\", \"The Temple of Elemental Evil\", \"Queen of the Demonweb Pits\", \"Keep on the Borderlands\", and \"The Tomb of Horrors\".\nIn an attempt to attract players of other \"D&amp;D\" settings, WotC released \"Die, Vecna, Die!\", by Bruce R. Cordell and Steve Miller, a three-part adventure tying Greyhawk to the \"Ravenloft\" and \"Planescape\" campaign settings. Published in 2000, it was the last adventure to be written for \"D&amp;D\"'s 2nd edition rules.\nThird edition (2000\u20132008).\nIn the editions of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" published by TSR, the setting of the game had not been specifically defined\u2014Dungeon Masters were expected to either create a new world, or purchase a commercial campaign setting such as Greyhawk or \"Forgotten Realms\". In 2000, after two years of work and playtesting, WotC released the 3rd edition of \"D&amp;D\", and defined a default setting for the game for the first time. Under third edition rules, unless a Dungeon Master specifically chose to use a different campaign setting, his or her \"D&amp;D\" game would be set in the world of Greyhawk.\n\"Living Greyhawk\".\nWith the release of the 3rd edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", RPGA\u2014the organized play division of WotC\u2014announced a new massively shared living campaign, \"Living Greyhawk\", modeled on a 2nd edition campaign called \"Living City\". Although \"Living City\" was relatively successful, RPGA wanted to expand the scope of their new campaign\u2014instead of one city as a setting, the new campaign would involve thirty different regions of Greyhawk, each specifically keyed to a particular country, state, or province of the real world. Each region would produce its own adventures, and in addition to these, RPGA would provide worldwide \"Core\" adventures. To provide the level of detail needed for such a venture, WotC published the \"Living Greyhawk Gazetteer\", the most in-depth examination of the world of Greyhawk ever produced, and the official starting point for not only the campaign, but also for all home campaigns from that point forward.\nConcurrent with the release of the 3rd edition \"Player's Handbook\", \"Living Greyhawk\" debuted at Gen Con 2000 with three \"Core\" adventures: COR1-1 \"Dragon Scales at Morningtide\", by Sean K. Reynolds; COR1-2 \"The Reckoning\", by Sean Flaherty and John Richardson; and COR1-3 \"River Of Blood\", by Erik Mona. WotC also released \"The Fright at Tristor\" by Keith Polster (2000), designed as an introductory adventure to the Living Greyhawk campaign world.\nUnlike previous campaign settings, in which the calendar was frozen at a point chosen by the author, the \"Living Greyhawk\" calendar did advance one year in game time for every calendar year in real time: the campaign started in 591 CY (2001) and ended in 598 CY (2008), at which point over a thousand adventures had been produced for an audience of over ten thousand players. During this time, the campaign administrators incorporated most of WotC's new rules into the Greyhawk world, only excising material they felt would unbalance the campaign. In 2005, the administrators incorporated every deity ever mentioned in official Greyhawk material previous to the \"D&amp;D\" 3rd edition, as well as all deities mentioned in the new 3rd edition source books. This tripled the number of deities in the campaign from about seventy to almost two hundred.\nDespite the massive amount of world and storyline development, none of the \"Living Greyhawk\" storylines or changes to the setting were considered official, since the regional adventure modules were produced by volunteers; this material only received a cursory vetting by RPGA campaign administrators, and no review by WotC personnel.\nWizards of the Coast Greyhawk releases.\nDespite the popularity of the \"Living Greyhawk\" campaign, Wizards of the Coast did not produce much material for Greyhawk after the 25th anniversary \"Return to...\" series of adventures and the \"Living Greyhawk Gazetteer\":\nOtherwise, Wizards of the Coast left the development of the Greyhawk world to RPGA's \"Living Greyhawk\" campaign and concentrated on producing new source books of expansion material for the core rules of \"D&amp;D\".\nFourth and fifth edition of \"D&amp;D\" (2008\u2013present).\nFourth edition.\nAt Gen Con 2007, WotC announced that the 4th edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" would be released the following spring, and Greyhawk would no longer be the default campaign setting under the new rules system. For this reason, \"Living Greyhawk\" was not converted to the new rules system; instead, it was brought to a conclusion at Origins 2008.\nIn 2009, WotC released \"The Village of Hommlet\", by Andy Collins, which updated Gary Gygax's original 1st edition \"Village of Hommlet\" to the 4th edition rules for characters of 4th level. It was not available for purchase, but was sent as a reward for those who joined the RPGA. In March 2013 the adventure by Collins was reprinted in issue 212 of \"Dungeon\", but now for characters of 3rd to 5th level.\nFifth edition.\nWhen the \"Player's Handbook\" for the fifth edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was released in 2014, several references to the world of Greyhawk appeared throughout the descriptions of various races and classes, and a partial list of Greyhawk deities appeared in the book. The \"Monster Manual\", the second released book of the 5th edition, did not include any direct references to Greyhawk but did mention Explictica Defilus from \"Against the Cult of the Reptile God\" in the Naga entry, and tied the creation of ghouls to Doresain, the \"King of Ghouls\", from the Greyhawk adventure \"Kingdom of the Ghouls\" by Wolfgang Baur from \"Dungeon\" #70.\nIn April 2017, \"Tales from the Yawning Portal\" was released. It contained seven older modules now reprinted and updated for the fifth edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Four out of the seven were old Greyhawk modules: \"Against the Giants\", \"The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan\", \"Tomb of Horrors\", and \"White Plume Mountain\". In addition the book also featured advice how to place the other adventures within the Greyhawk setting, or how to change the name-giving tavern Yawning Portal in Waterdeep from the Forgotten Realms into the Green Dragon Inn from the City of Greyhawk. In May 2019, \"Ghosts of Saltmarsh\" was released for the fifth edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". The book compiles new versions of classic adventures that are located around Saltmarsh in Greyhawk (\"The Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh\", \"Danger at Dunwater\", and \"The Final Enemy\"), or are generally naval themed.\nIn May 2024, it was announced that the updated \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" would feature Greyhawk as a sample campaign setting, and that prominent characters from the Greyhawk campaign setting would feature heavily in the art of all three updated core rulebooks. In December 2024, Wizards of the Coast announced \"Legends of Greyhawk\" as a new convention campaign which debuted at MagicCon: Chicago in February 2025. However, while this campaign is inspired by \"past and current organized play campaigns\", it uses separate rules from the standard D&amp;D Adventurers League program. At Gen Con, in July 2025, they announced an expansion of \"Legends of Greyhawk\" as their \"newest D&amp;D organized play campaign\" with various premier organizers assigned locations within the Greyhawk setting to create adventures for. Samantha Nelson of \"Polygon\" reported that it \"will run at several other conventions this year before being made widely available for organized play in 2026\". Nelson explained that players go from level one to three \"after playing at least three adventures\" and the \"decisions players make in these early adventures will shape the future of the campaign, which is entering its beta phase. The campaign will grow and evolve based on the decisions players make at events worldwide, shaping the future of the campaign and the way that players experience the Grayhawk setting\".\nUnofficial Greyhawk sources.\nAlthough TSR and WotC had each in turn owned the official rights to the \"World of Greyhawk\" since the first folio edition was published in 1980, the two people most responsible for its early development, Gary Gygax and Rob Kuntz, still had most of their original notes regarding the fifty levels of dungeons under Castle Greyhawk. Gygax also had his old maps of the city of Greyhawk, and still owned the rights to Gord the Rogue.\nAfter Gygax left TSR in 1985, he continued to write a few more \"Gord the Rogue\" novels, which were published by New Infinities Productions: \"Sea of Death\" (1987), \"City of Hawks\" (1987), and \"Come Endless Darkness\" (1988). However, by this time, Gygax was furious with the new direction in which TSR was taking \"his\" world. In a literary declaration that his old world of Oerth was dead, and wanting to make a clean break with all things Greyhawk, Gygax destroyed his version of Oerth in the final \"Gord the Rogue\" novel, \"Dance of Demons\". For the next fifteen years, he worked to develop other game systems.\nBut there was still the matter of the unpublished dungeons under Castle Greyhawk. Although Gygax had given glimpses into the dungeons in his magazine columns and articles, the dungeons themselves had never been released to the public. Likewise, Gygax's version of the city of Greyhawk had never been published, although Frank Mentzer believed the reason for that was because \"the City of Greyhawk was a later development, originally being but a location (albeit a capital). As such it was never fleshed out all that thoroughly... notes on certain locations and notorious personnel, a sketch map of great brevity, and otherwise quite loose. That is doubtless why Gary didn't publish it; it had never been completed\".\nHowever, in 2003, Gygax announced that he was working with Rob Kuntz to publish the original castle and city in six volumes, although the project would use the rules for \"Castles and Crusades\" rather than \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Since WotC still owned the rights to the name Greyhawk, Gygax changed the name of the castle to \"Castle Zagyg\"\u2014the reverse homophone of his own name originally ascribed to the mad architect of his original thirteen level dungeon. Gygax also changed the name of the nearby city to \"Yggsburgh\", a play on his initials E.G.G.\nThis project proved to be much more work than Gygax and Kuntz had envisioned. By the time Gygax and Kuntz had stopped working on the original home campaign, the castle dungeons had encompassed fifty levels of maze-like passages and thousands of rooms and traps. This, plus plans for the city of Yggsburgh and encounter areas outside the castle and city, were found to be too much to fit into the proposed six volumes. Gygax decided he would recreate something like his original thirteen level dungeon, amalgamating the best of what could be gleaned from binders and boxes of old notes. Neither Gygax nor Kuntz had kept careful or comprehensive plans. Because they had often made up details of play sessions as they went, they usually just drew a quick map as they played, with cursory notes about monsters, treasures, and traps. These sketchy maps contained just enough detail so that the two could combine their independent efforts, after determining the merits of each piece. Recreating the city was also a challenge; although Gygax still had his old maps of the original city, all of his previously published work on the city was owned by WotC, so he would have to create most of the city from scratch while maintaining the look and feel of his original.\nThe slow and laborious process came to a complete halt in April 2004, when Gygax suffered a serious stroke. Although he returned to his keyboard after a seven-month convalescence, his output was reduced from fourteen-hour work days to only one or two hours per day. Kuntz had to withdraw due to other projects, although he continued to work on an adventure module that would be published at the same time as the first book. Under these circumstances, work on the Castle Zagyg project continued even more slowly, although Jeffrey Talanian stepped in to help Gygax. In 2005, Troll Lord Games published Volume I, \"Castle Zagyg: Yggsburgh\". This 256-page hardcover book contained details of Gygax's original city, its personalities and politics, as well as over thirty encounters outside the city. The two part fold out map of the area was rendered by Darlene Pekul, the same artist who had produced the original map for the folio edition of \"World of Greyhawk\". Later that year, Troll Lord Games also published \"Castle Zagyg: Dark Chateau\", an adventure module written for the Yggsburgh setting by Rob Kuntz.\nBook catalogs published in 2005 indicated several more volumes in the series would follow shortly, but it was not until 2008 that the second volume, \"Castle Zagyg: The Upper Works\", appeared. \"The Upper Works\" described details of the castle above ground, acting as a teaser for the volumes concerning the actual dungeons that would follow. However, Gygax died in March 2008 before any further books were published. After his death, Gygax Games, under the control of Gary's widow Gail, took over the project, but no more volumes of the \"Castle Zagyg\" project have been published.\nRob Kuntz also published some of his creative work from the Castle Greyhawk dungeons. In 2008, he released the adventure modules \"The Living Room\", about a whimsical but dangerous room that housed enormous furniture, and \"Bottle City\", about a bottle found on the second level of the dungeon that contained an entire city. 2009 saw Kuntz release \"Daemonic &amp; Arcane\", a collection of Greyhawk and \"Kalibruhn\" magic items, and \"The Stalk\", a wilderness adventure. By October 2010, Black Blade Publishing began to publish several of Kuntz's original Greyhawk levels, including the Machine Level, the Boreal Level, the Giants' Pool Hall, and the Garden of the Plantmaster.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46926", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46926", "title": "Flanaess", "text": ""}
{"id": "46927", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46927", "title": "Oerth", "text": ""}
{"id": "46928", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46928", "title": "Forgotten Realms", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional campaign setting\nForgotten Realms is a campaign setting for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"D&amp;D\") fantasy role-playing game. Commonly referred to by players and game designers as \"The Realms\", it was created by game designer Ed Greenwood around 1967 as a setting for his childhood stories. Several years later, it was published for the \"D&amp;D\" game as a series of magazine articles, and the first Realms game products were released in 1987. Role-playing game products have been produced for the setting ever since, in addition to novels, role-playing video game adaptations (including the first massively multiplayer online role-playing game to use graphics), comic books, the \"Forgotten Realms\" play-by-mail game, and the film \"\".\n\"Forgotten Realms\" is a fantasy world setting, described as a world of strange lands, dangerous creatures, and mighty deities, where magic and supernatural phenomena are very real. The premise is that, long ago, planet Earth and the world of the \"Forgotten Realms\" were more closely connected. As time passed, the inhabitants of Earth had mostly forgotten about the existence of that other world \u2013 hence the name \"Forgotten Realms\". The original \"Forgotten Realms\" logo, which was used until 2000, had small runic letters that read \"Herein lie the lost lands\" as an allusion to the connection between the two worlds.\n\"Forgotten Realms\" is one of the most popular \"D&amp;D\" settings, largely due to the success of novels by authors such as R. A. Salvatore and numerous role-playing video games, including \"Pool of Radiance\" (1988), \"Eye of the Beholder\" (1991), \"Icewind Dale\" (2000), the \"Neverwinter Nights\" and the \"Baldur's Gate\" series.\nCreative origins.\nEd Greenwood began writing stories about the \"Forgotten Realms\" as a child, starting at the age of eight. He came up with the name from the notion of a multiverse of parallel worlds; Earth is one such world, and the Realms another. In Greenwood's original conception, the fantastic legends of Earth derive from a fantasy world that can no longer be accessed. Greenwood discovered the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game in 1975, and became a serious role-playing enthusiast with the first \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"AD&amp;D\") game releases in 1978. Greenwood brought his fantasy world into the new medium of role-playing games when a university student named September invited him to play \"AD&amp;D\" with her. Greenwood then starting using the setting for his personal role-playing campaign. Greenwood began a Realms campaign in the city of Waterdeep before creating a group known as the Knights of Myth Drannor in the Shadowdale region. Greenwood felt that his players' thirst for detail made the Realms what it is: \"They want it to seem real, and work on 'honest jobs' and personal activities, until the whole thing grows into far more than a casual campaign. Roleplaying always governs over rules, and the adventures seem to develop themselves.\" Greenwood has stated that his own version of the \"Forgotten Realms\", as run in his personal campaign, is much darker than published versions.\nStarting in 1979, Greenwood published a series of articles that detailed the setting in \"The Dragon\" (later \"Dragon\") magazine, the first of which was about a monster known as the \"curst\". Greenwood continued to write extensive articles for \"Dragon\", in which he used the \"Forgotten Realms\" as the setting to detail magic items, monsters, and spells. When Gary Gygax \"lost control of TSR in 1985, the company saw an opportunity to move beyond Greyhawk and introduce a new default setting\". In 1986, TSR began looking for a new campaign setting for \"AD&amp;D\", and assigned Jeff Grubb to find out more about the setting used by Greenwood as portrayed in his articles in \"Dragon\".\nGreenwood states that Grubb asked him \"Do you just make this stuff up as you go, or do you really have a huge campaign world?\", and Greenwood answered \"yes\" to both questions. TSR felt that the \"Forgotten Realms\" would be a more open-ended setting than its epic fantasy counterpart Dragonlance, and chose the Realms as a ready-made campaign setting upon deciding to publish \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd edition. Greenwood agreed to work on the project and began working to get \"Forgotten Realms\" officially published. He sent TSR a few dozen cardboard boxes stuffed with pencil notes and maps, and sold all rights to the setting for a token fee. He noted that TSR altered his original conception of the Realms being a place that could be accessed from Earth, as \"[c]oncerns over possible lawsuits (kids getting hurt while trying to 'find a gate') led TSR to de-emphasize this meaning\".\nJon Peterson, author of \"Dungeons and Dragons Art and Arcana: A Visual History\", said that Greenwood \"was that rare obsessive DM who just seemed to have more ideas and energy to pour into his world than even the folks at TSR did. Naturally when TSR was shopping for new campaign worlds as part of their cross-media strategy, they had to get the \"Forgotten Realms\". R. A. Salvatore took Greenwood's world and created characters and stories for it that made him a bestselling author and sustained TSR as a major fantasy book publisher\".\nPublication history.\n1985\u20131990.\nIn 1985, the \"AD&amp;D\" module \"Bloodstone Pass\" was released by TSR and is retroactively considered to be a part of the \"Forgotten Realms\", although it was not until the module \"The Bloodstone Wars\" was released that it became the official setting for the module series. Douglas Niles had worked on a novel trilogy with a Celtic theme, which were then altered to become the first novels set in the \"Forgotten Realms\", starting with \"Darkwalker on Moonshae\" (1987). It is the first book in \"The Moonshae Trilogy\", which predates the \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Set\" by one month.\nThe \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Set\" was later released in 1987 as a boxed set of two source books (\"Cyclopedia of the Realms\" and \"DM's Sourcebook of the Realms\") and four large color maps, designed by Greenwood in collaboration with Grubb. It sold \"ca.\" one hundred fifty thousand times in its first two years. The set introduced the campaign setting and explained how to use it, and reserved space on the map for SSI's Gold Box computer role-playing games set in the \"Forgotten Realms\".\nTSR began incorporating elements by other designers into the \"Forgotten Realms\", including the Moonshae Isles by Douglas Niles, the \"Desert of Desolation\" by Tracy Hickman and Laura Hickman, and Kara-Tur by Zeb Cook. The setting also provided a new way for TSR to market its \"Battlesystem\" rules, which it had supported with the Bloodstone adventure sequence which started with \"Bloodstone Pass\"; the last two adventures in the series, \"The Bloodstone Wars\" (1987) and \"The Throne of Bloodstone\" (1988), were unambiguously set in the \"Forgotten Realms\". Some characters from \"Egg of the Phoenix\" (1987) by Frank Mentzer were incorporated into \"The Savage Frontier\" (1988).\nThe compilation module \"Desert of Desolation\" reworked the previous adventures to fit as part of the \"Forgotten Realms\". The module \"Under Illefarn\" published in 1987 is set in the \"Forgotten Realms\", as is the module released in 1988, \"Swords of the Iron Legion\".\nR. A. Salvatore wrote his first novel for the \"Forgotten Realms\", \"The Crystal Shard\" (1988), which was originally set in the Moonshae Islands before being moved to a new location and introduced the drow character Drizzt Do'Urden. Drizzt has since appeared in more than seventeen subsequent novels, many of which have appeared on the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list. In 1988, the first in a line of \"Forgotten Realms\" role-playing video games, \"Pool of Radiance\", was released by Strategic Simulations, Inc. The game was popular and won the Origins Award for \"Best Fantasy or Science Fiction Computer Game of 1988\".\nSeveral supplements to the original boxed set were released under the first edition rules, beginning with \"Waterdeep and the North\", which was followed by \"Moonshae\" in 1987, and \"Empires of the Sands\", \"The Magister\", \"The Savage Frontier\", \"Dreams of the Red Wizards\", and \"Lords of Darkness\" in 1988. The \"City System\" boxed set was released in 1988, and it contained several maps of the city of Waterdeep. \"Ruins of Adventure\", a module based on the computer game \"Pool of Radiance\", was also released in 1988.\nThe boxed set \"\" was released in 1988. It gives details of the lands of Kara-Tur, and was designed to be used with the 1986 book \"Oriental Adventures\", which officially placed the book in the \"Forgotten Realms\" world.\nIn 1989, DC Comics began publishing a series of Forgotten Realms comics written by Grubb. Each issue contains twenty-six pages, illustrated primarily by Rags Morales and Dave Simons. Twenty-five issues were published in total, with the last being released in 1991. A fifty-six page annual \"Forgotten Realms Comic Annual #1: Waterdhavian Nights\", illustrated by various artists, was released in 1990.\n\"Curse of the Azure Bonds\", a module based on the role-playing video game of the same name, was released in 1989.\n1990\u20132000.\nTo transition the \"Forgotten Realms\" from first edition \"AD&amp;D\" to the ruleset's second edition, a story involving the gods being cast down was planned by TSR management from the top-down and started with \"Hall of Heroes\" (1989) and continued with a three-adventure \"Avatar\" series (1989) and a three-novel \"Avatar\" series (1989), and some stories in the comic book. TSR adjusted the timeline of the \"Forgotten Realms\" by advancing the calendar one year forward to 1358 DR, referring to the gap as the Time of Troubles.\nIn early 1990, the hardcover \"Forgotten Realms Adventures\" by Grubb and Greenwood was released, which introduced the setting to \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd edition; the book also detailed how the Time of Troubles had changed the setting. \"The Ruins of Undermountain\" (1991) was one of the first published mega-dungeons. The Al-Qadim setting by Jeff Grubb was released in 1992, and the setting was added to the southern part of the \"Forgotten Realms\". In July 1990, the RPGA Network's \"Polyhedron Newszine\" began publishing a monthly column by Greenwood entitled \"The Everwinking Eye\" detailing various locations and personalities in the Realms. The Network used the \"Forgotten Realms\" city of Ravens Bluff as the setting for their first living campaign. Official RPGA support for this product line included the \"Living City\" module series. A number of sub-settings of the \"Forgotten Realms\" were briefly supported in the early 1990s. Three more modules were produced for the Kara-Tur setting. \"The Horde\" boxed set, released in 1990, detailed the Hordelands, which featured a series of three modules. The \"Maztica Campaign Set\", released in 1991, detailed the continent of Maztica.\nThe original gray boxed set was revised in 1993 to update it to \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd edition, with the release of a new \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\" boxed set containing three books (\"A Grand Tour of the Realms\", \"Running the Realms\", and \"Shadowdale\") and various \"monster supplements\". Additional material for the setting was released steadily throughout the 1990s. \"Forgotten Realms\" novels, such as the \"Legacy of the Drow\" series, the first three books of \"The Elminster Series\", and numerous anthologies were also released throughout the 1990s, which led to the setting being hailed as one of the most successful shared fantasy universes of the 1990s. By the first quarter of 1996, TSR had published sixty-four novels set in the \"Forgotten Realms\" out of the 242 novels set in \"AD&amp;D\" worlds. These novels in turn sparked interest in role-playing by new gamers.\nNumerous \"Forgotten Realms\" video games were released between 1990 and 2000. \"Eye of the Beholder\" for MS-DOS was released in 1990, which was followed by two sequels: the first in 1991, and the second in 1992. All three games were re-released for MS-DOS compatible operating systems on a single disk in 1995. Another 1991 release was \"Neverwinter Nights\" on America Online, the first graphical massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG). In 1998, \"Baldur's Gate\", the first in a line of popular role-playing video games developed by BioWare and \"considered by most pundits as the hands-down best PC roleplaying game ever\", was released. The game was followed by a sequel, ', in 2000 and \"Icewind Dale\", a separate game that utilized the same game engine as \"Baldur's Gate\". ' was released in 2001. Several popular \"Forgotten Realms\" characters such as Drizzt Do'Urden and Elminster made minor appearances in these games.\n2000\u20132008.\nWhen Wizards of the Coast took over publication of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" after purchasing TSR in 1997, they trimmed production down from six campaign settings to \"Forgotten Realms\" and \"Dragonlance\", and completed \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd edition production sometime between 1998 and 1999. They later hired Rob Heinsoo to be part of the D&amp;D Worlds team and focus on \"Forgotten Realms\" in the third edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". An official material update and a timeline advance were introduced to the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 3rd edition in 2001 with the release of the hardcover book the \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\", which won the Origins Award for \"Best Role-Playing Game Supplement of 2001\" in 2002. The timeline was officially advanced from 1358 DR to 1372 DR. The adventure \"City of the Spider Queen\" (2002) did not meet its projected sales targets, so Wizards of the Coast cut back on production of new adventures.\nIn 2002, BioWare released \"Neverwinter Nights\", set in the northern reaches of Faer\u00fbn and operating on the revised 3.0 rules for D&amp;D. It was followed by two expansion packs: ' and '. A sequel using version 3.5 of the rules was produced by Obsidian Entertainment in 2006, and was followed by the expansion sets ' and '. The \"Forgotten Realms Deluxe Edition\" compilation was released in 2006, containing the \"Baldur's Gate\" series (excluding the \"Dark Alliance\" games), \"Icewind Dale\" series, and all \"Neverwinter Nights\" games before \"Neverwinter Nights 2\".\n2008\u20132014.\nWith the release of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th edition in 2008, Wizards opted for a publishing plan featuring a series of six books per year \u2013 consisting of three core rulebooks as well as three setting books \u2013 beginning with the \"Forgotten Realms\". The company started the cycle with the \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide\" (2008), the \"Forgotten Realms Player's Guide\" (2008), and \"Scepter Tower of Spellgard\". These books updated the \"Forgotten Realms\" to the newest rules system which altered the setting drastically to make it fit with the 4th edition concept of \"Points of Light\".\nThe main lore change centered around an event called the Spellplague in 1385 DR. This cataclysm was unleashed when the goddess of magic Mystra was killed, \"transforming whole nations and altering creatures. In addition, parts of Toril have fused with its long-lost twin world Abeir, whisking away some countries and adding new ones. The Underdark is more open to the surface. Thay has become a nightmare land of death and the Elves, sensing the newfound connection to the Feywild, have returned to Faer\u00fbn in force\". The event moved the fictional world's timeline 94 years into the future to 1479 DR. The Spellplague acted as \"a narrative justification for design changes\".\nIn 2008, the \"Forgotten Realms\" also became the setting for the RPGA's sole living campaign, Living Forgotten Realms, replacing Living Greyhawk.\nIn 2011, the \"Neverwinter Campaign Setting\" was released which launched the 4th edition's first major multimedia release. The \"Forgotten Realms\" city setting spawned four novels by R. A. Salvatore called the Neverwinter Saga, a comic book, and a board game called \"The Legend of Drizzt\", as well as two video games \u2013 the Facebook game \"Heroes of Neverwinter\" (2011\u20132012) and a MMORPG called \"Neverwinter\" (2013). Laura Tommervik, from the Wizards of the Coast marketing team, explained the approach: \"We use Neverwinter as the connective tissue across multiple product categories. The transmedia campaign is an opportunity for fans to experience the brand however they choose to\".\nIn 2013, Wizards of the Coast announced a year-long event called the Sundering which acted as a multimedia project to transition the \"Forgotten Realms\" to the next edition of the game. This release included a weekly D&amp;D Encounters in-store play event, a free-to-play mobile game \"Arena of War\" (2013), and a collaborative novel series: \"The Companions\" (2013) by R. A. Salvatore, \"The Godborn\" (2013) by Paul S. Kemp, \"The Adversary\" (2013) by Erin Evans, \"The Reaver\" (2014) by Richard Lee Byers, \"The Sentinel\" (2014) by Troy Denning, and \"The Herald\" (2014) by Ed Greenwood. Liz Schuh, Head of Publishing and Licensing for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", said:The Sundering is the last of a series of ground-shaking events. It really affects the whole world of the Forgotten Realms in a major way. You may remember when the Spell Plagues began, the two worlds of the Forgotten Realms, Abeir and Toril, crashed together. That created both geographic changes (the map of the Forgotten Realms and Faer\u00fbn actually changed due to that collision), and also changed the way magic works. It changed the pantheon of the gods. The Sundering is all about those two worlds separating\u2014coming apart\u2014and the process of that separation is really the story that we're telling over the next year. At the end of this story arc, Abeir and Toril will be separate again, and many of the things that happened when they crashed together will go back to the way they were before. So magic will be much like it was before the Spell Plague. Markings that marked spell-plagued people and animals will fade and go away. It's really about moving the Forgotten Realms forward, but also about bringing it around to the most beloved and most fondly remembered Forgotten Realms. The result of The Second Sundering, in game terms, was the transition from 4th edition rules to 5th edition rules of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", published in 2014.\n2014\u20132024.\nWhen \"D&amp;D\" 5th edition was published in 2014, Wizards of the Coast announced that the \"Forgotten Realms\" would continue to serve as the official campaign setting for its upcoming published adventure materials. The village of Phandalin in the \"Forgotten Realms\" acted as the primary setting for the new 5th edition \"Starter Set\" (2014) which was published before the release of three new core rulebooks. \"Tyranny of Dragons\" was the first multimedia storyline for the new edition and included two adventure modules, \"Hoard of the Dragon Queen\" (2014) and \"The Rise of Tiamat\" (2014), and an update to the \"Neverwinter\" (2013) video game. The next two storylines, \"Elemental Evil\" which included \"Princes of the Apocalypse\" (2015) and \"Rage of Demons\" which included \"Out of the Abyss\" (2015), were also set in the \"Forgotten Realms\".\nThe first campaign guide for the new edition, the \"Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide\" (2015), was released on November 3, 2015, and only covered a fraction of the \"Forgotten Realms\". It describes the 2013 Sundering event, referred to as the Second Sundering in the book, and its consequences in game terms and lore. The video game \"Sword Coast Legends\" (2015) published by Digital Extremes was also released in the same month as the tabletop campaign guide. The adventure module \"Storm King's Thunder\" (2016) \"sprawls over the northern Forgotten Realms\u2013from Waterdeep to Icewind Dale\". 5th edition details on \"the rest of Faer\u00fbn had been untouched until the \"Tomb of Annihilation\" (2017), an adventure that leaves the northern Sword Coast for the southern jungles of Chult\". The official \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" actual play web series \"Rivals of Waterdeep\", which premiered in 2018, is set in the \"Forgotten Realms\". It adapted adventure modules such as ' (2018), ' (2019) and \"Candlekeep Mysteries\" (2021) which are also set in the \"Forgotten Realms\".\nIn 2023, the \"Forgotten Realms\" role-playing video game \"Baldur's Gate 3\" (2023) was released by Larian Studios. It had record-breaking awards success such as becoming the first game to win Game of the Year, or the equivalent category, at all five major ceremonies: the Golden Joystick Awards, the Game Developers Choice Awards, the DICE Awards, the BAFTAs, and The Game Awards. Also released in 2023 was the film \"\" which is set in the \"Forgotten Realms\" and features Neverwinter as a major location.\n2024\u2013present.\n\"\" is a stage production which combines actual play, improv, and immersive theater as the player cast navigate a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" adventure set in the \"Forgotten Realms\". It officially opened on off-Broadway on May 5, 2024, at Stage 42 in New York City; it closed on May 11, 2025. In December 2024, it opened at the Sydney Opera House's Studio venue in Sydney; it closed on April 6, 2025. The U.S. national tour began in July 2025.\nWizards of the Coast released the 2024 revision to the 5th Edition ruleset which updates preexisting player options while introducing new content to the game. This included releasing new backward compatible versions of the core rulebooks. Two \"Forgotten Realms\" focused sourcebooks \u2013 ' (2025) and ' (2025) \u2013 were scheduled released in November 2025. Following the announcement of these sourcebooks, \"Game Rant\" noted that \"outside the brief documentation for many areas in the \"Storm King's Thunder\" adventure, the only real sourcebook the [Forgotten Realms] setting saw [in 5th Edition] was the \"Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide\"\". (2025) is aimed at players and \"will include new subclasses, feats, backgrounds, items, along with new rules for Circle magic, a gazeteer-style guide to the Realms, a guide to the gods of the Realms, and more information about the factions that rule Faer\u00fbn\". (2025) is aimed at dungeon masters and will include adventures, monsters and villains along with details on \"five different settings: Baldur's Gate, Calimshan, the Dalelands, the Moonshae Isles, and Icewind Dale\". Additionally, three corresponding digital expansions will be released exclusively on D&amp;D Beyond in November 2025 \u2013 \"Astarion's Book of Hungers\" (2025) with vampire themed player options and adventures, \"Netheril's Fall\" (2025) which features a time-traveling adventure, and an untitled third book.\nFictional setting.\nThe focus of the \"Forgotten Realms\" setting is the continent of Faer\u00fbn, the western part of a continent that was roughly modeled after the Eurasian continent on Earth. The lands of the \"Forgotten Realms\" are not all ruled by the human race, with populations of many humanoid races and creatures ubiquitous in fantasy fiction works such as dwarves, elves, goblins, and orcs. Technologically, the world of the \"Forgotten Realms\" resembles the pre-industrial Earth in the 13th or 14th century. However, the presence of magic provides an additional element of power to the societies. There are several nation states and many independent cities, with loose alliances being formed for defense or conquest. Trade is performed by ship or horse-drawn vehicle, and manufacturing is based upon cottage industry.\nGeography.\nThe \"Forgotten Realms\" is part of the fictional world of Abeir-Toril (usually just called Toril), an Earth-like planet with many real-world influences and consists of several large continents. It was first detailed in the original \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Set\", published in 1987 by TSR. The other continents of Toril include Kara-Tur, Zakhara, Maztica, and other yet unspecified landmasses. Kara-Tur, roughly corresponding to ancient East Asia, was later the focus of its own source book \"\", published in 1988. There is also a vast subterranean world called the Underdark beneath the surface.\nIn early editions of the setting, The Realms shared a unified cosmology with various other campaign settings called the Great Wheel. In this way each of the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" campaign settings were linked together to form one interwoven world connected by various planes of existence. With the release of the 2001 \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\", the setting was given its own distinct and separate cosmological arrangement, with unique planes not explicitly connected to those of the other settings.\nReligion.\nReligion plays a large part in the \"Forgotten Realms\", with deities and their followers being an integral part of the world. Deities interact directly in mortal affairs, answer prayers, and have their own personal agendas. All deities must have worshippers to survive, and all mortals must worship a patron deity to secure a good afterlife. A huge number of diverse deities exist within several polytheistic pantheons; a large number of supplements have documented many of them, some in more detail than others. Greenwood created a pantheon of gods for his home \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game, in his \"Forgotten Realms\" world, which were introduced in his article \"Down-to-earth divinity\" from \"Dragon\" #54 (October 1981).\nWhen the \"Forgotten Realms\" was published as a setting in 1987, the pantheon added Waukeen, the goddess of trade, money, and wealth, who was created by one of Jeff Grubb's players, and added to the \"Forgotten Realms\" by Grubb. Tyche was replaced with Tymora, and the elemental lords from Melnibon\u00e9 were replaced by Akadi, Grumbar, Istishia, and Kossuth.\nMuch of the history of the \"Forgotten Realms\" detailed in novels and source books concerns the actions of various deities and The Chosen (mortal representatives with a portion of their deities' power) such as Elminster, Fzoul Chembryl, Midnight (who later became the new embodiment of the goddess of magic, Mystra), and the Seven Sisters. Above all other deities is Ao, the Overlord, who does not sanction worshipers and distances himself from mortals. He is single-handedly responsible for the Time of Troubles, or Godswar, as seen in \"The Avatar Trilogy\".\nCharacters.\nThe setting is home to several noteworthy recurring characters that have gained wider reception, including:\nReception.\nIn his book \"The Fantasy Roleplaying Gamer's Bible\", Sean Patrick Fannon describes the \"Forgotten Realms\" as being \"the most ambitious fantasy game setting published since Tekumel\", and that it \"may be the most widely played-in game setting in RPG history\". Similarly, in literature, the novels written in the \"Forgotten Realms\" setting have formed one of \"the industry's leading fantasy series\". Over time these novels have gained \"unprecedented popularity\", which led, as Marc Oxoby noted in his book, \"The 1990s\", to the novels having an \"extraordinary shelf life\", remaining in print for many years. This popular reception has also been reflected in public libraries; for example, Joyce Saricks states in \"The Readers' Advisory Guide to Genre Fiction\" that the novels have been among the most requested books by fans of the fantasy genre. \"D&amp;D\" chroniclers Michael Witwer \"et al.\", in the book \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Art &amp; Arcana\", noted that the \"level of Tolkienesque history and detail that Greenwood had infused in his creation - and almost \"real world\" quality - granted the Realms an irresistible allure [...]. While at its core the Forgotten Realms is a familiar, almost traditional, medieval-styled fantasy setting, it boasted unprecedented scope\". \"It is, quite simply, Dungeons &amp; Dragons at its very core.\"\nAubrey Sitterson, for \"PC Magazine\", included the \"Forgotten Realms\" in a 2015 roundup of the \"11 Best Dungeons &amp; Dragons Campaign Settings\" and wrote that \"for most people, Forgotten Realms is synonymous with \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", and with good reason: it's the setting that played home to the massively popular Baldur's Gate video game, as well as R. A. Salvatore's Drizzt books. Currently, it's the only campaign setting actively supported by \"D&amp;D\" makers Wizards of the Coast, which would be restrictive if Forgotten Realms wasn't such an incredibly diverse place, housing classic European middle ages tropes, as well as a heroic fantasy take on African, Middle Eastern, and other real-world cultures\". Brian Silliman, for SYFY Wire in 2017, described the \"Forgotten Realms\" as \"a classic fantasy backdrop\" and highlighted that \"at one time in our history, our world and this one were connected, but over time this magical realm was, well, forgotten. It is an ideal place for any \"D&amp;D\" adventure, inspiring limitless possibilities for any smirking dungeon master\". In 2019, academic Philip J. Clements called the \"highly popular\" \"Forgotten Realms\" \"an unusually well-developed D&amp;D setting\" and \"more-or-less the flagship setting for D&amp;D\". He also noted that it has received the greatest number of supplements.\nIn a retrospective on the legacy of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", academic Daniel Heath Justice commented that the \"\"Forgotten Realms\" was explicitly based on the civilized-versus-savage binary and leaned in hard on racial essentialism in its sadistic black-skinned drow led by vicious matriarchs and their terrible spider goddess, firmly melding anti-Blackness with misogyny, a once-civilized people gone feral under the debased rule of women\".\nEdition updates.\nThe 4th edition update to the \"Forgotten Realms\" brought massive lore changes which were \"tied to a number of other design philosophies\" and the \"Forgotten Realms\" \"simultaneously had become a grittier setting, on the edge of collapse, while also becoming a more fantastic one, full of wonder and mystery\". Jason Wilson, for \"VentureBeat\", highlighted that unlike the Time of Troubles cataclysm, the 4th edition Spellplague cataclysm was \"one players never embraced in the same manner as the earlier disaster\". Shannon Appelcline, author of \"Designers &amp; Dragons\", wrote:\n[The 4th edition] \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide\" may be the most controversial D&amp;D book ever produced by Wizards. That's entirely due to the large-scale destruction of the Realms. Similar updates have been tried by other companies \u2014 to reinvigorate settings, to make them more accessible to new players, or to make them more adventuresome. [...] It never seems to go well, because old fans feel left behind. With that said, some folks did love the changes, because the setting was now more playable, more accessible, more fantastic, and more PC centered. [...] Meanwhile, a series of adventures and novels called \"The Sundering\" (2013\u20132014) reversed many of the 4e changes to the Realms, but without rebooting the timeline. Instead, the Realms continues to evolve and advance, as it has since its earlier days.\nR. A. Salvatore was also publicly unhappy with the 4th edition changes to the \"Forgotten Realms\": [B]asically, we authors were handed a document and told how things were going to be. We were asked our opinions, but they mattered very little \u2013 the changes were being driven from a different direction. [...] To have characters that have built such a strong history, then have that upset on the orders of someone else was very disconcerting. I will admit that the abrupt changes forced me into an uncomfortable place, and from that place came some of the better things I've written, but I very much preferred the way it was done this time, with 5th Edition and the changes, where we, the authors, were told what was happening to the game and asked how we could make the world and the lore live and breathe it.Christian Hoffer, for \"ComicBook.com\", reported that Wizards of the Coast's 5th edition publishing strategy, which focuses on the \"Forgotten Realms\" and newer intellectual property for campaign settings, has created a rift in the fan base where some \"feel that this push for new players has come at the cost of keeping the game's current players sated\" by not updating campaign settings that \"predate the Forgotten Realms\". Hoffer highlighted that Wizards of the Coast has a much slower publication schedule than with previous editions with a focus on quality and profit and \"the D&amp;D teams knows that they have plenty of great campaign settings in their back pocket and are either actively developing more settings or have ideas for them further down the line\". Francesco Cacciatore of \"Polygon\" noted that the 3rd Edition \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\" (2001) sourcebook was \"an ambitious attempt at a comprehensive look at the Realms, and while many locations remained sketched, it was still enough to feed our imagination (and campaigns) for decades\". However, its 4th Edition \"equivalent\" was overlooked by many players \"due to the mess that the Spellplague event was, lore-wise\" and while \"players were excited for a 'return to form' for the Forgotten Realms\" when the 5th Edition undid most Spellplague changes, details have been \"limited in scope\" since \"the majority of D&amp;D 5e products set in the Forgotten Realms focused on the Sword Coast and its adjacent areas\". Following the announcement of the (2025) for the revised 5th Edition, Cacciatore commented that while he was \"disappointed\" to see two regions previously explored in 5th Edition campaign books would be included, he was also \"excited to get the first good glimpse at the Dales, Calimshan, and the Moonshae Isles in more than two decades\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46930", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46930", "title": "Ravenloft", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional campaign setting\nRavenloft is a campaign setting for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" roleplaying game. It is an alternate time-space existence known as a \"pocket dimension\" or demiplane, called the Demiplane of Dread, which consists of a collection of land pieces called \"domains\", brought together by a mysterious force known only as the Dark Powers. Each domain is tailored to and mystically ruled by a being called a Darklord who is forever trapped and surrounded by magical mists surrounding the domain. Strahd von Zarovich, a vampire in the original \"AD&amp;D\" \"Ravenloft\" I6 module released in 1983, became the first Darklord, both ruler and prisoner of his own personal domain of Barovia. The story of how Count von Zarovich became Darklord of Barovia was detailed in the 1993 novel '. As originally established in the ' boxed set known as \"the Black Box\" released in 1990, the Ravenloft campaign setting was located in the Ethereal Plane. As a physical manifestation of that plane, lands, monsters and even people were created out of the mysterious mists, and the realm acted as a prison where one could enter or be transported, but means of escape were few. Other Ravenloft Domains and Darklords were eventually added in various \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd edition (and then later in 3rd edition) products establishing a core continent attached around Barovia which could be traveled to by others if their respective lords allowed entering or leaving their borders; while some Domains remained isolated in the mists and were referred to as Islands.\nCreative origins.\nIn 1978, Tracy and Laura Hickman wrote adventures that would eventually be published as the \"Dungeon &amp; Dragons\" modules \"Pharaoh\" and \"Ravenloft\". Strahd von Zarovich was created by the Hickmans \"after Tracy returned home from a disappointing session of \"D&amp;D\". Back in First Edition, the game was less of a storytelling game. [...] It didn't make sense to [Tracy] why a creature like a vampire was just sitting around in a random dungeon with oozes, goblins, and zombies. So he and his wife set out to create a vampire villain with fleshed-out motivations and history\". When the Hickmans began work on \"Ravenloft\", they felt the vampire archetype had become overused, trite, and mundane, and decided to create a frightening version of the creature for the module. They play-tested it with a group of players every Halloween for five years on their own game system with the adventure titled \"Vampyr\". However, the Hickmans kept being asked about their \"Ravenloft game\", and so the Ravenloft name stuck. The duo eventually caught the attention of \"D&amp;D\"'s original publishers. They were hired to adapt it into the first edition of \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and it was released as \"Module I6: Ravenloft\" in 1983 by TSR.\nPublication history.\n1st edition.\nThe first appearance of the setting was in \"Ravenloft\", a stand-alone \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" adventure module, published in 1983. In 1984, it won the Strategists' Club Award for Outstanding Play Aid. It was popular enough to spawn a 1986 sequel, \"\", and an Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons Adventure Gamebooks novel, \"Master of Ravenloft\", the same year.\n2nd edition.\nRavenloft was launched as a full-fledged campaign setting, for \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition, in 1990, with the \"\" boxed set, popularly known as the \"Black Box\", and winner of the Origins Award in 1991 for \"Best Graphic Presentation of a Roleplaying Game, Adventure, or Supplement of 1990\".\nThe campaign setting was revised twice during \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition: first as the \"Ravenloft Campaign Setting\" or \"Red Box\", then as the \"Domains of Dread\" hardback.\nIn 1994, Ravenloft spun off into a sub-setting called \"Masque of the Red Death\", set on Gothic Earth, an Edgar Allan Poe-influenced alternative Earth of the 1890s, where fantasy creatures and magic exist in the shadows of civilization.\nTSR also published a series of novels set in Ravenloft. Each was typically focused on one of the Darklords that inhabited the Ravenloft world, with several focusing on the figure of Count Strahd von Zarovich. Many of these early novels were by authors who would later receive wider fame as horror/dark fantasy authors. These authors have included Elaine Bergstrom, P. N. Elrod, Christie Golden, and Laurell K. Hamilton.\n3rd and 3.5 edition.\nA major revision of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was released in 2000, the first edition published by Wizards of the Coast (which had acquired TSR in 1997). In the same year, Wizards of the Coast licensed the Ravenloft brand to White Wolf Publishing. Under its Sword &amp; Sorcery Studios (and later Arthaus imprints), White Wolf Publishing released the 3rd Edition d20 System \"Ravenloft Campaign Setting\" (2001) and the 3.5 Edition \"Ravenloft Player's Handbook\" (2003).\nThe campaign settings published by White Wolf introduced a number of alterations, many due to conflicts with existing Wizards of the Coast intellectual property. Specific references to \"D&amp;D\"-specific deities were replaced with new names in the White Wolf Ravenloft settings (for example, Bane was changed to the Lawgiver). The license to the Ravenloft trademark reverted to Wizards of the Coast on August 15, 2005, but White Wolf retained the right to continue to sell its back stock until June 2006. The timing of this reversion meant that the Ravenloft supplement \"Van Richten's Guide to the Mists\" did not see print. Instead, it was released by White Wolf as a free download in late September 2005. The majority of the \"Van Richten's Guide\" series had already been published by TSR in the 1990s, before White Wolf's involvement.\nIn October 2006, Wizards of the Coast released \"Expedition to Castle Ravenloft\", a hardcover version of the original 1st Ed. adventure, updated for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" v.3.5 rule set. This version includes maps from the original \"Ravenloft\" adventure, and new character-generation options. \"Expedition to Castle Ravenloft\" is a stand-alone supplement set for any \"D&amp;D\" worlds, and only requires the three core books for usage. This book's setting is distinct from the Ravenloft of the White Wolf product line. Shannon Appelcline, author of \"Designers &amp; Dragons\", highlighted that by 2006 people were beginning to wonder if Wizards of the Coast might be preparing a fourth edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and stated that \"the release of \"Expedition to Castle Ravenloft\" (2006) might just have offered another clue to the changing winds that lay ahead. First, it was a new line for 3.5e, suggesting that their original series of 3.5e books was coming to an end. Second, it was a fond look back at one of the most notable adventures from the \"AD&amp;D\" days, just the sort of thing that Wizards published in the waning days of 2e\". Appelcline later noted that, once fourth edition was officially announced, \"the \"Expedition\" books that had begun publication in 2006 were revealed to indeed be part of Wizard's slow slide into 4e\".\n4th edition.\nIn 2007, Wizards of the Coast announced the printing of two new Ravenloft novels for 2008, \"Black Crusade\" and \"The Sleep of Reason\", fueling more speculation. A short story by Ari Marmell, \"Before I Wake\", based on the realms of Darkon, Lamordia, and Bluetspur was released on October 31, 2007, on the Wizards of the Coast website as a special for Halloween; it featured characters inspired by H. P. Lovecraft and Clark Ashton Smith.\nIn 2008, Ravenloft was revealed to be re-introduced to 4th edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", as was depicted in the October issue of the \"Dragon\" online magazine. The \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th edition supplement \"Manual of the Planes\" (2008) established that in the retconned cosmology, the Domains of Dread (and by extension the Ravenloft setting) were now located within the Shadowfell, a mirror-plane of death and gloom lying adjacent to the mortal realm. While a 4th edition update to the Ravenloft setting was announced at Gen Con 2010, the product was never released.\nIn 2010, Ravenloft was the setting for the \"Castle Ravenloft Board Game\". Ravenloft also appeared in official magazine articles, such as, \"Dungeon\" #207 \"Fair Barovia\" (October 2012) and \"Dragon\" #416 \"History Check: Strahd and Van Richten\" (October 2012).\n5th edition.\nIn 2016, Barovia (one of the main locations within Ravenloft) was the main setting for adventure module \"Curse of Strahd\" which acts as an adaptation of the original \"Ravenloft\" module for the 5th edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". The adventure states: \"The lands of Barovia are from a forgotten world in the D&amp;D multiverse [...]. In time, cursed Barovia was torn from its home world by the Dark Powers and bound in mist as one of the Domains of Dread in the Shadowfell\". The module was developed in-house by the Wizards of the Coast team, led by Christopher Perkins, with story contributions by original creators Tracy and Laura Hickman. Charlie Hall, for \"Polygon\", explained that \"instead of reinventing the wheel, principle [\"sic\"] designer Chris Perkins brought in the module's original writers \u2014 the husband and wife team of Tracy and Laura Hickman \u2014 to create the very best version of the famous module yet. [...] Tracy and Laura have been hosting nearly annual sessions of the original \"Ravenloft\" at their home, for friends and family, over the course of decades. When Perkins asked for their input, they flew out to meet with the team. The result was a torrent of ideas for new locations, characters and encounters\". Ravenloft was also the setting of the limited series comic \"Dungeons and Dragons: Shadows of the Vampire\" (2016) written by Jim Zub, and illustrated by Max Dunbar and Nelson Daniel.\nWizards of the Coast released a new edition of the \"Curse of Strahd\" module, entitled \"Curse of Strahd: Revamped\", on October 20, 2020. This module is the first released with the publisher's new focus on diversity and inclusion. Wizards of the Coast stated that \"the adventure includes the latest errata and a revised depiction of the Vistani\" who are based on stereotypes about the Romani people.\nWizards of the Coast released a new Ravenloft campaign sourcebook, \"Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft\" (2021), which introduces other Domains of Dread to the edition. It was published on May 18, 2021. The limited series comic \"\" (2022), by writer Casey Gilley and artist Bayleigh Underwood, then featured the mad scientist Viktra Mordenheim, the Darklord of Ravenloft's Lamordia domain introduced in \"Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft\". The novel \"Ravenloft: Heir of Strahd\" (2025), by Delilah S. Dawson, was the first Ravenloft novel to be published in 17 years.\nFictional setting.\nRavenloft is primarily a Gothic horror setting. Dungeon Masters are encouraged to use scenes that build apprehension and fear, culminating in the eventual face-to-face meeting with the nameless evil. Characters have a much greater significance attached to their acts, especially if they are morally impure, as they risk coming under the influence of the Dark Powers (through the game process called \"dark powers checks\") and gradually transforming themselves into figures of evil.\nThe magical mists of Ravenloft could appear anywhere in the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" universe, drawing evil-doers (or player characters) into the Ravenloft setting. One exception is the phlogiston of the Spelljammer setting. The phlogiston blocks all planar travel, but the Ravenloft mists can appear in deep space inside crystal shells, according to the \"Complete Spacefarer's Handbook\".\nLuis Javier Flores Arvizu named the continuous presence of supernatural beings as one of the factors that made \"Ravenloft\" a very well received role-playing game setting during the 33 years of its existence.\nThe Dark Powers.\nThe Dark Powers are a malevolent force who control the Demiplane of Dread. Their exact nature and number are deliberately kept vague, allowing for plot development in accordance with the Gothic tradition of storytelling \u2013 where the heroes are frequently outclassed and outnumbered by unknowable evil forces beyond their control.\nThe Dark Powers most frequently serve as a plot device for Ravenloft, especially concerning the Darklords, the visible rulers of the Ravenloft Demiplane. Where the player characters are often tormented and opposed by the Darklords, the Darklords are themselves tormented and opposed by the Dark Powers. The difference lies in order of power\u2014while many \"D&amp;D\" adventures focus on allowing a band of heroes to prevail over a Darklord (much as in the spirit of Bram Stoker's novel \"Dracula\"), no such victory over the Dark Powers seems possible, or even conceivable, for the Darklords. Vecna and Lord Soth \"escaped\" Ravenloft, but are the only two Darklords known to have done so; Vecna by attaining the status of Greater God (and thus becoming too powerful for the Dark Powers to contain) and Lord Soth by ignoring his domain and punishment, causing the Dark Powers to lose interest in imprisoning him, and agents of his former curse on the world of Krynn coming to collect him.\nMost frequently, the Dark Powers make their wishes and intentions known through subtle manipulations of fate. Thus, Barovia's vampire lord Strahd von Zarovich's many attempts to win back his love, Tatyana, are doomed to failure, but the Dark Powers arrange such that he never truly loses hope. Each time, for example, Strahd's own actions may be partially culpable for his failure, and as such he may go through crippling self-recrimination, rather than cursing the gods solely and giving up. Most other Darklords have similar tales of frustration, kept all the more unbearable because the flicker of the possibility of success is never truly extinguished.\nNot all Darklords acknowledge the Dark Powers directly, however. Strahd, for example, in his own memoirs, speaks only of a force known as Death, who mocks him with the voices of his family and former colleagues throughout his life. Vlad Drakov, the Darklord of Falkovnia whose military expeditions are doomed to constant failure, seems even to be totally oblivious to any non-mortal factors in his repeated defeats.\nThe Dark Powers also seem capable of non-evil manipulations. Although their machinations are often directly responsible for the misery of many of Ravenloft's inhabitants, they also appear to play a role as dispensers of justice. Some tales of innocents who have escaped Ravenloft for happier environs are attributed to the Dark Powers, who have judged a being worthy of reward and release from their misty domain.\nDomains of Dread.\nThere are many Domains of Dread that makeup the landscape of Ravenloft. The Domains are surrounded by strange mists that can ensnare both people and places in Prime Material Plane and pull them into the Domains. Each Domain is ruled by a Darklord, but each Darklord was imprisoned in their Domain by the Dark Powers. The Dark Powers \"are believed to have been responsible for the overall creation of the Dread Domains\". The concept of Domains and locations in Ravenloft besides Barovia and Mordent was introduced in the 2nd Edition campaign setting book \"\" (1990). This book outlined that the size of Ravenloft is \"40,000 square miles [spanning] 26 different domains, including Barovia and Mordent. All of the core domains are overviewed in \"Ravenloft\", as are eight 'islands'\". The revised 2nd Edition boxset \"Ravenloft Campaign Setting\" (1994) is an update to \"Realm of Terror\", but it removes Domains that were destroyed in the Grand Conjunction adventure series and adds new Domains. The metaplot of the adventure series was used to update the setting: \"David Wise, leader of the 'Kargat' of \"Ravenloft\" designers at TSR, has said there were a few reasons for the changes. Some domains were changed or removed because they didn't fit into Ravenloft ecologically [...]. Some domains were removed or merged because their lords were too similar, and finally some islands of terror were kicked to the curb just because they were 'less exciting'. [...] A few domains that had appeared since the publication of \"Ravenloft: Realm of Terror\" were notably missing [...]. All told, \"Ravenloft Campaign Setting\" covers 20 core domains and nine islands\". The 5th Edition campaign guide \"Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft\" (2021) includes an overview of 39 Domains and many Domains are given a \"wholesale revision\" while \"other Domains keep their original lore but are advanced in other ways\". Rob Wieland, writing for Forbes, explained that in this book \"many of the domains have new Darklords that reflect their original character but have details changed to better fit the type of horror the domain is supposed to represent\".\nSome of the more notable Domains include:\nDarklords.\nDarklord is the title used to refer to the mystically imprisoned and cursed ruler of a domain. A Darklord was originally an individual who had committed a truly horrific crime, which drew the attention of the enigmatic Dark Powers. The Dark Powers then proceeded to craft a personal kingdom around the Darklord. This crafted domain serves both as a kingdom and a prison: the Darklord gains incredible powers whilst within its borders but can never leave it, although most Darklords can seal their domain borders with a thought. Within their domains, the Darklords are forever tormented by the objects of their desires, which are often the objects for which they committed their crimes.\nVistani.\nThe Vistani are a nomadic ethnic group. They are based on depictions of the Romani people. Since their introduction in the original \"Ravenloft\" module (1983) as fortune-tellers, they became a unifying element in the Ravenloft and the Masque of the Red Death campaign settings, which offer Gothic horror scenarios. In a Ravenloft adventure, the Vistani have some control of the Mists of Ravenloft, which divide realms, while the players are generally confined to a region from which they must escape by solving one or more problems. Players generally need help from the Vistani to travel reliably from one open realm to another.\nThe Vistani people were \"described as superstitious\" and had \"abilities to curse and hypnotize players or cast spells like Evil Eye\". They were also originally stereotyped \"as 'uncivilized' and heavy drinkers\", but this portrayal was removed in the adventure module \"Curse of Strahd Revamped\" (2020). Their portrayal was further retconned in \"Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft\" (2021); the Vistani people are no longer considered superstitious but instead focused on their traditional practices and their abilities are grounded in the forms of magic found in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nThe fictional character Rudolph van Richten, a famous Monster Hunter in Ravenloft and author of a series of guides to hunting and slaying various monsters, had a great enmity for the Vistani for most of his monster-hunting career, but his opinion improved during his penning of \"Van Richten's Guide To The Vistani\", during which he befriended a \"mortu\" (a Vistani outcast).\nReception.\nGame designer Rick Swan commented in 1994 that when the Ravenloft setting first came out, it \"just didn't seem special, a Forgotten Realms variant with a few more bats\", but after supplements like \"Forbidden Lore\", \"The Created\", and the \"Van Richten's Guide\" series, Swan felt that \"the Ravenloft campaign has proven to be a credible adventure alternative for players interested in the dark side of the \"AD&amp;D\" game. Though it lacks the flamboyance of \"Call of Cthulhu\" and the, er, bite of \"\", the Ravenloft setting remains the hobby's most enduring fusion of horror and fantasy\".\nDarker Days Radio declared Ravenloft the \"greatest D&amp;D campaign setting\", citing the unique gothic horror elements and classic villains such as Azalin Rex.\nIn the \"Io9\" series revisiting older \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" novels, Rob Bricken highlighted that \"Vampire of the Mists\" \"isn't scary, per se, but Strahd wreaks enough horror and carnage to drive home that Ravenloft is much, much more sinister than the Forgotten Realms. [...] Ravenloft (and I guess Forgotten Realms) vampires have \"all\" the tropes: They can turn into bats, wolves, and mists, and they don't cast reflections. They can control animals and enthrall people, to a degree. They can't cross running water, and they have to be invited into a home to enter. Unless they're an extremely powerful vampire like Strahd, natch\".\nShelly Jones, in the journal \"Analog Game Studies: Volume IV\", highlighted the Tarokka Deck mechanic used in both the original \"Ravenloft\" (1983) module and the 5th edition \"Curse of Strahd\" (2016) module to add randomization to the game and increase replayability. Jones wrote: \"The Tarokka Deck incorporates an inconsistency in the game play that reflects fragmented traumatic memory and reifies the inconsistency present within an abusive relationship\". Jones also highlighted that \"without sunshine as a key time-tracking element, players are forced to rely upon other means to signal the passage of time within Barovia. Further adding to that disorientation is the knowledge that the players have been abandoned from anything familiar or real. [...] This alienating effect, based upon the physical environment as well as the psychological manifestations, traumatizes characters\".\nThe Ravenloft setting has been criticized \"for reinforcing harmful stereotypes through its portrayal of the Vistani, an in-fiction analogue for the Roma people\". In 2020, Wizards of the Coast announced \"in the editorial process for \"Strahd\"'s reprint, as well as two upcoming products, Wizards worked with a Romani consultant to present the Vistani without using reductive tropes\". On this update, Jon Ryan, for \"IGN\", wrote that \"it's worth noting that the book's illustrations of the Vistani still evoke Romani culture, and some players may still associate certain abilities [...] with outdated cultural stereotypes\". Julie Muncy, for \"Io9\", criticized the \"granular changes\" to the Vistani people as not very extensive and that \"while there's a real opportunity here to do better work\u2014the aforementioned diversity pledge also mentioned future works that will feature the Vistani people and aim to complicate their depictions\u2014starting that work with a fancy collector's edition feels less like a promise to do better and more like a victory lap\". Muncy also highlighted that the unrevised parts, such as the art and specific magical abilities, still lean \"into tropes that suggest the Romani have mystical, dangerous powers, tropes that have been used in the past to target Romani for persecution\".\nChristian Hoffer, for ComicBook.com, highlighted that in \"Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft\" (2021) the Domains of Dread \"all now function as originally intended: prisons meant to torture specific souls. Many of the original Ravenloft domains featured strange punishments that didn't necessarily fit the crime of the Darklord. The revised domains are usually a better utilization of the ironic intent that flavors the immortal prisons of Ravenloft. The domains also now include a variety of different horror genres rather than a fixation on gothic horror. Finally, much of the misogynistic, colonialist, or racist elements have been purged out of this new iteration of Ravenloft. Although these changes will likely be the most talked about part of the book in some circles, these changes seem to have occurred naturally during the course of updating Ravenloft to reflect more diverse horror genres and to make the domains conform to Ravenloft's internal laws\".\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"In many ways, Strahd is a vessel for the audience's relationship with an ever-changing and evolving vampire legend. While a character in his own right, he is broadly drawn, so every group of players can make him their own. There are many Strahds, each defined by the tastes of the people at the table.\"\nOfficial products.\n\"Ravenloft\" has acted as the official campaign setting for multiple \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" roleplaying adventure modules, sourcebooks and accessories. It has also been the main setting for novels and video games.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46931", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46931", "title": "Mystara", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional campaign setting\nMystara is a campaign setting for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" fantasy role playing game. It was the default setting for the \"Basic\" version of the game throughout the 1980s and 1990s. Most adventures published for the \"Basic\" edition of \"D&amp;D\" take place in \"The Known World\", a central continent that includes a varied patchwork of both human and non-human realms. The human realms are based on various real-world historical cultures. In addition, unlike other \"D&amp;D\" settings, Mystara had ascended immortal beings instead of gods.\nThe Mystara planet also has sub-settings. The older \"Blackmoor\" setting was retconned to exist in Mystara's distant past. The Hollow World refers to the inner surface contained within the world of Mystara, similar to the real world legends of the Hollow Earth, while some adventures take place on the Savage Coast, a -long frontier coastline about 2,000 miles to the west of the Known World.\nBy the mid-1990s, gamers' attention started to shift towards the second edition of \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and its official campaigns. Some Mystara adventures for \"AD&amp;D\" were published between 1994 and 1996. Eventually, official support of the Mystara setting was transitioned to the Official Fan Site system wherein the Vaults of Pandius fansite was selected to become the official site for the future 3rd edition of Mystara, and Wizards of the Coast support was discontinued by the time the game's third edition was released in 2000.\nDevelopment.\nMystara originated as a fantasy world developed by Lawrence Schick and Tom Moldvay for their own \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game sessions from 1974 to 1976. Their original setting consisted of a large continent with fictionalized nations that were based on real-world historical cultures. Inspired by author H. P. Lovecraft and his work in creating a fiction shared universe, Schick and Moldvay named their setting as the \"Known World\" so it could be expanded upon by other players. Schick then went to work at TSR Hobbies as a designer for \"D&amp;D\" and other games. After being promoted to director of the Design Department he brought Moldvay in to join the company as a game designer, around the time when the \"D&amp;D Expert Set\" was under development. After being told that they could not use the existing Greyhawk setting, as it was being reserved for only \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" products, Schick and Moldvay got approval to instead use their \"Known World\" as the standard \"D&amp;D\" campaign setting.\nSchick and Moldvay's \"Known World\" was used as a semi-generic setting in early adventure modules, first mentioned in Module X1, \"The Isle of Dread\". It was then expanded upon in various \"D&amp;D\" modules and sources, particularly a series of Gazetteers, many of which originally referred to the setting as \"The \"D&amp;D\" Game World\". The first published use of the name \"Mystara\" came in 1991 from Bruce Heard in the Letters section of his Voyage of the Princess Ark series in \"Dragon\" magazine. While the name was used in official publications after this, it was not until the conversion to \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition in 1994 that products were produced under the Mystara title with the official Mystara logo.\nEach part of the \"D&amp;D Gazetteer\" series treats one nation or empire and has three basic elements: cultural and geographic background, features, and adventures. The cultural and geographic campaign background section offers a brief history and timeline for each nation; basic geography, climate, and ecology; and, fundamental social and political concepts of the region. Each Gazetteer also offers a list of scenario ideas appropriate to the campaign setting.\nTrenton Webb for the British \"Arcane\" RPG magazine described Mystara as \"a traditional Tolkienesque world\".\nPlanet of Mystara.\nThree principal land masses are described on Mystara's outer surface: the continent of Brun, the continent of Skothar, the continent of Davania, and the island continent of Alphatia (up to AC 1010). In the officially published material, the Known World concentrated on the eastern portion of Brun and the lands of the Sea of Dawn. The continents of Mystara were designed to be similar in appearance to the continents of Laurasia and Gondwana on Earth approximately 135 million years ago.\nIn addition to human races, several archetypal fantasy races were included on Mystara: these include elves, dwarves, halflings, orcs, and dragons.\nNations created for the world of Mystara include the Thyatian Empire, the Grand Duchy of Karameikos, the Principalities of Glantri, the merchant-run Republic of Darokin, the Emirates of Ylaruam, the Dwarven nation of Rockhome, the Elven Kingdom of Alfheim, Halfling lands of the Five Shires, and the chaotic Alphatian Empire.\nThe continent of Brun.\nThe most commonly known land mass on Mystara's outer surface is only a tiny portion of Brun. In the officially published material, the Known World concentrated on the eastern portion of Brun along with the islands of the Sea of Dawn.\nThe Known World.\nNations of the Known World display a great range of government types. Some countries are populated entirely by demihumans and/or humanoids. By standard convention, the boundaries of the \"Known World\" are those covered in the world map as initially published in the module X1, \"The Isle of Dread,\" plus Norwold, the Isle of Dawn, and (pre \"Wrath of the Immortals\") Alphatia.\nAs the name implies, the \"Known World\" covers the most notable nations of Mystara, the ones most commonly used in Mystara-based campaigns and featured in fiction. It includes the Thyatian Empire, which could be compared to the Byzantine Empire; the Grand Duchy of Karameikos (which includes the town of Threshold, the default setting of many classic D&amp;D adventures); the Principalities of Glantri, ruled by wizard-princes; the Ethengar Khanate, a Mongol-like society; the merchant-run Republic of Darokin, which is based loosely on the mercantile states of medieval Italy; the Emirates of Ylaruam; the Heldannic Territories, ruled by an order of religious knights similar to the Teutonic Order devoted to the Immortal Vanya; the Atruaghin Clans, which have an Amerindian feel; the nation of Sind, based on the Mughal Empire; the Northern Reaches Kingdoms of Ostland, Vestland, and the Soderfjord Jarldoms, based on Scandinavia at various periods of history; the Dwarven nation of Rockhome; the elven Kingdom of Alfheim; the Halfling lands of the Five Shires; and the Alphatian Empire, ruled by wizards and other spellcasters.\nTo the distant Northwest of the \"Known World\", across the Great Waste, lies the mysterious lands of Hule, ruled by Hosadus, also known as \"The Master\". Also on the periphery of the Known World are the Kingdoms of Wendar and Denagoth, the first an elven-dominated nation and the latter a mountainous and dark realm of evil, with ill-intentions towards Wendar. The Adri Varma lies between Sind, Wendar, the Great Waste, and The Black Mountains, forming the northern border of Glantri and defining the northwestern limits of the region.\nThe Savage Coast.\nMystara includes the Savage Coast, a coastal area located in the south-central part of the Brun continent, to the south and west of Hule. The area is a 2000-mile frontier coastline about 2000 miles west of the Known World.\nThis part of Mystara is affected by the Red Curse. This sinister enchantment eventually kills its inhabitants through mutation unless the (fictional) metal \"cinnabryl\" is worn in contact with the body. The specifics of the \"Red Curse\" include mutilation of the body and extreme degeneration of physical and mental health. It also imprisons the region's inhabitants, as debilitating effects result if they leave the cursed area.\nAtmosphere.\nSavage Coast's swashbuckling flavor is very different from that of the Known World, closer in atmosphere to that of the Age of Discovery than the fantasy middle-ages/renaissance tone of the Known World. The Savage Coast is complete with gunpowder (\"smokepowder\") weaponry.\nPublication history.\nThe first published information on the area was the module \"X9 The Savage Coast\" for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Expert Set\". The region was later expanded in \"Dungeon\" magazine issues #6 and 7 (1987) with the adventure \"Tortles of the Purple Sage\".\nTwo series in \"Dragon\" Magazine, \"The Princess Ark\" and the \"Known World Grimoire\", described the Savage Coast in more detail. These articles were partially reprinted in the D&amp;D game accessory \"Champions of Mystara\" (1993).\nThe \"Savage Coast\" in 1994 was spun off into a campaign setting for \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (2nd Edition). This area was published in its own boxed set entitled \"Red Steel\", and later republished online as the Savage Coast. An expansion, \"Savage Baronies\", was released the following year. These supplements were for Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons 2nd edition, as all the previous material had been for the \"Classic\" version of \"D&amp;D\".\nIn 1996, the setting was revised and re-released under the \"AD&amp;D: Odyssey\" line as three fully online products available for free download. This range included the base \"Savage Coast Campaign Book\" by Tim Beach and Bruce Heard, a supplement \"Savage Coast: Orc's Head\", and a Monstrous Compendium Appendix.\nThe continent of Davania.\nEven though most of the Known World civilizations historically originated from this part of the planet, it did not see much development while the Mystara product line was still in production. The only major appearance of the continent was in \"Dragon\" magazine, where parts of it were sketched out during the Voyage of the Princess Ark series, by Known World Product Manager Bruce Heard.\nMany Mystara fans have been turning their attention to Davania with fan-made material in recent years.\nThe continent of Skothar.\nVery little was officially developed for this part of Mystara. Since the Mystara product line was discontinued, fans have created their material for this part of Mystara.\nThe Hollow World.\nMystara is a hollow planet, with a habitable surface on its interior called the Hollow World, inspired by conceptions like that novelized by Jules Verne. This world is lit by an eternal red sun at the center of Mystara, and serves as a \"cultural museum\", preserving the societies that have become extinct in the outer world, \"based on Native American, Aztec, Viking, and ancient Rome. The existence of the Hollow World is not, in general, known to the inhabitants of the outer world. The poles are actually huge, subtly curving holes that allow passage between the outer and inner world, although it is a long, hard trek through a cold, unlit, stormy and anti-magic area. The curvature of the holes is so subtle that explorers from either surface do not notice the transition until after it is already made, causing quite a shock for most.\nMoons.\nTwo moons orbit the planet. Matera is a moon much like our own, whose phases govern lycanthropy (werewolves, werebears, etc.). Only the Immortals inhabit Matera. They live in a city, Pandius, where they can meet and watch over Mystara. Patera, or Myoshima to its inhabitants, is an invisible moon that cannot be seen from Mystara. Patera's inhabitants have a culture similar to that of medieval Japan.\nBlackmoor.\nMystara (like Greyhawk) incorporated the Blackmoor setting by placing it in the world's distant past. Blackmoor evolved from a feudal kingdom into a highly advanced civilization, using more and more powerful \u2013 and destructive \u2013 technology. It ended itself in an apocalyptic explosion so devastating that it changed the climate and geography of the entire planet.\nMystara video games.\nFive video games were set in Mystara, spanning three different genres. ' (TurboGrafx-16, 1992) and ' (Sega Genesis, 1992) are role-playing video games. \"Fantasy Empires\" (PC, 1993) is a strategy game. The plots and development teams of these games are unrelated.\n' (1993) and its sequel ' (1996) are two arcade beat 'em up with minimal role-playing elements. These two games are among the few D&amp;D video games developed by a Japanese company, in this case by Capcom.\nSource material.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" BECMI rules.\nThese rulebooks are designed for the BECMI edition of \"Basic D&amp;D\" by Frank Mentzer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46932", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46932", "title": "Planescape", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional campaign setting\nPlanescape is a campaign setting for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" fantasy role-playing game, designed by Zeb Cook, and published by TSR in 1994.\nDescription.\n\"Planescape\" encompasses numerous planes of existence, creating an entire cosmology called the Great Wheel, which was originally developed in the 1987 \"Manual of the Planes\" by Jeff Grubb. This includes many of the other \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" worlds, linking them via inter-dimensional magical portals.\nCosmology.\nThe \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" cosmology as reflected in \"Planescape\" consists of a number of planes, which can be divided into the following regions:\n\"Planescape\" \"solidified the Great Wheel cosmology that began in 1e and would later be reinstated in 5e as the dominant of three theoretical models\".\nOuter Planes.\nThe Outer Planes consist of: the Abyss, Acheron, Arborea, Arcadia, Baator, Beastlands, Bytopia, Carceri, Elysium, Gehenna, Gray Waste of Hades, Limbo, Mechanus, Mount Celestia, the Outlands, Pandemonium, and Ysgard.\nSigil.\n\"Sigil\", the \"City of Doors\", is located atop the \"Spire\" in the Outlands. It has the shape of a torus, and the city itself is located on the inner surface of the ring. There is no sky, simply an all-pervasive light that waxes and wanes to create day and night. Sigil cannot be entered or exited save via portals. Although this makes it quite safe from any would-be invader, it also makes it a prison of sorts for those not possessing a portal key. Thus, many call Sigil \"The Bird Cage\" or \"The Cage\". Though Sigil is commonly held to be located \"at the center of the planes\" (where it is positioned atop the infinitely tall Spire), some argue that this is impossible since the planes are infinite in all dimensions, and therefore there can never truly be a center to any or all of them. Curiously, from the Outlands, one can see Sigil atop the supposedly infinite Spire.\nFactions.\nWithin Sigil there are philosophy-derived factions. Before the event known as the \"Faction War\", the groups controlled the political climate of Sigil. Each of these factions is based on one particular belief system; one faction's beliefs make them enemies while others make them allies. There are fifteen factions in total.\n\"The Faction War\".\nIn 1998, TSR published \"Faction War\", an adventure that effectively closed the book on Planescape, as it was then ending the product line. The culmination of several adventures leading up to that point, the Faction War brought an end to the factions' control of the city. Instigated by the power-hungry Duke Rowan Darkwood, factol of the Fated, in a bid to dethrone the Lady and rule Sigil himself, the war spread throughout the city before the Lady of Pain, with the aid of a group of adventurers (the players' characters), intervened.\nSects.\nSects are in many ways identical to the Factions, differing in that they are not based in Sigil. Sects are often highly specific to the particular planes they originate from, though historically many of the Factions were once Sects and some Sects were once Factions.\nRules.\nThere are three principles (or heuristics) governing the world of Planescape: the Rule-of-Three, the Unity of Rings, and the Center of the Multiverse.\nRule-of-Three.\nThe first principle, the Rule-of-Three, says simply that things tend to happen in threes. The principles which govern the planes are themselves subject to this rule.\nUnity of Rings.\nThe second principle is the Unity of Rings, and notes that many things on the planes are circular, coming back around to where they started.\nCenter of All.\nThe third principle (fitting neatly into the Rule-of-Three above) is the Center of All, and states that there is a center of everything\u2014or, rather, wherever a person happens to be \"is\" the center of the multiverse... From their own perspective, at least. As most planes are functionally infinite, disproving anyone's centricity would be impossible. In \"Planescape\", this is meant philosophically just as much as it is meant in terms of multiversal geography.\nThe fact that anywhere could be the center of the multiverse in this view also implies that nowhere can be said to be the only absolute true center. This sparks a lot of arguments and violence since some people believe the City of Doors to be the center due to its uncommon number of portals to other planes and position in the Outlands and some factions also claim different centers, each with their own significance.\nPublication history.\nDevelopment.\n\"Planescape\" is an expansion of ideas presented in the \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (First Edition) and the original \"Manual of the Planes\". When \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 2nd edition was published, a decision was made not to include angelic or demonic creatures, and so the cosmology was largely ignored. However, fan demand for a 2nd Edition \"Manual of the Planes\" was strong enough to justify its expansion into a full-fledged campaign setting, and so in 1994 Planescape was released.\nDavid \"Zeb\" Cook developed Planescape when he was assigned to create \"a complete campaign world (not just a place to visit), survivable by low-level characters, as compatible with the old \"Manual of the Planes\" as possible, filled with a feeling of vastness without overwhelming the referee, distinct from all other TSR campaigns, free of the words 'demon' and 'devil' and explainable to Marketing in 25 words or less\". For inspiration, Cook listened to Pere Ubu, Philip Glass and \"Alexander Nevsky\", read \"The Dictionary of the Khazars\", \"Einstein's Dreams\", and \"The Narrow Road to the Deep North\", and for fun at \"Bad Movie Nights\", watched such films as \"Naked Lunch\" and \"Wolf Devil Woman\".\nCook came up with the idea that all of the activity in Sigil would revolve around factions, each of which would be built upon ideas taken to their extreme. He also felt that Sigil was necessary as a crossroads for the planes and a campaign center which could be both an adventure location itself and somewhere to hide out, which characters could quickly get to and from. Cook decided to adapt the \"Manual of the Planes\" because the older material made survival on the planes too difficult or complex, so he ignored anything that made gameplay more complicated, which left the \"descriptions of twisted and strange creations\".\nCook conceived of the look for the setting from images such as \"the gloomy prisons of Piranesi's \"Le Carceri\" etchings, and Brian Froud's illustrations and surrealist art\", and Dana Knutson was assigned to draw whatever Cook wanted to see. According to Cook, \"before any of us knew it, [Knutson] drew the Lady of Pain. I'm very fond of the Lady of Pain; she really locks up the Planescape look. We all liked her so much that she became our logo\".\n2nd edition.\nThe \"Planescape Campaign Setting\" was released, for \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition, in April 1994. The campaign setting was followed by a series of expansions detailing the \"Planes of Chaos\" (by Wolfgang Baur and Lester W. Smith), the \"Planes of Law\" (by Colin McComb and Baur), and the \"Planes of Conflict\" (by McComb and Dale Donovan). From 1994 to 1998, \"\"Planescape\" was a major setting\" for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nThe setting also had a small number of novels.\nLater editions.\nUpon the release of 3rd Edition, Planescape, along with most other settings, were discontinued, although fan sites such as planewalker.com were allowed to continue to use the material and update it to the new edition. The 3rd Edition \"Manual of the Planes\" (2001), the 3.5 Edition \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (2003), and the \"Planar Handbook\" (2004) also used the general layout of the planes and some of the details from the setting, including Sigil, but these are not part of the Planescape line.\nSigil is described in the 4th edition \"Manual of the Planes\" (2008) and expanded upon in \"Dungeon Master's Guide 2\" (2009). Shannon Appelcline, author of \"Designers &amp; Dragons\", commented that while Sigil \"had been largely ignored during the 3e era\", it \"was faring better in 4e, despite the large-scale restructuring of D&amp;D's cosmology\" due to small inclusions in the \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (2008) and \"Manual of the Planes\".\nAppelcline highlighted that it was the 4th Edition \"Dungeon Master's Guide 2\" which \"saw the return of the fan-favorite setting of Sigil\" which \"was laid out as a full paragon-level setting. There's not much new here for old-time fans of \"Planescape\", but there was one \"big\" change as a result of \"Faction War\" (1998). The factions that caused much of the conflict in \"Planescape\" are now gone. [...] The \"Dungeon Master's Guide 2\" also contains 'A Conspiracy of Doors', the first Sigil adventure to see print in many years\".\nThe 5th Edition \"Player's Handbook\" (2014) also contains a section explaining the planes and briefly mentions Sigil. There is also some information on Sigil in the 5th Edition \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (2014). In July 2022, \"Unearthed Arcana: Wonders of the Multiverse\" was released as part of the Unearthed Arcana public playtest series for the 5th Edition. Both \"Polygon\" and \"ComicBook.com\" highlighted that the new character race \u2013 the Glitchling \u2013 and other references to the Planescape setting might indicate a reboot of the setting for 5th Edition. Charlie Hall, for \"Polygon\", commented that \"this wouldn't be the first time that Wizards used playtest materials to tease a reboot of a classic setting\".\nChristian Hoffer, for \"ComicBook.com\", wrote that \"while described as a collection of material from around the Multiverse, many \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" fans noticed that it contained multiple references to Mechanus, Sigil, the Outlands, and other areas explored in the popular Planescape setting. [...] Based on the last handful of public playtests, it appears that \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is gearing up for some sort of multiversal book in the near future. Whether this is a true Planescape re-launch or just a book that uses the D&amp;D cosmology remains to be seen\".\nA three-volume box set titled \"Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse\" was released in October 2023 for 5th Edition.\nReception.\n\"Pyramid magazine\" reviewer Scott Haring said \"Planescape\" is \"the finest game world ever produced for \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"\". Haring described the writing as \"wonderful\", also saying that it \"has got one of the most distinctive graphic looks I've seen in any game product\" and that the \"unusual drawings remind [him] a little of Dr. Seuss\".\nTrenton Webb of British RPG magazine \"Arcane\" called Planescape \"the premier \"AD&amp;D\" world\", noting its hallmark as \"a bizarre juxtaposition of legend and nightmare\". Game designer Rick Swan said that the original \"Manual of the Planes\" had in a sense been \"reincarnated as the Planescape setting ... TSR's most ambitious campaign world to date. Abandoning the straightforward but dry approach of the \"Manual\", the Planescape set reads less like a textbook and more like a story. Characters take precedence over game systems, high adventure supplants the physics lessons\".\nCurtis D. Carbonell, in the book \"Dread Trident: Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Modern Fantastic\", wrote: \"Planescape's sophistication marked it as D&amp;D's answer to its own simplistic medieval-European-inspired fantasy settings, [...]. Planescape channeled the Weird before China Mi\u00e9ville brought the 'new weird' genre into focus [...]. With Planescape, we have an attempt by an AD&amp;D game setting to add layers of intellectual complexity to a game often driven by much more simplistic mechanism. The greatest commerce isn't loot, treasure, magic items, etc.; it is belief so strong it can shape reality\".\nIn a review of \"The Great Modron March\", \"Backstab\" magazine contributor Philippe Tessier called the presentation of Planescape products superb in general.\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"If there is a problem with \"Planescape\", it would be its vast strangeness. There's a lot to explain and not nearly enough space to fit it all in.\" However, Horvath lauded the artwork, saying, \"The art picks up where the words leave off. \"Planescape\" is the apex of the aesthetic-driven, high-concept \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" setting. Dana Knutson developed all of the concept artwork for the setting, which Robh Ruppel turned into covers, and Tony DiTerlizzi used to fill out the interiors.\" Horvath concluded, \"\"Planescape\" often feels built for something besides conflict \u2014 the art, the philosophy, and the infinite reaches encourage exploration in a way few other \"D&amp;D\" settings do: Characters are encouraged to just walk off into the multiverse until they find something to wonder at.\"\nAwards.\nThe \"Planescape Campaign Setting\" boxed set won the 1994 Origins Award for \"Best Graphic Presentation of a Roleplaying Game, Adventure, or Supplement\".\nOfficial products.\nVideo game.\nThe setting was featured in the computer game \"\", which portrayed the \"Planescape\" world (specifically Sigil, the Outlands, Baator, Carceri, and the Negative Energy Plane). It is now a cult game and was out of print until its DVD re-release as a budget title in 2009. It was released as a download on GOG.com in 2010 and soon became the \"second most wanted game\" on the site. An enhanced edition by Beamdog was released on April 11, 2017.\nMarketed as a spiritual successor to \"Planescape: Torment\", \"\" was released in February 2017. The game takes inspiration from the previous game but is not itself based in the Planescape setting.\nCollectible card game.\nTSR published a collectible card game based on the \"Planescape\" setting called \"Blood Wars\". The game featured major locations, personalities, and features of the Planescape setting and also introduced new creatures that were added to the role playing game setting as part of subsequent products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46933", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46933", "title": "Spelljammer", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional campaign setting\nSpelljammer is a campaign setting originally published for the \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (2nd edition) role-playing game, which features a fantastic (as opposed to scientific) outer space environment. Subsequent editions have included \"Spelljammer\" content; a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 5th edition setting update was released on August 16, 2022.\n\"Spelljammer\" introduced into the \"AD&amp;D\" universe a comprehensive system of fantasy astrophysics, including the Ptolemaic concept of crystal celestial spheres. Crystal spheres may contain multiple worlds and are navigable using ships equipped with \"spelljamming helms\". Ships powered by spelljamming helms are capable of flying into not only the sky but into space. With their own fields of gravity and atmosphere, the ships have open decks and tend not to resemble the spaceships of science fiction, but instead look more like galleons, animals, birds, fish or even more wildly fantastic shapes.\nThe \"Spelljammer\" setting is designed to allow the usual sword and sorcery adventures of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" to take place within the framework of outer space tropes. Flying ships travel through the vast expanses of interplanetary space, visiting moons and planets and other stellar objects.\nLike the Planescape setting, \"Spelljammer\" unifies most of the other AD&amp;D settings and provides a canonical method for allowing characters from one setting (such as Dragonlance) to travel to another (such as the Forgotten Realms). However, unlike Planescape, it keeps all of the action on the Prime Material Plane and uses the crystal spheres, and the \"phlogiston\" between them, to form natural barriers between otherwise incompatible settings. Though the cosmology is derived largely from the Ptolemaic system of astronomy, many of the ideas owe much to the works of Jules Verne and his contemporaries, and to related games and fiction with a steampunk or planetary romance flavor. A strong Age of Sail flavor is also present.\nPublication history.\nShannon Appelcline, in the book \"Designers &amp; Dragons\" (2011), highlighted that in 1989 Spelljammer was the first of a host of new campaign settings published by TSR. It was created by Jeff Grubb and \"introduced a universe of magical starships traversing the 'crystal spheres' that contained all the earthbound AD&amp;D campaign worlds. It suggested a method to connect together all of TSR's settings and at the same time introduced fun new Jules Verne-esque technology that had never before been seen in the game. It was innovative and popular\". Appelcline commented that Spelljammer \"offered a way to connect every single \"D&amp;D\" fantasy world, was thus one of the first true crossovers\" in role-playing games.\n\"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (2nd edition).\nThe \"\" space fantasy boxed set was released in 1989. Several of TSR's other campaign worlds had their own sections in the \"Spelljammer Boxed Set\" - \"Realmspace\" for the Forgotten Realms, \"Krynnspace\" for Dragonlance, and \"Greyspace\" for Greyhawk. Along with the new sphere - \"Clusterspace\" - they were known as the \"Big Three and Astromundi\". Dark Sun, Ravenloft and Mystara weren't included, as the first two did not fit with the setting and the Mystara only used the D&amp;D rules, not the AD&amp;D rules.\nThe product line would be expanded with a number of boxed sets and accessories such as \"Lost Ships\" (1990), \"Realmspace\" (1991) and \"The Astromundi Cluster\" (1993). Appelcline commented that \"The Astromundi Cluster\" acted as \"a soft reboot of the \"Spelljammer\" line\" and was more of setting focused sourcebook than previous Spelljammer books which acted more \"as a conduit between all of the other AD&amp;D settings\". The first adventure module, titled \"Wildspace\", was released in 1990; four connected adventure modules followed it. A longer campaign module, \"Heart of the Enemy\", was then published in 1992 followed by an adventure anthology, \"Space Lairs\", in 1993.\nThe monsters of \"Spelljammer\" were detailed in two installments of the \"Monstrous Compendium\" series, \"Spelljammer Appendix\" in 1990 and \"Spelljammer Appendix II\" in 1991.\nIn 1993, \"Space Lairs\" and \"The Astromundi Cluster\" were the final products of the line. Appelcline commented on the end of the setting in the \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" era: \"TSR's fifth second-edition campaign world, Planescape (1993), was released to replace Spelljammer, which had just then ended. TSR wanted a new world-spanning setting and Slade Henson came up with the answer by suggesting a new setting built on Jeff Grubb's first-edition \"Manual of the Planes\" (1987). [...] Unlike Spelljammer this new setting had a strong geographical centre, the City of Sigil, resolving a flaw in the Spelljammer setting that denied players a good home base\".\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (3rd edition).\nThe \"Spelljammer\" line of products was discontinued by TSR before they were acquired by Wizards of the Coast in 1997.\nIn May 2002, Paizo published an article for Spelljammer in \"Dungeon\" #92 titled \"Spelljammer: Shadow of the Spider Moon\". Using the D20 system, it provided new rules for firearms and spelljamming, as well as skills, feats and prestige classes. Spelljammer monsters such as neogi and giff were not used. Instead, it featured creatures from the \"Monster Manual\" such as drow, formians and yuan-ti.\nIn May 2005, Wizards of the Coast updated the neogi to the 3.5 edition rules in the supplement \"Lords of Madness\" (2005). The book included a chapter with a sample map of a crashed Spelljamming vessel, cultural habits of the neogi, and the monster's stat blocks.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (4th edition).\nA \"Spelljammer\" homage appears in the 4th edition \"Manual of the Planes\"; the sourcebook highlights Spelljammer ships as one method of traveling between planes and provides information for in-game use of Spelljammer vessels.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (5th edition).\n\"Spelljammer\" content also appears in the 5th Edition adventure module \"\" (2018). In the adventure, a spelljamming ship and its illithid captain appear stranded in level 19 of the titular dungeon. Then in October 2021, Wizards released the PDF \"Travelers of the Multiverse\" which is part of the \"Unearthed Arcana\" public playtest series. Of the six player races it included, four races (autognome, giff, hadozee, and plasmoid) are closely associated with the \"Spelljammer\" setting. Both \"Polygon\" and \"Bleeding Cool\" highlighted that this playtest could indicate a future \"Spelljammer\" reboot.\nWizards of the Coast released a new boxed set titled \"\" on August 16, 2022; this release updates the \"Spelljammer\" setting for the 5th Edition. The box set includes a Dungeon Master's screen, a double-sided poster map and three 64-page hardcover books: \"Astral Adventurer's Guide\" (a Dungeon Master guide), \"Boo's Astral Menagerie\" (a bestiary), and \"Light of Xaryxis\" (an adventure module). A special edition, with cover art by Hydro74, was also released. A prequel adventure module, titled \"Spelljammer Academy\", was released for free on the Wizards of the Coast website and on D&amp;D Beyond in July of the same year.\n\"Monstrous Compendium Vol 1: Spelljammer Creatures\" introduced ten creatures from the \"Spelljammer\" setting to the 5th Edition in April 2022.\nFictional setting.\nSpelljamming helms.\n\"Spelljamming helms\" are the central setting concept which allow interplanetary and interstellar space travel for vessels which would otherwise not be spaceworthy, in the form of a helm. Any spellcaster may sit on a spelljammer helm to move the ship. The mysterious race known as the Arcane is the sole manufacturer and distributor of spelljamming helms. Within the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" universe, they are a method of converting magical energy into motive power.\nGravity and air.\nAll bodies of a sufficiently large size have gravity. This gravity usually (but not always) exerts a force equal to the standard gravitational attraction on the surface of an Earth-sized planetary body. Gravity in the \"Spelljammer\" universe is also an exceptionally convenient force, and almost always works such that \"down\" orients itself in a manner most humanoids would find sensible.\nAll bodies of any size carry with them an envelope of air whenever they leave the surface of a planet or other stellar object. Unlike real-world astrophysics, this air envelope is not dispersed by the vacuum of space. These bubbles of air provide breathable atmosphere for varying lengths of time, but 3 months is considered \"standard\".\nCrystal spheres.\nA crystal sphere (also known as a crystal shell) is a gigantic spherical shell which contains an entire planetary system. Each sphere varies in size but typically they are twice the diameter of the orbit of the planet that is farthest from the sun or planet at the center of the sphere (the system's primary).\nThe surface of the sphere is called the \"sphere wall\" and separates the void of \"wildspace\" (within the sphere) from the \"phlogiston\" (that surrounds and flows outside the sphere). The sphere wall has no gravity and appears to be impossible to damage by any normal or magical means. Openings in the sphere wall called \"portals\" allow spelljamming ships or wildspace creatures to pass through and enter or exit from a crystal sphere. Portals can spontaneously open and close anywhere on the sphere wall. Magical spells (or magical items that reproduce their effects) can allow a portal to be located. Other magic can open a new portal or collapse an existing one. Ships or creatures passing through a portal when it closes may be cut in two.\nUnlike the Ptolemaic system, the crystal spheres are not nested within each other.\nWildspace.\nWildspace is similar to the outer space of science fiction, with planets, asteroids and stars, but with different physics. Gravity is either none or the same as that of Earth, and is directed towards the center of planet-sized bodies; on large objects in space like spacecraft and enormous creatures gravity is directed towards a flat plane running through the object's long axis, allowing characters to stand on the decks of ships.\nThe Phlogiston.\nThe phlogiston is essentially a big ocean of a unique element that is neither air, fire, water, or earth. The phlogiston (also known as \"the Flow\") is a bright, extremely combustible gas-like medium that exists between the Crystal Spheres. A signature property of the substance is that it does not exist within the boundaries of a crystal sphere, to the degree that it cannot be brought into a crystal sphere by any known means up to and including the direct will of deities. Every crystal sphere floats in the phlogiston, very slowly bobbing up and down over time. Travel between Crystal Spheres is facilitated by the formation of \"Flow rivers\" \u2014 sections of the phlogiston which have a current and greatly reduce travel time. Travel through the \"slow flow\" (i.e. off the Flow rivers) is possible, but very dangerous.\nThe \"Spelljammer\".\nThe \"Spelljammer\" is a legendary ship which looks like a gigantic manta ray, and houses an entire city on its back. All spacefarers (people who live in wildspace) have heard of the \"Spelljammer\" but very few have ever seen it themselves. It is this ship that gives its name to \"spelljamming\", \"spelljamming helms\" and anything else connected with spelljamming. The ship has been reported to have been seen in countless spheres for as long as records go back. Even some groundlings (people who live on planets that have very little or no commerce with spelljamming communities) have legends about it. There are hundreds of conflicting legends about this ship, and a mythology has developed about the ship that is similar to the legends surrounding \"The Flying Dutchman\".\nAs a living thing (although it does not consume any matter, it does absorb heat and light through its ventral (or under) side and uses them to produce air and food for its inhabitants), the \"Spelljammer\" has a complex life cycle and means of procreation. Normally the ship has no captain and wanders the cosmos seemingly aimlessly. When the \"Spelljammer\" has a captain, obtained through another complex process, it will create Smalljammers (miniature versions of the \"Spelljammer\") that go forth as its spawn. Apparently there can only be one Spelljammer at any one time. One Smalljammer will mature into a full \"Spelljammer\" ship if its predecessor is ever destroyed.\nRaces.\nAlien races inhabiting the Spelljammer universe included humans, dwarves, xenophobic beholders, rapacious neogi, militant giff (humanoid hippopotami), centaurlike dracons, hubristic elf armadas, spacefaring orcs called \"scro\", mysterious arcane, the Thri-kreen insectoids, and bumbling tinker gnomes. Illithids were another major race, but were presented as more mercantile and less overtly evil than in other D&amp;D settings. The \"Monstrous Compendium\" series added many more minor races. The simian Hadozee were also introduced into the setting, and later incorporated into the 3.5 rules in the supplemental book \"Stormwrack\".\nOfficial products.\nSpelljammer has acted as the official campaign setting for multiple \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" roleplaying adventure modules, sourcebooks and accessories.\nIn other media.\nComics.\nSixteen comics set in the \"Spelljammer\" universe were published by DC Comics between September 1990 and November 1991 with the creative team of Barbara Kesel as writer, and Michael Collins, Dan Panosian, and other contributors. The first appearance was in TSR Worlds Annual #1, where the Jammers were introduced in a third of the 72-page book. Two weeks later, their own title went on sale, but both comics have a shelf date of September, 1990. \"Spelljammer\" comics also uses Jasmine, a winged human character originally introduced from Forgotten Realms comics, as one of the lead characters.\nMusic.\nWizards of the Coast released a soundtrack, titled \"\", for \"Spelljammer: Adventures in Space\" digitally on August 16, 2022; each song on the soundtrack corresponds with one of the chapters in the adventure module \"Light of Xaryxis\".\nNovels.\nSix novels set in the \"Spelljammer\" universe were published by TSR, before TSR was incorporated into Wizards of the Coast. The novels were interconnected and formed \"The Cloakmaster Cycle\". The novels tell the story of Teldin Moore, a 'groundling' farmer on Krynn who has a powerful and apparently cursed magical cloak that was given to him. He then ends up on a quest, which takes him first into wildspace and then away from his home sphere to distant crystal spheres. The series showcases the wonders and perils of the Spelljammer universe. The novels are now out of print.\nComputer games.\nThe only \"Spelljammer\" computer game ever produced was \"\", published by SSI in 1992.\nIn 2002 a team of freelance game modification developers created \"The Arcane Space Tileset\" for \"Neverwinter Nights\". This tileset included Spelljamming ships, space and atmospheric terrains, along with monsters and NPCs, all set within the Spelljammer Campaign setting.\nWeb series.\n\"Legends of the Multiverse\" is an official actual play streaming series broadcast on the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" channels which premiered on April 27, 2022 and is set in the Spelljammer campaign setting. It stars Deborah Ann Woll, B. Dave Walters, Gina Darling, Meagan Kenreck, and Todd Kenreck. It will also feature guest stars such as Brennan Lee Mulligan, Aabria Iyengar, Ginny Di, Anna Prosser, Deejay Knight, Emme Montgomery, Travis McElroy, SungWon Cho, and Jim Zub.\nReception.\nIn the January 1990 edition of \"Games International\" (issue #12), James Wallis was not a fan of the initial release, \"\", finding inconsistencies in the combat rules, saying that the cumulative effect of these inconsistencies is to make space combat unplayable. He did find the background \"imaginative and consistent\", but very little of it. Although he admired the production values of the components, he found the book disorganized to the point of \"disarray and confusion\". He concluded by giving the game a poor rating of only 2 out of 5, saying that \"\"Spelljammer\" may score well physically but fails mentally [...] Scavenging \"AD&amp;D\" players who enjoy stripping tasty ideas from the carcasses of dying games may find it of interest, but I cannot recommend it to anyone else\".\nAlexander Sowa, for \"CBR\" in October 2021, commented that Spelljammer should be one of the classic settings Wizards of the Coast brings back for the 5th Edition. Sowa wrote that \"players have been asking for Spelljammer to be introduced to \"5e\" since the release of the first setting sourcebook. Wizards tossed them a bone with the Dream of The Blue Veil spell added in \"Tasha's Cauldron of Everything\", but it's not a replacement for the niche Spelljammer previously filled. It's not just a way to travel between different campaign settings; it's a simultaneous fulfillment of sci-fi and fantasy dreams of exploration, venturing deep into unknown depths and contending with the strange and otherworldly\".\nSpelljammer was #3 on \"The Gamer\"'s 2022 \"The 8 Best Dungeons &amp; Dragons Settings Ever\" list \u2014 the article states that \"Spelljammer is one of the most unique settings on this list, with endless possibilities brought up in its planet-hopping realms. The Spelljammer setting can almost best be surmised as 'pirates meets sci-fi fantasy' with its blend of magical worlds and galaxy-traversing galleons\". In a separate article for \"The Gamer\", in February 2022, Paul DiSalvo commented that \"while D&amp;D's second edition was home to a wide range of Spelljammer books including several adventure modules, the setting has since faded into obscurity, with it not being prominently featured within the game's third, fourth, and fifth editions\".\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath called the game \"gloriously bewildering.\" Horvath also noted the new edition being launched for the 5th edition of \"D&amp;D\", commenting \"I can't imagine something so weird as the original coming out today \u2014 the new version already seems different, a little less odd, a little more formulaic.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46934", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46934", "title": "Drow", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons fictional creature\nIn the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" fantasy roleplaying game, drow ( or ) or dark elves are a dark-skinned and white-haired subrace of elves connected to the subterranean Underdark. The drow have traditionally been portrayed as generally evil and connected to the evil spider goddess Lolth. However, subsequent editions of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" have moved away from this portrayal and preassigned alignment, while later publications have explored drow societies unconnected to Lolth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCreative origins.\nThe word \"drow\" originates from the Orcadian and Shetland dialects of Scots, an alternative form of \"trow\", which is a cognate with \"troll\". The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" gives no entry for \"drow\", but two of the citations under \"trow\" name it as an alternative form of the word. Trow/drow was used to refer to a wide variety of evil sprites. Everything about the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" drow was invented by \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" co-creator Gary Gygax except for the basic concept of \"dark elves\". However, in the Prose Edda, Snorri Sturluson wrote about the black elves: \"... the dark elves however live down below the ground. ... [and] are blacker than pitch.\"\nGygax stated that \"Drow are mentioned in Keightley's \"The Fairy Mythology\", as I recall (it might have been \"The Secret Commonwealth\"\u2014neither book is before me, and it is not all that important anyway), and as Dark Elves of evil nature, they served as an ideal basis for the creation of a unique new mythos designed especially for the \"AD&amp;D\" game.\" Gygax later stated that he took the term from a listing in the \"Funk &amp; Wagnall's Unexpurgated Dictionary\", and no other source at all. \"I wanted a most unusual race as the main power in the Underdark, so used the reference to 'dark elves' from the dictionary to create the Drow.\" There seems to be no work with this title. However, the following entry can be found in abridged editions of Funk &amp; Wagnall's \"Standard Dictionary of the English Language\", such as \"The Desk Standard Dictionary of the English Language\": \"[Scot.] In folk-lore, one of a race of underground elves represented as skillful workers in metal. Compare TROLL. [Variant of TROLL.] trow\".\nPublication history.\n\"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 1st edition.\nThe drow were first mentioned in the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game in the 1st Edition 1977 \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" \"Monster Manual\" under the \"Elf\" entry, where it is stated that \"The 'Black Elves,' or drow, are only legend.\" No statistics are given for the drow in this book, apart from the statistics for normal elves. The drow are described as purportedly dwelling deep beneath the surface world, in strange subterranean realms. They are said to be evil, \"as dark as faeries are bright\", and pictured in tales as poor fighters but strong magic-users. From 1978 to 1980, the \"Greyhawk\" adventure module series explored the drow in depth, including statblocks for drow and an introduction to their Underdark society.\nThe first hardcover \"D&amp;D\" rulebook featuring statistical information on the drow was the original \"Fiend Folio\" (1981). Gygax wrote this entry, listed under \"Elf, Drow\", according to the book's credits section. The text is a slightly abridged version of the text originally found in modules G3 and D3. Likewise, Lolth's description from module D3 is reprinted in the \"Fiend Folio\" under the \"Demon\" heading.\nThe drow were first presented as a player character race in \"Unearthed Arcana\" (1985), also written by Gygax. Several elven sub-races are described in the book, including gray elves, wood elves, wild elves, and valley elves; the dark elves are described as the most divergent sub-race, and dark elf player characters are considered outcasts from their homeland, either by choice, differing from the standard chaotic evil alignment of the race, or having lost in some family-wide power struggle.\n\"Greyhawk\" module storyline.\nIt is hinted in G1 \"Steading of the Hill Giant Chief\" (1978) that there is a \"secret force, some motivational power behind this unusual banding of different races of giants.\" G2 \"The Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl\" (1978) mentions this guiding force again in its introduction. The third module in the series, G3 \"Hall of the Fire Giant King\" (1978) again mentions the party's need to find out whatever is behind the giants' alliance, and this time mentions the drow specifically by name. In the adventure, the player characters can discover the first hint of drow involvement in the fire giant king's council room, on a scroll which promises \"powerful help from the Drow\", signed by Eclavdra. Actual drow can be encountered starting on level #2 of the king's hall, beginning with a group of drow priests, and then other drow later.\nHaving discovered that the drow instigated the alliance between the races of giants and its warfare against mankind, in \"D1 Descent into the Depths of the Earth\" (1978) the party follows the fleeing drow into the tunnels leading northwest and deep into the earth, to eliminate the threat they pose. Examining a golden spider pin found on one of the drow priestesses, the party can discover runes in the drow language reading \"Lolth, Death Queen Mother\". The party continues to pursue the drow in D2 \"Shrine of the Kuo-Toa\" (1978). In \"D3 Vault of the Drow\" (1978), the adventurers eventually make it to Erelhei-Cinlu, the vast subterranean city of the drow, which is thoroughly described in the module. An extensive overview of the drow power structure is given for the purpose of creating any number of mini-campaigns or adventures taking place inside the drow capital. The characters travel on to the Egg of Lolth, where they must enter the dungeon level and fight the demoness herself. The statistics and information for drow are reprinted from \"Hall of the Fire Giant King\" in the back of this module, along with statistics for Lolth herself.\nThe story concludes in module \"Q1 Queen of the Demonweb Pits\" (1980). The astral gate from \"D3\" leads to the Abyssal realm of Lolth, goddess of the drow elves and Demon Queen of Spiders; Lolth is the architect of the sinister plot described in the two previous series of modules. At the very end of the module, the players face a final confrontation with Lolth, an exceptionally difficult challenge. The G1-G3 modules were later published together in 1981 as a single combined module as \"G1-2-3 Against the Giants\", and the entire series of modules in which the drow originally appeared were later published together in \"Queen of the Spiders\" (1986).\nNovels.\nGary Gygax's 1986 novel for TSR's \"Greyhawk Adventures\" series, \"Artifact of Evil\", was the first novel to feature the drow prominently. Gygax's subsequent \"Gord the Rogue\" novels, published by New Infinities, Inc., continued the story and the drow's involvement, in the novels \"Sea of Death\" (1987), \"Come Endless Darkness\" (1988), and \"Dance of Demons\" (1988).\nR. A. Salvatore's 1988\u20131990 \"The Icewind Dale Trilogy\" featured the unlikely hero Drizzt Do'Urden as one of the protagonists, and the 1990\u20131991 followup \"The Dark Elf Trilogy\" focused on Drizzt and the drow of the Forgotten Realms setting. Salvatore continued the story of Drizzt and the drow in his subsequent series \"Legacy of the Drow\" (1992\u20131996), \"Paths of Darkness\" (1998\u20132001), and \"The Hunter's Blades Trilogy\" (2002\u20132004). Other works continuing the story of the drow in the Forgotten Realms include Elaine Cunningham's \"Starlight and Shadows\" series (1995\u20131996, 2003), the \"War of the Spider Queen\" series (2002\u20132005, various authors), and Lisa Smedman's \"The Lady Penitent\" series (2007\u20132008).\nKeith Baker's \"The Dreaming Dark\" trilogy (2005\u20132006) featured the story of the drow in Baker's world of Eberron.\n\"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons 2nd edition\".\nThe drow appear first for this edition in the \"Monstrous Compendium Volume Two\" (1989), which expands the information on drow society. Also included in the entry for drow is a description and statistics for the drider. This entry is reprinted with some minor modifications in the \"Monstrous Manual\" (1993). The 1992 boxed set \"Menzoberranzan\" details the largest city of the drow and offers a detailed description of drow socity.\nDrow society, religion, history, magic, craftwork, and language for the Forgotten Realms campaign setting is detailed significantly in \"The Drow of the Underdark\" (1991), by Ed Greenwood. Greenwood appears in the book's introduction as a narrator, explaining how he came across the information in the book: a discussion with Elminster, and chance encounter with a former apprentice of Elminster\u2014the drow lady, Susprina Arkhenneld\u2014as the two explain the drow of the world to the narrator.\nThe drow are presented as a player character race for 2nd edition in \"The Complete Book of Elves\" (1992). Drow deities Lolth, Kiaransalee, Vhaeraun, and Zinzerena are described in \"Monster Mythology\" (1992). The drow are later presented as a playable character race again in ' (1995).\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 3rd edition.\nThe drow appears in the \"Monster Manual\" for this edition (2000). The drow of the Forgotten Realms setting appear in the hardcover \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\" (2001), and in \"Races of Faer\u00fbn\" (2003). The drow also appears in the revised \"Monster Manual\" for the 3.5 edition (2003).\nThe \"Underdark\" hardcover for the Forgotten Realms setting (2003) features the drow yet again as a player character race, as does the \"Player's Guide to Faer\u00fbn\" (2004). \"Lost Empires of Faer\u00fbn\" describes the drow werebat (2005). The drow paragon 3-level prestige class appears in \"Unearthed Arcana\" (2004).\nIn 2004, the new Eberron campaign setting introduced drow in a world where Lolth doesn't exist; various drow societies were then explored in more detail in \"Secrets of Xen'drik\" (2006). Additionally, the umbragen for the setting appeared as a player character race in \"Dragon\" #330 (April 2005).\nThe arcane guard drow, the dark sniper drow, the drow priestess, the Lolth's sting, and the Lolth-touched drow ranger appear in \"Monster Manual IV\" (2006). The deepwyrm drow is presented as a player character race in \"Dragon Magic\" (2006).\nThe drow are presented as a player character race for the 3.5 edition in \"Expedition to the Demonweb Pits\" (2007) and \"Drow of the Underdark\" (2007). \"Drow of the Underdark\" also features the arcane guard, the drow assassin, the house captain, the house wizard, the drow inquisitor, the favored consort, the drow priestess, the drow slaver, the spider sentinel, the albino drow (szarkai), the szarkai fighters, the szarkai druids, and the drow warrior, along with numerous prestige classes and other monsters related to drow.\nOpen gaming.\nThe release of the Open Game License and the System Reference Document's inclusion of the drow race also led to a number of books related to drow being published by companies not affiliated with Wizards of the Coast, such as \"The Quintessential Drow\", \"The Complete Guide to Drow\", \"Encyclopaedia Arcane: Drow Magic,\" and \"Rise of the Drow\".\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th edition.\nThe drow appear in the \"Monster Manual\" for this edition (2008), including the drow warrior, the drow arachnomancer, the drow blademaster, and the drow priest. The drow appear as a playable race in the \"Forgotten Realms Player's Guide\" (2008) and the \"Essentials\" rulebook \"Heroes of the Forgotten Kingdoms\" (2010).\nThe drow feature in a pre-written playable module called \"Demon Queen's Enclave\" (2008) which takes adventurers from levels 14 through 17 into the Underdark to battle the forces of Orcus and possibly ally with members of the treacherous dark elves and/or their minions. The drow of Xen'drik are also outlined in the 4E \"Eberron Campaign Guide\" (2009).\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 5th edition.\nThe drow appear as a playable elf subrace in the \"Player's Handbook\" (2014) for this edition. They also appear in the \"Monster Manual\" (2014) for this edition. In the adventure module \"Out of the Abyss\" (2015), the players are captured by the drow at the beginning of the adventure. The floodgate to the Abyss is opened by Gromph Baenre, the Archmage of Menzoberranzan, when he tries to harnesses a specific form of power in the Underdark; designer Chris Perkins commented that Gromph is \"arguably the most powerful male drow spellcaster in the Forgotten Realms, yet he feels subjugated and betrayed by Lolth and her priestesses\". Perkins also said the drow are \"iconic D&amp;D villains\" with a matriarchal society that \"is part of their core identity\", adding they are \"not looking to fundamentally change that\" so there should not be expectations for \"drow males to supplant their female superiors any time soon\". The drow are also discussed in the \"Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide\" (2015) and in the \"Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes\" (2018) supplements.\nThe drow of Xen'drik are again outlined in \"\" (2019). The new Exandria campaign setting added a non-Lolth based society of drow which was introduced in the \"Explorer's Guide to Wildemount\" (2020). Per Wizards of the Coast, the drow of these settings are presented as more \"morally and culturally complex\". On June 26, 2020, Netflix and Hulu removed the \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" episode of the TV series \"Community\" from their platforms due to scenes with Chang playing a dark elf by wearing elf ears and makeup resembling blackface. A statement from Sony Pictures Television said that the studio supported the decision to remove the episode.\nChristian Hoffer, for \"ComicBook.com\", highlighted a May 2021 update on Drizzt Do'Urden by Wizards of the Coast and wrote, \"it also notes one major change to D&amp;D canon that relates to the drow culture that Drizzt ultimately abandoned. The website points out that while Drizzt grew up in a 'cult of Lolth' [...], there are two other entire cultures of drow who have no ties to Lolth whatsoever. [...] The reveal of the Lorendrow and Aevendrow seem to suggest that \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is officially moving past some long-held canon about the drow\". Tika Viteri, for \"Book Riot\", commented that Salvatore's \"Starlight Enclave\" (2021) \"contains a singular shift in the narrative of the story of the drow; Salvatore reveals that drow are not, in fact, the only dark-skinned elves in the Forgotten Realms\". In December 2021, Wizards of the Coast released an errata for the \"Player's Handbook\" (2014) which updated the lore description of drow to emphasize their environmental connection to the Underdark and decouple them for Lolth. Designer Jeremy Crawford explained that the errata clarifies a description which \"confused the culture of Menzoberranzan [...] with drow themselves\" and that \"drow are united by an ancestral connection to the Underdark, not by worship of Lolth\u2013a god some of them have never heard of\".\n\"2024 revision\".\nThe backward compatible \"Player's Handbook\" (2024), as part of the 2024 revision to the 5th Edition ruleset, updates preexisting player options while introducing new content to the game; player races are now described as player species. Drow appear as an Elven Lineage option in this sourcebook. \"Screen Rant\" highlighted that mechanically drow are \"largely unchanged, save for better spell selection and the removal of sunlight sensitivity\". \"Polygon\" commented that the changes to the drow reflect a shift in design philosophy by Wizards of the Coast, noting that they were often \"portrayed in the past as evil\". \"Polygon\" highlighted that the 2024 sourcebook describes elves as impacted by their \"environment in ways that imbue them with magic and change their appearance\" with the drow \"being marked by the Underdark without necessarily being aligned with the evil deity Lolth\"; this sourcebook \"also draws attention to the rainforest-dwelling drow found in the Eberron campaign setting\".\nReception.\nMade famous by R. A. Salvatore's Drizzt novels, these dark elves from the game influenced subsequent works of fantasy. Drow have a gender-based caste system that one author claims says \"a great deal about attitudes towards gender roles in the real world\".\nThe drow originally created by Gary Gygax are now \"essentially the drow of fantasy fiction today\", according to Ed Greenwood, who believes them to be \"arguably Gary Gygax's greatest, most influential fantasy creation\" after the D&amp;D game itself. Designer James Jacobs considers the drow to be a rare example of a D&amp;D-invented monster becoming mainstream, with even non-gamers recognizing them. Rob Bricken, for \"Io9\", named the drow as the eighth most memorable \"D&amp;D\" monster. In the 1990s, products which featured drow produced higher sales. While Paizo Publishing was printing \"Dragon\" and \"Dungeon\", covers featuring drow often sold better than other issues in the same year. Academic Steven Holmes noted that drow \"remain highly visible in successful media projects\".\nHolmes highlighted that Gygax created drow as \"perfect villains\u2014endpoints on a divide of good and evil\".129 However, Holmes thought R. A. Salvatore's depiction was more complicated than Gygax's and Salvatore's work \"in many ways\" ended up as the definitive portrayal of the drow.128 In the \"Io9\" series revisiting older \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" novels, in his review of \"Homeland\" by Salvatore, Bricken says that \"its greatest strength is how it explores drow society, which up to that point was best summarized as 'very evil.' Prior to Drizzt, in the vein of orcs, trolls, and primary-colored dragons, the Drow were essentially categorized as more monsters for players to battle and defeat. Their skin was obsidian black, earning them the alternate name of dark elves, and marking them as the evil counterpart to the good and heroic lighter-skinned elves of the surface.\"\nAs player characters.\nThe drow, especially when used as player characters, are surrounded by much controversy, especially after the release of Salvatore's novel, \"The Crystal Shard\". Game designer James Jacobs has said that the drow player characters often spark arguments, with some players refusing to play in a campaign that allows drow PCs. Jacobs says that \"even the name\" is controversial, having at least two pronunciations. Rob Bricken, for \"Kotaku\", wrote that there \"has been one good Drow in the history of D&amp;D, and that's Drizzt Do'Urden, who is one of the Mary Sue-iest characters in all of fiction\u2014and he's been the star of countless novels and is the only reason any D&amp;D player has even been interested in the Drow, of which now there is a terrifying amount of material\".\nMatthew Beilman, for \"CBR\", highlighted multiple reasons to play as a drow character: You will love playing a drow if you enjoy making others uncomfortable. In most \"D&amp;D\" settings, the drow civilization is evil. [...] This makes them excellent campaign villains but also gives them great potential as antiheroes who lack traditional heroic attributes [...]. Playing a drow can also present an opportunity to play against traditional gender norms. [...] The drow are outsiders, even in settings that do not include Lolth and her corruptive influence. These campaigns might not have evil societies of dark elves, but they still tend to make them into foreigners with strange customs [...]. Playing a misunderstood, feared yet potentially heroic character can be great fun. In contrast, in his review of \"\" for \"DieHard GameFan\", Alex Lucard wrote, \"I'll be honest: I've never understood the appeal of the Drow at all. They just seemed overly angsty and dark for the sake of being dark. I've been bored by the novels where they are the featured race and I've generally avoided them unless someone is making fun of them\".\nInherent characteristics.\nSome critics have highlighted that the drow are \"dark skinned and inherently evil\" and are connected to the \"racist idea that non-white people are inherently bad\". In the academic journal \"Mythlore\", Holmes argued that the depiction of drow was an example of various creators using \"negative estrangement\" within the narrative \"to create a 'more evil' antagonist to serve as a foil for narrative protagonists\"121 and this narrative process \"warps\" and \"strips\" stereotypes \"of their context in order to use them like ingredients in a recipe for a compelling villain\".129 Holmes also highlighted the inconsistent artistic portrayal over time as \"the black skin of the drow is not\" consistently used across all products\u2014this meant that when \"some saw the drow as a fantastical race of spider-themed elves, others saw them as one of the very few depictions of black-skinned people in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"\" and the inconsistent \"visual representation\" then \"further compounds the complexity of discussing the relationship of the drow to real world race, given that some players may see the drow as obviously modeled on real world black bodies, and others seeing them as a fantasy race with no realworld analogue\".126\nIn 2010, scholar Cory Lowell Grewell found that in the \"Baldur's Gate\" video game series, \"issues of contemporary race relations are brought to the fore in the player-Character's interactions with the dark-skinned Drow Elves.\" In the book \"Dungeons and Dragons and Philosophy\" (2012), author James Rocha states that the difference between drow and dark elves in the Forgotten Realms setting is rooted in racist stereotypes: \"an acceptable lighter skinned dark race side by side with only the most rare exceptions in the darker race, which is thought to be inherently evil, mirrors American history in a very uncomfortable fashion\". In a retrospective on the legacy of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", academic Daniel Heath Justice also commented that the \"\"Forgotten Realms\" was explicitly based on the civilized-versus-savage binary and leaned in hard on racial essentialism in its sadistic black-skinned drow led by vicious matriarchs and their terrible spider goddess, firmly melding anti-Blackness with misogyny, a once-civilized people gone feral under the debased rule of women\". \nIn response to this criticism in 2020, Wizards of the Coast stated: \"we present orcs and drow in a new light in two of our most recent books, \"\" and \"Explorer's Guide to Wildemount\". In those books, orcs and drow are just as morally and culturally complex as other peoples. We will continue that approach in future books, portraying all the peoples of D&amp;D in relatable ways and making it clear that they are as free as humans to decide who they are and what they do\". Christian Hoffer, for \"ComicBook.com\", highlighted a 2021 \"Forgotten Realms\" lore update on the Wizards of the Coast website: While Drizzt himself is proof that all drow aren't inherently evil, many fans still think that \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" lore needs major updates when it comes to the drow. The main issue is that the drow (like other 'evil' races) are presented as a large monolithic society dedicated to evil instead of a group with multiple competing interests and beliefs. It's not that some drow, or even a city or country of drow, are seen as evil\u2014it's that \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" lore has traditionally considered evil drow to be the default. [...] By bringing in two entirely new cultures of drow that have rejected Lolth, it seems that the lore will show that drow are just as complex and multi-faceted as the many other elven subraces in the game. Holmes commented that \"to some extent, the current revisions being applied to race, half races, and the drow specifically reflect longstanding tensions in gaming spaces\" and how audience views around \"narrative subjects change over time\". Holmes thought Wizards of the Coast appears to be aiming for a \"middle ground\" where \"drow are not intrinsically evil\" by allowing players to decide if they want to play as an evil drow who adheres to Lolth or play as a \"good drow\" who deals with \"overcoming the racism of the world based on the violence of Lolth-sworn drow. This allows Wizards of the Coast to retain the brand identity of the drow that drove sales of drow-related products for thirty years, while shifting emphasis away from an implied endorsement of naturalized racism\".\nFictional description.\nThe drow made their first statistical appearance in the Greyhawk adventure module \"Hall of the Fire Giant King\" (1978) at the end of the module, and received a lengthy writeup. The history of the drow within the game is revealed; in ages past, the elves were torn by discord and warfare, driving out from their surface lands their selfish and cruel members, who sought safety in the underworld. These creatures, later known as the \"dark elvenfolk\" or drow, grew strong in the arcane arts over the centuries and content with their gloomy fairyland beneath the earth, though they still bear enmity towards and seek revenge against their distant kin, the elves and faeries who drove them down. They are described as chaotic evil in alignment, and highly intelligent. They are described as black-skinned and pale haired in appearance, around 5-feet tall and slight of build with somewhat sharp features, with large eyes and large pointed ears. Drow are difficult to surprise as they are able to see very well in the dark, have an intuitive sense about their underground world similar to that of dwarves, and can detect hidden or secret doors as easily as other elves do. Drow are highly resistant to magic, while all drow have the ability to use some inherent magical abilities even if they are not strictly spellcasters. The module also reveals that there are rumors of vast caverns housing whole cities of drow which exist somewhere deep beneath the earth, and now that the drow have dwelled in these dark labyrinthe places they dislike daylight and other forms of bright light as it hampers their abilities. They are able to communicate using a silent language composed of hand movements, and when coupled with facial and body expression, movement, and posture, this form of communication is the equal of any spoken language.\nThe \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game's second edition product \"Monstrous Compendium Volume Two\" (1989) describes the world of the drow, where violent conflict is part of everyday life, so much so that most drow encountered are ready for a fight. Their inherent magic use comes from training in magic, which all drow receive. Not long after the creation of the elves, they were torn into rival factions, one evil and one good; after a great civil war, those who followed the path of evil and chaos were driven far from the world's forests and into the bleak, lightless caverns and tunnels of the underworld. Drow society is fragmented into opposing noble houses and merchant families, and they base their rigid class system on the belief that the strongest should rule. Female drow tend to fill many positions of great importance, with priests of the dark goddess Lolth holding a very high place in society. Drow fighters are required to go through rigorous training in their youth, and those who fail are put to death. Drow constantly war with other underground neighbors such as dwarves and deep gnomes (svirfneblin), and keep slaves of all types\u2014including allies who fail to live up to drow expectations.\n\"The Complete Book of Elves\" (1993) by Colin McComb focuses some of its attention on the drow. The \"Elfwar\" is presented, an elven myth in which the elves were one people until the Spider Queen Lolth used the dissent among the elves to gain a foothold; the elves of Lolth took the name Drow to signify their new allegiance, but as they massed to conquer the other elves, Corellon Larethian and his followers drove Lolth and her people deep into the earth, where they chose to remain. The dark elves who became the drow were originally simply elves who held more with the tenets of might than those of justice, and as they quested for power they became corrupted and turned against their fairer brethren. Any elf character of good or neutral alignment, even drow, is allowed into the realm of Arvanaith where elves go upon reaching old age. The book notes that drow player characters have a large number of benefits while suffering few disadvantages, but that \"the major disadvantage to being a drow \"is\" being a drow.\" Drow characters are extraordinarily dexterous and intelligent, but have the typically low elf constitution; also, their personalities are described as grating at best, and all other elves \"hate\" the drow which affects their reactions to a drow character.\nIn the 5th Edition Basic Rules, drow are described as a subrace of elves with a connection to Underdark magic. Additionally, it states, \"the cult of the god Lolth, Queen of Spiders, has corrupted some of the oldest drow cities, especially in the worlds of Oerth and Toril. Eberron, Krynn, and other realms have escaped the cult's influence\u2014for now. Wherever the cult lurks, drow heroes stand on the front lines in the war against it, seeking to sunder Lolth's web\". \"Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes\" (2018) retells the story of Corellon and Lolth; the elves who supported Lolth were cast \"into darkness. They became a people wholly dedicated to Lolth and her scheming and for many, many centuries were viewed in the multi-verse as a people of evil\". However, since all elves are descended from Corellon, the drow have the ability to \"break free of Lolth's influence\" and turn to \"the light within themselves\".\nFictional ecology.\nAbilities.\nWith the ability to resist magic and powerful darkvision, drow are more powerful than many of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"' races. Drow possess natural magical abilities which enables them to summon globes of darkness, outline targets in faerie fire which causes no harm but makes the target brightly visible to everyone who sees them, and create magical balls of light. They can also levitate for short periods of time. They live to extraordinarily long ages if not killed by violence first, over a thousand years in some cases. Their hearing and vision are better than that of a human being and they are difficult to sneak up on because of this. They naturally excel at moving silently. Drow also employ the unusual hand crossbow, firing small, though very lethal, darts.\nIn Lolth based societies, noble drow males are commonly wizards or fighters. Female nobles are almost always clerics and almost never wizards.\nAlignment.\nAs a race, drow were traditionally portrayed evil. There were unusual exceptions, the most notable being Drizzt Do'Urden, Jarlaxle Baenre, and Liriel Baenre. Originally, drow were chaotic evil in alignment. Beginning with 3rd edition \"D&amp;D\", drow were usually neutral evil. There have been encounters with non-evil drow, but these are distrusted as much as their brethren, due to their reputation. In the \"Forgotten Realms\" setting, the Drow followers of Eilistraee were originally the largest group of good Drow, as Eilistraee is the patron goddess of all Drow that have a good alignment.\nThe 4th Edition \"Heroes of the Forgotten Kingdoms\" (2010) does not suggest any typical alignment for drow player characters; however, it highlights the drow that break away from the evil Lolth based societies. The 5th Edition \"Player's Handbook\" (2014) described drow as \"more often evil than not\". In 2021, official errata removed the suggested alignments for playable races, including drow, in all 5th Edition sourcebooks. As of \"\" (2022), creature stat blocks that also have playable races \"now state that they can be any alignment\".\nEnvironment.\nWithin the context of many \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" campaign settings, the drow were forced underground in what is now known as the Underdark after the great war amongst the elves, a vast system of caverns and tunnels spanning much of the continent. The drow live in city-states in the Underdark, becoming one of the most powerful races therein.\nThe drow are well adapted to seeing in the dark, and they loathe, are terrified of, and are easily blinded by the light of the surface. Some magic weapons, armor, and various other items of the drow disintegrate or lose their magical properties if exposed to the sun.\nTypical physical characteristics.\nDrow characters are extremely intelligent, charismatic and dexterous, but share surface elves' comparative frailty and slight frames. Females tend to be bigger and stronger than males. Drow are characterized by white or silver hair and obsidian black skin. Their eyes are red (or rarely gray, violet, or yellow) in darkness and can be many different colors in normal light. In 5th Edition, drow typically have \"white hair and grayish skin of many hues\" along with better darkvision and a sensitivity to sunlight.\nDrow have several kinds of innate spell powers and spell resistance. This is balanced by their weakness in daylight. Half-drow are the result of crossbreeding between another race and a drow, and share characteristics of both.\nSociety.\nLolth based drow society is primarily matriarchal, with priestesses of their evil spider goddess Lolth in the highest seats of power. This society is based upon violence, murder, cunning, and the philosophy that only the strong survive. Hence, most drow plot endlessly to murder or otherwise incapacitate their rivals and enemy drow using deceit and betrayal. Drow, particularly in higher positions, are constantly wary of assassins and the like. One of the quirks of this constant infighting is the relatively short lifespan of the average drow. While being just as long lived as their surface cousins, living as long as a thousand years, elderly drow are rarely encountered. Consequently, they are the only race of elves that matches the fertility of 'lesser' races, such as humans. Their society, as a whole, is seemingly nonviable. The only reason they do not murder themselves to extinction is by the will of Lolth, working primarily through her clergy. Lolth does not tolerate any drow that threaten to bring down her society, and the clergy make certain that perpetrators cease their destructive actions by either threatening or killing them. Matron mothers lead the various noble houses and act as \"high priestesses of Lolth\". Matthew Beilman, for \"CBR\", highlighted that Lolth based \"drow society is a lethal cloak-and-dagger affair\u2014like a constant \"Game of Thrones\" but if every character were playing by Lannister/Bolton rules. That is to say, playing dirty and playing to \"win\"\".\nThere are exceptions to the rule, of course. Some communities of drow worship other gods (like Vhaeraun or Eilistraee), and thus, their hierarchy changes, reverses the roles of males and females, or (such as in the case of Eilastree) even approaching something like a workable, progressive society. Drow societies can also vary vastly depending on the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" campaign setting.\nIn various campaign settings.\nDifferent campaign settings portray drow in various ways.\nIn \"Eberron\".\nInhabiting the jungles and Underdark in the continental isle of Xen'drik, the drow in Eberron have a much more tribalistic culture than their other \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" counterparts. They are not an offshoot of the elven race like in many other worlds but rather a separate, if similar, race. Instead of the spider goddess Lolth, most tribes worship a male scorpion deity known as Vulkoor, though exceptions are common. It is believed that Vulkoor is actually one of the forms of the Mockery (a member of the Dark Six). The tribes are often xenophobic, and the social structure varies from tribe to tribe. It is known that the drow mastered elemental binding before gnomes did \u2013 including a cultural group of fire-elemental binders called the Sulatar. There is also a subgroup called the \"umbragen\", or shadow elves, who worship the Mockery in the form of a scorpion god and Khyber or the Umbra, the Consuming Shadow, for whom the umbragen are named; the umbragen dwell underground beneath Xen'drik and are noted for producing many warlocks and soulknives.\nDrow in Eberron run the gamut from almost feral in nature to being fully civilized and on par with the cultural level of Khorvaire, varying from tribe to tribe.\nIn \"Exandria\".\nThe region of Xhorhas, the eastern side of the Wildemount continent in the Exandria setting, is governed by the Kryn Dynasty and ruled by the Bright Queen Leylas Kryn. The Dynasty was founded by drow who escaped to surface after rejecting Lolth for a god of light known as the Luxon. The nation is now home to many creatures others in Wildemount would see as monstrous or evil. Due to the Luxon, the Kryn Dynasty also established a new source of magic called dunamancy which \"involves the manipulation of entropy, gravity, and time\". Known as dunamancers, people accessing this power draw it \"from alternate timelines and unseen realities, subtly affect the flow of time, and even tighten or loosen the grip of gravity\". Compared to their neighboring country, the human-run monarchy of the Dwendalian Empire, \"the Dynasty is freer, both politically and culturally. They accept anyone and everyone while the Empire is restrictive and nearly inaccessible to outsiders\". The Kryn Dynasty was first explored in depth in the second campaign of the web series \"Critical Role\" before being added to the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" canon in the \"Explorer's Guide to Wildemount\" (2020).\nCritics have highlighted that this setting breaks from traditional fantasy tropes especially around evil races. James Grebey, for \"Syfy Wire\", highlighted \"it's a country of cast-offs and scrappy upstarts who are simply trying to thrive in a world that's prejudiced toward them. Due in no small part to a religion that allows for souls to be reborn in another body, the Kryn society is race-neutral in a way that's rarely seen in fantasy lore. It's borderline progressive, even. Crucially, while there are bad actors among the Kryn, they're not evil solely because of their race\". Academics Lisa Horton and David Beard, in the book \"The Routledge Handbook of Remix Studies and Digital Humanities\", viewed the Kryn Dynasty and Xhorhasian culture as \"a departure and significant extension of \"D&amp;D\" lore surrounding drow\" and highlighted that their religion is centered on \"the physical manifestation of light itself, the Luxon, and the pursuit off immortality\". In contrast, Dan Arndt of \"The Fandomentals\" opined that the setting's attempt at subverting the evil drow trope was not \"the biggest step up\" since he viewed the Wildemount drow as \"religious nutjobs with suicidal tendencies\".\nIn the \"Forgotten Realms\".\n1991's \"The Drow of the Underdark\", a 128-page sourcebook all about the drow, expanded the drow significantly for the Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons second edition version of the \"Forgotten Realms\" setting. In the \"Forgotten Realms\", the dark elves were once ancient tribes of Ilythiir and Miyeritar. They were transformed into drow by the Seldarine and were cast down and driven underground by the light-skinned elves because of the Ilythiirian's savagery during the Crown Wars. The drow had fallen under the influence of Araushnee, who was transformed into Lolth and was cast down into the Demonweb Pits along with her son Vhaeraun by the elven god Corellon Larethian because of Lolth's and Vhaeraun's attempt to take control of the elven pantheon (which included Araushnee's seduction of Corellon Larethian). Drow society, being strongly matriarchal, allows the females to hold all positions of power in the government, and to choose and discard mates freely. Social station is the most important thing in drow society, making ascension to greater power a drow's ultimate goal. Drow have a strong affinity for arachnids, as most worship the spider goddess Lolth, and spiders dwell freely among drow communities. The largest drow civilization is the subterranean city of Llurth Dreier. However, Menzoberranzan is featured most prominently in the novels.\nPrior to the Spellplague descendants of the Miyeritar, dark elves later succeed in reversing their transformation and are recreated as a distinct dark elf race. According to \"The Complete Book of Elves\", drow are not welcome in Evermeet and are turned away. Drow could also worship Ghaunadaur, Kiaransalee, Selvetarm or Vhaeraun. A special case is Eilistraee, the only drow goddess who is chaotic good instead of chaotic evil; she wants the drow to return to the light. However, all of these alternative deities (except perhaps Ghaunadaur) were killed or forgotten in the last years before the Spellplague, but they managed to return to life and regain their followers, about a century later, during the Sundering.\nAmongst the most infamous of drow are the members of House Baenre, while Abeir-Toril is also home to some famous benevolent drow including Drizzt Do'Urden and his deceased father Zaknafein (both of House Do' Urden), Liriel Baenre (formerly of Menzoberranzan's aforementioned House Baenre), and Qilu\u00e9 of the Seven Sisters. The drow Jarlaxle is also well-known, as he is one of the few males in Menzoberranzan to obtain a position of great power. He is the founder and leader of the mercenary band Bregan D'aerthe. These characters are from \"The Dark Elf Trilogy\" (1990\u20131991), a series of books by R. A. Salvatore (except for Liriel Baenre and Qilue). The six drow in the \"War of the Spider Queen\" series have also gained some renown since the novels have been published.\nIn 2021, two new Underdark based drow societies, the Lorendrow and the Aevendrow, were introduced; both of these societies have rejected Lolth and are not evil. The Lolth based society of Menzoberranzan is now referred to as Unadrow. This retcon \"suggests that the beliefs and evil practices once seen as common to all drow are specifically related to the 'Unadrow,' the culture of drow who have become corrupted by the evil spider goddess\".\nIn \"Dragonlance\".\nIn the \"Dragonlance\" setting, Drow are not a native race. However, a colony of them exists in a connected pocket dimension called the Valley of Perfect Silence. These arrived by means of a crashed Spelljammer vessel, and are now worshippers of Jiathuli, an evil daughter of Takhisis. \"Dark Elves\" is a separate term in Dragonlance, referencing elves who have been cast out by the other elves for various crimes, such as worship of the evil deities. Dalamar, a student of Raistlin Majere, is the most notable of Krynn's dark elves. However, over the years Drow have accidentally appeared in a few \"Dragonlance\" modules and novels. Similar mistakes have occurred with other standard AD&amp;D races, such as orcs and lycanthropes, which are not part of the \"Dragonlance\" setting. Some theories say that these rare Drow may have accidentally been sent there during a plane shifting spell or related magic, a misfire as like as not that is corrected before the respective timelines are tampered with too drastically.\nIn \"Greyhawk\".\nIn the world of \"Greyhawk\", the drow were driven underground by their surface-dwelling relatives because of ideological differences. There they eventually adapted to their surroundings, especially by attracting the attention of the goddess Lolth, \"Queen of Spiders\". The center of drow civilization is the subterranean city Erelhei-Cinlu, and its surrounding Vault, commonly called the Vault of the Drow. Drow rank structure was based much more on personal experience level and proven personal abilities rather than on gender. Males were just as likely to have positions of authority over both males and females, and the tradition of matriarchy, where the highest-ranking member was always a female, was not a special directive of the Demon Queen Lolth. The vast majority of Drow Elves both male and female in the original campaign setting of Greyhawk have no authority or ranking at all and live an idle and degenerate life in the great city of the Drow.\nKnown drow of Greyhawk include Clannair Blackshadow, Derken Gale, Jawal Severnain, and Landis Bree of Greyhawk City; Eclavdra of House Eilserv; and Edralve of the Slave Lords. In the drow city Erelhei-Cinlu, player characters may freely enter the city and spend time there, unless they attempt to organize any escaped slave groups for open warfare against the drow; the threat of a slave uprising will bring the chaotic drow into full cooperation.\nSome drow worship a nameless Elder Elemental God (said to have ties to Tharizdun) instead of Lolth. The module \"Vault of the Drow\" showcases that the House of Eilservs, led by Eclavdra in Erelhei-Cinlu, turned from worship of Lolth to the Elder Elemental God when the city's other noble houses allied against them after proclaiming that their mistress should be the Queen of All Drow. Eilservs attempted to establish a power base through a puppet kingdom in the surface world dedicated to the worship of their new deity, so that their demands of supreme power in the Vault can no longer be denied, but this scheme was ruined.\nFictional gods.\nLolth.\nLolth is a fictional goddess in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Lolth (\"Lloth\" in the Drow language), the Demon Queen of Spiders, is the chief goddess of the Drow. She is also known as the \"Spider Queen\" and the \"Queen of the Demonweb Pits\"; her realm in the Abyss is referred to as the Demonweb Pits. Lolth usually appears in two forms: drow and arachnid. In drow form, the Spider Queen appears as an \"exquisitely beautiful\" female dark elf, sometimes covered in clinging spiders. In her arachnid form, Lolth takes the appearance of a giant black widow spider with the head of a female drow or human peering from between the eight spider-eyes. Sometimes, the two foremost pair of her spider-legs are actually humanoid arms. In third edition, her arachnid form has taken more of a drider-like appearance, due to the events of the \"War of the Spider Queen\" novel series.\nConception and creation.\nLolth was created by Gary Gygax for the \"World of Greyhawk\" campaign setting, later appeared in the \"Forgotten Realms\" setting, and in the 3rd edition became a member of the default pantheon of \"D&amp;D\" gods. In those various settings, the drow pantheon of gods consists of the leader Lolth, as well as Kiaransalee, Vhaeraun, and Zinzerena and also the one good goddess Eilistraee. Other drow gods may be present in different campaign settings.\nAccording to the Forgotten Realms storyline, Lolth began as an intermediary goddess abiding in the sixty-sixth layer of the Abyss, the Demonweb Pits. Through the events that transpired in \"War of the Spider Queen series\", she transformed herself into a greater goddess as depicted in 4th Edition, the Demonweb Pits becoming its own plane.\nPublication history.\nLolth was first mentioned in the modules \"Descent into the Depths of the Earth\" (1978) and more fully described in \"Vault of the Drow\" (1978), and was the main antagonist of the module \"Queen of the Demonweb Pits\" (1980). These modules were later reprinted as part of the \"Queen of the Spiders\" collection in 1986. Lolth's role as a deity was first explored in \"Deities &amp; Demigods\" (1980). Her game statistics were reprinted in the \"Fiend Folio\" (1981).\nLolth's role in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting was first detailed in Ed Greenwood's second edition \"AD&amp;D\" sourcebook, \"Drow of the Underdark\" (1991). Lolth was detailed as a deity in the book \"Monster Mythology\" (1992), including details about her priesthood. Her role in the cosmology of the Planescape campaign setting was described in \"On Hallowed Ground\" (1996). Lolth received a very detailed description of her role in the Forgotten Realms in \"Demihuman Deities\" (1998).\nLolth is detailed in \"Defenders of the Faith\" (2000), and \"Deities &amp; Demigods\" (2002), and her role in the Forgotten Realms is revisited in \"Faiths and Pantheons\" (2002). Lolth's priesthood is detailed for this edition in \"Complete Divine\" (2004), and her role in the Abyss is detailed in the ' (2006). Lolth and the Drow are further detailed in both \"Drow of the Underdark\" (2007), and the adventure \"Expedition to the Demonweb Pits\" (2007).\nLolth appears as one of the evil deities described in the \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (2008) for the 4th Edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". The story of her dissent from and war against Corellon and Sehanine is fleshed out in the supplements \"Underdark\" and \"\". A slightly different (and arguably more powerful) version of Lolth is presented in the \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide.\" Lolth in the Forgotten Realms has a different appearance, dogma and personality than the core Lolth. Wizards of the Coast's D&amp;D Compendium and D&amp;D Character Builder record the core Lolth and the \"Realms\" Lolth as separate entities. Lolth (Demon Queen of Spiders) appears in the 4th Edition's \"Monster Manual 3\" (2010). She is the mascot for this volume, which includes statistics for Lolth in both drow and spider form.\nIn 2021, Lolth was featured on two cards as a \"legendary planeswalker\" in the \"Adventures in the Forgotten Realms\" line from the \"\" collectible card game. Lolth was featured on the alternative cover edition of the 2024 Revised 5th Edition \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" with art by Olena Richards.\nReception.\n\"Dragon\" #359 (September 2007), the final print issue of the magazine, described Lolth as one of the 20 most memorable villains of the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game. Witwer \"et al.\", in the book \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Art &amp; Arcana\", considered Lolth one of the \"iconic D&amp;D characters\", present throughout the decades of the game.\nLolth was #10 on \"Screen Rant\"'s 2018 \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons: The 15 Most Powerful Villains, Ranked\" list\u2014the article states \"The \"War of the Spider Queen\" series would show Lolth's transformation into a greater goddess, making her one of the most powerful beings in the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" multiverse. [...] Lolth can appear in the form of a monstrous spider, which many fans have mocked, due to the fact that it only has sixty-six hit points. You likely won't get a chance to get close enough to harm Lolth, due to the fact that you are battling her in her home dimension, which is filled with an army of demonic spiders. Lolth can also transform into the form of a high-level magic-user/cleric, which gives her access to a wide-range of powerful spells. This is to say nothing of her psionic abilities, though these are given to her at the discretion of the dungeon master\". Lolth was #8 on \"CBR\"'s 2020 \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons: 10 Endgame Bosses You Need To Use In Your Next Campaign\" list\u2014the article states \"the DMs can even get rather creative with the stage; since Lolth is a creature of the Underdark, the fight leading up to her and the boss herself can take place in a dark and nightmarish cave that requires some spelunking and vertical maneuvers. Bonus points if the fight happens in a web network suspended midair with an abyssal drop\".\nEilistraee.\nEilistraee, also referred to as \"The Dark Maiden\", is a fictional deity in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting. Eilistraee's name is pronounced as EEL-iss-TRAY-yee\", \"eel-ISS-tray-ee\", \"eel-iss-tray-yee\" or \"eil-iss-tray-yee\". In the game world, she is a goddess in the drow pantheon, and her portfolios are song, dance, swordwork, hunting, moonlight and beauty.\nCreative origins and Forgotten Realms storylines.\nEilistraee was first created for the original home campaign run by Ed Greenwood himself, appearing by manifestation, dream vision, and in person. At the behest of editor Newton Ewell, who wanted a deity for good drow in the game, Greenwood used the opportunity to make the Dark Dancer official and added Eilistraee to \"The Drow of the Underdark\" (1991) and thus to the official Forgotten Realms. He meant for Eilistraee to take the role of a nurturing and protecting mother-goddess for the whole drow race. Greenwood denies a connection to Artemis/Diana of Greek and Roman mythology.\nIn the Forgotten Realms campaign setting, Eilistraee is the daughter of Corellon Larethian and of Araushnee (who later took the name Lolth after being punished by Corellon), a free-spirited and kind-hearted goddess, with a fiery streak in her personality. When, during her youth, a host of evil deities assaulted Arvandor (her home), Araushnee's treachery almost made her slay her own father. Even though she was cleared from any guilt, Eilistraee chose to share her mother's exile, because she knew that the drow would need her light and help in the dark times to come. Since after the descent of the drow, in the present era of the setting, Eilistraee tries her best to be a mother goddess to her people and bring them the hope of a new life: she fights to lead them back to the lands of light, helping them to flourish and prosper in harmony with all other races, free from Lolth's tyranny. Hers is an uphill battle, however, as her power is little and she is opposed by all the gods of the Dark Seldarine. But, despite having to overcome many hardships and setbacks, Eilistraee has never given up fighting for her people. In the 1370s DR, her conflict with her mother over the souls of the drow race ultimately led to Eilistraee's defeat and disappearance. It lasted for about a century, until The Sundering (c. 1480s DR), when Eilistraee returned to life and to her followers.\nPublication history.\nEilistraee was first detailed in \"The Drow of the Underdark\" (1991). Her role in the cosmology of the Planescape campaign setting was described in \"On Hallowed Ground\" (1996). Eilistraee received a very detailed description in \"Demihuman Deities\" (1998). She is described as one of the good deities that celestials can serve in the supplement \"Warriors of Heaven\" (1999). Eilistraee then appears in 3rd edition in the \"Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting\" book (2001), and was further described in \"Faiths and Pantheons\" (2002).\nEilistraee is one of the Forgotten Realms deities that made a reappearance during the event known as The Sundering which transitioned \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" from 4th Edition to 5th Edition. She is mentioned as such in the novels \"Spellstorm\" (2015) and \"Death Masks\" (2016) by Greenwood. In the 5th Edition sourcebook \"Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide\" (2015), Eilistraee receives a brief description, and is listed as one of the deities active in the post-Sundering era of the Forgotten Realms. \"Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes\" (2018) includes a full entry for Eilistraee.\nReception.\nScholar Michael Blume posited that the inclusion of Eilistraee as a benign counterpart to her evil mother Lolth in \"D&amp;D\"s mythology of the elves contributed to bringing a complexity to the fantasy drow, beyond racist and antifeminist stereotypes perceived in the writings of J.R.R. Tolkien and Gary Gygax. Rob Bricken of \"Kotaku\" identified Eilistraee as one of \"The 13 Strangest Deities in Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", commenting: \"To know Eilistraee, you have to know the Drow. The Drow are a race of evil elves who live underground and basically spend all their days murdering each other because they're so damn evil. There has been one good Drow in the history of D&amp;D, and that's Drizzt Do'Urden, who is one of the Mary Sue-iest characters in all of fiction\u2014and he's been the star of countless novels and is the only reason any D&amp;D player has even been interested in the Drow, of which now there is a terrifying amount of material. Anyways, Eilistraee is apparently the goddess of good Drow, which means she has one worshipper on the planet. This is nonsense.\"\nOther deities.\nThe drow deities Ghaunadaur, Kiaransalee, Selvetarm, Vhaeraun, and Zinzerena were primarily introduced during the \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 2nd Edition era. Ghaunadaur first appeared in \"The Drow of the Underdark\" (1991) and was expanded upon in \"Demihuman Deities\" (1998) and 3rd Edition's \"Faiths and Pantheons\" (2002). Kiaransalee debuted in \"Monster Mythology\" (1992), was further detailed in \"On Hallowed Ground\" (1996), \"Demihuman Deities\" (1998), and \"Faiths and Pantheons\" (2002); she also appears in module \"City of the Spider Queen\" (2002) and Forgotten Realms novels. Selvetarm's lore was expanded in \"Faiths and Pantheons\" (2002) and novels such as Lisa Smedman's \"Sacrifice of the Widow\" (2007). Vhaeraun was also introduced in \"Monster Mythology\" (1992) and was featured in \"On Hallowed Ground\" (1996), \"Demihuman Deities\" (1998), and \"Faiths and Pantheons\" (2002), with additional narrative developments in Forgotten Realms novels. Zinzerena appeared in \"Monster Mythology\" (1992) and \"On Hallowed Ground\" (1996), but later lore relegated her to a minor or deceased status under Lolth's dominance. As part of the world restructuring of the Forgotten Realms in preparation for D&amp;D 4th Edition, many deities were removed from the game to simplify the pantheons.\nGhaunadaur, also known as That Which Lurks and The Elder Eye, is a chaotic god of oozes, rebels, and outcasts, known for his capricious nature and ancient origins from primordial slimes. Kiaransalee, the vengeful Lady of the Dead, is a goddess of undead and retribution who rose from mortal royalty to godhood, only to later fall from power through epic magic. Selvetarm, the Spider that Waits, embodies mindless battle and bloodlust, having been corrupted and enslaved by Lolth after a tragic manipulation. Vhaeraun, the Masked Lord, champions drow males, surface raiding, and rebellion against Lolth's matriarchy; it is believed he was killed by Eilistraee during a failed assassination attempt. Zinzerena, a chaotic goddess of assassins and trickery, ascended through theft of divine power and embodies stealth, betrayal, and ruthless survival, though her influence waned under Lolth's supremacy.\nRelated creatures.\nLike elves, drow have other creatures associated with them either by environment or by blood. The drider, a drow transformed into a half-drow half-spider creature as a punishment, is one of the most often cited examples.\nDrider.\nOnly high-level priestesses in good standing with Lolth are able to initiate the transformation of a dark elf into a drider. This transformation is very painful, and lasts at least 12 hours. Driders develop a poisonous bite. Their digestion changes and they must drink blood of living creatures for sustenance. Driders still maintain the spells and special abilities they had developed as a drow. There can exist any character class of drider. They retain intelligence and memories. This usually makes them bitter, spiteful creatures. Some hunt for magic powerful enough to undo the transformation.\nIn previous editions, driders appear sexless due to bloating, but able to magically reproduce. In \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" edition 3.5, driders seem to retain their gender and characteristics after the transformation, but fertility is debatable.\nDriders play many roles in drow society. The dark elves both fear and are revolted by driders. After transformation, they are usually pushed to the wild area around a drow city. Driders are usually found in company with tiny, huge and giant spiders. Driders speak Common, Elvish, and Undercommon. In the first and second editions of the game, Driders spoke Drow. Driders are almost always Chaotic Evil.\nIn the Fourth Edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", becoming a drider is actually considered holy and a blessing from Lolth.\nDraegloths.\nDraegloths are half-demon, half drow monstrosities. Found in any campaign setting, they are particularly numerous in the \"Forgotten Realms\". They are created by the unholy union between an ascending high priestess of the drow goddess Lolth and a glabrezu.\nDraegloths are about ten feet tall and have four arms, the upper pair being much larger than the lower. They have large claws on the upper arms and they use them for hand-to-hand combat, for they usually prefer the feeling of tearing flesh and sinew under their claws and fangs. Their face is stretched so it resembles that of a dog. Their flesh is as dark as a drow's, and they are covered in a fine coat of fur; they also have a white mane. They are sacred creatures to the Lolthites and are usually treated with respect.\nTriel Baenre of Menzoberranzan, in the \"Forgotten Realms\", had a draegloth son, Jeggred.\nV3.5 statistics for the draegloth can be found in \"Drow of the Underdark\".\nChitines and choldriths.\n\"The chitine and the choldrith are part-elf, part-spider abominations created by magic as servitors of the spider goddess Lolth\" appearing in the Forgotten Realms setting. Chitine resembles a sickly, white, four-foot tall humanoid with vaguely spider-like features. They are depicted with wavy hair and sly faces with a set of spider's fangs protruding from their mouths. Chitines also have four arms which feature an additional joint (compared to a human), giving them great flexibility and dexterity. They were created inadvertently by the drow as a result of failed experiments on normal humanoids.\nChitines typically hate their former masters, the drow, but keep worshipping Lolth. The role of priests in their society is taken up by a closely related but completely separate race, the choldriths. Chitines strongly live up to their spider heritage; in their underground cities and villages, they build with webs in the same way that humans build with wood and stone. They build everything out of it, homes, traps, clothing, weapons, and more.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46936", "revid": "29449026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46936", "title": "Angband (Middle-earth)", "text": ""}
{"id": "46937", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46937", "title": "Jean Jaures", "text": ""}
{"id": "46943", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46943", "title": "Audio time stretching and pitch scaling", "text": "Changing the speed or duration of an audio signal without affecting its pitch\nTime stretching is the process of changing the speed or duration of an audio signal without affecting its pitch. Pitch scaling is the opposite: the process of changing the pitch without affecting the speed. Pitch shift is pitch scaling implemented in an effects unit and intended for live performance. Pitch control is a simpler process which affects pitch and speed simultaneously by slowing down or speeding up a recording.\nThese processes are often used to match the pitches and tempos of two pre-recorded clips for mixing when the clips cannot be reperformed or resampled. Time stretching is often used to adjust radio commercials and the audio of television advertisements to fit exactly into the 30 or 60 seconds available. It can be used to conform longer material to a designated time slot, such as a 1-hour broadcast.\nResampling.\nThe simplest way to change the duration or pitch of an audio recording is to change the playback speed. For a digital audio recording, this can be accomplished through sample rate conversion. When using this method, the frequencies in the recording are always scaled at the same ratio as the speed, transposing its pitch up or down in the process. Slowing down the recording to increase duration also lowers the pitch, while speeding it up for a shorter duration respectively raises the pitch, creating the so-called Chipmunk effect. When resampling audio to a notably lower pitch, it may be preferred that the source audio is of a higher sample rate, as slowing down the playback rate will reproduce an audio signal of a lower resolution, and therefore reduce the perceived clarity of the sound. When resampling audio to a notably higher pitch, it may be preferred to incorporate an interpolation filter, as frequencies that surpass the Nyquist frequency (determined by the sampling rate of the audio reproduction software or device) will create sound distortions due to aliasing.\nFrequency domain.\nPhase vocoder.\nOne way of stretching the length of a signal without affecting the pitch is to build a phase vocoder after Flanagan, Golden, and Portnoff.\nBasic steps:\nThe phase vocoder handles sinusoid components well, but early implementations introduced considerable smearing on transient (\"beat\") waveforms at all non-integer compression/expansion rates, which renders the results phasey and diffuse. Recent improvements allow better quality results at all compression/expansion ratios but a residual smearing effect still remains.\nThe phase vocoder technique can also be used to perform pitch shifting, chorusing, timbre manipulation, harmonizing, and other unusual modifications, all of which can be changed as a function of time.\nSinusoidal spectral modeling.\nAnother method for time stretching relies on a spectral model of the signal. In this method, peaks are identified in frames using the STFT of the signal, and sinusoidal \"tracks\" are created by connecting peaks in adjacent frames. The tracks are then re-synthesized at a new time scale. This method can yield good results on both polyphonic and percussive material, especially when the signal is separated into sub-bands. However, this method is more computationally demanding than other methods.\nTime domain.\nSOLA.\nRabiner and Schafer in 1978 put forth an alternate solution that works in the time domain: attempt to find the period (or equivalently the fundamental frequency) of a given section of the wave using some pitch detection algorithm (commonly the peak of the signal's autocorrelation, or sometimes cepstral processing), and crossfade one period into another.\nThis is called time-domain harmonic scaling or the synchronized overlap-add method (SOLA) and performs somewhat faster than the phase vocoder on slower machines but fails when the autocorrelation mis-estimates the period of a signal with complicated harmonics (such as orchestral pieces).\nAdobe Audition (formerly Cool Edit Pro) seems to solve this by looking for the period closest to a center period that the user specifies, which should be an integer multiple of the tempo, and between 30 Hz and the lowest bass frequency.\nThis is much more limited in scope than the phase vocoder based processing, but can be made much less processor intensive, for real-time applications. It provides the most coherent results for single-pitched sounds like voice or musically monophonic instrument recordings.\nHigh-end commercial audio processing packages either combine the two techniques (for example by separating the signal into sinusoid and transient waveforms), or use other techniques based on the wavelet transform, or artificial neural network processing, producing the highest-quality time stretching.\nFrame-based approach.\nIn order to preserve an audio signal's pitch when stretching or compressing its duration, many time-scale modification (TSM) procedures follow a frame-based approach.\nGiven an original discrete-time audio signal, this strategy's first step is to split the signal \ninto short \"analysis frames\" of fixed length.\nThe analysis frames are spaced by a fixed number of samples, called the \"analysis hopsize\" formula_1.\nTo achieve the actual time-scale modification, the analysis frames are then temporally relocated\nto have a \"synthesis hopsize\" formula_2.\nThis frame relocation results in a modification of the signal's duration by a \"stretching factor\" of\nformula_3.\nHowever, simply superimposing the unmodified analysis frames typically results in undesired artifacts\nsuch as phase discontinuities or amplitude fluctuations.\nTo prevent these kinds of artifacts, the analysis frames are adapted to form \"synthesis frames\", prior to\nthe reconstruction of the time-scale modified output signal.\nThe strategy of how to derive the synthesis frames from the analysis frames is a key difference among\ndifferent TSM procedures.\nSpeed hearing and speed talking.\nFor the specific case of speech, time stretching can be performed using PSOLA.\nTime-compressed speech is the representation of verbal text in compressed time. While one might expect speeding up to reduce comprehension, Herb Friedman says that \"Experiments have shown that the brain works most efficiently if the information rate through the ears\u2014via speech\u2014is the 'average' reading rate, which is about 200\u2013300 wpm (words per minute), yet the average rate of speech is in the neighborhood of 100\u2013150 wpm.\"\nListening to time-compressed speech is seen as the equivalent of speed reading.\nPitch scaling.\nThese techniques can also be used to transpose an audio sample while holding speed or duration constant. This may be accomplished by time stretching and then resampling back to the original length. Alternatively, the frequency of the sinusoids in a sinusoidal model may be altered directly, and the signal reconstructed at the appropriate time scale.\nTransposing can be called \"frequency scaling\" or \"pitch shifting\", depending on perspective.\nFor example, one could move the pitch of every note up by a perfect fifth, keeping the tempo the same.\nOne can view this transposition as \"pitch shifting\", \"shifting\" each note up 7 keys on a piano keyboard, or adding a fixed amount on the Mel scale, or adding a fixed amount in linear pitch space.\nOne can view the same transposition as \"frequency scaling\", \"scaling\" (multiplying) the frequency of every note by 3/2.\nMusical transposition preserves the ratios of the harmonic frequencies that determine the sound's timbre, unlike the \"frequency shift\" performed by amplitude modulation, which adds a fixed frequency offset to the frequency of every note. (In theory one could perform a literal \"pitch scaling\" in which the musical pitch space location is scaled [a higher note would be shifted at a greater interval in linear pitch space than a lower note], but that is highly unusual, and not musical.)\nTime domain processing works much better here, as smearing is less noticeable, but scaling vocal samples distorts the formants into a sort of Alvin and the Chipmunks-like effect, which may be desirable or undesirable. A process that preserves the formants and character of a voice involves analyzing the signal with a channel vocoder or LPC vocoder plus any of several pitch detection algorithms and then resynthesizing it at a different fundamental frequency.\nA detailed description of older analog recording techniques for pitch shifting can be found at .\nDJing.\nTime stretching and pitch scaling is used extensively by DJs in addition to beatmixing when playing and creating set. In order to seamlessly blend two tracks together, the tempo of a track can be adjusted to match another track such that the beats line up. Pitch scaling is commonly used to retain the pitch of a track. Pitch scaling is also used by DJs for harmonic mixing, to transform tracks into compatible keys so that they sound pleasing when mixed together. Time stretching and pitch scaling are included in modern DJ hardware (CDJs and DJ controllers) and software (such as VirtualDJ, Mixxx, Serato and Rekordbox).\nMusic production.\nTime stretching and pitch scaling is used in digital audio workstation software for working with music loops, sound clips which can be repeated and transposed to form a song. The pitch and tempo of multiple loops are aligned to create tracks. Notable software includes Acid Pro with its \"Acidized\" loops feature and FL Studio.\nIn consumer software.\nPitch-corrected audio timestretch is found in every modern web browser as part of the HTML standard for media playback. Similar controls are ubiquitous in media applications and frameworks such as GStreamer and Unity."}
{"id": "46944", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46944", "title": "Parallax scrolling", "text": "Technique in computer graphics\nParallax scrolling is a technique in computer graphics where background images move past the camera more slowly than foreground images, creating an illusion of depth in a 2D scene of distance. The technique grew out of the multiplane camera technique used in traditional animation since the 1930s.\nParallax scrolling was popularized in 2D computer graphics with its introduction to video games in the early 1980s. Some parallax scrolling was used in the arcade video game \"Jump Bug\" (1981). It used a limited form of parallax scrolling with the main scene scrolling while the starry night sky is fixed and clouds move slowly, adding depth to the scenery. The following year, \"Moon Patrol\" (1982) implemented a full form of parallax scrolling, with three separate background layers scrolling at different speeds, simulating the distance between them. \"Moon Patrol\" is often credited with popularizing parallax scrolling. \"Jungle King\" (1982), later called \"Jungle Hunt\", also had parallax scrolling, and was released a month after \"Moon Patrol\" in June 1982.\nMethods.\nThere are four main methods of parallax scrolling used in titles for arcade system board, video game console and personal computer systems.\nLayer method.\nSome display systems support multiple background layers that can be scrolled independently in horizontal and vertical directions and composited on one another, simulating a multiplane camera. On such a display system, a game can produce parallax by simply changing each layer's position by a different amount in the same direction. Layers that move more quickly are perceived to be closer to the virtual camera. Layers can be placed in front of the \"playfield\"\u2014the layer containing the objects with which the player interacts\u2014for various reasons such as to provide increased dimension, obscure some of the action of the game, or distract the player.\nSprite method.\nProgrammers may also make pseudo-layers of sprites\u2014individually controllable moving objects drawn by hardware on top of or behind the layers\u2014if they are available on the display system. For instance \"Star Force\", an overhead-view vertically scrolling shooter for NES, used this for its starfield, and \"Final Fight\" for the Super NES used this technique for the layer immediately in front of the main playfield.\nThe Amiga computer has sprites which can have any height and can be set horizontal with the copper co-processor, which makes them ideal for this purpose.\nRisky Woods on the Amiga uses sprites multiplexed with the copper to create an entire fullscreen parallax background layer as an alternative to the system's dual playfield mode.\nRepeating pattern/animation method.\nScrolling displays built up of individual tiles can be made to 'float' over a repeating background layer by animating the individual tiles' bitmaps in order to portray the parallax effect. Color cycling can be used to animate tiles quickly on the whole screen. This software effect gives the illusion of another (hardware) layer. Many games used this technique for a scrolling star-field, but sometimes a more intricate or multi-directional effect is achieved, such as in the game \"Parallax\" by Sensible Software.\nRaster method.\nIn raster graphics, the lines of pixels in an image are typically composited and refreshed in top-to-bottom order with a slight delay (called the horizontal blanking interval) between drawing one line and drawing the next line.\nGames designed for older graphical chipsets\u2014such as those of the third and fourth generations of video game consoles, those of dedicated TV games, or those of similar handheld systems\u2014take advantage of the raster characteristics to create the illusion of more layers.\nSome display systems have only one layer. These include most of the classic 8-bit systems (such as the Commodore 64, Nintendo Entertainment System, Master System, PC Engine/TurboGrafx-16 and original Game Boy). The more sophisticated games on such systems generally divide the layer into horizontal strips, each with a different position and rate of scrolling. Typically, strips higher on the screen will represent things farther away from the virtual camera or one strip will be held stationary to display status information. The program will then wait for horizontal blank and change the layer's scroll position just before the display system begins to draw each scanline. This is called a \"raster effect\" and is also useful for changing the system palette to provide a gradient background.\nSome platforms (such as the Commodore 64, Amiga, Master System, PC Engine/TurboGrafx-16, Sega Mega Drive/Genesis, Super NES, Game Boy, Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS) provide a horizontal blank interrupt for automatically setting the registers independently of the rest of the program. Others, such as the NES, require the use of cycle-timed code, which is specially written to take exactly as long to execute as the video chip takes to draw one scanline, or timers inside game cartridges that generate interrupts after a given number of scanlines have been drawn. Many NES games use this technique to draw their status bars, and \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Arcade Game\" and \"\" for NES use it to scroll background layers at different rates.\nMore advanced raster techniques can produce interesting effects. A system can achieve a very effective depth of field if layers with rasters are combined; \"Sonic the Hedgehog\", \"Sonic The Hedgehog 2\", \"ActRaiser\", \"Lionheart\", \"Kid Chaos\" and \"Street Fighter II\" used this effect well. If each scanline has its own layer, the \"Pole Position\" effect is produced, which creates a pseudo-3D road (or a pseudo-3D ball court as in \"NBA Jam\") on a 2D system.\nIf the display system supports rotation and scaling in addition to scrolling\u2014an effect popularly known as Mode 7\u2014changing the rotation and scaling factors can draw a projection of a plane (as in \"F-Zero\" and \"Super Mario Kart\") or can warp the playfield to create an extra challenge factor.\nAnother advanced technique is row/column scrolling, where rows/columns of tiles on a screen can be scrolled individually. This technique is implemented in the graphics chips of various Sega arcade system boards since the Sega Space Harrier and System 16, the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis console, and the Capcom CP System, Irem M-92 and Taito F3 System arcade game boards.\nExample.\nIn the following animation, three layers are moving leftward at different speeds. Their speeds decrease from front to back and correspond to increases in relative distance from the viewer. The ground layer is moving 8 times as fast as the vegetation layer. The vegetation layer is moving two times as fast as the cloud layer.\nParallax scrolling in Web design.\nOne of the first implementations of parallax scrolling in the browser was created and shared in a blog post by web developer Glutnix in 2007, this included example code and a demo using JavaScript and CSS\u00a02 that supported Internet\u00a0Explorer\u00a06 and other browsers of that era.\nIn a February 2008 tutorial on web design blog Think Vitamin, web designer Paul Annett explained how he had created a parallax effect using CSS and without JavaScript for the website of Silverback, a usability testing app. He demonstrated the effect on stage at SXSW Interactive 2009, with the help of audience participation and a man in a gorilla suit.\nAdvocates argue it is a simple way to embrace the fluidity of the Web, citing the Silverback website as the first example they had come across.\nProponents use parallax backgrounds as a tool to better engage users and improve the overall experience that a website provides. However, a Purdue University study, published in 2013, revealed the following findings: \"... although parallax scrolling enhanced certain aspects of the user experience, it did not necessarily improve the overall user experience\". A undated study occurring during or after 2010 by Dede Frederick, James Mohler, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, and Ronald Glotzbach noted that parallax scrolling \"may cause certain people to experience nausea.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46945", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46945", "title": "2013", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2013 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n2013 was the first year since 1987 (after 26 years) to contain four unique digits, or no repeating numbers.\n2013 was designated as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46946", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46946", "title": "Victorian Era", "text": ""}
{"id": "46947", "revid": "50151310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46947", "title": "Elizabethan era", "text": "Epoch in English history (1558\u20131603)\nThe Elizabethan era is the epoch in the Tudor period of the history of England during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (1558\u20131603). Historians often depict it as the golden age in English history. The Roman symbol of Britannia (a female personification of Great Britain) was revived in 1572, and often thereafter, to mark the Elizabethan age as a renaissance that inspired national pride through classical ideals, international expansion, and naval triumph over Spain.\nThis \"golden age\" represented the apogee of the English Renaissance and saw the flowering of poetry, music, and literature. The era is most famous for its theatre, as William Shakespeare and many others composed plays that broke free of England's past style of theatre. It was an age of exploration and expansion abroad, while back at home, the Protestant Reformation became more acceptable to the people, most certainly after the Spanish Armada was repelled. It was also the end of the period when England was a separate realm before its royal union with Scotland.\nComparing and establishments.\nThe Elizabethan age contrasts sharply with the previous and following reigns. It was a brief period of internal peace between the Wars of the Roses in the previous century, the English Reformation, and the religious battles between Protestants and Catholics before Elizabeth's reign, and then the later conflict of the English Civil War and the ongoing political battles between parliament and the monarchy that engulfed the remainder of the seventeenth century. The Protestant/Catholic divide was settled, for a time, by the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, and parliament was not yet strong enough to challenge royal absolutism.\nEngland was also well-off compared to the other nations of Europe. The Italian Renaissance had come to an end following the end of the Italian Wars, which left the Italian Peninsula impoverished. The Kingdom of France was embroiled in the French Wars of Religion (1562\u20131598). They were (temporarily) settled in 1598 by a policy of tolerating Protestantism with the Edict of Nantes. In part because of this, but also because the English had been expelled from their last outposts on the continent by Spain's tercios, the centuries-long Anglo-French Wars was largely suspended for most of Elizabeth's reign.\nThe one great rival was Habsburg Spain, with whom England clashed both in Europe and the Americas in skirmishes that exploded into the Anglo-Spanish War of 1585\u20131604. An attempt by Philip II of Spain to invade England with the Spanish Armada in 1588 was famously defeated.\nEngland during this period had a centralised, well-organised, and effective government, largely a result of the reforms of Henry VII and Henry VIII, as well as Elizabeth's harsh punishments for any dissenters. Economically, the country began to benefit greatly from the new era of trans-Atlantic trade and persistent theft of Spanish and Portuguese treasures, most notably as a result of Francis Drake's circumnavigation.\nThe term \"Elizabethan era\" was already well-established in English and British historical consciousness, long before the accession of Queen Elizabeth II, and generally refers solely to the time of the earlier queen of this name.\nRomance and reality.\nThe Victorian era and the early 20th century idealised the Elizabethan era. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" maintains that \"[T]he long reign of Elizabeth I, 1558\u20131603, was England's Golden Age... 'Merry England', in love with life, expressed itself in music and literature, in architecture and adventurous seafaring\". This idealising tendency was shared by Britain and Anglophilic America. In popular culture, the image of those adventurous Elizabethan seafarers was embodied in the films of Errol Flynn.\nIn response and reaction to this hyperbole, modern historians and biographers have tended to take a more dispassionate view of the Tudor period.\nGovernment.\nElizabethan England was not particularly successful in a military sense during the period, but it avoided major defeats and built up a powerful navy. On balance, it can be said that Elizabeth provided the country with a long period of general if not total peace and generally increased prosperity due in large part to stealing from Spanish treasure ships, raiding settlements with low defenses, and selling African slaves. Having inherited a virtually bankrupt state from previous reigns, her frugal policies restored fiscal responsibility. Her fiscal restraint cleared the regime of debt by 1574, and ten years later the Crown enjoyed a surplus of \u00a3300,000. Economically, Sir Thomas Gresham's founding of the Royal Exchange (1565), the first stock exchange in England and one of the earliest in Europe, proved to be a development of the first importance, for the economic development of England and soon for the world as a whole. With taxes lower than other European countries of the period, the economy expanded; though the wealth was distributed with wild unevenness, there was more wealth to go around at the end of Elizabeth's reign than at the beginning. This general peace and prosperity allowed the attractive developments that \"Golden Age\" advocates have stressed.\nPlots, intrigues, and conspiracies.\nThe Elizabethan Age was also an age of plots and conspiracies, frequently political, and often involving the highest levels of Elizabethan society. High officials in Madrid, Paris, and Rome sought to kill Elizabeth, a Protestant, and replace her with Mary, Queen of Scots, a Catholic. That would be a prelude to the religious recovery of England for Catholicism. In 1570, the Ridolfi plot was thwarted. In 1584, the Throckmorton Plot was discovered, after Francis Throckmorton confessed his involvement in a plot to overthrow the Queen and restore the Catholic Church in England. Another major conspiracy was the Babington Plot \u2013 the event which most directly led to Mary's execution, the discovery of which involved a double agent, Gilbert Gifford, acting under the direction of Francis Walsingham, the Queen's highly effective spy master.\nThe Essex Rebellion of 1601 has a dramatic element, as just before the uprising, supporters of the Earl of Essex, among them Charles and Joscelyn Percy (younger brothers of the Earl of Northumberland), paid for a performance of \"Richard II\" at the Globe Theatre, apparently to stir public ill will towards the monarchy. It was reported at the trial of Essex by Chamberlain's Men actor Augustine Phillips, that the conspirators paid the company forty shillings \"above the ordinary\" (i. e., above their usual rate) to stage the play, which the players felt was too old and \"out of use\" to attract a large audience.\nIn the last decades of the reign, Elizabeth gave James VI of Scotland an annual annuity or subsidy which contributed to an \"amity\" or peace between England and Scotland. It became clear that he would be her successor. Plots continued in the new reign. In the Bye Plot of 1603, two Catholic priests planned to kidnap King James and hold him in the Tower of London until he agreed to be more tolerant towards Catholics. Most dramatic was the 1605 Gunpowder Plot to blow up the House of Lords during the State Opening of Parliament. It was discovered in time with eight conspirators executed, including Guy Fawkes, who became the iconic evil traitor in English lore.\nEnglish Navy and defeat of the Armada.\nWhile Henry VIII had launched the Royal Navy, Edward and Mary had ignored it and it was little more than a system of coastal defense. Elizabeth made naval strength a high priority. She risked war with Spain by supporting the \"Sea Dogs\", such as John Hawkins and Francis Drake, who preyed on the Spanish merchant ships carrying gold and silver from the New World. The Navy yards were leaders in technical innovation, and the captains devised new tactics. Parker (1996) argues that the full-rigged ship was one of the greatest technological advances of the century and permanently transformed naval warfare. In 1573 English shipwrights introduced designs, first demonstrated in the \"Dreadnaught\", that allowed the ships to sail faster and maneuver better and permitted heavier guns. Whereas before warships had tried to grapple with each other so that soldiers could board the enemy ship, now they stood off and fired broadsides that would sink the enemy vessel. When Spain finally decided to invade and conquer England it was a fiasco. Superior English ships and seamanship foiled the invasion and led to the destruction of the Spanish Armada in 1588, marking the high point of Elizabeth's reign. Technically, the Armada failed because Spain's over-complex strategy required coordination between the invasion fleet and the Spanish army on shore. Moreover, the poor design of the Spanish cannons meant they were much slower in reloading in a close-range battle. Spain and France still had stronger fleets, but England was catching up.\nParker has speculated on the dire consequences if the Spanish had landed their invasion army in 1588. He argues that the Spanish army was larger, more experienced, better equipped, more confident, and had better financing. The English defenses, on the other hand, were thin and outdated; England had too few soldiers and they were at best only partially trained. Spain had chosen England's weakest link and probably could have captured London in a week. Parker adds that a Catholic uprising in the north and in Ireland could have brought total defeat.\nThe following year England launched an equally unsuccessful expedition to Spain with the Drake\u2013Norris Expedition. The advantage England had won upon the destruction of the Spanish Armada was lost and would mark a revival of Spanish naval power. A second English armada sent in 1596 succeeded in capturing and sacking C\u00e1diz, and was one of the most signal English victories of the war. Further Spanish Armadas also failed - in 1596, 1597 and 1601. The war ended with the Treaty of London the year following Elizabeth's death.\nColonising the New World.\nThe discoveries of Christopher Columbus electrified all of Western Europe, especially maritime powers like England. King Henry VII commissioned John Cabot to lead a voyage to find a northern route to the Spice Islands of Asia; this began the search for the North West Passage. Cabot sailed in 1497 and reached Newfoundland. He led another voyage to the Americas the following year, but nothing was heard of him or his ships again.\nIn 1562 Elizabeth sent privateers also named 'Elizabethan Sea Dogs'; these included the likes of Hawkins and Drake to seize booty from Spanish and Portuguese ships off the coast of West Africa. When the Anglo-Spanish Wars intensified after 1585, Elizabeth approved further raids against Spanish ports in the Americas and shipping returning to Europe with treasure. Meanwhile, the influential writers Richard Hakluyt and John Dee were beginning to press for the establishment of England's own overseas empire. Spain was well established in the Americas, while Portugal, in union with Spain from 1580, had an ambitious global empire in Africa, Asia, and South America. France was exploring North America. England was stimulated to create its own colonies, with an emphasis on the West Indies rather than in North America.\nMartin Frobisher landed at Frobisher Bay on Baffin Island in August 1576; He returned in 1577, claiming it in Queen Elizabeth's name, and a third voyage tried but failed to find a settlement in Frobisher Bay.\nFrom 1577 to 1580, Francis Drake circumnavigated the globe. Combined with his daring raids against the Spanish and his great victory over them at C\u00e1diz in 1587, he became a famous hero\u2014his exploits are still celebrated\u2014but England did not follow up on his claims. In 1583, Humphrey Gilbert sailed to Newfoundland, taking possession of the harbour of St. John's together with all land within two hundred leagues to the north and south of it.\nIn 1584, the queen granted Walter Raleigh a charter for the colonisation of Virginia; it was named in her honour. Raleigh and Elizabeth sought both immediate riches and a base for privateers to raid the Spanish treasure fleets. Raleigh sent others to found the Roanoke Colony; it remains a mystery why the settlers all disappeared. In 1600, the queen chartered the East India Company in an attempt to break the Spanish and Portuguese monopoly of far Eastern trade. It established trading posts, which in later centuries evolved into British India, on the coasts of what is now India and Bangladesh. Larger scale colonisation to North America began shortly after Elizabeth's death.\nDistinctions.\nEngland in this era had some positive aspects that set it apart from contemporaneous continental European societies. Torture was rare, since the English legal system reserved torture only for capital crimes like treason\u2014though forms of corporal punishment, some of them extreme, were practised. The persecution of witches began in 1563, and hundreds were executed, although there was nothing like the frenzy on the Continent. Mary had tried her hand at an aggressive anti-Protestant Inquisition and was hated for it; it was not to be repeated. Nevertheless, more Catholics were persecuted, exiled, and burned alive than under Queen Mary.\nReligion.\nElizabeth managed to moderate and quell the intense religious passions of the time. This was in significant contrast to previous and succeeding eras of marked religious violence.\nElizabeth said \"I have no desire to make windows into men's souls\". Her desire to moderate the religious persecutions of previous Tudor reigns \u2013 the persecution of Catholics under Edward VI, and of Protestants under Mary I \u2013 appears to have had a moderating effect on English society. Elizabeth, Protestant, but undogmatic one, authorizing the 1559 \"Book of Common Prayer\" which effectively reinstated the 1552 \"Book of Common Prayer\" with modifications which made clear that the Church of England believed in the (spiritual) Real Presence of Christ in the Holy Communion but without a definition how in favor of leaving this a mystery, and she had the Black Rubric removed from the Articles of Faith: this had allowed kneeling to receive communion without implying that by doing so it meant the real and essential presence of Christ in the bread and wine: she believed it so. She was not able to get an unmarried clergy or the Protestant Holy Communion celebrated to look like a Mass. The Apostolic Succession was maintained, the institution of the church continued without a break (with 98% of the clergy remaining at their posts) and the attempt to ban music in church was defeated. The Injunctions of 1571 forbade any doctrines that did not conform to the teaching of the Church Fathers and the Catholic Bishops. The Queen's hostility to strict Calvinistic doctrines blocked the Radicals.\nAlmost no original theological thought came out of the English Reformation; instead, the Church relied on the Catholic Consensus of the first Four Ecumenical Councils. The preservation of many Catholic doctrines and practices was the cuckoo's nest that eventually resulted in the formation of the Via Media during the 17th century. She spent the rest of her reign ferociously fending off radical reformers and Roman Catholics who wanted to modify the Settlement of Church affairs: The Church of England was Protestant, \"with its peculiar arrested development in Protestant terms, and the ghost which it harboured of an older world of Catholic traditions and devotional practice\".\nFor several years, Elizabeth refrained from persecuting Catholics because she was against Catholicism, not her Catholic subjects if they made no trouble. In 1570, Pope Pius V declared Elizabeth a heretic who was not a legitimate queen and that her subjects no longer owed her obedience. The pope sent Jesuits and seminarians to secretly evangelize and support Catholics. After several plots to overthrow her, Catholic clergy were mostly considered to be traitors and were pursued aggressively in England. Often priests were tortured or executed after capture unless they cooperated with the English authorities. People who publicly supported Catholicism were excluded from the professions; sometimes fined or imprisoned. This was justified because Catholics were not persecuted for their religion but punished for being traitors who supported the Queen's Spanish foe; in practice, however, Catholics perceived it as religious persecution and regarded those executed as martyrs.\nScience, technology, and exploration.\nLacking a dominant genius or a formal structure for research (the following century had both Sir Isaac Newton and the Royal Society), the Elizabethan era nonetheless saw significant scientific progress. The astronomers Thomas Digges and Thomas Harriot made important contributions; William Gilbert published his seminal study of magnetism, \"De Magnete,\" in 1600. Substantial advancements were made in the fields of cartography and surveying. The eccentric but influential John Dee also merits mention.\nMuch of this scientific and technological progress is related to the practical skill of navigation. English achievements in exploration were noteworthy in the Elizabethan era. Sir Francis Drake circumnavigated the globe between 1577 and 1581, and Martin Frobisher explored the Arctic. The first attempt at English settlement of the eastern seaboard of North America occurred in this era\u2014the abortive colony at Roanoke Island in 1587.\nWhile Elizabethan England is not thought of as an age of technological innovation, some progress did occur. In 1564 Guilliam Boonen came from the Netherlands to be Queen Elizabeth's first coach-builder \u2014thus introducing the new European invention of the spring-suspension coach to England, as a replacement for the litters and carts of an earlier transportation mode. Coaches quickly became as fashionable as sports cars in a later century; social critics, especially Puritan commentators, noted the \"diverse great ladies\" who rode \"up and down the countryside\" in their new coaches.\nSocial history.\nHistorians since the 1960s have explored many facets of the social history, covering every class of the population.\nHealth.\nAlthough home to only a small part of the population the Tudor municipalities were overcrowded and unhygienic. Most towns were unpaved with poor public sanitation. There were no sewers or drains, and rubbish was simply abandoned in the street. Animals such as rats thrived in these conditions. In larger towns and cities, such as London, common diseases arising from lack of sanitation included smallpox, measles, malaria, typhus, diphtheria, scarlet fever, and chickenpox.\nOutbreaks of the Black Death pandemic occurred in 1498, 1535, 1543, 1563, 1589 and 1603. The reason for the speedy spread of the disease was the increase of rats infected by fleas carrying the disease.\nChild mortality was low in comparison with earlier and later periods, at about 150 or fewer deaths per 1000 babies. By age 15 a person could expect 40\u201350 more years of life.\nHomes and dwelling.\nThe great majority were tenant farmers who lived in small villages. Their homes were, as in earlier centuries, thatched huts with one or two rooms, although later on during this period, roofs were also tiled. Furniture was basic, with stools being commonplace rather than chairs. The walls of Tudor houses were often made from timber and wattle and daub, or brick; stone and tiles were more common in the wealthier homes. The daub was usually then painted with limewash, making it white, and the wood was painted with black tar to prevent rotting, but not in Tudor times; the Victorians did this afterward. The bricks were handmade and thinner than modern bricks. The wooden beams were cut by hand, which makes telling the difference between Tudor houses and Tudor-style houses easy, as the original beams are not straight. The upper floors of Tudor houses were often larger than the ground floors, which would create an overhang (or jetty). This would create more floor surface above while also keeping maximum street width. During the Tudor period, the use of glass when building houses was first used, and became widespread. It was very expensive and difficult to make, so the panes were made small and held together with a lead lattice, in casement windows. People who could not afford glass often used polished horn, cloth or paper. Tudor chimneys were tall, thin, and often decorated with symmetrical patterns of molded or cut brick. Early Tudor houses, and the homes of poorer people, did not have chimneys. The smoke in these cases would be let out through a simple hole in the roof.\nMansions had many chimneys for the many fireplaces required to keep the vast rooms warm. These fires were also the only way of cooking food. Wealthy Tudor homes needed many rooms, where a large number of guests and servants could be accommodated, fed and entertained. Wealth was demonstrated by the extensive use of glass. Windows became the main feature of Tudor mansions, and were often a fashion statement. Mansions were often designed to a symmetrical plan; \"E\" and \"H\" shapes were popular.\nCities.\nThe population of London increased from 100,000 to 200,000 between the death of Mary Tudor in 1558 and the death of Elizabeth I in 1603. Inflation was rapid and the wealth gap was wide. Poor men, women, and children begged in the cities, as the children only earned sixpence a week. With the growth of industry, many landlords decided to use their land for manufacturing purposes, displacing the farmers who lived and worked there. Despite the struggles of the lower class, the government tended to spend money on wars and exploration voyages instead of on welfare.\nPoverty.\nAbout one-third of the population lived in poverty, with the wealthy expected to give alms to assist the impotent poor. Tudor law was harsh on the able-bodied poor, i.e., those unable to find work. Those who left their parishes in order to locate work were termed vagabonds and could be subjected to punishments, including whipping and putting at the stocks.\nThe idea of the workhouse for the able-bodied poor was first suggested in 1576.\nEducation.\nThere was an unprecedented expansion of education in the Tudor period. Until then, few children went to school. Those that did go were mainly the sons of wealthy or ambitious fathers who could afford to pay the attendance fee. Boys were allowed to go to school and began at the age of 4, they then moved to grammar school when they were 7 years old. Girls were either kept at home by their parents to help with housework or sent out to work to bring money in for the family. They were not sent to school. Boys were educated for work and the girls for marriage and running a household so when they married they could look after the house and children. Wealthy families hired a tutor to teach the boys at home. Many Tudor towns and villages had a parish school where the local vicar taught boys to read and write. Brothers could teach their sisters these skills. At school, pupils were taught English, Latin, Greek, catechism and arithmetic. The pupils practised writing in ink by copying the alphabet and the Lord's Prayer. There were few books, so pupils read from hornbooks instead. These wooden boards had the alphabet, prayers or other writings pinned to them and were covered with a thin layer of transparent cow's horn. There were two types of school in Tudor times: petty school was where young boys were taught to read and write; grammar school was where abler boys were taught English and Latin. It was usual for students to attend six days a week. The school day started at 7:00 am in winter and 6:00 am in summer and finished about 5:00 pm. Petty schools had shorter hours, mostly to allow poorer boys the opportunity to work as well. Schools were harsh and teachers were very strict, often beating pupils who misbehaved.\nEducation would begin at home, where children were taught the basic etiquette of proper manners and respecting others. It was necessary for boys to attend grammar school, but girls were rarely allowed in any place of education other than petty schools, and then only with a restricted curriculum. Petty schools were for all children aged from 5 to 7 years of age. Only the most wealthy people allowed their daughters to be taught, and only at home. During this time, endowed schooling became available. This meant that even boys of very poor families were able to attend school if they were not needed to work at home, but only in a few localities were funds available to provide support as well as the necessary education scholarship.\nBoys from wealthy families were taught at home by a private tutor. When Henry VIII shut the monasteries he closed their schools. He refounded many former monastic schools\u2014they are known as \"King's schools\" and are found all over England. During the reign of Edward VI many free grammar schools were set up to take in non-fee paying students. There were two universities in Tudor England: Oxford and Cambridge. Some boys went to university at the age of about 14.\nFood.\nAvailability.\nEngland's food supply was plentiful throughout most of the reign; there were no famines. Bad harvests caused distress, but they were usually localized. The most widespread came in 1555\u201357 and 1596\u201398. In the towns the price of staples was fixed by law; in hard times the size of the loaf of bread sold by the baker was smaller.\nTrade and industry flourished in the 16th century, making England more prosperous and improving the standard of living of the upper and middle classes. However, the lower classes did not benefit much and did not always have enough food. As the English population was fed by its own agricultural produce, a series of bad harvests in the 1590s caused widespread starvation and poverty. The success of the wool trading industry decreased attention on agriculture, resulting in further starvation of the lower classes. Cumbria, the poorest and most isolated part of England, suffered a six-year famine beginning in 1594. Diseases and natural disasters also contributed to the scarce food supply.\nIn the 17th century, the food supply improved. England had no food crises from 1650 to 1725, a period when France was unusually vulnerable to famines. Historians point out that oat and barley prices in England did not always increase following a failure of the wheat crop, but did do so in France.\nEngland was exposed to new foods (such as the potato imported from South America), and developed new tastes during the era. The more prosperous enjoyed a wide variety of food and drink, including exotic new drinks such as tea, coffee, and chocolate. French and Italian chefs appeared in the country houses and palaces bringing new standards of food preparation and taste. For example, the English developed a taste for acidic foods\u2014such as oranges for the upper class\u2014and started to use vinegar heavily. The gentry paid increasing attention to their gardens, with new fruits, vegetables and herbs; pasta, pastries, and dried mustard balls first appeared on the table. The apricot was a special treat at fancy banquets. Roast beef remained a staple for those who could afford it. The rest ate a great deal of bread and fish. Every class had a taste for beer and rum.\nDiet.\nThe diet in England during the Elizabethan era depended largely on social class. Bread was a staple of the Elizabethan diet, and people of different statuses ate bread of different qualities. The upper classes ate fine white bread called manchet, while the poor ate coarse bread made of barley or rye.\n Diet of the lower class\nThe poorer among the population consumed a diet largely of bread, cheese, milk, and beer, with small portions of meat, fish and vegetables, and occasionally some fruit. Potatoes were just arriving at the end of the period, and became increasingly important. The typical poor farmer sold his best products on the market, keeping the cheap food for the family. Stale bread could be used to make bread puddings, and bread crumbs served to thicken soups, stews, and sauces.\n Diet of the middle class\nAt a somewhat higher social level families ate an enormous variety of meats, who could choose among venison, beef, mutton, veal, pork, lamb, fowl, salmon, eel, and shellfish. The holiday goose was a special treat. Rich spices were used by the wealthier people to offset the smells of old salt-preserved meat. Many rural folk and some townspeople tended a small garden which produced vegetables such as asparagus, cucumbers, spinach, lettuce, beans, cabbage, turnips, radishes, carrots, leeks, and peas, as well as medicinal and flavoring herbs.Some grew their own apricots, grapes, berries, apples, pears, plums, strawberries, currants, and cherries. Families without a garden could trade with their neighbors to obtain vegetables and fruits at low cost. Fruits and vegetables were used in desserts such as pastries, tarts, cakes, crystallized fruit, and syrup.\n Diet of the upper class\nAt the rich end of the scale the manor houses and palaces were awash with large, elaborately prepared meals, usually for many people and often accompanied by entertainment. The upper classes often celebrated religious festivals, weddings, alliances and the whims of the king or queen. Feasts were commonly used to commemorate the \"procession\" of the crowned heads of state in the summer months, when the king or queen would travel through a circuit of other nobles' lands both to avoid the plague season of London, and alleviate the royal coffers, often drained through the winter to provide for the needs of the royal family and court. This would include a few days or even a week of feasting in each noble's home, who depending on his or her production and display of fashion, generosity and entertainment, could have his way made in court and elevate his or her status for months or even years.\nAmong the rich private hospitality was an important item in the budget. Entertaining a royal party for a few weeks could be ruinous to a nobleman. Inns existed for travellers, but restaurants were not known.\nSpecial courses after a feast or dinner which often involved a special room or outdoor gazebo (sometimes known as a folly) with a central table set with dainties of \"medicinal\" value to help with digestion. These would include wafers, comfits of sugar-spun anise or other spices, jellies and marmalades (a firmer variety than we are used to, these would be more similar to our gelatin jigglers), candied fruits, spiced nuts and other such niceties. These would be eaten while standing and drinking warm, spiced wines (known as hypocras) or other drinks known to aid in digestion. Sugar in the Middle Ages or Early Modern Period was often considered medicinal, and used heavily in such things. This was not a course of pleasure, though it could be as everything was a treat, but one of healthful eating and abetting the digestive capabilities of the body. It also, of course, allowed those standing to show off their gorgeous new clothes and the holders of the dinner and banquet to show off the wealth of their estate, what with having a special room just for banqueting.\nGender.\nWhile the Tudor era presents an abundance of material on the women of the nobility\u2014especially royal wives and queens\u2014historians have recovered scant documentation about the lives of average women. There has, however, been extensive statistical analysis of demographic and population data which includes women, especially in their childbearing roles. The role of women in society was, for that historical era, relatively unconstrained; Spanish and Italian visitors to England commented regularly, and sometimes caustically, on the freedom that women enjoyed in England, in contrast to their home cultures. England had more well-educated upper-class women than was common anywhere in Europe.\nThe Queen's marital status was a major political and diplomatic topic. It also entered into the popular culture. Elizabeth's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity. In poetry and portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin or a goddess or both, not as a normal woman. Elizabeth made a virtue of her virginity: in 1559, she told the Commons, \"And, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient, that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time, lived and died a virgin\". Public tributes to the Virgin by 1578 acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queen's marriage negotiations with the Duc d'Alen\u00e7on.\nIn contrast to her father's emphasis on masculinity and physical prowess, Elizabeth emphasized the maternalism theme, saying often that she was married to her kingdom and subjects. She explained \"I keep the good will of all my husbands \u2013 my good people \u2013 for if they did not rest assured of some special love towards them, they would not readily yield me such good obedience\", and promised in 1563 they would never have a more natural mother than she. Coch (1996) argues that her figurative motherhood played a central role in her complex self-representation, shaping and legitimating the personal rule of a divinely appointed female prince.\nMarriage.\nOver ninety per cent of English women (and adults, in general) entered marriage at the end of the 1500s and beginning of the 1600s, at an average age of about 25\u201326 years for the bride and 27\u201328 years for the groom, with the most common ages being 25\u201326 for grooms (who would have finished their apprenticeships around this age) and 23 for brides. Among the nobility and gentry, the average was around 19\u201321 for brides and 24\u201326 for grooms. Many city and townswomen married for the first time in their thirties and forties and it was not unusual for orphaned young women to delay marriage until the late twenties or early thirties to help support their younger siblings, and roughly a quarter of all English brides were pregnant at their weddings.\nHigh culture.\nTheatre.\nWith William Shakespeare at his peak, as well as Christopher Marlowe and many other playwrights, actors and theatres constantly busy, the high culture of the Elizabethan Renaissance was best expressed in its theatre. Historical topics were especially popular, not to mention the usual comedies and tragedies.\nLiterature.\nElizabethan literature is considered one of the \"most splendid\" in the history of English literature. In addition to drama and the theatre, it saw a flowering of poetry, with new forms like the sonnet, the Spenserian stanza, and dramatic blank verse, as well as prose, including historical chronicles, pamphlets, and the first English novels. Edmund Spenser, Richard Hooker, and John Lyly, as well as Marlowe and Shakespeare, are major Elizabethan writers.\nMusic.\nTravelling musicians were in great demand at Court, in churches, at country houses, and at local festivals. Important composers included William Byrd (1543\u20131623), John Dowland (1563\u20131626) Thomas Campion (1567\u20131620), and Robert Johnson (c. 1583\u2013c. 1634). The composers were commissioned by church and Court, and deployed two main styles, madrigal and ayre. The popular culture showed a strong interest in folk songs and ballads (folk songs that tell a story). It became the fashion in the late 19th century to collect and sing the old songs.\nFine arts.\nIt has often been said that the Renaissance came late to England, in contrast to Italy and the other states of continental Europe; the fine arts in England during the Tudor and Stuart eras were dominated by foreign and imported talent\u2014from Hans Holbein the Younger under Henry VIII to Anthony van Dyck under Charles I. Yet within this general trend, a native school of painting was developing. In Elizabeth's reign, Nicholas Hilliard, the Queen's \"limner and goldsmith\", is the most widely recognized figure in this native development; but George Gower has begun to attract greater notice and appreciation as knowledge of him and his art and career has improved.\nPopular culture.\nPastimes.\nThe Annual Summer Fair and other seasonal fairs such as May Day were often bawdy affairs.\nWatching plays became very popular during the Tudor period. Most towns sponsored plays enacted in town squares followed by the actors using the courtyards of taverns or inns (referred to as inn-yards) followed by the first theatres (great open-air amphitheatres and then the introduction of indoor theatres called playhouses). This popularity was helped by the rise of great playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe using London theatres such as the Globe Theatre. By 1595, 15,000 people a week were watching plays in London. It was during Elizabeth's reign that the first real theatres were built in England. Before theatres were built, actors travelled from town to town and performed in the streets or outside inns.\nMiracle plays were local re-enactments of stories from the Bible. They derived from the old custom of mystery plays, in which stories and fables were enacted to teach lessons or educate about life in general. They influenced Shakespeare.\nFestivals were popular seasonal entertainments.\nSports.\nThere were many different types of Elizabethan sports and entertainment. Animal sports included bear and bull baiting, dog fighting and cock fighting.\nThe rich enjoyed tennis, fencing, jousting, and running at the ring. Hunting was strictly limited to the upper class. They favoured their packs of dogs and hounds trained to chase foxes, hares and boars. The rich also enjoyed hunting small game and birds with hawks, known as falconry.\nJousting.\nJousting was an upscale, very expensive sport where warriors on horseback raced toward each other in full armor trying to use their lance to knock the other off his horse. It was a violent sport--King Henry II of France was killed in a tournament in 1559, as were many lesser men. King Henry VIII was a champion; he finally retired from the lists after a hard fall left him unconscious for hours.\nOther sports included archery, bowling, hammer-throwing, quarter-staff contests, troco, quoits, skittles, wrestling and mob football.\nGambling and card games.\nDice was a popular activity in all social classes. Cards appeared in Spain and Italy about 1370, but they probably came from Egypt. They began to spread throughout Europe and came into England around 1460. By the time of Elizabeth's reign, gambling was a common sport. Cards were not played only by the upper class. Many of the lower classes had access to playing cards. The card suits tended to change over time. The first Italian and Spanish decks had the same suits: Swords, Batons/ Clubs, Cups, and Coins. The suits often changed from country to country. England probably followed the Latin version, initially using cards imported from Spain but later relying on more convenient supplies from France. Most of the decks that have survived use the French Suit: Spades, Hearts, Clubs, and Diamonds. Yet even before Elizabeth had begun to reign, the number of cards had been standardized to 52 cards per deck. The lowest court subject in England was called the \"knave\". The lowest court card was therefore called the knave until later when the term \"Jack\" became more common. Popular card games included Maw, One and Thirty, Bone-ace. (These are all games for small group players.) Ruff and Honors was a team game.\nFestivals, holidays and celebrations.\nDuring the Elizabethan era, people looked forward to holidays because opportunities for leisure were limited, with time away from hard work being restricted to periods after church on Sundays. For the most part, leisure and festivities took place on a public church holy day. Every month had its own holiday, some of which are listed below:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46948", "revid": "1310238819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46948", "title": "Suicide bomber", "text": ""}
{"id": "46949", "revid": "51623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46949", "title": "Yasir Arafat", "text": ""}
{"id": "46950", "revid": "24565488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46950", "title": "Libretto", "text": "Text used in an extended musical work such as an opera or musical\nA libretto (from the Italian word , lit.\u2009'booklet') is the text used in, or intended for, an extended musical work such as an opera, operetta, masque, oratorio, cantata or musical. The term \"libretto\" is also sometimes used to refer to the story line of a ballet or the texts of major liturgical works, such as the Mass, requiem, or sacred cantata.\nThe Italian word (, plural ) is the diminutive of the word \"libro\" (\"book\"). Sometimes other-language equivalents are used for libretti in that language, \"livret\" for French works, \"Textbuch\" for German and \"libreto\" for Spanish. A libretto is distinct from a synopsis or scenario of the plot, in that the libretto contains all the words and stage directions, while a synopsis summarizes the plot. Some ballet historians also use the word \"libretto\" to refer to the 15- to 40-page books which were on sale to 19th century ballet audiences in Paris and contained a very detailed description of the ballet's story, scene by scene.\nThe relationship of the librettist (that is, the writer of a libretto) to the composer in the creation of a musical work has varied over the centuries, as have the sources and the writing techniques employed.\nIn the context of a modern English-language musical theatre piece, the libretto is considered to encompass both the book of the work (i.e., the spoken dialogue) and the sung lyrics.\nRelationship of composer and librettist.\nLibretti for operas, oratorios and cantatas in the 17th and 18th centuries were generally written by someone other than the composer, often a well-known poet.\nPietro Trapassi, known as Metastasio (1698\u20131782), was one of the most highly regarded librettists in Europe. His libretti were set many times by many different composers. Another noted 18th-century librettist was Lorenzo Da Ponte. He wrote the libretti for three of Mozart's greatest operas, and for many other composers as well. Eug\u00e8ne Scribe was one of the most prolific librettists of the 19th century, providing the words for works by Meyerbeer (with whom he had a lasting collaboration), Auber, Bellini, Donizetti, Rossini and Verdi. The French writers' duo Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Hal\u00e9vy wrote many opera and operetta libretti for the likes of Jacques Offenbach, Jules Massenet and Georges Bizet. Arrigo Boito, who wrote libretti for, among others, Giuseppe Verdi and Amilcare Ponchielli, also composed two operas of his own.\nThe libretto is not always written before the music. Some composers, such as Mikhail Glinka, Alexander Serov, Rimsky-Korsakov, Puccini and Mascagni wrote passages of music without text and subsequently had the librettist add words to the vocal melody lines (this has often been the case with American popular song and musicals in the 20th century, as with Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart's collaboration, although with the later team of Rodgers and Hammerstein the lyrics were generally written first, which was Rodgers' preferred modus operandi).\nSome composers wrote their own libretti. Richard Wagner is perhaps most famous in this regard, with his transformations of Germanic legends and events into epic subjects for his operas and music dramas. Hector Berlioz, too, wrote the libretti for two of his best-known works, \"La damnation de Faust\" and \"Les Troyens\". Alban Berg adapted Georg B\u00fcchner's play \"Woyzeck\" for the libretto of \"Wozzeck\".\nSometimes the libretto is written in close collaboration with the composer; this can involve adaptation, as was the case with Rimsky-Korsakov and his librettist Vladimir Belsky, or an entirely original work. In the case of musicals, the music, the lyrics and the \"book\" (i.e., the spoken dialogue and the stage directions) may each have its own author. Thus, a musical such as \"Fiddler on the Roof\" has a composer (Jerry Bock), a lyricist (Sheldon Harnick) and the writer of the \"book\" (Joseph Stein). In rare cases, the composer writes everything except the dance arrangements \u2013 music, lyrics and libretto, as Lionel Bart did for \"Oliver!\".\nOther matters in the process of developing a libretto parallel those of spoken dramas for stage or screen. There are the preliminary steps of selecting or suggesting a subject and developing a sketch of the action in the form of a scenario, as well as revisions that might come about when the work is in production, as with out-of-town tryouts for Broadway musicals, or changes made for a specific local audience. A famous case of the latter is Wagner's 1861 revision of the original 1845 Dresden version of his opera \"Tannh\u00e4user\" for Paris.\nLiterary characteristics.\nThe opera libretto from its inception (c.\u20091600) was written in verse, and this continued well into the 19th century, although genres of musical theatre with spoken dialogue have typically alternated verse in the musical numbers with spoken prose. Since the late 19th century some opera composers have written music to prose or free verse libretti. Much of the recitatives of George Gershwin's opera \"Porgy and Bess\", for instance, are merely DuBose and Dorothy Heyward's play \"Porgy\" set to music as written \u2013 in prose \u2013 with the lyrics of the arias, duets, trios and choruses written in verse.\nThe libretto of a musical, on the other hand, is almost always written in prose (except for the song lyrics). The libretto of a musical, if the musical is adapted from a play (or even a novel), may even borrow their source's original dialogue liberally \u2013 much as \"Oklahoma!\" used dialogue from Lynn Riggs's \"Green Grow the Lilacs\", \"Carousel\" used dialogue from Ferenc Moln\u00e1r's \"Liliom\", \"My Fair Lady\" took most of its dialogue word-for-word from George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\", \"Man of La Mancha\" was adapted from the 1959 television play \"I, Don Quixote\", which supplied most of the dialogue, and the 1954 musical version of \"Peter Pan\" used J. M. Barrie's dialogue. Even the musical \"Show Boat\", which is greatly different from the Edna Ferber novel from which it was adapted, uses some of Ferber's original dialogue, notably during the miscegenation scene. And Lionel Bart's \"Oliver!\" uses chunks of dialogue from Charles Dickens's novel \"Oliver Twist\", although it bills itself as a \"free adaptation\" of the novel.\nLanguage and translation.\nAs the originating language of opera, Italian dominated that genre in Europe (except in France) well through the 18th century, and even into the next century in Russia, for example, when the Italian opera troupe in Saint Petersburg was challenged by the emerging native Russian repertory. Significant exceptions before 1800 can be found in Purcell's works, Handel's first operas, ballad opera and Singspiel of the 18th century, etc.\nJust as with literature and song, the libretto has its share of problems and challenges with translation. In the past (and even today), foreign musical stage works with spoken dialogue, especially comedies, were sometimes performed with the sung portions in the original language and the spoken dialogue in the vernacular. The effects of leaving lyrics untranslated depend on the piece. A man like Louis Durdilly would translate the whole libretto, dialogues and airs, into French: Cos\u00ec fan tutte became \" Ainsi font toutes, ou la Fid\u00e9lit\u00e9 des femmes\", and instead of Ferrando singing \"Un' aura amorosa\" French-speaking audiences were treated to Fernand singing \"Ma belle est fid\u00e8le autant qu'elle est belle\".\nMany musicals, such as the old Betty Grable \u2013 Don Ameche \u2013 Carmen Miranda vehicles, are largely unaffected, but this practice is especially misleading in translations of musicals like \"Show Boat\", \"The Wizard of Oz\", \"My Fair Lady\" or \"Carousel\", in which the lyrics to the songs and the spoken text are often or always closely integrated, and the lyrics serve to further the plot. Availability of printed or projected translations today makes singing in the original language more practical, although one cannot discount the desire to hear a sung drama in one's own language.\nThe Spanish words \"libretista\" (playwright, script writer or screenwriter) and \"libreto\" (script or screen play), which are used in the Hispanic TV and cinema industry, derived their meanings from the original operatic sense.\nStatus.\nLibrettists have historically received less prominent credit than the composer. In some 17th-century operas still being performed, the name of the librettist was not even recorded. As the printing of libretti for sale at performances became more common, these records often survive better than music left in manuscript. But even in late 18th century London, reviews rarely mentioned the name of the librettist, as Lorenzo Da Ponte lamented in his memoirs.\nBy the 20th century some librettists became recognised as part of famous collaborations, as with Gilbert and Sullivan or Rodgers and Hammerstein. Today the composer (past or present) of the musical score to an opera or operetta is usually given top billing for the completed work, and the writer of the lyrics relegated to second place or a mere footnote, a notable exception being Gertrude Stein, who received top billing for \"Four Saints in Three Acts\". Another exception was Alberto Franchetti's 1906 opera \"La figlia di Iorio\" which was a close rendering of a highly successful play by its librettist, Gabriele D'Annunzio, a celebrated Italian poet, novelist and dramatist of the day. In some cases, the operatic adaptation has become more famous than the literary text on which it was based, as with Claude Debussy's \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\" after a play by Maurice Maeterlinck.\nThe question of which is more important in opera \u2013 the music or the words \u2013 has been debated over time, and forms the basis of at least two operas, Richard Strauss's \"Capriccio\" and Antonio Salieri's \"Prima la musica e poi le parole\".\nPublication.\nLibretti have been made available in several formats, some more nearly complete than others. The text \u2013 i.e., the spoken dialogue, song lyrics and stage directions, as applicable \u2013 is commonly published separately from the music (such a booklet is usually included with sound recordings of most operas). Sometimes (particularly for operas in the public domain) this format is supplemented with melodic excerpts of musical notation for important numbers.\nPrinted scores for operas naturally contain the entire libretto, although there can exist significant differences between the score and the separately printed text. More often than not, this involves the extra repetition of words or phrases from the libretto in the actual score. For example, in the aria \"Nessun dorma\" from Puccini's \"Turandot\", the final lines in the libretto are \"Tramontate, stelle! All'alba, vincer\u00f2!\" (Fade, you stars! At dawn, I will win!). However, in the score they are sung as \"Tramontate, stelle! Tramontate, stelle! All'alba, vincer\u00f2! Vincer\u00f2! Vincer\u00f2!\".\nBecause the modern musical tends to be published in two separate but intersecting formats (i.e., the book and lyrics, with all the words, and the piano-vocal score, with all the musical material, including some spoken cues), both are needed in order to make a thorough reading of an entire show.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46952", "revid": "17843444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46952", "title": "US State Department", "text": ""}
{"id": "46953", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46953", "title": "Chroma key", "text": "Compositing technique, also known as green screen\nChroma key compositing, or chroma keying, is a visual-effects and post-production technique for compositing (layering) two or more images or video streams together based on colour hues (chroma range). The technique has been used in many fields to remove a background from the subject of a photo or video \u2014 particularly the newscasting, motion picture, and video game industries. A colour range in the foreground footage is made transparent, allowing separately filmed background footage or a static image to be inserted into the scene. The chroma keying technique is commonly used in video production and post-production. This technique is also referred to as colour keying, colour separation overlay (CSO; primarily by the BBC), or by various terms for specific colour-related variants such as green screen or blue screen; chroma keying can be done with backgrounds of any colour that are uniform and distinct, but green and blue backgrounds are more commonly used because they differ most distinctly in hue from any human skin colour. No part of the subject being filmed or photographed may duplicate the colour used as the backing, or the part may be erroneously identified as part of the backing.\nIt is commonly used for live weather forecast broadcasts in which a news presenter is seen standing in front of a CGI map instead of a large blue or green background. Chroma keying is also common in the entertainment industry for visual effects in movies and video games. Rotoscopy may instead be carried out on subjects that are not in front of a green (or blue) screen. Motion tracking can also be used in conjunction with chroma keying, such as to move the background as the subject moves.\nHistory.\nPredecessors.\nPrior to the introduction of travelling mattes and optical printing, double exposure was used to introduce elements into a scene which were not present in the initial exposure. This was done using black draping where a green screen would be used today. George Albert Smith first used this approach in 1898. In 1903, \"The Great Train Robbery\" by Edwin S. Porter used double exposure to add background scenes to windows which were black when filmed on set, using a garbage matte to expose only the window areas.\nIn order to have figures in one exposure actually move in front of a substituted background in the other, a travelling matte was needed, to occlude the correct portion of the background in each frame. In 1918, Frank Williams patented a travelling matte technique, again based on using a black background. This was used in many films, such as \"The Invisible Man\".\nIn the 1920s, Walt Disney used a white backdrop to include human actors with cartoon characters and backgrounds in his \"Alice Comedies\".\nFrom bluescreen to greenscreen.\nThe blue screen method was developed in the 1930s at RKO Radio Pictures. At RKO, Linwood Dunn used an early version of the travelling matte to create \"wipes\" \u2014 where there were transitions like a windshield wiper in films such as \"Flying Down to Rio\" (1933). Credited to Larry Butler, a scene featuring a genie escaping from a bottle was the first use of a proper bluescreen process to create a travelling matte for \"The Thief of Bagdad\" (1940), which won the Academy Award for Best Special Effects that year. In 1950, Warner Brothers employee and ex-Kodak researcher Arthur Widmer began working on an ultraviolet travelling matte process. He also began developing bluescreen techniques: one of the first films to use them was the 1958 adaptation of the Ernest Hemingway novella, \"The Old Man and the Sea\", starring Spencer Tracy.\nThe name \"Chroma-Key\" was RCA's trade name for the process, as used on its NBC television broadcasts, incorporating patents granted to RCA's Albert N. Goldsmith. A very early broadcast use was NBC's George Gobel Show in fall 1957.\nPetro Vlahos was awarded an Academy Award for his refinement of these techniques in 1964. His technique exploits the fact that most objects in real-world scenes have a colour whose blue-colour component is similar in intensity to their green-colour component. Zbigniew Rybczy\u0144ski also contributed to bluescreen technology. An optical printer with two projectors, a film camera and a \"beam splitter\", was used to combine the actor in front of a blue screen together with the background footage, one frame at a time. In the early 1970s, American and British television networks began using green backdrops instead of blue for their newscasts. During the 1980s, minicomputers were used to control the optical printer. For the film \"The Empire Strikes Back\", Richard Edlund created a \"quad optical printer\" that accelerated the process considerably and saved money. He received a special Academy Award for his innovation.\nFor decades, travelling matte shots had to be done \"locked-down\", so that neither the matted subject nor the background could shift their camera perspective at all. Later, computer-timed, motion-control cameras alleviated this problem, as both the foreground and background could be filmed with the same camera moves.\nMeteorologists on television often use a field monitor, to the side of the screen, to see where they are putting their hands against the background images. A newer technique is to project a faint image onto the screen.\nSome films make heavy use of chroma key to add backgrounds that are constructed entirely using computer-generated imagery (CGI). Performances from different takes can be composited together, which allows actors to be filmed separately and then placed together in the same scene. Chroma key allows performers to appear to be in any location without leaving the studio.\nAdvances in computer technology have simplified the incorporation of motion into composited shots, even when using handheld cameras. Reference points such as a painted grid, X's marked with tape, or equally spaced tennis balls attached to the wall, can be placed onto the coloured background to serve as markers. In post-production, a computer can use these markers to compute the camera's position and thus render an image that matches the perspective and movement of the foreground perfectly. Modern advances in software and computational power have eliminated the need to accurately place the markers\u200a\u2060 \u2014 \u200a\u2060the software figures out their position in space; a potential disadvantage of this is that it requires camera movement, possibly contributing to modern cinematographic techniques whereby the camera is always in motion.\nProcess.\nThe principal subject is filmed or photographed against a background consisting of a single colour or a relatively narrow range of colours, usually blue or green because these colours are considered to be the furthest away from skin tone. The portions of the video which match the pre-selected colour are replaced by the alternate background video. This process is commonly known as \"keying\", \"keying out\" or simply a \"key\".\nProcessing a green backdrop.\nGreen is used as a backdrop for TV and electronic cinematography more than any other colour because television weather presenters tended to wear blue suits. When chroma keying first came into use in television production, the blue screen that was then the norm in the movie industry was used out of habit, until other practical considerations caused the television industry to move from blue to green screens. Broadcast-quality colour television cameras use separate red, green, and blue image sensors, and early analog TV chroma keyers required RGB component video to work reliably. From a technological perspective it was equally possible to use the blue or green channel, but because blue clothing was an ongoing challenge, the green screen came into common use. Newscasters sometimes forget the chroma key dress code, and when the key is applied to clothing of the same colour as the background, the person would seem to disappear into the key. Because green clothing is less common than blue, it soon became apparent that it was easier to use a green matte screen than it was to constantly police the clothing choices of on-air talent. Also, because the human eye is more sensitive to green wavelengths, which lie in the middle of the visible light spectrum, the green analog video channel typically carried more signal strength, giving a better signal to noise ratio compared to the other component video channels, so green screen keys could produce the cleanest key. In the digital television and cinema age, much of the tweaking that was required to make a good quality key has been automated. However, the one constant that remains is some level of colour coordination to keep foreground subjects from being keyed out.\nProcessing a blue backdrop.\nBefore electronic chroma keying, compositing was done on (chemical) film. The camera colour negative was printed onto high-contrast black and white negative, using either a filter or the high contrast film's colour sensitivity to expose only blue (and higher) frequencies. Blue light only shines through the colour negative where there is \"not\" blue in the scene, so this left the film clear where the blue screen was, and opaque elsewhere, except it also produced clear for any white objects (since they also contained blue). Removing these spots could be done by a suitable double-exposure with the colour positive (thus turning any area containing red or green opaque), and many other techniques. The result was film that was clear where the blue screen was, and opaque everywhere else. This is called a \"female matte\", similar to an \"alpha matte\" in digital keying. Copying this film onto another high-contrast negative produced the opposite \"male matte\". The background negative was then packed with the female matte and exposed onto a final strip of film, then the camera negative was packed with the male matte and was double-printed onto this same film. These two images combined creates the final effect.\nMajor factors.\nThe most important factor for a key is the colour separation of the foreground (the subject) and background (the screen)\u00a0\u2013 a blue screen will be used if the subject is predominantly green (for example plants), despite the camera being more sensitive to green light.\nIn analog television, colour is represented by the phase of the chroma subcarrier relative to a reference oscillator. Chroma key is achieved by comparing the phase of the video to the phase corresponding to the pre-selected colour. In-phase portions of the video are replaced by the alternate background video.\nIn digital colour TV, colour is represented by three numbers (red, green, blue intensity levels). Chroma key is achieved by a simple numerical comparison between the video and the pre-selected colour. If the colour at a particular point on the screen matches (either exactly, or in a range), then the video at that point is replaced by the alternate background.\nLighting.\nIn order to create an illusion that characters and objects filmed are present in the intended background scene, the lighting in the two scenes must be a reasonable match. For outdoor scenes, overcast days create a diffuse, evenly coloured light which can be easier to match in the studio, whereas direct sunlight needs to be matched in both direction and overall colour based on time of day.\nA studio shot taken in front of a green screen will naturally have ambient light the same colour as the screen, due to its light scattering. This effect is known as \"spill\". This can look unnatural or cause portions of the characters to disappear, so must be compensated for, or avoided by using a larger screen placed far from the actors.\nCamera.\nThe depth of field used to record the scene in front of the coloured screen should match that of the background. This can mean recording the actors with a larger depth of field than normal.\nClothing.\nA chroma key subject must avoid wearing clothes which are similar in colour to the chroma key colour(s) (unless intentional e.g., wearing a green top to make it appear that the subject has no body), because the clothing may be replaced with the background image/video. An example of intentional use of this is when an actor wears a blue covering over a part of his body to make it invisible in the final shot. This technique can be used to achieve an effect similar to that used in the \"Harry Potter\" films to create the effect of an invisibility cloak. The actor can also be filmed against a chroma-key background and inserted into the background shot with a distortion effect, in order to create a cloak that is marginally detectable.\nDifficulties emerge with blue screen when a costume in an effects shot must be blue, such as Superman's traditional blue outfit. In the 2002 film \"Spider-Man\", in scenes where both Spider-Man and the Green Goblin are in the air, Spider-Man had to be shot in front of a green screen and the Green Goblin had to be shot in front of a blue screen. The colour difference is because Spider-Man wears a costume which is red and blue in colour and the Green Goblin wears a costume which is entirely green in colour. If both were shot in front of the same screen, parts of one character would be erased from the shot.\nFor a clean division of foreground from background, it is also important that clothing and hair in the foreground shot have a fairly simple silhouette, as fine details such as frizzy hair may not resolve properly. Similarly, partially transparent elements of the costume cause problems.\nBackground colour.\nBlue was originally used for the film industry as making the separations required a film that would only respond to the screen colour, and film that responded only to blue and higher frequencies (ultraviolet, etc.) was far easier to manufacture and make reliable than film that somehow excluded both frequencies higher and lower than the screen colour.\nIn television and digital film making, however, it is equally easy to extract any colour, and green quickly became the favoured colour. Bright green is less likely to be in the foreground objects, colour film emulsions usually had much finer grain in the green, and lossy compression used for analog video signals and digital images and movies retain more detail in the green channel. Green can also be used outdoors where the light colour temperature is significantly blue. Red is avoided as it is in human skin, and any other colour is a mix of primaries and thus produces a less clean extraction.\nA so-called \"yellow screen\" is accomplished with a white backdrop. Ordinary stage lighting is used in combination with a bright yellow sodium lamp. The sodium light falls almost entirely in a narrow frequency band, which can then be separated from the other light using a prism, and projected onto a separate but synchronized film carrier within the camera. This second film is high-contrast black and white, and is processed to produce the matte.\nA newer technique is to use a retroreflective curtain in the background, along with a ring of bright LEDs around the camera lens. This requires no light to shine on the background other than the LEDs, which use an extremely small amount of power and space unlike big stage lights, and require no rigging. This advance was made possible by the invention in the 1990s of practical blue LEDs, which also allow for emerald green LEDs.\nThere is also a form of colour keying that uses light spectrum invisible to human eye. Called Thermo-Key, it uses infrared as the key colour, which would not be replaced by background image during postprocessing.\nFor \"\", an ultraviolet light matting process was proposed by Don Lee of CIS Hollywood and developed by Gary Hutzel and the staff of Image G. This involved a fluorescent orange backdrop which made it easier to generate a holdout matte, thus allowing the effects team to produce effects in a quarter of the time needed for other methods.\nIn principle, any type of still background can be used as a chroma key instead of a solid colour. First the background is captured without actors or other foreground elements; then the scene is recorded. The image of the background is used to cancel the background in the actual footage; for example in a digital image, each pixel will have a different chroma key. This is sometimes referred to as a \"difference matte\". However, this makes it easy for objects to be accidentally removed if they happen to be similar to the background, or for the background to remain due to camera noise or if it happens to change slightly from the reference footage. A background with a repeating pattern alleviates many of these issues, and can be less sensitive to wardrobe colour than solid-colour backdrops.\nThere is some use of the specific full-intensity magenta colour #FF00FF in digital colour images to encode (1-bit) transparency; this is sometimes referred to as \"magic pink\". This is not a photographic technique, and the extraction of the foreground from the background is trivial.\nTolerances.\nEven lighting.\nThe biggest challenge when setting up a blue screen or green screen is even lighting and the avoidance of shadow because it is best to have as narrow a colour range as possible being replaced. A shadow would present itself as a darker colour to the camera and might not register for replacement. This can sometimes be seen in low-budget or live broadcasts where the errors cannot be manually repaired or scenes reshot. The material being used affects the quality and ease of having it evenly lit. Materials which are shiny will be far less successful than those that are not. A shiny surface will have areas that reflect the lights making them appear pale, while other areas may be darkened. A matte surface will diffuse the reflected light and have a more even colour range. In order to get the cleanest key from shooting green screen, it is necessary to create a value difference between the subject and the green screen. In order to differentiate the subject from the screen, a two-stop difference can be used, either by making the green screen two stops higher than the subject, or vice versa.\nSometimes a shadow can be used to create a visual effect. Areas of the blue screen or green screen with a shadow on them can be replaced with a darker version of the desired background video image, making it look like the person is casting a shadow on them. Any spill of the chroma key colour will make the result look unnatural. A difference in the focal length of the lenses used can affect the success of chroma key.\nExposure.\nAnother challenge for blue screen or green screen is proper camera exposure. Underexposing or overexposing a coloured backdrop can lead to poor saturation levels. In the case of video cameras, underexposed images can contain high amounts of noise, as well. The background must be bright enough to allow the camera to create a bright and saturated image.\nProgramming.\nThere are several different quality- and speed-optimised techniques for implementing colour keying in software.\nIn most versions, a function f(r, g, b) \u2192 \u03b1 is applied to every pixel in the image. \u03b1\u00a0(alpha) has a meaning similar to that in alpha compositing techniques. \u03b1\u00a0\u2264\u00a00 means the pixel is fully in the green screen, \u03b1\u00a0\u2265\u00a01 means the pixel is fully in the foreground object, and intermediate values indicate the pixel is partially covered by the foreground object (or it is transparent). A further function g(r,\u00a0\"g\",\u00a0\"b\")\u00a0\u2192 (r,\u00a0\"g\",\u00a0\"b\") is needed to remove green spill on the foreground objects.\nA very simple f() function for green screen is A(r+\"b\") \u2212 Bg where A and B are user adjustable constants with a default value of 1.0. A very simple g() is (\"r\", min(\"g\",\"b\"), \"b\"). This is fairly close to the capabilities of analog and film-based screen pulling.\nModern examples of these functions are best described by two closed nested surfaces in 3D RGB space, often quite complex. Colours inside the inner surface are considered green screen. Colours outside the outer surface are opaque foreground. Colours between the surfaces are partially covered, they are more opaque the closer they are to the outer surface. Sometimes more closed surfaces are used to determine how to remove green spill. It is also very common for f() to depend on more than just the current pixel's colour, it may also use the (\"x\",\u00a0\"y\") position, the values of nearby pixels, the value from reference images or a statistical colour model of the scene, and values from user-drawn masks. These produce closed surfaces in space with more than three dimensions.\nA different class of algorithm tries to figure out a 2D path that separates the foreground from the background. This path can be the output, or the image can be drawn by filling the path with \u03b1\u00a0=\u00a01 as a final step. An example of such an algorithm is the use of active contour. Most research in recent years has been into these algorithms.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46954", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46954", "title": "Lock", "text": "Lock(s) or Locked may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46955", "revid": "44408056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46955", "title": "Identity map pattern", "text": "Database access design pattern\nIn database design, the identity map pattern is a database access design pattern used to improve performance by providing a context-specific, in-memory cache to prevent duplicate retrieval of the same object data from the database.\nIf the requested data has already been loaded from the database, the identity map returns the same instance of the already instantiated object, but if it has not been loaded yet, it loads it and stores the new object in the map. In this way, it follows a similar principle to lazy loading.\nThere are 4 types of identity maps\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46956", "revid": "50999855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46956", "title": "Cepstrum", "text": "Concept in Fourier analysis\nIn Fourier analysis, the cepstrum (; plural \"cepstra\", adjective \"cepstral\") is the result of computing the inverse Fourier transform (IFT) of the logarithm of the estimated signal spectrum. The method is a tool for investigating periodic structures in frequency spectra. The \"power cepstrum\" has applications in the analysis of human speech.\nThe term \"cepstrum\" was derived by reversing the first four letters of \"spectrum\". Operations on cepstra are labelled \"quefrency analysis\" (or \"quefrency alanysis\"), \"liftering\", or \"cepstral analysis\". It may be pronounced in the two ways given, the second having the advantage of avoiding confusion with \"kepstrum\".\nOrigin.\nThe concept of the cepstrum was introduced in 1963 by B. P. Bogert, M. J. Healy, and J. W. Tukey. It serves as a tool to investigate periodic structures in frequency spectra. Such effects are related to noticeable echos or reflections in the signal, or to the occurrence of harmonic frequencies (partials, overtones). Mathematically it deals with the problem of deconvolution of signals in the frequency space.\nReferences to the Bogert paper, in a bibliography, are often edited incorrectly. The terms \"quefrency\", \"alanysis\", \"cepstrum\" and \"saphe\" were invented by the authors by rearranging the letters in frequency, analysis, spectrum, and phase. The invented terms are defined in analogy to the older terms.\nGeneral definition.\nThe cepstrum is the result of following sequence of mathematical operations:\nTypes.\nThe cepstrum is used in many variants. Most important are:\nThe following abbreviations are used in the formulas to explain the cepstrum:\nPower cepstrum.\nThe \"cepstrum\" was originally defined as power cepstrum by the following relationship:\nformula_1\nThe power cepstrum has main applications in analysis of sound and vibration signals. It is a complementary tool to spectral analysis.\nSometimes it is also defined as:\nformula_2\nDue to this formula, the cepstrum is also sometimes called the \"spectrum of a spectrum\". It can be shown that both formulas are consistent with each other as the frequency spectral distribution remains the same, the only difference being a scaling factor which can be applied afterwards. Some articles prefer the second formula.\nOther notations are possible due to the fact that the log of the power spectrum is equal to the log of the spectrum if a scaling factor 2 is applied:\nformula_3 \nand therefore:\nformula_4\nformula_5\nwhich provides a relationship to the \"real cepstrum\" (see below).\nFurther, it shall be noted, that the final squaring operation in the formula for the power cepstrum formula_6 is sometimes called unnecessary and therefore sometimes omitted.\nThe real cepstrum is directly related to the power cepstrum:\nformula_7\nIt is derived from the complex cepstrum (defined below) by discarding the phase information (contained in the imaginary part of the complex logarithm). It has a focus on periodic effects in the amplitudes of the spectrum:\nformula_8\nComplex cepstrum.\nThe complex cepstrum was defined by Oppenheim in his development of homomorphic system theory. The formula is provided also in other literature.\nformula_9\nAs formula_10 is complex the log-term can be also written with formula_10 as a product of magnitude and phase, and subsequently as a sum. Further simplification is obvious, if log is a natural logarithm with base\u00a0\"e\":\nformula_12\nThe complex cepstrum retains the information about the phase. Thus it is always possible to return from the quefrency domain to the time domain by the inverse operation:\nformula_13\nwhere \"b\" is the base of the used logarithm.\nMain application is the modification of the signal in the quefrency domain (liftering) as an analog operation to filtering in the spectral frequency domain. An example is the suppression of echo effects by suppression of certain quefrencies.\nThe phase cepstrum (after phase spectrum) is related to the complex cepstrum as\n phase spectrum = (complex cepstrum \u2212 time reversal of complex cepstrum)2.\nRelated concepts.\nThe independent variable of a cepstral graph is called the quefrency. The quefrency is a measure of time, though not in the sense of a signal in the time domain. For example, if the sampling rate of an audio signal is 44100\u00a0Hz and there is a large peak in the cepstrum whose quefrency is 100 samples, the peak indicates the presence of a fundamental frequency that is 44100/100 = 441\u00a0Hz. This peak occurs in the cepstrum because the harmonics in the spectrum are periodic and the period corresponds to the fundamental frequency, since harmonics are integer multiples of the fundamental frequency.\nThe \"kepstrum\", which stands for \"Kolmogorov-equation power-series time response\", is similar to the cepstrum and has the same relation to it as expected value has to statistical average, i.e. cepstrum is the empirically measured quantity, while kepstrum is the theoretical quantity. It was in use before the cepstrum.\n The autocepstrum is defined as the cepstrum of the autocorrelation. The autocepstrum is more accurate than the cepstrum in the analysis of data with echoes.\nPlaying further on the anagram theme, a filter that operates on a cepstrum might be called a \"lifter\". A low-pass lifter is similar to a low-pass filter in the frequency domain. It can be implemented by multiplying by a window in the quefrency domain and then converting back to the frequency domain, resulting in a modified signal, i.e. with signal echo being reduced.\nInterpretation.\nThe cepstrum can be seen as information about the rate of change in the different spectrum bands. It was originally invented for characterizing the seismic echoes resulting from earthquakes and bomb explosions. It has also been used to determine the fundamental frequency of human speech and to analyze radar signal returns. Cepstrum pitch determination is particularly effective because the effects of the vocal excitation (pitch) and vocal tract (formants) are additive in the logarithm of the power spectrum and thus clearly separate.\nThe cepstrum is a representation used in homomorphic signal processing, to convert signals combined by convolution (such as a source and filter) into sums of their cepstra, for linear separation. In particular, the power cepstrum is often used as a feature vector for representing the human voice and musical signals. For these applications, the spectrum is usually first transformed using the mel scale. The result is called the mel-frequency cepstrum or MFC (its coefficients are called mel-frequency cepstral coefficients, or MFCCs). It is used for voice identification, pitch detection and much more. The cepstrum is useful in these applications because the low-frequency periodic excitation from the vocal cords and the formant filtering of the vocal tract, which convolve in the time domain and multiply in the frequency domain, are additive and in different regions in the quefrency domain.\nNote that a pure sine wave can not be used to test the cepstrum for its pitch determination from quefrency as a pure sine wave does not contain any harmonics and does not lead to quefrency peaks. Rather, a test signal containing harmonics should be used (such as the sum of at least two sines where the second sine is some harmonic (multiple) of the first sine, or better, a signal with a square or triangle waveform, as such signals provide many overtones in the spectrum.).\nAn important property of the cepstral domain is that the convolution of two signals can be expressed as the addition of their complex cepstra:\n formula_14\nApplications.\nThe concept of the cepstrum has led to numerous applications:\nRecently, cepstrum-based deconvolution was used on surface electromyography signals, to remove the effect of the stochastic impulse train, which originates an sEMG signal, from the power spectrum of the sEMG signal itself. In this way, only information about the motor unit action potential (MUAP) shape and amplitude was maintained, which was then used to estimate the parameters of a time-domain model of the MUAP itself.\nA short-time cepstrum analysis was proposed by Schroeder and Noll in the 1960s for application to pitch determination of human speech.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46957", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46957", "title": "Quefrency", "text": ""}
{"id": "46958", "revid": "1633765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46958", "title": "Lifter", "text": "Lifter may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46959", "revid": "16809467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46959", "title": "Koch snowflake", "text": "Fractal curve\nThe Koch snowflake (also known as the Koch curve, Koch star, or Koch island) is a fractal curve and one of the earliest fractals to have been described. It is based on the Koch curve, which appeared in a 1904 paper titled \"On a Continuous Curve Without Tangents, Constructible from Elementary Geometry\" by the Swedish mathematician Helge von Koch.\nThe Koch snowflake can be built up iteratively, in a sequence of stages. The first stage is an equilateral triangle, and each successive stage is formed by adding outward bends to each side of the previous stage, making smaller equilateral triangles. The areas enclosed by the successive stages in the construction of the snowflake converge to formula_1 times the area of the original triangle, while the perimeters of the successive stages increase without bound. Consequently, the snowflake encloses a finite area, but has an infinite perimeter.\nThe Koch snowflake has been constructed as an example of a continuous curve where drawing a tangent line to any point is impossible. Unlike the earlier Weierstrass function where the proof was purely analytical, the Koch snowflake was created to be possible to geometrically represent at the time, so that this property could also be seen through \"naive intuition\".\nOrigin and history.\nThere is no doubt that the snowflake curve is based on the von Koch curve and its iterative construction. However, the picture of the snowflake does not appear in either the original article published in 1904 nor in the extended 1906 memoir. So one can ask who is the man who constructed the snowflake figure first. An investigation of this question suggests that the snowflake curve is due to the American mathematician Edward Kasner.\nConstruction.\nThe Koch snowflake can be constructed by starting with an equilateral triangle, then recursively altering each line segment as follows:\nThe first iteration of this process produces the outline of a hexagram.\nThe Koch snowflake is the limit approached as the above steps are followed indefinitely. The Koch curve originally described by Helge von Koch is constructed using only one of the three sides of the original triangle. In other words, three Koch curves make a Koch snowflake.\nA Koch curve\u2013based representation of a nominally flat surface can similarly be created by repeatedly segmenting each line in a sawtooth pattern of segments with a given angle. \nProperties.\nPerimeter of the Koch snowflake.\nThe arc length of the Koch snowflake is infinite. To show this, we note that each iteration of the construction is a polygonal approximation of the curve. Thus, it suffices to show that the perimeters of the iterates is unbounded.\nThe perimeter of the snowflake after formula_2 iterations, in terms of the side length formula_3 of the original triangle, is\nformula_4\nwhich diverges to infinity.\nArea of the Koch snowflake.\nThe total area of the snowflake after formula_2 iterations is, in terms of the original area formula_6 of the original triangle, is the geometric series\nformula_7\nTaking the limit as formula_2 approaches infinity, the area of the Koch snowflake is formula_1 of the area of the original triangle. Expressed in terms of the side length formula_3 of the original triangle, this is: \nformula_11\nSolid of revolution.\nThe volume of the solid of revolution of the Koch snowflake about an axis of symmetry of the initiating equilateral triangle of unit side is formula_12\nOther properties.\nThe Koch snowflake is self-replicating with six smaller copies surrounding one larger copy at the center. Hence, it is an irrep-7 irrep-tile (see Rep-tile for discussion).\nThe Hausdorff dimension of the Koch curve is formula_13. This is greater than that of a line (formula_14) but less than that of Peano's space-filling curve (formula_15).\nThe Hausdorff measure of the Koch curve formula_16 satisfies formula_17, but its exact value is unknown. It is conjectured that formula_18.\nIt is impossible to draw a tangent line to any point of the curve.\nRepresentation as a de Rham curve.\nThe Koch curve arises as a special case of a de Rham curve. The de Rham curves are mappings of Cantor space into the plane, usually arranged so as to form a continuous curve. Every point on a continuous de Rham curve corresponds to a real number in the unit interval. For the Koch curve, the tips of the snowflake correspond to the dyadic rationals: each tip can be uniquely labeled with a distinct dyadic rational.\nTessellation of the plane.\nIt is possible to tessellate the plane by copies of Koch snowflakes in two different sizes. However, such a tessellation is not possible using only snowflakes of one size. Since each Koch snowflake in the tessellation can be subdivided into seven smaller snowflakes of two different sizes, it is also possible to find tessellations that use more than two sizes at once. Koch snowflakes and Koch antisnowflakes of the same size may be used to tile the plane.\nThue\u2013Morse sequence and turtle graphics.\nA turtle graphic is the curve that is generated if an automaton is programmed with a sequence.\nIf the Thue\u2013Morse sequence members are used in order to select program states:\nthe resulting curve converges to the Koch snowflake.\nRepresentation as Lindenmayer system.\nThe Koch curve can be expressed by the following rewrite system (Lindenmayer system):\nAlphabet : F\nConstants : +, \u2212\nAxiom : F\nProduction rules : F \u2192 F+F--F+F\nHere, \"F\" means \"draw forward\", \"-\" means \"turn right 60\u00b0\", and \"+\" means \"turn left 60\u00b0\".\nTo create the Koch snowflake, one would use F--F--F (an equilateral triangle) as the axiom.\nVariants of the Koch curve.\nFollowing von Koch's concept, several variants of the Koch curve were designed, considering right angles (quadratic), other angles (Ces\u00e0ro), circles and polyhedra and their extensions to higher dimensions (Sphereflake and Kochcube, respectively)\nSquares can be used to generate similar fractal curves. Starting with a unit square and adding to each side at each iteration a square with dimension one third of the squares in the previous iteration, it can be shown that both the length of the perimeter and the total area are determined by geometric progressions. The progression for the area converges to formula_22 while the progression for the perimeter diverges to infinity, so as in the case of the Koch snowflake, we have a finite area bounded by an infinite fractal curve. The resulting area fills a square with the same center as the original, but twice the area, and rotated by formula_23 radians, the perimeter touching but never overlapping itself.\nThe total area covered at the formula_2th iteration is:\nformula_25\nwhile the total length of the perimeter is:\nformula_26\nwhich approaches infinity as formula_2 increases.\nFunctionalisation.\nIn addition to the curve, the paper by Helge von Koch that has established the Koch curve shows a variation of the curve as an example of a continuous everywhere yet nowhere differentiable function that was possible to represent geometrically at the time. From the base straight line, represented as AB, the graph can be drawn by recursively applying the following on each line segment:\nEach point of \"AB\" can be shown to converge to a single height. If formula_29 is defined as the distance of that point to the initial base, then formula_30 as a function is continuous everywhere and differentiable nowhere.\nApplications.\nBecause the Koch snowflake has a finite area but an infinitely long boundary, it serves as a model for designs that require maximized perimeter or surface length within limited space. In antenna engineering, incorporating a Koch-type fractal design increases the perimeter of the material that transmits or receives electromagnetic radiation, allowing the construction of compact antennas suited to confined or complex circuit layouts. In acoustic engineering, a Koch snowflake-inspired acoustic metasurface has been tested for broadband sound diffusion in automotive cabins. The Koch snowflake geometry has also been applied to enhance heat transfer performance in double-pipe heat exchangers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46961", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46961", "title": "Thomas Crapper", "text": "British businessman, plumber (died 1910)\nThomas Crapper (baptised 28 September 1836; died 27 January 1910) was an English plumber and businessman. He founded Thomas Crapper &amp; Co in London, a plumbing equipment company. His notability with regard to toilets has often been overstated, mostly due to the publication in 1969 of a tongue-in-cheek biography by New Zealand satirist Wallace Reyburn.\nCrapper held nine patents, three of them for water closet improvements such as the floating ballcock. He improved the S-bend plumbing trap in 1880 by inventing the U-bend. The firm's lavatorial equipment was manufactured at premises in nearby Marlborough Road (now Draycott Avenue). The company owned the world's first bath, toilet and sink showroom in King's Road. Crapper was noted for the quality of his products and received several royal warrants.\nManhole covers with Crapper's company's name on them in Westminster Abbey have become one of London's minor tourist attractions.\nLife.\nThomas Crapper was born in Thorne, West Riding of Yorkshire, in 1836; the exact date is unknown, but he was baptised on 28 September 1836. His father, Charles, was a sailor. In 1853, he was apprenticed to his brother George, a master plumber in Chelsea, and thereafter spent three years as a journeyman plumber.\nIn 1861 Crapper set himself up as a sanitary engineer with his own brass foundry and workshops in nearby Marlborough Road.\nIn the 1880s Prince Albert (later Edward VII) purchased his country seat of Sandringham House in Norfolk and asked Thomas Crapper &amp; Co. to supply the plumbing, including thirty lavatories with cedarwood seats and enclosures, thus giving Crapper his first Royal Warrant. The firm received further warrants from Edward as king and from George V, both as Prince of Wales and as king.\nIn 1904 Crapper retired, passing the firm to his nephew George and his business partner Robert Marr Wharam. Crapper lived at 12 Thornsett Road, Anerley, for the last six years of his life and died on 27 January 1910. He was buried in the nearby Elmers End Cemetery.\nPosthumous fate of the Crapper company.\nIn 1966 the Crapper company was sold by then-owner Robert G. Wharam (son of Robert Marr Wharam) upon his retirement to its rival John Bolding &amp; Sons. Bolding went into liquidation in 1969. The company fell out of use until it was acquired by Simon Kirby, a historian and collector of antique bathroom fittings, who relaunched the company in Stratford-upon-Avon, producing authentic reproductions of Crapper's original Victorian bathroom fittings.\nAchievements.\nAs the first man to set up public showrooms for displaying sanitary ware, Crapper became known as an advocate of sanitary plumbing, popularising the notion of installation inside people's homes. He also helped refine and develop improvements to existing plumbing and sanitary fittings. As a part of his business he maintained a foundry and metal shop, which enabled him to try out new designs and develop more efficient plumbing solutions.\nCrapper improved the S-bend trap in 1880. The new U-bend plumbing trap was a significant improvement on the \"S\" as it could not jam, and unlike the S-bend, it did not have a tendency to dry out and did not need an overflow. The BBC nominated the S-bend as one of the \"50 Things That (have) Made the Modern Economy\".\nCrapper held nine patents, three of them for water closet improvements such as the floating ballcock, but none for the flush toilet itself.\nCrapper's advertisements implied the siphonic flush was his invention. One such advertisement read, \"Crapper's Valveless Water Waste Preventer (Patent #4,990) One movable part only\", even though patent 4,990 (for a minor improvement to the water waste preventer) was not his, but that of Albert Giblin in 1898. However, Crapper's nephew, George, did improve the siphon mechanism by which the water flow starts. A patent for this development was awarded in 1897.\nOrigin of the word \"crap\".\nIt has often been claimed in popular culture that the vulgar slang term for human bodily waste, \"crap\", originated with Thomas Crapper because of his association with lavatories. A common version of this story is that American servicemen stationed in England during World War I saw his name on cisterns and used it as Army slang, i.e., \"I'm going to the crapper\".\nThe word \"crap\" is actually of Middle English origin and predates its application to bodily waste. Its most likely etymological origin is a combination of two older words: the Dutch \"krappen\" (to pluck off, cut off, or separate) and the Old French \"crappe\" (siftings, waste or rejected matter, from the medieval Latin \"crappa\"). In English, it was used to refer to chaff and also to weeds or other rubbish. Its first recorded application to bodily waste, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", appeared in 1846, 10 years after Crapper was born, under a reference to a \"crapping ken,\" or a privy, where \"ken\" means a house.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46963", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46963", "title": "Cunt", "text": "Vulgar term\nCunt () is a vulgar word for the vulva in its primary sense, and it is used in a variety of ways, including as a term of disparagement. It is often used as a disparaging and obscene term for a woman in the United States, an unpleasant or objectionable person (regardless of gender) in the United Kingdom and Ireland, or a contemptible man in Australia and New Zealand. In Australia and New Zealand, it can also be a neutral or positive term when used with a positive qualifier (e.g., \"He's a good cunt\"). The term has various derivative senses, including adjective and verb uses.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known use of the word, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", was as part of a placename: an Oxford street called Gropecunt Lane, c.\u20091230, now by the name of Grove Passage or Magpie Lane. Use of the word as a term of abuse is relatively recent, dating from the late nineteenth century. The word was not considered vulgar in the Middle Ages, but became so during the seventeenth century, and it was omitted from dictionaries from the late eighteenth century until the 1960s.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of \"cunt\" is a matter of debate, but most sources consider the word to have derived from a Germanic word (Proto-Germanic \"*kunt\u014d\", stem \"*kunt\u014dn-\"), which appeared as in Old Norse. Scholars are uncertain of the origin of the Proto-Germanic form itself. There are cognates in most Germanic languages, most of which also have the same meaning as the English cunt, such as the Swedish, Faroese and Nynorsk ; West Frisian and Middle Low German ; another Middle Low German ; Middle High German (meaning \"\"); modern German ; Middle Dutch ; modern Dutch words (same meaning) and (\"butt\", \"arse\"); and perhaps Old English .\nThe etymology of the Proto-Germanic term is disputed. It may have arisen by Grimm's law operating on the Proto-Indo-European root \" seen in gonads, genital, gamete, genetics, gene, or the Proto-Indo-European root \" (, seen in gynaecology). Similarly, its use in England likely evolved from the Latin word \"cunnus\" (\"vulva\"), or one of its derivatives French \"con\", Spanish \"co\u00f1o\", and Galician/Portuguese \"cona\". Other Latin words related to \"cunnus\" are (\") and its derivative (\", (figurative) \"\"), leading to English words such as \"cuneiform\" (\"\"). In Middle English, \"cunt\" appeared with many spellings, such as , and , which did not always reflect the actual pronunciation of the word.\nThe word, in its modern meaning, is attested in Middle English. \"Proverbs of Hendyng\", a manuscript from some time before 1325, includes the advice:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(Give your cunt wisely and make [your] demands after the wedding.)\nOffensiveness.\nGenerally.\nThe word \"cunt\" is generally regarded in English-speaking countries as profanity and unsuitable for normal public discourse. It has been described as \"the most heavily tabooed word of all English words\", although John Ayto, editor of the \"Oxford Dictionary of Slang\", says \"nigger\" is more taboo.\nFeminist perspectives.\nSome American feminists of the 1970s sought to eliminate disparaging terms for women, including \"bitch\" and \"cunt\". In the context of pornography, Catharine MacKinnon argued that use of the word acts to reinforce a dehumanisation of women by reducing them to mere body parts; and in 1979 Andrea Dworkin described the word as reducing women to \"the one essential \u2013 'cunt: our essence ... our offence'\".\nDespite criticisms, there is a movement among feminists that seeks to reclaim \"cunt\" not only as acceptable, but as an honorific, in much the same way that \"queer\" has been reappropriated by LGBT people and \"nigger\" has been by some African Americans. Proponents include artist Tee Corinne in \"The Cunt Coloring Book\" (1975); Eve Ensler in \"Reclaiming Cunt\" from \"The Vagina Monologues\" (1996); and Inga Muscio in her book, \"\" (1998).\nGermaine Greer, the feminist writer and professor of English who once published a magazine article entitled \"Lady, Love Your Cunt\" (anthologised in 1986), discussed the origins, usage and power of the word in the BBC series \"Balderdash and Piffle\", explaining how her views had developed over time. In the 1970s she had \"championed\" the use of the word for the female genitalia, thinking it \"shouldn't be abusive\"; she rejected the \"proper\" word vagina, a Latin name meaning \"sword-sheath\" originally applied by male anatomists to all muscle coverings (see synovial sheath) \u2013 not just because it refers only to the internal canal but also because of the implication that the female body is \"simply a receptacle for a weapon\". But in 2006, referring to its use as a term of abuse, she said that, though used in some quarters as a term of affection, it had become \"the most offensive insult one man could throw at another\" and suggested that the word was \"sacred\", and \"a word of immense power, to be used sparingly\". Greer said in 2006 that \"'cunt' is one of the few remaining words in the English language with a genuine power to shock.\"\nUsage: pre-twentieth century.\n\"Cunt\" has been attested in its anatomical meaning since at least the 13th century. While Francis Grose's 1785 \"A Classical Dictionary of The Vulgar Tongue\" listed the word as \"C**T: a nasty name for a nasty thing\", it did not appear in any major English dictionary from 1795 to 1961, when it was included in \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\" with the comment \"usu. considered obscene\". Its first appearance in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" was in 1972, which cites the word as having been in use from 1230 in what was supposedly a London street name of \"Gropecunte Lane\". It was, however, also used before 1230, having been brought over by the Anglo-Saxons, originally not an obscenity but rather an ordinary name for the vulva or vagina. Gropecunt Lane was originally a street of prostitution, a red light district. It was normal in the Middle Ages for streets to be named after the goods available for sale therein, hence the prevalence in cities having a medieval history of names such as \"Silver Street\" and \"Fish Street\". In some locations, the former name has been bowdlerised, as in the City of York, to the more acceptable \"Grape Lane\".\nThe somewhat similar word 'queynte' appears several times in Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\" (c. 1390), in bawdy contexts, but since it is used openly, does not appear to have been considered obscene at that time. A notable use is from the \"Miller's Tale\": \"Pryvely he caught her by the queynte.\" The Wife of Bath also uses this term, \"For certeyn, olde dotard, by your leave/You shall have queynte right enough at eve\u00a0... What aileth you to grouche thus and groan?/Is it for ye would have my queynte alone?\" In modernised versions of these passages the word \"queynte\" is usually translated simply as \"cunt\". However, in Chaucer's usage there seems to be an overlap between the words \"cunt\" and \"quaint\" (possibly derived from the Latin for \"known\"). \"Quaint\" was probably pronounced in Middle English in much the same way as \"cunt\". It is sometimes unclear whether the two words were thought of as distinct from one another. Elsewhere in Chaucer's work the word \"queynte\" seems to be used with meaning comparable to the modern \"quaint\" (curious or old-fashioned, but nevertheless appealing). This ambiguity was still being exploited by the 17th century; Andrew Marvell's \"... then worms shall try / That long preserved virginity, / And your quaint honour turn to dust, / And into ashes all my lust\" in \"To His Coy Mistress\" depends on a pun on these two senses of \"quaint\".\nBy Shakespeare's day, the word seems to have become obscene. Although Shakespeare does not use the word explicitly (or with derogatory meaning) in his plays, he still uses wordplay to sneak it in obliquely. In Act III, Scene 2, of \"Hamlet\", as the castle's residents are settling in to watch the play-within-the-play, Hamlet asks his girlfriend Ophelia, \"Lady, shall I lie in your lap?\" Ophelia replies, \"No, my lord.\" Hamlet, feigning shock, says, \"Do you think I meant \"country matters\"?\" Then, to drive home the point that the accent is definitely on the first syllable of \"country\", Shakespeare has Hamlet say, \"That's a fair thought, to lie between maids' legs.\" In \"Twelfth Night\" (Act II, Scene V) the puritanical Malvolio believes he recognises his employer's handwriting in an anonymous letter, commenting \"There be her very Cs, her Us, and her Ts: and thus makes she her great Ps\", unwittingly punning on \"cunt\" and \"piss\", and while it has also been argued that the slang term \"cut\" is intended, Pauline Kiernan writes that Shakespeare ridicules \"prissy puritanical party-poopers\" by having \"a Puritan spell out the word 'cunt' on a public stage\". A related scene occurs in \"Henry V\": when Katherine is learning English, she is appalled at the \"gros, et impudique\" words \"foot\" and \"gown\", which her teacher has mispronounced as \"coun\". It is usually argued that Shakespeare intends to suggest that she has misheard \"foot\" as \"foutre\" (French, \"fuck\") and \"coun\" as \"con\" (French \"cunt\", also used to mean \"idiot\").\nSimilarly, John Donne alludes to the obscene meaning of the word without being explicit in his poem \"The Good-Morrow\", referring to sucking on \"country pleasures\". The 1675 Restoration comedy \"The Country Wife\" also features such word play, even in its title.\nBy the 17th century, a softer form of the word, \"cunny\", came into use. A well-known use of this derivation can be found in the 25 October 1668 entry of the diary of Samuel Pepys. He was discovered having an affair with Deborah Willet: he wrote that his wife \"coming up suddenly, did find me embracing the girl con [with] my hand sub [under] su [her] coats; and endeed I was with my main [hand] in her cunny. I was at a wonderful loss upon it and the girl also\u00a0...\"\n\"Cunny\" was probably derived from a pun on \"coney\", meaning \"rabbit\", rather as \"pussy\" is connected to the same term for a cat. (Philip Massinger (1583\u20131640): \"A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry, like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'\") Because of this slang use as a synonym for a taboo term, the word \"coney\", when it was used in its original sense to refer to rabbits, came to be pronounced as (rhymes with \"phoney\"), instead of the original (rhymes with \"honey\"). Eventually, the taboo association led to the word \"coney\" becoming deprecated entirely and replaced by the word \"rabbit\".\nRobert Burns (1759\u20131796) used the word in his \"\", a collection of bawdy verses which he kept to himself and were not publicly available until the mid-1960s. In \"Yon, Yon, Yon, Lassie\", this couplet appears: \"For ilka birss upon her cunt, Was worth a ryal ransom\" (\"For every hair upon her cunt was worth a royal ransom\").\nUsage: modern.\nAs a term of abuse.\nMerriam-Webster states it is a \"usually disparaging and obscene\" term for a woman, and that it is an \"offensive way to refer to a woman\" in the United States. In American slang, the term can also be used to refer to \"a fellow male homosexual one dislikes\". Australian scholar Emma Alice Jane describes how the term as used on modern social media is an example of what she calls \"gendered vitriol\", and an example of misogynistic e-bile. As a broader derogatory term, it is comparable to \"prick\" and means \"a fool, a dolt, an unpleasant person \u2013 of either sex\". This sense is common in New Zealand, British, and Australian English, where it is usually applied to men or as referring \"specifically\" to \"a despicable, contemptible or foolish\" \"man\".\nDuring the 1971 Oz trial for obscenity, prosecuting counsel asked writer George Melly, \"Would you call your 10-year-old daughter a cunt?\" Melly replied, \"No, because I don't think she is.\"\nIn the 1975 film \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\", the central character McMurphy, when pressed to explain exactly why he does not like the tyrannical Nurse Ratched, says, \"Well, I don't want to break up the meeting or nothing, but she's something of a cunt, ain't she, Doc?\"\nOther usage.\nIn informal British, Irish, New Zealand, and Australian English, and occasionally but to a lesser extent in Canadian English, it can be used with no negative connotations to refer to a (usually male) person. In this sense, it may be modified by a positive qualifier (funny, clever, etc.). For example, \"This is my mate Brian. He's a good cunt.\" In Welsh, (the Welsh equivalent) is sometimes used as a term of endearment, such as the phrase (lit.\u2009'okay cunt') in Caernarfon.\nIt can also be used to refer to something very difficult or unpleasant (as in \"a cunt of a job\").\nIn the Survey of English Dialects the word was recorded in some areas as meaning \"the vulva of a cow\". This was pronounced as [k\u028cnt] in Devon, and [k\u028ant] in the Isle of Man, Gloucestershire and Northumberland. Possibly related was the word \"cunny\" [k\u028cni], with the same meaning, in Wiltshire.\nThe word \"cunty\" is also known, although used rarely: a line from Hanif Kureishi's \"My Beautiful Laundrette\" is the definition of England by a Pakistani immigrant as \"eating hot buttered toast with cunty fingers\", suggestive of hypocrisy and a hidden sordidness or immorality behind the country's quaint fa\u00e7ade. This term is attributed to British novelist Henry Green. In the United States, \"cunty\" is sometimes used in cross-dressing drag ball culture for a drag queen that \"projects feminine beauty\" and was the title of a hit song by Aviance. A visitor to a New York drag show tells of the emcee praising a queen with \"cunty, cunty, cunty\" as she walks past.\nRapper Azealia Banks is known for her frequent usage of the word, and her fans are known as the Kunt Brigade. She's said in one interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"To be cunty is to be feminine and to be, like, aware of yourself. Nobody's fucking with that inner strength and delicateness. The cunts, the gay men, adore that. My friends would say, \"Oh you need to cunt it up! You're being too banjee.\"\nIn the 2020s, the phrase \"serving cunt\" (or to \"serve cunt\") became popular as a term for acting in a powerfully and unapologetically feminine manner.\nFrequency of use.\nFrequency of use varies widely. According to research in 2013 and 2014 by Aston University and the University of South Carolina, based on a corpus of nearly 9 billion words in geotagged tweets, the word was most frequently used in the United States in New England and was least frequently used in the south-eastern states. In Maine, it was the most frequently used \"cuss word\" after \"asshole\".\nExamples of use.\nLiterature.\nJames Joyce was one of the first major 20th-century novelists to put the word \"cunt\" into print. In the context of one of the central characters in \"Ulysses\" (1922), Leopold Bloom, Joyce refers to the Dead Sea and to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... the oldest people. Wandered far away over all the earth, captivity to captivity, multiplying, dying, being born everywhere. It lay there now. Now it could bear no more. Dead: an old woman's: the grey sunken cunt of the world.\nJoyce uses the word figuratively rather than literally; but while Joyce used the word only once in \"Ulysses\", with four other wordplays ('cunty') on it, D. H. Lawrence later used the word ten times in \"Lady Chatterley's Lover\" (1928), in a more direct sense. Mellors, the gamekeeper and eponymous lover, tries delicately to explain the definition of the word to Lady Constance Chatterley: \"If your sister there comes ter me for a bit o' cunt an' tenderness, she knows what she's after.\" The novel was the subject of an unsuccessful UK prosecution in 1961 against its publishers, Penguin Books, on grounds of obscenity.\nSamuel Beckett was an associate of Joyce, and in his \"Malone Dies\" (1956), he writes: \"His young wife had abandoned all hope of bringing him to heel, by means of her cunt, that trump card of young wives.\" In 1998, Inga Muscio published \"\". In Ian McEwan's novel \"Atonement\" (2001), set in 1935, the word is used in the draft of a love letter mistakenly sent instead of a revised version and, although not spoken, is an important plot pivot.\nIrvine Welsh uses the word widely in his novels, such as \"Trainspotting\", generally as a generic placeholder for a man, and not always negatively, e.g. \"Ah wis the cunt wi the fuckin pool cue in ma hand, n the plukey cunt could huv the fat end ay it in his pus if he wanted, like.\"\nArt.\nThe word is occasionally used in the titles of works of art, such as Peter Renosa's portrait of the pop singer Madonna, \"I am the Cunt of Western Civilization\", from a 1990 quote by the singer. One of the first works of Gilbert &amp; George was a self-portrait in 1969 entitled \"Gilbert the Shit and George the Cunt\". The London performance art group the Neo Naturists had a song and an act called \"Cunt Power\", a name which potter Grayson Perry borrowed for one of his early works: \"An unglazed piece of modest dimensions, made from terracotta like clay \u2013 labia carefully formed with once wet material, about its midriff\". Australian artist Greg Taylor's display of scores of white porcelain vulvas, \"CUNTS and other conversations\" (2009), was deemed controversial for both its title and content, with Australia Post warning the artist that the publicity postcards were illegal.\nTheatre.\nTheatre censorship was effectively abolished in the UK in 1968; prior to that, all theatrical productions had to be vetted by Lord Chamberlain's Office. English stand-up comedian Roy \"Chubby\" Brown claims that he was the first person to say the word on stage in the United Kingdom.\nTelevision.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBroadcast media is regulated for content, and media providers such as the BBC have guidelines which specify how \"cunt\" and similar words should be treated. In a survey of 2000 commissioned by the British Broadcasting Standards Commission, Independent Television Commission, BBC and Advertising Standards Authority, \"cunt\" was regarded as the most offensive word which could be heard, above \"motherfucker\" and \"fuck\". Nevertheless, there have been occasions when, particularly in a live broadcast, the word has been aired outside editorial control:\nThe first scripted uses of the word on British television occurred in 1979, in the ITV drama \"No Mama No\". In \"Jerry Springer \u2013 The Opera\" (BBC, 2005), the suggestion that the Christ character might be gay was found more controversial than the chant describing the Devil as \"cunting, cunting, cunting, cunting cunt\". In 2016, the BBC announced that there was \"strong editorial justification\" for airing especially profane dialogue from a 1978 Derek and Clive sketch in the BBC Four documentary \"The Undiscovered Peter Cook\"; containing 12 uses of \"cunt\" and 15 uses of \"fuck\" over its 70-second duration, the clip was named \"almost certainly\" the \"most profanity riddled rant ever broadcast on British TV\" by the \"Radio Times\", and its broadcast was only allowed after BBC head of television Charlotte Moore gave her clear approval.\nIn July 2007 BBC Three broadcast an hour-long documentary, entitled \"The 'C' Word\", about the origins, use and evolution of the word from the early 1900s to the present day. Presented by British comedian Will Smith, viewers were taken to a street in Oxford once called Gropecunt Lane and presented with examples of the acceptability of \"cunt\" as a word. (Note that \"the C-word\" is also a long-standing euphemism for cancer; Lisa Lynch's book led to a BBC1 drama, both with that title.)\nThe \"Attitudes to potentially offensive language and gestures on TV and radio\" report by Ofcom, based on research conducted by Ipsos MORI, categorised the usage of the word 'cunt' as a highly unacceptable pre-watershed, but generally acceptable post-watershed, along with 'fuck' and 'motherfucker'. Discriminatory words were generally considered as more offensive than the most offensive non-discriminatory words such as 'cunt' by the UK public, with discriminatory words being more regulated as a result.\nUnited States.\nThe first scripted use on US television was on the \"Larry Sanders Show\" in 1992, and a notable use occurred in \"Sex and the City\". In the US, an episode of the NBC TV show \"30 Rock\", titled \"The C Word\", centered around a subordinate calling protagonist Liz Lemon (Tina Fey) a \"cunt\" and her subsequent efforts to regain her staff's favour. Characters in the popular TV series \"The Sopranos\" often used the term. Jane Fonda uttered the word on a live airing of the \"Today Show\", a network broadcast-TV news program, in 2008 when being interviewed by co-host Meredith Vieira about \"The Vagina Monologues\". Coincidentally, nearly two years later in 2010, also on the \"Today Show\", Vieira interviewed a thirteen-year-old girl said the word twice to describe the contents of text messages she was privy to that were central to a well publicised and violent assault. Meredith gently cautioned the girl to choose her words more carefully. As this was a live broadcast on the East Coast, the slurs already were already broadcast, but the producers removed the audio for the Central, Mountain, and Pacific feeds as well as online. Like the Fonda incident, Vieira issued an apology later in the show. Media Critic Thomas Francis commented on what he perceived to be hypocrisy in the media industry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Isn't it interesting how the national media licks its chops over this story, delighting in every gory detail, only to caution a 13-year-old girl to be \"careful about our language\"? \nWhy should she be careful, Meredith? Because there are 13-year-old girls in the audience? There's so much violence and vulgarity in modern American culture, words like \"cunt\" are like so many deck chairs on the \"Titanic\".\nRadio.\nOn 6 December 2010, on the BBC Radio 4 Today programme, presenter James Naughtie referred to the British Culture Secretary Jeremy Hunt as \"Jeremy Cunt\"; he later apologised for what the BBC called the inadvertent use of \"an offensive four-letter word\". In the programme following, about an hour later, Andrew Marr referred to the incident during \"Start the Week\" where it was said that \"we won't repeat the mistake\" whereupon Marr slipped up in the same way as Naughtie had.\nFilm.\nThe word's first appearance was in graffiti on a wall in the 1969 film \"Bronco Bullfrog\". The first spoken use of the word in mainstream cinema occurs in \"The Boys in the Band\" (1970) where it is used four times, including the insults \"real card-carrying cunt,\" \"truly super-cunt,\" and \"\u00e7unt \u2014 that's French with a cedilla.\" The next year, it appeared in \"Carnal Knowledge\" (1971), in which Jonathan (Jack Nicholson) asks, \"Is this an ultimatum? Answer me, you ball-busting, castrating, son of a cunt bitch! Is this an ultimatum or not?\" In the same year, the word was used in the film \"Women in Revolt\", in which Holly Woodlawn shouts \"I love cunt\" whilst avoiding a violent boyfriend. Nicholson later used it again, in \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" (1975). Two early films by Martin Scorsese, \"Mean Streets\" (1973) and \"Taxi Driver\" (1976), use the word in the context of the virgin-whore dichotomy, with characters using it after they were rejected (in \"Mean Streets\") or after they have slept with the woman (in \"Taxi Driver\").\nIn notable instances, the word has been edited out. \"Saturday Night Fever\" (1977) was released in two versions, \"R\" (Restricted) and \"PG\" (Parental Guidance), the latter omitting or replacing dialogue such as Tony Manero (John Travolta)'s comment to Annette (Donna Pescow), \"It's a decision a girl's gotta make early in life, if she's gonna be a nice girl or a cunt\". This differential persists, and in \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (1991), Agent Starling (Jodie Foster) meets Dr. Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins) for the first time and passes the cell of \"Multiple Miggs\", who says to Starling: \"I can smell your cunt.\" In versions of the film edited for television the word is dubbed with the word scent. The 2010 film \"Kick-Ass\" caused a controversy when the word was used by Hit-Girl because the actress playing the part, Chlo\u00eb Grace Moretz, was 11 years old at the time of filming.\nIn Britain, use of the word \"cunt\" may result in an \"18\" rating from the British Board of Film Classification (BBFC), and this happened to Ken Loach's film \"Sweet Sixteen\", because of an estimated twenty uses of \"cunt\". Still, the BBFC's guidelines at \"15\" state that \"very strong language may be permitted, depending on the manner in which it is used, who is using the language, its frequency within the work as a whole and any special contextual justification\". Also directed by Loach, \"My Name is Joe\" was given a 15 certificate despite more than one instance of the word. The 2010 Ian Dury biopic \"Sex &amp; Drugs &amp; Rock &amp; Roll\" was given a \"15\" rating despite containing seven uses of the word. The BBFC have also allowed it at the \"12\" level, in the case of well known works such as Hamlet.\nComedy.\nIn their Derek and Clive dialogues, Peter Cook and Dudley Moore, particularly Cook, used the word in the 1976 sketch \"This Bloke Came Up To Me\", with \"cunt\" used 35 times. The word is also used extensively by British comedian Roy 'Chubby' Brown, which ensures that his stand-up act has never been fully shown on UK television.\nAustralian stand-up comedian Rodney Rude frequently refers to his audiences as \"cunts\" and makes frequent use of the word in his acts, which got him arrested in Queensland and Western Australia for breaching obscenity laws of those states in the mid-1980s. Australian comedic singer Kevin Bloody Wilson makes extensive use of the word, most notably in the songs \"Caring Understanding Nineties Type\" and \"You Can't Say \"Cunt\" in Canada\".\nThe word appears in American comic George Carlin's 1972 standup routine on the list of the seven dirty words that could not, at that time, be said on American broadcast television, a routine that led to a U.S. Supreme Court decision. While some of the original seven are now heard on US broadcast television from time to time, \"cunt\" remains generally taboo except on premium paid subscription cable channels like HBO or Showtime. Comedian Louis C.K. uses the term frequently in his stage act as well as on his television show \"Louie\" on FX network, which bleeps it out.\nIn 2018, Canadian comedian Samantha Bee had to apologise after calling Ivanka Trump a \"feckless cunt\" on American late night TV show \"Full Frontal with Samantha Bee\".\nMusic.\nThe 1977 Ian Dury and The Blockheads album, \"New Boots and Panties\", used the word in the opening line of the track \"Plaistow Patricia\", thus: \"Arseholes, bastards, fucking cunts and pricks\", particularly notable as there is no musical lead-in to the lyrics.\nIn 1979, during a concert at New York's Bottom Line, Carlene Carter introduced a song about mate-swapping called \"Swap-Meat Rag\" by stating, \"If this song doesn't put the cunt back in country, nothing will.\" However use of the word in lyrics is not recorded before the Sid Vicious's 1978 version of \"My Way\", which marked the first known use of the word in a UK top 10 hit, as a line was changed to \"You cunt/I'm not a queer\". The following year, \"cunt\" was used more explicitly in the song \"Why D'Ya Do It?\" from Marianne Faithfull's album \"Broken English\": &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why'd ya do it, she screamed, after all we've said,\nEvery time I see your dick I see her cunt in my bed.\nEarlier, in 1972, the Rolling Stones' \"Casino Boogie\" (on \"Exile on Main St.\") contains the lyric \"Kissing cunt in Cannes\", sung by Mick Jagger. Its use of \"cunt\" initially went generally unremarked on. The author Gina Arnold believes this is because \"probably hardly anyone understood it\", given Jagger's garbled syntax when delivering the line.\nThe Happy Mondays song, \"Kuff Dam\" (i.e. \"Mad fuck\" in reverse), from their 1987 debut album, \"Squirrel and G-Man Twenty Four Hour Party People Plastic Face Carnt Smile (White Out)\", includes the lyrics \"You see that Jesus is a cunt / And never helped you with a thing that you do, or you don't\". Biblical scholar James Crossley, writing in the academic journal, \"Biblical Interpretation\", analyses the Happy Mondays' reference to \"Jesus is a cunt\" as a description of the \"useless assistance\" of a now \"inadequate Jesus\". A phrase from the same lyric, \"Jesus is a cunt\" was included on the notorious Cradle of Filth T-shirt which depicted a masturbating nun on the front and the slogan \"Jesus is a cunt\" in large letters on the back. The T-shirt was banned in New Zealand, in 2008.\nLiz Phair in \"Dance of Seven Veils\" on her 1993 album \"Exile in Guyville\", uses the word in the line \"I only ask because I'm a real cunt in spring\".\nThe word has been used by numerous non-mainstream bands, such as the Australian band TISM, who released an extended play in 1993 \"Australia the Lucky Cunt\" (a reference to Australia's label the \"lucky country\"). They also released a single in 1998 entitled \"I Might Be a Cunt, but I'm Not a Fucking Cunt\", which was banned. The American grindcore band Anal Cunt, on being signed to a bigger label, shortened their name to AxCx.\nComputer and video games.\nThe 2004 title \"\" by SCEE used the word several times during the game.\nIn the 2008 title \"Grand Theft Auto IV\" (developed by Rockstar North and distributed by Take Two Interactive), the word, amongst many other expletives, was used by James Pegorino who, after finding out that his personal bodyguard had turned states, exclaimed \"The world is a cunt!\" while aiming a shotgun at the player.\nLinguistic variants and derivatives.\nVarious euphemisms, minced forms and in-jokes are used to imply the word without actually saying it, thereby escaping obvious censure and censorship.\nSpoonerisms.\nDeriving from a dirty joke: \"What's the difference between a circus and a strip club?\"- \"The circus has a bunch of cunning stunts...\". The phrase \"cunning stunt\" has been used in popular music. Its first documented appearance was by the English band Caravan, who released the album \"Cunning Stunts\" in July 1975; the title was later used by Metallica for a CD/Video compilation, and in 1992 the Cows released an album with the same title. In his 1980s BBC television programme, Kenny Everett played a vapid starlet, \"Cupid Stunt\".\nAcronyms.\nThere are numerous informal acronyms, including various apocryphal stories concerning academic establishments, such as the \"Cambridge University National Trust Society\".\nPuns.\nThe name \"Mike Hunt\" is a frequent pun on \"my cunt\"; it has been used in a scene from the movie \"Porky's\", and for a character in the BBC radio comedy \"Radio Active\" in the 1980s. \"Has Anyone Seen Mike Hunt?\" were the words written on a \"pink neon sculpture\" representing the letter C, in a 2004 exhibition of the alphabet at the British Library in collaboration with the International Society of Typographic Designers.\nAs well as obvious references, there are also allusions. On \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", Stephen Fry once defined \"countryside\" as the act of \"murdering Piers Morgan\".\nDerived meanings.\nThe word \"cunt\" forms part of some technical terms used in seafaring and other industries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46966", "revid": "44645973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46966", "title": "Sleep disorder", "text": "Medical disorder of a person's sleep patterns\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA sleep disorder, or somnipathy, is a medical disorder that disrupts an individual's sleep patterns and quality. This can cause serious health issues and affect physical, mental, and emotional well-being. Polysomnography and actigraphy are tests commonly ordered for diagnosing sleep disorders.\nSleep disorders are broadly classified into dyssomnias, parasomnias, circadian rhythm sleep disorders, and other disorders (including those caused by medical or psychological conditions). When a person struggles to fall or stay asleep without an obvious cause, it is referred to as insomnia, which is the most common sleep disorder. Other sleep disorders include sleep apnea, narcolepsy, hypersomnia (excessive sleepiness at inappropriate times), sleeping sickness (disruption of the sleep cycle due to infection), sleepwalking, and night terrors.\nSleep disruptions can be caused by various issues, including teeth grinding (bruxism) and night terrors. Managing sleep disturbances that are secondary to mental, medical, or substance abuse disorders should focus on addressing the underlying condition.\nSleep disorders are common in both children and adults. However, there is a significant lack of awareness about sleep disorders in children, with many cases remaining unidentified. Several common factors involved in the onset of a sleep disorder include increased medication use, age-related changes in circadian rhythms, environmental changes, lifestyle changes, existing physiological problems, and stress. Among the elderly, the risk of developing sleep-disordered breathing, periodic limb movements, restless legs syndrome, REM sleep behavior disorders, insomnia, and circadian rhythm disturbances is especially high.\nCauses.\nA systematic review found that traumatic childhood experiences, such as family conflict or sexual trauma, significantly increase the risk of several sleep disorders in adulthood, including sleep apnea, narcolepsy, and insomnia.\nAn evidence-based synopsis suggests that idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder may have a hereditary component. A total of 632 participants, half with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder and half without, completed self-report questionnaires. The study results suggest that people with the sleep disorder are more likely to report having a first-degree relative with the same sleep disorder than people of the same age and sex who do not have the disorder. More research is needed to further understand the hereditary basis of sleep disorders.\nA population susceptible to the development of sleep disorders includes people who have experienced a traumatic brain injury. Due to the significant research focus on this issue, a systematic review was conducted to synthesize the findings. The results indicate that individuals who have experienced a traumatic brain injury are disproportionately at risk of developing narcolepsy, obstructive sleep apnea, excessive daytime sleepiness, and insomnia.\nObstructive sleep apnea is a common condition affecting 10-20% of middle-aged and older adults, characterized by repeated breathing pauses during sleep, leading to poor sleep quality, and excessive daytime somnolence and, sometimes insomnia. Common factors include obesity, narrow airways, and certain neuromuscular conditions that cause airway collapse during sleep.\nSleep disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.\nNeurodegenerative diseases are often associated with sleep disorders, particularly when characterized by the abnormal accumulation of alpha-synuclein, as seen in multiple system atrophy (MSA), Parkinson's disease (PD), and Lewy body disease (LBD). For example, individuals diagnosed with PD frequently experience various sleep issues, such as insomnia (affecting approximately 70% of the PD population), hypersomnia (over 50%), and REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) (around 40%), which is linked to increased motor symptoms. Moreover, RBD has been identified as a significant precursor to the future development of these neurodegenerative diseases over several years, presenting a promising opportunity for improving treatments.\nNeurodegenerative conditions are commonly related to structural brain impairments, which may disrupt sleep and wakefulness, circadian rhythm, and motor or non-motor functioning. Conversely, sleep disturbances are often linked to worsening of patients' cognitive functioning, emotional state, and quality of life. Additionally, these abnormal behavioral symptoms can place a significant burden on patients' relatives and caregivers. The limited research in this area, coupled with increasing life expectancy, highlights the need for a deeper understanding of the relationship between sleep disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.\nSleep disturbances and Alzheimer's disease.\nSleep disturbances have also been observed in Alzheimer's disease (AD), affecting about 45% of the affected population. When based on caregiver reports, this percentage increases to about 70%. As in the PD population, insomnia and hypersomnia are frequently recognized in AD patients. These disturbances have been associated with the accumulation of beta-amyloid, circadian rhythm sleep disorders (CRSD), and melatonin alterations. Additionally, changes in sleep architecture are observed in AD. Although sleep architecture seems to naturally change with age, its development appears aggravated in AD patients. Slow-wave sleep (SWS) potentially decreases (and is sometimes absent), sleep spindles and the length of time spent in REM sleep are also reduced, while REM latency increases. Poor sleep onset in AD has been associated with dream-related hallucinations, increased restlessness, wandering, and agitation related to sundowning\u2014a typical chronobiological phenomenon in the disease.\nIn Alzheimer's disease, in addition to cognitive decline and memory impairment, there are also significant sleep disturbances with modified sleep architecture. These disturbances may consist of sleep fragmentation, reduced sleep duration, insomnia, increased daytime napping, decreased quantity of some sleep stages, and a growing resemblance between some sleep stages (N1 and N2). More than 65% of people with Alzheimer's disease experience this type of sleep disturbance.\nOne factor that could explain this change in sleep architecture is a disruption in the circadian rhythm, which regulates sleep. This disruption can lead to sleep disturbances. Some studies show that people with Alzheimer's disease have a delayed circadian rhythm, whereas in normal aging, an advanced circadian rhythm is present.\nIn addition to these psychological symptoms, there are two main neurological features of Alzheimer's disease: \nIt has been shown that the sleep-wake cycle influences the beta-amyloid burden, a central component found in Alzheimer's disease (AD). As individuals awaken, the production of beta-amyloid protein becomes more consistent compared to its production during sleep. This phenomenon can be explained by two factors. First, metabolic activity is higher during waking hours, resulting in greater secretion of beta-amyloid protein. Second, oxidative stress increases during waking hours, which leads to greater beta-amyloid production.\nOn the other hand, it is during sleep that beta-amyloid residues are degraded to prevent plaque formation. The glymphatic system is responsible for this through the phenomenon of glymphatic clearance. Thus, during wakefulness, the beta-amyloid burden is greater because metabolic activity and oxidative stress are higher, and there is no protein degradation by glymphatic clearance. During sleep, the burden is reduced as there is less metabolic activity and oxidative stress, in addition to the glymphatic clearance that occurs.\nGlymphatic clearance occurs during NREM SWS sleep, a stage that decreases with normal aging, leading to reduced glymphatic clearance and increased beta-amyloid burden, which forms plaques. Therefore, sleep disturbances in individuals with Alzheimer's disease may exacerbate this phenomenon.\nThe decrease in the quantity and quality of NREM SWS, along with sleep disturbances, will therefore increase the A\u03b2 plaques. This initially occurs in the hippocampus, a brain structure integral to long-term memory formation. As hippocampal cell death occurs, it contributes to reduced memory performance and cognitive decline found in AD.\nAlthough the causal relationship is unclear, the development of AD correlates with the onset of prominent sleep disorders. Similarly, sleep disorders exacerbate disease progression, forming a positive feedback loop. As a result, sleep disturbances are not only a symptom of AD; the relationship between sleep disturbances and AD is likely bidirectional.\nAt the same time, it has been shown that memory consolidation in long-term memory, which depends on the hippocampus, occurs during NREM sleep. This indicates that a decrease in NREM sleep will result in less consolidation, leading to poorer memory performance in hippocampal-dependent long-term memory. This drop in performance is one of the central symptoms of AD.\nRecent studies have also linked sleep disturbances, neurogenesis, and AD. The subgranular zone and subventricular zone continue to produce new neurons in adult brains. These new cells are then incorporated into neuronal circuits in the subgranular zone, which is found in the hippocampus. These new cells contribute to learning and memory, playing an essential role in hippocampal-dependent memory.\nHowever, recent studies have shown that several factors can interrupt neurogenesis, including stress and prolonged sleep deprivation (more than one day). The sleep disturbances encountered in AD could therefore suppress neurogenesis and impair hippocampal functions. This suppression would contribute to diminished memory performance and the progression of AD, while the progression of AD would further aggravate sleep disturbances.\nChanges in sleep architecture in patients with AD occur during the preclinical phase of the disease. These changes could potentially be used to detect those most at risk of developing AD. However, this is still only theoretical.\nWhile the exact mechanisms and causal relationship between sleep disturbances and AD remain unclear, these findings provide a better understanding and offer possibilities to improve the targeting of at-risk populations, as well as the implementation of treatments to curb the cognitive decline of AD patients.\nSleep disorder symptoms in psychiatric illnesses.\nSchizophrenia.\nIn individuals with psychiatric illnesses sleep disorders may include a variety of clinical symptoms, including but not limited to: excessive daytime sleepiness, difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep, nightmares, sleep talking, sleepwalking, and poor sleep quality. Sleep disturbances - insomnia, hypersomnia, and delayed sleep-phase disorder - are quite prevalent in severe mental illnesses such as psychotic disorders. In those with schizophrenia, sleep disorders contribute to cognitive deficits in learning and memory. Sleep disturbances often occur before the onset of psychosis.\nSleep deprivation can also produce hallucinations, delusions and depression. A 2019 study investigated the three above-mentioned sleep disturbances in schizophrenia-spectrum (SCZ) and bipolar (BP) disorders in 617 SCZ individuals, 440 BP individuals, and 173 healthy controls (HC). Sleep disturbances were identified using the Inventory for Depressive Symptoms - Clinician-Rated Scale (IDS-C). Results suggested that at least one type of sleep disturbance was reported in 78% of the SCZ population, in 69% of individuals with BD, and in 39% of healthy controls. The SCZ group reported the highest number of sleep disturbances compared to the BD and HC groups; specifically, hypersomnia was more frequent among individuals with SCZ, and delayed sleep phase disorder was three times more common in the SCZ group compared to the BD group. Insomnias was the most frequently reported sleep disturbance across all three groups.\nBipolar disorder.\nOne of the main behavioral symptoms of bipolar disorder is abnormal sleep. Studies have suggested that 23-78% of individuals with bipolar disorder consistently report symptoms of excessive time spent sleeping, or hypersomnia. The pathogenesis of bipolar disorder, including the higher risk of suicidal ideation, could possibly be linked to circadian rhythm variability, and sleep disturbances are a good predictor of mood swings. The most common sleep-related symptom of bipolar disorder is insomnia, in addition to hypersomnia, nightmares, poor sleep quality, obstructive sleep apnea, extreme daytime sleepiness, and other disturbances. Moreover, animal models have shown that sleep debt can induce episodes of bipolar mania in laboratory mice, but these models are still limited in their potential to explain bipolar disorder in humans with all its multifaceted symptoms, including those related to sleep disturbances.\nMajor depressive disorder (MDD).\nSleep disturbances (insomnia or hypersomnia)\u2014though not a necessary diagnostic criterion\u2014are among the most frequent symptoms in individuals with major depressive disorder (MDD). Among individuals with MDD, insomnia and hypersomnia have prevalence estimates of 88% and 27%, respectively, whereas individuals with insomnia have a threefold increased risk of developing MDD. Depressed mood and sleep efficiency strongly co-vary, and while sleep regulation problems may precede depressive episodes, such depressive episodes may also precipitate sleep deprivation. Fatigue, as well as sleep disturbances such as irregular and excessive sleepiness, are linked to symptoms of depression. Recent research has even pointed to sleep problems and fatigue as potential driving forces bridging MDD symptoms to those of co-occurring generalized anxiety disorder.\nTreatment.\nTreatments for sleep disorders generally can be grouped into four categories:\nNone of these general approaches are sufficient for all patients with sleep disorders. Rather, the choice of a specific treatment depends on the patient's diagnosis, medical and psychiatric history, and preferences, as well as the expertise of the treating clinician. Often, behavioral/psychotherapeutic and pharmacological approaches may be compatible, and can effectively be combined to maximize therapeutic benefits.\nManagement of sleep disturbances that are secondary to mental, medical, or substance abuse disorders should focus on the underlying conditions. Medications and somatic treatments may provide the most rapid symptomatic relief from certain disorders, such as narcolepsy, which is best treated with prescription drugs like modafinil. Others, such as chronic and primary insomnia, may be more amenable to behavioral interventions\u2014with more durable results.\nChronic sleep disorders in childhood, which affect some 70% of children with developmental or psychological disorders, are under-reported and under-treated. Sleep-phase disruption is also common among adolescents, whose school schedules are often incompatible with their natural circadian rhythm. Effective treatment begins with careful diagnosis using sleep diaries and perhaps sleep studies. Modifications in sleep hygiene may resolve the problem, but medical treatment is often warranted.\nSpecial equipment may be required for treatment of several disorders such as obstructive apnea, circadian rhythm disorders, and bruxism. In severe cases, it may be necessary for individuals to accept living with the disorder, however well managed.\nSome sleep disorders have been found to compromise glucose metabolism.\nAllergy treatment.\nHistamine plays a role in wakefulness in the brain. An allergic reaction overproduces histamine, causing wakefulness and inhibiting sleep. Sleep problems are common in people with allergic rhinitis. A study from the N.I.H. found that sleep is dramatically impaired by allergic symptoms, and that the degree of impairment is related to the severity of those symptoms. Treatment of allergies has also been shown to help sleep apnea.\nAcupuncture.\nA review of the evidence in 2012 concluded that current research is not rigorous enough to make recommendations regarding the use of acupuncture for insomnia. The pooled results of two trials on acupuncture showed a moderate likelihood that there may be some improvement in sleep quality for individuals with insomnia. This form of treatment for sleep disorders is generally studied in adults, rather than children. Further research would be needed to study the effects of acupuncture on sleep disorders in children.\nHypnosis.\nResearch suggests that hypnosis may be helpful in alleviating some types and manifestations of sleep disorders in some patients. \"Acute and chronic insomnia often respond to relaxation and hypnotherapy approaches, along with sleep hygiene instructions.\" Hypnotherapy has also helped with nightmares and sleep terrors. There are several reports of successful use of hypnotherapy for parasomnias, specifically for head and body rocking, bedwetting, and sleepwalking.\nHypnotherapy has been studied in the treatment of sleep disorders in both adults and children.\nMusic therapy.\nAlthough more research should be done to increase the reliability of this method of treatment, research suggests that music therapy can improve sleep quality in acute and chronic sleep disorders. In one particular study, participants (18 years or older) who had experienced acute or chronic sleep disorders were put in a randomized controlled trial, and their sleep efficiency, in the form of overall time asleep, was observed. In order to assess sleep quality, researchers used subjective measures (i.e. questionnaires) and objective measures (i.e. polysomnography). The results of the study suggest that music therapy did improve sleep quality in subjects with acute or chronic sleep disorders, though only when tested subjectively. Although these results are not fully conclusive and more research should be conducted, they still provide evidence that music therapy can be an effective treatment for sleep disorders.\nIn another study specifically looking to help people with insomnia, similar results were seen. The participants who listened to music experienced better sleep quality than those who did not listen to music. Listening to slower-pace music before bed can help decrease the heart rate, making it easier to transition into sleep. Studies have indicated that music helps induce a state of relaxation that shifts an individual's internal clock towards the sleep cycle. This is said to have an effect on children and adults with various cases of sleep disorders. Music is most effective before bed once the brain has been conditioned to it, helping to achieve sleep much faster.\nMelatonin.\nResearch suggests that melatonin is useful in helping people fall asleep faster (decreased sleep latency), stay asleep longer, and experience improved sleep quality. To test this, a study was conducted that compared subjects who had taken melatonin to subjects with primary sleep disorders who had taken a placebo. Researchers assessed sleep onset latency, total minutes slept, and overall sleep quality in the melatonin and placebo groups to note the differences. In the end, researchers found that melatonin decreased sleep onset latency and increased total sleep time, but had an insignificant and inconclusive impact on the quality of sleep compared to the placebo group.\nSleep medicine.\nDue to rapidly increasing knowledge and understanding of sleep in the 20th century, including the discovery of REM sleep in the 1950s and circadian rhythm disorders in the 70s and 80s, the medical importance of sleep was recognized. By the 1970s in the US, clinics and laboratories devoted to the study of sleep and sleep disorders had been founded, and a need for standards arose. The medical community began paying more attention to primary sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea, as well as the role and quality of sleep in other conditions. \nSpecialists in sleep medicine were originally and continue to be certified by the American Board of Sleep Medicine. Those passing the Sleep Medicine Specialty Exam received the designation \"diplomate of the ABSM\". Sleep medicine is now a recognized subspecialty within internal medicine, family medicine, pediatrics, otolaryngology, psychiatry and neurology in the United States. Certification in Sleep medicine shows that the specialist:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;has demonstrated expertise in the diagnosis and management of clinical conditions that occur during sleep, that disturb sleep, or that are affected by disturbances in the wake-sleep cycle. This specialist is skilled in the analysis and interpretation of comprehensive polysomnography, and well-versed in emerging research and management of a sleep laboratory.\nCompetence in sleep medicine requires an understanding of a myriad of very diverse disorders. Many of which present with similar symptoms such as excessive daytime sleepiness, which, in the absence of volitional sleep deprivation, \"is almost inevitably caused by an identifiable and treatable sleep disorder\", such as sleep apnea, narcolepsy, idiopathic hypersomnia, Kleine\u2013Levin syndrome, menstrual-related hypersomnia, idiopathic recurrent stupor, or circadian rhythm disturbances. Another common complaint is insomnia, a set of symptoms which can have a great many different causes, physical and mental. Management in the varying situations differs greatly and cannot be undertaken without a correct diagnosis.\nSleep dentistry (bruxism, snoring and sleep apnea), while not recognized as one of the nine dental specialties, qualifies for board-certification by the American Board of Dental Sleep Medicine (ABDSM). The qualified dentists collaborate with sleep physicians at accredited sleep centers, and can provide oral appliance therapy and upper airway surgery to treat or manage sleep-related breathing disorders. The resulting diplomate status is recognized by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM), and these dentists are organized in the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine (USA).\nOccupational therapy is an area of medicine that can also address a diagnosis of sleep disorder, as rest and sleep is listed in the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework (OTPF) as its own occupation of daily living. Rest and sleep are described as restorative in order to support engagement in other occupational therapy occupations. In the OTPF, the occupation of rest and sleep is broken down into rest, sleep preparation, and sleep participation. Occupational therapists have been shown to help improve restorative sleep through the use of assistive devices/equipment, cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia, therapeutic activities, and lifestyle interventions.\nIn the UK, knowledge of sleep medicine and possibilities for diagnosis and treatment seem to lag. The Imperial College Healthcare shows attention to obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and very few other sleep disorders. Some NHS trusts have specialist clinics for respiratory and neurological sleep medicine.\nEpidemiology.\nChildren and adolescents.\nA systematic review reveals parasomnias to be the most common sleep disorder in childhood, affecting up to 50% of children. However, only 4% of these parasomnias persist past adolescence. These parasomnias and their prevalences in childhood are sleepwalking (17%), confusional arousals (17.3% in 3-13 year olds), sleep terrors (1-6.5%), and nightmares (10-50% in 3-5 year olds). Other common sleep disorders and their prevalences are behavioural insomnia of childhood (10-30%), delayed sleep phase disorder (7-16%), obstructive sleep apnea (1-5%), and restless legs syndrome (2-4%).\nSleepwalking was found to be more common in males, with no gender disparity noted in any of the other common childhood sleep disturbances. Obstructive sleep apnea was found to be more common in African Americans, individuals with craniofacial abnormalities, Down syndrome, neuromuscular diseases, and choanal atresia. A number of the sleep disorders listed were found to have a familial pattern, meaning the incidence in a child was more likely to occur if one or both parents had a history of that sleep disorder; these include sleepwalking, confusional arousals, delayed sleep phase disorder, and restless legs syndrome.\nA different systematic review examining sleep bruxism in children found prevalence rates ranging from 5.9% to 49.6%. In preschool-aged children, between 15.29% and 38.6% grind their teeth in their sleep for at least one night per week. In all but one of the included studies, the prevalence of bruxism decreases as age increases.\nBetween 20 and 26% of adolescents report a sleep onset latency of greater than 30 minutes, and 7-36% have difficulty initiating sleep. Asian teens tend to have a higher prevalence of adverse sleep outcomes than their North American and European counterparts.\nInsomnia.\nInsomnia is a prevalent form of sleep deprivation. Individuals with insomnia may have problems falling asleep, staying asleep, or a combination of both resulting in hyposomnia - i.e. insufficient quantity and poor quality of sleep.\nCombining results from 17 studies on insomnia in China, a pooled prevalence of 15.0% is reported for the country. This result is consistent among other East Asian countries; however, this is considerably lower than a series of Western countries (50.5% in Poland, 37.2% in France and Italy, 27.1% in USA). Men and women residing in China experience insomnia at similar rates.\nA separate meta-analysis focusing on this sleeping disorder in the elderly mentions that those with more than one physical or psychiatric malady experience it at a 60% higher rate than those with one condition or less. It also notes a higher prevalence of insomnia in women over the age of 50 than their male counterparts.\nA study which resulted from a collaboration between Massachusetts General Hospital and Merck describes the development of an algorithm to identify patients with sleep disorders using electronic medical records. The algorithm that incorporated a combination of structured and unstructured variables identified more than 36,000 individuals with physician-documented insomnia.\nInsomnia can start off at the basic level but about 40% of people who struggle with insomnia have worse symptoms. Treatments that can help with insomnia include medication, creating and following a sleep routine, limiting one's caffeine intake, and cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia.\nObstructive sleep apnea.\nObstructive sleep apnea affects around 4% of men and 2% of women in the United States. While the disorder is more prevalent among men, this difference tends to diminish with age. Obstructive sleep apnea is more prevalent among women during pregnancy, and women tend to report depression and insomnia in conjunction with obstructive sleep apnea.\nIn a meta-analysis of the various Asian countries, India and China present the highest prevalence of the disorder. Specifically, about 13.7% of the Indian population and 7% of Hong Kong's population is estimated to have obstructive sleep apnea. The two groups in the study experience daytime symptoms such as difficulties concentrating, mood swings, or high blood pressure, at similar rates (prevalence of 3.5% and 3.57%, respectively).\nObesity and sleep apnea.\nIn obese individuals, excess fat in the upper respiratory tract can lead to breathing difficulties during sleep and lead to obstructive sleep apnea. As obesity is a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea, it is essential to screen obese individuals for obstructive sleep apnea and related disorders. Additionally, both obese and obstructive sleep apnea patients are at greater risk of developing a metabolic syndrome. Implementing dietary control in obese individuals can have a positive impact on sleep problems and help alleviate associated issues such as depression, anxiety, and insomnia. Excessive daytime sleepiness caused by obstructive sleep apnea may promote an inactive lifestyle, possibly contributing to obesity.\nSleep paralysis.\nIn a systematic review, it was found that 7.6% of the general population had reported experiencing sleep paralysis at least once in their lifetime. Slightly more women (18.9%) reported experiencing sleep paralysis than men (15.9%). 28.3% of students reported experiencing sleep paralysis, with the highest incidence among students of Asian descent (39.9%) and lowest incidence among Caucasian students (30.8%) when compared to other ethnicities (Hispanic: 34.5%, African descent: 31.4%). 31.9% of psychiatric patients reported experiencing sleep paralysis, of which 34.6% had a panic disorder.\nRestless legs syndrome.\nAccording to one meta-analysis, the average prevalence rate among North American and Western European populations is estimated to be 14.5\u00b18.0%. Specifically in the United States, the prevalence of restless legs syndrome is estimated to be between 5% and 15.7% when using strict diagnostic criteria. Restless legs syndrome is over 35% more prevalent in American women than their male counterparts.\nClassification (ICSD-3, 2023).\nInsomnia.\nInsomnia is the most frequent sleep disorder. It may occur on its own or be associated with other conditions such as mental disorders (such as stress, anxiety, or depression). It can also be associated with medical conditions such as asthma, diabetes, heart disease, pregnancy, and neurological disorders\nCentral disorders of hypersomnolence.\nCentral disorders of hypersomnolence are conditions that cause excessive daytime sleepiness. These disorders are not explained by sleep-related breathing problems, circadian rhythm disturbances, or other causes of nighttime sleep disruptions.\nNarcolepsy.\nNarcolepsy is a rare and chronic sleep disorder. It is defined by four main symptoms: excessive daytime sleepiness with sudden sleep attacks, cataplexy (sudden loss of muscle tone and weakness), hypnagogic hallucinations and sleep paralysis.\nThere are two types of narcolepsy. Type 1 is marked by the presence of cataplexy and/or low cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin levels. Type 2 is characterized by the absence of both. Literature reviews suggest that narcolepsy is typically caused by genetic and environmental factors. The disorder is also linked to autoimmune damage of hypothalamic hypocretin-producing neurons.\nTreatment of narcolepsy focuses on managing symptoms. There is no cure for narcolepsy. Given the disabling morbidity associated with narcolepsy, more research and drug trials are needed. Psychostimulants (methylphenidate, modafinil) and antidepressant (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclics) are used to manage narcolepsy symptoms. More recent targeted therapies such as pitolisant, solriamfetol, and sodium oxybate have been approved to improve wakefulness or reduce cataplexy.\nIdiopathic hypersomnia (IH).\nA chronic neurological disease often compared to narcolepsy type 2, characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, even after normal or prolonged sleep time. Sleep time sometimes exceeds 10 hours in duration. There are two types of IH: with long nocturnal sleep time or without long nocturnal sleep time (marked by unintended and unrefreshing naps). The cause of idiopathic hypersomnia remains largely unclear, with no established pathophysiological mechanism. Patients dealing with idiopathic hypersomnia cannot obtain a healthy amount of sleep for a regular day of activities.\nTreatment, as in narcolepsy, focuses primarily on symptom management. It is mainly based on stimulants to improve alertness and wakefulness.\nKleine-Levin Syndrome.\nKleine\u2013Levin syndrome is a very rare sleep disorder, mainly affecting adolescent males. It is classified among recurrent hypersomnias and is marked by episodes that last anywhere from days to weeks. Diagnosis requires the presence of at least one of the following signs during the episodes: cognitive dysfunction, altered perception, eating disorder and disinhibited behavior like hypersexuality. Between the episodes, patients typically return to baseline and do not show symptoms (ICSD-3-TR).\nParasomnia.\nA category of sleep disorders that involve abnormal and unnatural movements, behaviors, emotions, perceptions, and dreams in connection with sleep.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46967", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46967", "title": "Russian accelerated industrialization (19th century)", "text": ""}
{"id": "46969", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46969", "title": "Radical Russian Political Parties in the late 19th century", "text": ""}
{"id": "46970", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46970", "title": "Russian Imperialism in Asia and the Russo-Japanese War", "text": ""}
{"id": "46972", "revid": "1519900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46972", "title": "All Fools' Day", "text": ""}
{"id": "46974", "revid": "15942094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46974", "title": "Guardian newspaper", "text": ""}
{"id": "46975", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46975", "title": "Manchester Guardian", "text": ""}
{"id": "46977", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46977", "title": "Poisson d'avril", "text": ""}
{"id": "46978", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46978", "title": "Castalia", "text": "Water deity\nCastalia (), in ancient Greek and Roman mythology, is a young nymph, a daughter of the river-god Achelous who attracted the god Apollo and who is said to have flung herself into the sacred spring in Delphi when pursued by him. The spring took the name Castalia afterwards.\nFamily.\nCastalia was the child of the river-god Achelous.\nMythology.\nThe Castalia or Castalian Spring was the name of a spring near Delphi, sacred to the Muses, mentioned by many authors. According to old traditions, the Castalian Spring already existed by the time Apollo came to Delphi searching for Python. According to some, the water was a gift to Castalia from the river Cephisus.\nIn his commentary on Statius's \"Thebaid\", Latin poet Lactantius Placidus says that the virgin Castalia, trying to escape Apollo's unwanted amorous advances, threw herself into a fountain at Delphi, at the base of Mount Parnassus, or at Mount Helicon, which took her name thereafter. Castalia then became the sacred fountain of Poseidon.\nIn culture.\nShe inspired the genius of poetry to those who drank her waters or listened to their quiet sound; the sacred water was also used to clean the Delphian temples. Apollo consecrated Castalia to the Muses (\"Castaliae Musae\").\nThe 20th-century German writer Hermann Hesse used Castalia as inspiration for the name of the futuristic fictional utopia in his 1943 magnum opus \"The Glass Bead Game\". Castalia is home to an austere order of intellectuals with a twofold mission: to run boarding schools for boys, and to nurture and play the Glass Bead Game.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46980", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46980", "title": "Pollen", "text": "Grains containing the male gametophytes of seed plants\nPollen is a powdery substance produced by most types of flowers of seed plants for the purpose of sexual reproduction. It consists of pollen grains (highly reduced microgametophytes), which produce male gametes (sperm cells).\nPollen grains have a hard coat made of sporopollenin that protects the gametophytes during the process of their movement from the stamens to the pistil of flowering plants, or from the male cone to the female cone of gymnosperms. If pollen lands on a compatible pistil or female cone, it germinates, producing a pollen tube that transfers the sperm to the ovule containing the female gametophyte. Individual pollen grains are small enough to require magnification to see detail. The study of pollen is called palynology and is highly useful in paleoecology, paleontology, archaeology, and forensics.\nPollen in plants is used for transferring haploid male genetic material from the anther of a single flower to the stigma of another in cross-pollination. In a case of self-pollination, this process takes place from the anther of a flower to the stigma of the same flower.\nPollen is infrequently used as food and food supplement. Because of agricultural practices, it is often contaminated by agricultural pesticides.\nStructure and formation.\nPollen itself is not the male gamete. It is a gametophyte, something that could be considered an entire organism, which then produces the male gamete. Each pollen grain contains vegetative (non-reproductive) cells (only a single cell in most flowering plants but several in other seed plants) and a generative (reproductive) cell. In flowering plants the vegetative tube cell produces the pollen tube, and the generative cell divides to form the two sperm nuclei.\nPollen grains come in a wide variety of shapes, sizes, and surface markings characteristic of the species (see electron micrograph, right). Pollen grains of pines, firs, and spruces are winged. The smallest pollen grain, that of the forget-me-not (\"Myosotis\" spp.), is 2.5\u20135\u00a0\u03bcm (0.005\u00a0mm) in diameter. Corn pollen grains are large, about 90\u2013100\u00a0\u03bcm. Most grass pollen is around 20\u201325\u00a0\u03bcm. Some pollen grains are based on geodesic polyhedra like a soccer ball.\nFormation.\nPollen is produced in the microsporangia in the male cone of a conifer or other gymnosperm or in the anthers of an angiosperm flower.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn angiosperms, during flower development the anther is composed of a mass of cells that appear undifferentiated, except for a partially differentiated dermis. As the flower develops, fertile sporogenous cells, the archespore, form within the anther. The sporogenous cells are surrounded by layers of sterile cells that grow into the wall of the pollen sac. Some of the cells grow into nutritive cells that supply nutrition for the microspores that form by meiotic division from the sporogenous cells. The archespore cells divide by mitosis and differentiate to form pollen mother cells (microsporocyte, meiocyte).\nIn a process called microsporogenesis, four haploid microspores are produced from each diploid pollen mother cell, after meiotic division. After the formation of the four microspores, which are contained by callose walls, the development of the pollen grain walls begins. The callose wall is broken down by an enzyme called callase and the freed pollen grains grow in size and develop their characteristic shape and form a resistant outer wall called the exine and an inner wall called the intine. The exine is what is preserved in the fossil record.\nTwo basic types of microsporogenesis are recognised, simultaneous and successive. In simultaneous microsporogenesis meiotic steps I and II are completed before cytokinesis, whereas in successive microsporogenesis cytokinesis follows. While there may be a continuum with intermediate forms, the type of microsporogenesis has systematic significance. The predominant form amongst the monocots is successive, but there are important exceptions.\nDuring microgametogenesis, the unicellular microspores undergo mitosis and develop into mature microgametophytes containing the gametes. In some flowering plants, germination of the pollen grain may begin even before it leaves the microsporangium, with the generative cell forming the two sperm cells.\nStructure.\nExcept in the case of some submerged aquatic plants, the mature pollen grain has a double wall. The vegetative and generative cells are surrounded by a thin delicate wall of unaltered cellulose called the endospore or intine, and a tough resistant outer cuticularized wall composed largely of sporopollenin called the exospore or exine. The exine often bears spines or warts, or is variously sculptured, and the character of the markings is often of value for identifying genus, species, or even cultivar or individual.\nThe spines may be less than a micron in length (spinulus, plural spinuli) referred to as spinulose (scabrate), or longer than a micron (echina, echinae) referred to as echinate. Various terms also describe the sculpturing such as reticulate, a net like appearance consisting of elements (murus, muri) separated from each other by a lumen (plural lumina). These reticulations may also be referred to as brochi.\nThe pollen wall protects the sperm while the pollen grain is moving from the anther to the stigma; it protects the vital genetic material from drying out and solar radiation. The pollen grain surface is covered with waxes and proteins, which are held in place by structures called sculpture elements on the surface of the grain. The outer pollen wall, which prevents the pollen grain from shrinking and crushing the genetic material during desiccation, is composed of two layers. These two layers are the tectum and the foot layer, which is just above the intine. The tectum and foot layer are separated by a region called the columella, which is composed of strengthening rods. The outer wall is constructed with a resistant biopolymer called sporopollenin.\nPollen apertures are regions of the pollen wall that may involve exine thinning or a significant reduction in exine thickness. They allow shrinking and swelling of the grain caused by changes in moisture content. The process of shrinking the grain is called harmomegathy. Elongated apertures or furrows in the pollen grain are called colpi (singular: colpus) or sulci (singular: sulcus). Apertures that are more circular are called pores. Colpi, sulci and pores are major features in the identification of classes of pollen. Pollen may be referred to as inaperturate (apertures absent) or aperturate (apertures present).\nThe aperture may have a lid (operculum), hence is described as operculate. However the term inaperturate covers a wide range of morphological types, such as functionally inaperturate (cryptoaperturate) and omniaperturate. Inaperaturate pollen grains often have thin walls, which facilitates pollen tube germination at any position. Terms such as uniaperturate and triaperturate refer to the number of apertures present (one and three respectively). Spiraperturate refers to one or more apertures being spirally shaped.\nThe orientation of furrows (relative to the original tetrad of microspores) classifies the pollen as sulcate or colpate. Sulcate pollen has a furrow across the middle of what was the outer face when the pollen grain was in its tetrad. If the pollen has only a single sulcus, it is described as monosulcate, has two sulci, as bisulcate, or more, as polysulcate. Colpate pollen has furrows other than across the middle of the outer faces, and similarly may be described as polycolpate if more than two. Syncolpate pollen grains have two or more colpi that are fused at the ends. Eudicots have pollen with three colpi (tricolpate) or with shapes that are evolutionarily derived from tricolpate pollen. The evolutionary trend in plants has been from monosulcate to polycolpate or polyporate pollen.\nAdditionally, gymnosperm pollen grains often have air bladders, or vesicles, called sacci. The sacci are not actually balloons, but are sponge-like, and increase the buoyancy of the pollen grain and help keep it aloft in the wind, as most gymnosperms are anemophilous. Pollen can be monosaccate, (containing one saccus) or bisaccate (containing two sacci). Modern pine, spruce, and yellowwood trees all produce saccate pollen.\nPollination.\nThe transfer of pollen grains to the female reproductive structure (pistil in angiosperms) is called pollination. Pollen transfer is frequently portrayed as a sequential process that begins with placement on the vector, moves through travel, and ends with deposition. This transfer can be mediated by the wind, in which case the plant is described as anemophilous (literally wind-loving). Anemophilous plants typically produce great quantities of very lightweight pollen grains, sometimes with air-sacs.\nNon-flowering seed plants (e.g., pine trees) are characteristically anemophilous. Anemophilous flowering plants generally have inconspicuous flowers. Entomophilous (literally insect-loving) plants produce pollen that is relatively heavy, sticky and protein-rich, for dispersal by insect pollinators attracted to their flowers. Many insects and some mites are specialized to feed on pollen, and are called palynivores.\nIn non-flowering seed plants, pollen germinates in the pollen chamber, located beneath the micropyle, underneath the integuments of the ovule. A pollen tube is produced, which grows into the nucellus to provide nutrients for the developing sperm cells. Sperm cells of Pinophyta and Gnetophyta are without flagella, and are carried by the pollen tube, while those of Cycadophyta and Ginkgophyta have many flagella.\nWhen placed on the stigma of a flowering plant, under favorable circumstances, a pollen grain puts forth a pollen tube, which grows down the tissue of the style to the ovary, and makes its way along the placenta, guided by projections or hairs, to the micropyle of an ovule. The nucleus of the tube cell has meanwhile passed into the tube, as does also the generative nucleus, which divides (if it has not already) to form two sperm cells. The sperm cells are carried to their destination in the tip of the pollen tube. Double-strand breaks in DNA that arise during pollen tube growth appear to be efficiently repaired in the generative cell that carries the male genomic information to be passed on to the next plant generation. However, the vegetative cell that is responsible for tube elongation appears to lack this DNA repair capability.\nIn the fossil record.\nThe sporopollenin outer sheath of pollen grains affords them some resistance to the rigours of the fossilisation process that destroy weaker objects; it is also produced in huge quantities. There is an extensive fossil record of pollen grains, often disassociated from their parent plant. The discipline of palynology is devoted to the study of pollen, which can be used both for biostratigraphy and to gain information about the abundance and variety of plants alive \u2014 which can itself yield important information about paleoclimates. Also, pollen analysis has been widely used for reconstructing past changes in vegetation and their associated drivers.\nPollen is first found in the fossil record in the late Devonian period, but at that time it is indistinguishable from spores. It increases in abundance until the present day.\nAllergy to pollen.\nNasal allergy to pollen is called pollinosis, and allergy specifically to grass pollen is called hay fever. Generally, pollens that cause allergies are those of anemophilous plants (pollen is dispersed by air currents.) Such plants produce large quantities of lightweight pollen (because wind dispersal is random and the likelihood of one pollen grain landing on another flower is small), which can be carried for great distances and are easily inhaled, bringing it into contact with the sensitive nasal passages.\nPollen allergies are common in polar and temperate climate zones, where production of pollen is seasonal. In the tropics pollen production varies less by the season, and allergic reactions less.\nIn northern Europe, common pollens for allergies are those of birch and alder, and in late summer wormwood and different forms of hay. Grass pollen is also associated with asthma exacerbations in some people, a phenomenon termed thunderstorm asthma.\nIn the US, people often mistakenly blame the conspicuous goldenrod flower for allergies. Since this plant is entomophilous (its pollen is dispersed by animals), its heavy, sticky pollen does not become independently airborne. Most late summer and fall pollen allergies are probably caused by ragweed, a widespread anemophilous plant.\nArizona was once regarded as a haven for people with pollen allergies, although several ragweed species grow in the desert. However, as suburbs grew and people began establishing irrigated lawns and gardens, more irritating species of ragweed gained a foothold and Arizona lost its claim of freedom from hay fever.\nAnemophilous spring blooming plants such as oak, birch, hickory, pecan, and early summer grasses may also induce pollen allergies. Most cultivated plants with showy flowers are entomophilous and do not cause pollen allergies.\nSymptoms of pollen allergy include sneezing, itchy, or runny nose, nasal congestion, red, itchy, and watery eyes. Substances, including pollen, that cause allergies can trigger asthma. A study found a 54% increased chance of asthma attacks when exposed to pollen.\nThe number of people in the United States affected by hay fever is between 20\u00a0and\u00a040\u00a0million, including around 6.1 million children and such allergy has proven to be the most frequent allergic response in the nation. Hay fever affects about 20% of Canadians and the prevalence is increasing. There are certain evidential suggestions pointing out hay fever and similar allergies to be of hereditary origin. Individuals who suffer from eczema or are asthmatic tend to be more susceptible to developing long-term hay fever.\nSince 1990, pollen seasons have gotten longer and more pollen-filled, and climate change is responsible, according to a new study. The researchers attributed roughly half of the lengthening pollen seasons and 8% of the trend in pollen concentrations to climate changes driven by human activity.\nIn Denmark, decades of rising temperatures cause pollen to appear earlier and in greater amounts, exacerbated by the introduction of new species such as ragweed.\nThe most efficient way to handle a pollen allergy is by preventing contact with the material. Individuals carrying the ailment may at first believe that they have a simple summer cold, but hay fever becomes more evident when the apparent cold does not disappear. The confirmation of hay fever can be obtained after examination by a general physician.\nTreatment.\nAntihistamines are effective at treating mild cases of pollinosis; this type of non-prescribed drugs includes loratadine, cetirizine and chlorpheniramine. They do not prevent the discharge of histamine, but it has been proven that they do prevent a part of the chain reaction activated by this biogenic amine, which considerably lowers hay fever symptoms.\nDecongestants can be administered in different ways such as tablets and nasal sprays.\nAllergy immunotherapy (AIT) treatment involves administering doses of allergens to accustom the body to pollen, thereby inducing specific long-term tolerance. Allergy immunotherapy can be administered orally (as sublingual tablets or sublingual drops), or by injections under the skin (subcutaneous). Discovered by Leonard Noon and John Freeman in 1911, allergy immunotherapy represents the only causative treatment for respiratory allergies.\nNutrition.\nMost major classes of predatory and parasitic arthropods contain species that eat pollen, despite the common perception that bees are the primary pollen-consuming arthropod group. Many Hymenoptera other than bees consume pollen as adults, though only a small number feed on pollen as larvae (including some ant larvae). Spiders are normally considered carnivores but pollen is an important source of food for several species, particularly for spiderlings, which catch pollen on their webs. Some predatory mites also feed on pollen, with some species being able to subsist solely on pollen, such as \"Euseius tularensis\", which feeds on the pollen of dozens of plant species. Members of some beetle families such as Mordellidae and Melyridae feed almost exclusively on pollen as adults, while various lineages within larger families such as Curculionidae, Chrysomelidae, Cerambycidae, and Scarabaeidae are pollen specialists even though most members of their families are not (e.g., only 36 of 40,000 species of ground beetles, which are typically predatory, have been shown to eat pollen\u2014but this is thought to be a severe underestimate as the feeding habits are only known for 1,000 species). Similarly, Ladybird beetles mainly eat insects, but many species also eat pollen, as either part or all of their diet. Hemiptera are mostly herbivores or omnivores but pollen feeding is known (and has only been well studied in the Anthocoridae). Many adult flies, especially Syrphidae, feed on pollen, and three UK syrphid species feed strictly on pollen (syrphids, like all flies, cannot eat pollen directly due to the structure of their mouthparts, but can consume pollen contents that are dissolved in a fluid). Some species of fungus, including \"Fomes fomentarius\", are able to break down grains of pollen as a secondary nutrition source that is particularly high in nitrogen. Pollen may be valuable diet supplement for detritivores, providing them with nutrients needed for growth, development and maturation. It was suggested that obtaining nutrients from pollen, deposited on the forest floor during periods of pollen rains, allows fungi to decompose nutritionally scarce litter.\nSome species of \"Heliconius\" butterflies consume pollen as adults, which appears to be a valuable nutrient source, and these species are more distasteful to predators than the non-pollen consuming species.\nAlthough bats, butterflies, and hummingbirds are not pollen eaters \"per se\", their consumption of nectar in flowers is an important aspect of the pollination process.\nIn humans.\nBee pollen for human consumption is marketed as a food ingredient and as a dietary supplement. The largest constituent is carbohydrates, with protein content ranging from 7 to 35 percent depending on the plant species collected by bees.\nHoney produced by bees from natural sources contains pollen derived p-coumaric acid, an antioxidant and natural bactericide that is also present in a wide variety of plants and plant-derived food products.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not found any harmful effects of bee pollen consumption, except for the usual allergies. However, FDA does not allow bee pollen marketers in the United States to make health claims about their produce, as no scientific basis for these has ever been proven. Furthermore, there are possible dangers not only from allergic reactions but also from contaminants such as pesticides and from fungi and bacteria growth related to poor storage procedures. A manufacturers's claim that pollen collecting helps the bee colonies is also controversial.\nPine pollen (; ) is traditionally consumed in Korea as an ingredient in sweets and beverages. M\u0101ori of precolonial New Zealand would gather pollen of \"Typha orientalis\" to make a special bread called \"pungapunga\".\nParasites.\nThe growing industries in pollen harvesting for human and bee consumption rely on harvesting pollen baskets from honey bees as they return to their hives using a \"pollen trap\". When this pollen has been tested for parasites, it has been found that a multitude of viruses and eukaryotic parasites are present in the pollen. It is currently unclear if the parasites are introduced by the bee that collected the pollen or if it is from the flower. Though this is not likely to pose a risk to humans, it is a major issue for the bumblebee rearing industry that relies on thousands of tonnes of honey bee collected pollen per year. Several sterilization methods have been employed, though no method has been 100% effective at sterilisation without reducing the nutritional value of the pollen \nForensic palynology.\nIn forensic biology, pollen can tell a lot about where a person or object has been, because regions of the world, or even more particular locations such a certain set of bushes, will have a distinctive collection of pollen species. Pollen evidence can also reveal the season in which a particular object picked up the pollen. Pollen has been used to trace activity at mass graves from the Bosnian War, catch a burglar who brushed against a \"Hypericum\" bush during a crime, and has even been proposed as an additive for bullets to enable tracking them.\nSpiritual purposes.\nIn some Native American religions, pollen was used in prayers and rituals to symbolize life and renewal by sanctifying objects, dancing grounds, trails, and sandpaintings. It may also be sprinkled over heads or in mouths. Many Navajo people believed the body became holy when it traveled over a trail sprinkled with pollen.\nPollen grain staining.\nFor agricultural research purposes, assessing the viability of pollen grains can be necessary and illuminating. A very common, efficient method to do so is known as Alexander's stain. This differential stain consists of ethanol, malachite green, distilled water, glycerol, phenol, chloral hydrate, acid fuchsin, orange G, and glacial acetic acid. (A less-toxic variation omits the phenol and chloral hydrate.) In angiosperms and gymnosperms non-aborted pollen grain will appear red or pink, and aborted pollen grains will appear blue or slightly green.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46981", "revid": "34017952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46981", "title": "Scutum (constellation)", "text": "Small constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nScutum is a small constellation. Its name is Latin for shield, and it was originally named Scutum Sobiescianum by Johannes Hevelius in 1684. Located just south of the celestial equator, its four brightest stars form a narrow diamond shape. It is one of the 88 IAU designated constellations defined in 1922.\nHistory.\nScutum was named in 1684 by Polish astronomer Johannes Hevelius (Jan Heweliusz), who originally named it \"Scutum Sobiescianum\" (Shield of Sobieski) to commemorate the victory of the Christian forces led by Polish King John III Sobieski (Jan III Sobieski) in the Battle of Vienna in 1683. Later, the name was shortened to Scutum.\nFive bright stars of Scutum (\u03b1 Sct, \u03b2 Sct, \u03b4 Sct, \u03b5 Sct and \u03b7 Sct) were previously known as 1, 6, 2, 3, and 9 Aquilae respectively.\nThe constellation of Scutum was adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 as one of the 88 constellations covering the entire sky, with the official abbreviation of \"Sct\". The constellation boundaries are defined by a quadrilateral. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 18h 21.6m and 18h 59.3m, while the declination coordinates are between \u22123.83\u00b0 and \u221215.94\u00b0.\nCoincidentally, the Chinese also associated these stars with battle armor, incorporating them into the larger asterism known as \"Tien Pien\", i.e., the Heavenly Casque (or Helmet).\nFeatures.\nStars.\nScutum is not a bright constellation, with the brightest star, Alpha Scuti, being a K-type giant star at magnitude 3.85. However, some stars are notable in the constellation. Beta Scuti is the second brightest at magnitude 4.22, followed by Delta Scuti at magnitude 4.72. It is also known as 6 Aquilae. Beta Scuti is a binary system, with the primary with a spectral type similar to the Sun, although it is 1,270 times brighter. Delta Scuti is a bluish white giant star, which is now coming at the direction of the Solar System. Within 1.3 million years it will come as close to 10 light years from Earth, and will be much brighter than Sirius by that time.\nUY Scuti is a red supergiant and is also one of the largest stars currently known with a radius over 900 times that of the Sun. RSGC1-F01 is another red supergiant whose radius is over 1,450 times that of the Sun. Scutum contains several clusters of supergiant stars, including RSGC1, Stephenson 2 and RSGC3.\nDeep sky objects.\nAlthough not a large constellation, Scutum contains several open clusters, as well as a globular cluster and a planetary nebula. The two best known deep sky objects in Scutum are M11 (the Wild Duck Cluster) and the open cluster M26 (NGC 6694). The globular cluster NGC 6712 and the planetary nebula IC 1295 can be found in the eastern part of the constellation, only 24 arcminutes apart.\nThe most prominent open cluster in Scutum is the Wild Duck Cluster, M11. It was named by William Henry Smyth in 1844 for its resemblance in the eyepiece to a flock of ducks in flight. The cluster, 6200 light-years from Earth and 20 light-years in diameter, contains approximately 3000 stars, making it a particularly rich cluster. It is around 220 million years old, although some studies give older estimates. Estimates for the mass of the star cluster range from to .\nSpace exploration.\nThe space probe Pioneer 11 is moving in the direction of this constellation. It will not near the closest star in this constellation for over a million years at its present speed, by which time its batteries will be long dead.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46982", "revid": "45807063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46982", "title": "Transmission system", "text": "System that transmits a signal from one place to another\nIn telecommunications, a transmission system is a communication system that transmits a signal from one place to another. The signal can be an electrical, optical or radio signal. The goal of a transmission system is to transmit data accurately and efficiently from point A to point B over a distance, using a variety of technologies such as copper cable and fiber-optic cables, satellite links, and wireless communication technologies.\nThe International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) define a transmission system as the interface and medium through which peer physical layer entities transfer bits. It encompasses all the components and technologies involved in transmitting digital data from one location to another, including modems, cables, and other networking equipment.\nSome transmission systems contain multipliers, which amplify a signal prior to re-transmission, or regenerators, which attempt to reconstruct and re-shape the coded message before re-transmission.\nOne of the most widely used transmission system technologies in the Internet and the public switched telephone network (PSTN) is synchronous optical networking (SONET).\nAlso, transmission system is the medium through which data is transmitted from one point to another. Examples of common transmission systems people use everyday are: the internet, mobile networks, cordless cables, etc.\nDigital transmission system.\nThe ITU defines a digital transmission system as a system that uses digital signals to transmit information. In a digital transmission system, the data is first converted into a digital format and then transmitted over a communication channel. The digital format provides a number of benefits over analog transmission systems, including improved signal quality, reduced noise and interference, and increased data accuracy.\nITU defines digital transmission system (DTS) as following:A specific means of providing a digital section.The ITU sets global standards for digital transmission systems, including the encoding and decoding methods used, the data rates and transmission speeds, and the types of communication channels used. These standards ensure that digital transmission systems are compatible and interoperable with each other, regardless of the type of data being transmitted or the geographical location of the sender and receiver.\nBasic components of a DTS.\nThese techniques are used to improve signal-to-noise ratio, which helps to maintain the integrity of the signal during transmission.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46983", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46983", "title": "Ray (geometry)", "text": ""}
{"id": "46984", "revid": "46040862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46984", "title": "Echion (painter)", "text": "Echion (), also known as Aetion (\u1f08\u03b5\u03c4\u03af\u03c9\u03bd), was a celebrated Greek painter in the latter half of the fourth century B.C. spoken of by Lucian, who gives a description of one of his pictures, representing the marriage of Alexander the Great and Roxana. This painting excited such admiration when exhibited at the ancient Olympic Games, that Proxenidas, one of the judges, gave the artist his daughter in marriage. \nEchion seems to have excelled particularly in the art of mixing and laying on his colors. It has commonly been supposed that he lived in the time of Alexander the Great; but the words of Lucian show clearly that he must have lived about the time of Hadrian and the Antonines. Aloys Hirt supposes that the name of the painter of Alexander's marriage, whom Lucian praises so highly, as Aetion, is a corruption of Echion.\nSandro Botticelli drew on Lucian's ekphrasis in his \"Mars and Venus\" (c.\u20091485, now National Gallery), borrowing the amoretti playing with Alexander's armour during the ceremony, two carrying his lance and one who has crawled inside his breastplate. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46985", "revid": "8943582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46985", "title": "Ray optics", "text": ""}
{"id": "46986", "revid": "47822643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46986", "title": "Grand Canyon National Park", "text": "National park in Arizona, United States\nGrand Canyon National Park is a national park of the United States located in northwestern Arizona, the 15th site to have been named as a national park. The park's central feature is the Grand Canyon, a gorge of the Colorado River, which is often considered one of the Wonders of the World. The park, which covers of unincorporated area in Coconino and Mohave counties, received more than 4.9 million recreational visitors in 2024. The Grand Canyon was designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1979. The park celebrated its 100th anniversary on February 26, 2019.\nHistory.\nThe Grand Canyon became well known to Americans in the 1880s after railroads were built and pioneers developed infrastructure and early tourism. In 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt visited the site and said, The Grand Canyon fills me with awe. It is beyond comparison\u2014beyond description; absolutely unparalleled throughout the wide world\u00a0... Let this great wonder of nature remain as it now is. Do nothing to mar its grandeur, sublimity and loveliness. You cannot improve on it. But you can keep it for your children, your children's children, and all who come after you, as the one great sight which every American should see.\nDespite Roosevelt's enthusiasm and strong interest in preserving land for public use, the Grand Canyon was not immediately designated as a national park. The first bill to establish Grand Canyon National Park was introduced in 1882 by then-Senator Benjamin Harrison, which would have established Grand Canyon as the third national park in the United States, after Yellowstone and Mackinac. Harrison unsuccessfully reintroduced his bill in 1883 and 1886; after his election to the presidency, he established the Grand Canyon Forest Reserve in 1893. Theodore Roosevelt created the Grand Canyon Game Preserve by proclamation on November 28, 1906, and the Grand Canyon National Monument on January 11, 1908. Further Senate bills to establish the site as a national park were introduced and defeated in 1910 and 1911, before the Grand Canyon National Park Act (Pub. L.\u00a0) was finally signed by President Woodrow Wilson on February 26, 1919. The National Park Service, established in 1916, assumed administration of the park.\nThe creation of the park was an early success of the conservation movement. Its national park status may have helped thwart proposals to dam the Colorado River within its boundaries. (Later, the Glen Canyon Dam would be built upriver.) A second Grand Canyon National Monument to the west was proclaimed in 1932. In 1975, that monument and Marble Canyon National Monument, which was established in 1969 and followed the Colorado River northeast from the Grand Canyon to Lees Ferry, were made part of Grand Canyon National Park. In 1979, UNESCO declared the park a World Heritage Site. The 1987 the National Parks Overflights Act found that\n\"Noise associated with aircraft overflights at the Grand Canyon National Park is causing a significant adverse effect on the natural quiet and experience of the park and current aircraft operations at the Grand Canyon National Park have raised serious concerns regarding public safety, including concerns regarding the safety of park users.\"\nIn 2010, Grand Canyon National Park was honored with its own coin under the America the Beautiful Quarters program. On February 26, 2019, the Grand Canyon National Park commemorated 100 years since its designation as a national park.\nThe Grand Canyon had been part of the National Park Service's Intermountain Region until 2018. Today, the Grand Canyon is a part of Region 8, also known as the Lower Colorado Basin.\nOn July 9, 2025, the Dragon Bravo Fire led to multiple structures on the North Rim being destroyed, including the Grand Canyon Lodge. The fire burned for more than a week using confine and contained strategies before firefighters started more aggressively tackling the fire. The fire is concurrent with another fire, the White Sage Fire. \nGeography.\nThe Grand Canyon, including its extensive system of tributary canyons, is valued for its combination of size, depth, and exposed layers of colorful rocks dating back to Precambrian times. The canyon itself was created by the incision of the Colorado River and its tributaries after the Colorado Plateau was uplifted, causing the Colorado River system to develop along its present path.\nThe primary public areas of the park are the South and North Rims, and adjacent areas of the canyon itself. The rest of the park is extremely rugged and remote, although many places are accessible by pack trail and backcountry roads. The South Rim is more accessible than the North Rim and accounts for 90% of park visitation.\nThe park headquarters are at Grand Canyon Village, not far from the South Entrance to the park, near one of the most popular viewpoints.\nSouth Rim.\nMost visitors to the park come to the South Rim, arriving on Arizona State Route 64. The highway enters the park through the South Entrance, near Tusayan, Arizona, and heads eastward, leaving the park through the East Entrance. Interstate 40 provides access to the area from the south. From the north, U.S. Route 89 connects Utah, Colorado, and the North Rim to the South Rim. Overall, some 30 miles of the South Rim are accessible by road.\nGrand Canyon Village is the primary visitor services area in the park. It is a full-service community, including lodging, fuel, food, souvenirs, a hospital, churches, and access to trails and guided walks and talks.\nLodging.\nSeveral lodging facilities are available along the South Rim. Hotels and other lodging include El Tovar, Bright Angel Lodge, Kachina Lodge, Thunderbird Lodge, and Maswik Lodge, all of which are located in Grand Canyon Village, and Phantom Ranch, located on the canyon floor. There is also an RV Park named Trailer Village. All of these facilities are managed by Xanterra Parks &amp; Resorts, while the Yavapai Lodge (also in the village area) is managed by Delaware North.\nThe El Tovar Hotel was built in 1905 as a luxury hotel for the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railway, on the South Rim near the railway's main line. It was designed by Charles Whittlesley, a staff architect for the railway. The hotel is reminiscent of a Swiss chalet or Norwegian villa, combined with local materials for a rustic appearance sometimes called \"National Park Service rustic.\" It consists of 4 stories, with a gift shop and restaurant located inside the hotel.\nBright Angel Lodge was built of logs and stone in 1935. Mary Colter designed the lodge and it was built by the Fred Harvey Company. Inside the lodge is a small museum honoring Fred Harvey (1835\u20131901), who played a major role in popularizing the Grand Canyon. In the History Room is a stone fireplace layered in the same sequence as those in the canyon.\nNorth Rim.\nThe North Rim area of the park is located on the Kaibab Plateau and Walhalla Plateau, directly across the Grand Canyon from the principal visitor areas on the South Rim. The North Rim's principal visitor areas are centered around Bright Angel Point. The North Rim is higher in elevation than the South Rim, at over of elevation. Because it is so much higher than the South Rim, it is closed from December 1 through May 15 each year, due to the enhanced snowfall at elevation. Visitor services are closed or limited in scope after October 15. Driving time from the South Rim to the North Rim is about 4.5 hours, over .\nA popular destination on the North Rim has been the historic Grand Canyon Lodge, along with the nearby Grand Canyon Inn and Campground. The main building of the Grand Canyon Lodge has been destroyed twice by fire\u2014first in September 1932, in a fire that started in the kitchen, and again in July 2025, due to the Dragon Bravo Fire.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Grand Canyon National Park has five climate zones; Cold Semi-Arid (\"BSk\"), Humid Continental Dry Cool Summer (\"Dsb\"), Humid Continental Dry Warm Summer (\"Dsa\"), Warm Summer Mediterranean (\"Csb\"), and Hot Summer Mediterranean (\"Csa\"). The plant hardiness zone at Grand Canyon Visitor Center is 7a with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of 3.3\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221215.9\u00a0\u00b0C).\nActivities.\nNorth Rim.\nThere are few roads on the North Rim, but there are some notable vehicle-accessible lookout points, including Point Imperial, Roosevelt Point, and Cape Royal. Mule rides are also available to a variety of places, including several thousand feet down into the canyon.\nMany visitors to the North Rim choose to make use of the variety of hiking trails including the Widforss Trail, Uncle Jim's Trail, the Transept Trail, and the North Kaibab Trail. The North Kaibab Trail can be followed all the way down to the Colorado River, connecting across the river to the South Kaibab Trail and the Bright Angel Trail, which continue up to the South Rim of the Grand Canyon.\nThe Toroweap Overlook is located in the western part of the park on the North Rim. Access is via unpaved roads off Route 389 west of Fredonia, Arizona. The roads lead through Grand Canyon\u2013Parashant National Monument and to the overlook.\nSouth Rim.\nA variety of activities at the South Rim cater to park visitors. A driving tour () along the South Rim is split into two segments. The western drive to Hermit's Point is with several overlooks along the way, including Mohave Point, Hopi Point, and the Powell Memorial. From March to December, access to Hermit's Rest is restricted to the free shuttle provided by the Park Service. The eastern portion to Desert View is , and is open to private vehicles year round.\nWalking tours include the Rim Trail, which runs west from the Pipe Creek viewpoint for about of paved road, followed by unpaved to Hermit's Rest. Hikes can begin almost anywhere along this trail, and a shuttle can return hikers to their point of origin. Mather Point, the first view most people reach when entering from the south entrance, is a popular place to begin.\nPrivate canyon flyovers are provided by helicopters and small airplanes out of Las Vegas, Phoenix, and Grand Canyon National Park Airport. Due to a crash in the 1990s, scenic flights are no longer allowed to fly within of the rim within the Grand Canyon National Park.\nGrand Canyon Conservancy.\nThe Grand Canyon Association (GCA) is the National Park Service's official nonprofit partner. It raises private funds to benefit Grand Canyon National Park by operating retail shops and visitor centers within the park, and providing educational opportunities about the natural and cultural history of the region. Its goals include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons (image gallery)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46988", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46988", "title": "Justinian (disambiguation)", "text": "Justinian I (483\u2013565), also known as the Great, was a Byzantine emperor.\nJustinian may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46989", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46989", "title": "Grand Canyon", "text": "Steep-sided canyon in Arizona, US\nThe Grand Canyon is a steep-sided canyon carved by the Colorado River in Arizona, United States. The Grand Canyon is long, up to wide and attains a depth of over a mile ().\nThe canyon and adjacent rim are contained within Grand Canyon National Park, the Kaibab National Forest, Grand Canyon\u2013Parashant National Monument, the Hualapai Indian Reservation, the Havasupai Indian Reservation and the Navajo Nation. President Theodore Roosevelt was a major proponent of the preservation of the Grand Canyon area and visited it on numerous occasions to hunt and enjoy the scenery.\nNearly two billion years of Earth's geological history have been exposed as the Colorado River and its tributaries cut their channels through layer after layer of rock while the Colorado Plateau was uplifted. While some aspects about the history of incision of the canyon are debated by geologists, several recent studies support the hypothesis that the Colorado River established its course through the area about 5 to 6 million years ago. Since that time, the Colorado River has driven the down-cutting of the tributaries and retreat of the cliffs, simultaneously deepening and widening the canyon.\nFor thousands of years, the area has been continuously inhabited by Native Americans, who built settlements within the canyon and its many caves. The Pueblo people considered the Grand Canyon a holy site, and made pilgrimages to it. The first European known to have viewed the Grand Canyon was Garc\u00eda L\u00f3pez de C\u00e1rdenas from Spain, who arrived in 1540.\nGeography.\nThe Grand Canyon is a river valley in the Colorado Plateau that exposes uplifted Proterozoic and Paleozoic strata, and it is also one of the six distinct physiographic sections of the Colorado Plateau province. Even though it is not the deepest canyon on land in the world (Kali Gandaki Gorge in Nepal is much deeper), the Grand Canyon is known for its visually overwhelming size and its intricate and colorful landscape. Geologically, it is significant because of the thick sequence of ancient rocks that are well preserved and exposed in the walls of the canyon. These rock layers record much of the early geologic history of the North American continent.\nUplift associated with mountain formation later moved these sediments thousands of feet upward and created the Colorado Plateau. The higher elevation has also resulted in greater precipitation in the Colorado River drainage area, but not enough to change the Grand Canyon area from being semi-arid. The uplift of the Colorado Plateau is uneven, and the Kaibab Plateau that the Grand Canyon bisects is over higher at the North Rim than at the South Rim. Almost all runoff from the North Rim (which also gets more rain and snow) flows toward the Grand Canyon, while much of the runoff on the plateau behind the South Rim flows away from the canyon (following the general tilt). The result is deeper and longer tributary washes and canyons on the north side and shorter and steeper side canyons on the south side.\nTemperatures on the North Rim are generally lower than those on the South Rim because of the greater elevation (averaging above sea level). Heavy rains are common on both rims during the summer months. Access to the North Rim via the primary route leading to the canyon (State Route 67) is limited during the winter season due to road closures.\nGeology.\nThe Grand Canyon is part of the Colorado River basin, which has developed over the past 70million years. For more than 150 years, scientists have gathered data, proposed new ideas, and debated sometimes contentious theories about the geologic origins of the Grand Canyon and the Colorado River. Formation of the Grand Canyon and the Colorado River may involve a complex history in which multiple factors and geologic processes have interacted over time and in different locations.\nIn the most recent round of \"old river\" vs. \"young river\" controversy, researchers have challenged estimates that had placed the age of the canyon at 5\u20136million years. The research has aroused considerable controversy because it suggests a substantial departure from prior widely supported scientific consensus.\nIn a 2008 study, Victor Polyak examined caves near the Grand Canyon and placed their origins about 17million years ago. The study, which was published in the journal \"Science\" in 2008, used uranium-lead dating to analyze calcite deposits found on the walls of nine caves throughout the canyon.\nIn another 2008 study, Rebecca Flowers reported on apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronometry results suggesting that parts of the Grand Canyon had reached a depth near to the modern depth around 20million years ago.\nIn a subsequent study published in the journal \"Science\" in 2012, she suggested that the western part of the Grand Canyon could be as old as 70million years.\nThe emerging scientific consensus is that the canyon is made up of multiple segments which formed at different times and eventually connected to become the waterway now traversed by the Colorado River. Of the three central segments, the \"Hurricane\" was formed 50\u201370million years ago, and the \"Eastern Grand Canyon\" was cut 15\u201325million years ago. In contrast, the \"Marble Canyon\" and \"Westernmost Grand Canyon\" segments at the ends of the canyon were carved in the last five to six million years.\nThe major geologic exposures in the Grand Canyon range in age from the two-billion-year-old Vishnu Schist at the bottom of the Inner Gorge to the 270-million-year-old Kaibab Limestone on the Rim. Within that there is a gap, the Great Unconformity, between 1.75billion and 1.25billion years ago for which no deposits are present.\nThen, between 1.25billion and 730million years ago, intermittent sediments began to form the Grand Canyon Supergroup. Many of the formations were deposited in warm shallow seas, near-shore environments (such as beaches), and swamps as the seashore repeatedly advanced and retreated over the edge of a proto-North America. Major exceptions include the Permian Coconino Sandstone, which contains abundant geological evidence of aeolian sand dune deposition. Several parts of the Supai Group also were deposited in non-marine environments.\nThe great depth of the Grand Canyon and especially the height of its strata (most of which formed below sea level) can be attributed to of uplift of the Colorado Plateau, starting about 65million years ago (during the Laramide orogeny). This uplift has steepened the stream gradient of the Colorado River and its tributaries, which in turn has increased their speed and thus their ability to cut through rock (see the elevation summary of the Colorado River for present conditions).\nWeather conditions during the ice ages also increased the amount of water in the Colorado River drainage system. The ancestral Colorado River responded by cutting its channel faster and deeper.\nThe base level and course of the Colorado River (or its ancestral equivalent) changed 5.3million years ago when the Gulf of California opened and lowered the river's base level (its lowest point). This increased the rate of erosion and cut nearly all of the Grand Canyon's current depth by 1.2million years ago. The terraced walls of the canyon were created by differential erosion.\nBetween 100,000 and 3million years ago, volcanic activity deposited ash and lava over the area, which at times completely obstructed the river. These volcanic rocks are the youngest in the canyon.\nHydrology.\nGroundwater flow in the Grand Canyon region is an active area of study.\nGroundwater forms when rain soaks down into the earth and reaches the water table. The composition of the earth in a given area determines its permeability, the ease with which water flows through it. Sand is more permeable than clay. Less permeable rock layers composed of clay can block the passage of water and are known as aquitards. More permeable areas of rock that hold and transport groundwater underground are known as aquifers. An area of water bounded by two aquitards is called a confined aquifer, while water below the surface and above an aquitard is called an unconfined aquifer.\nThe different geologic levels of the Grand Canyon have created two major aquifers where groundwater collects. The higher C-aquifer is an unconfined aquifer. It collects groundwater that seeps through the Kaibab and Toroweap Formations into the Coconino Sandstone. Below it, the Permian Hermit Formation and Supai Group provide a dense barrier. Groundwater from the C-acquifer can flow laterally, appearing as seeps along the canyon walls at the base of the Coconino Sandstone but can also descend vertically through fault zones to recharge the underlying confined R-aquifer. The R-aquifer, also known as the Red Wall Muav aquifer, is a karst aquifer. It involves an area of substantial fracturing through the Redwall Limestone, Temple Butte Formation and Cambrian Muav Limestone of the Tonto Group. Five individual systems flow through the R-aquifer and compose the regional groundwater-flow system which drains into the Grand Canyon: Kaibab, Uinkaret-Kanab, Marble-Shinumo, Cataract, and Blue Spring.\nThe flow of groundwater in the Grand Canyon region is influenced in multiple ways by geologic faults and folds. Discharge from the R-aquifer appears as springs and seeps in both the Grand Canyon and tributary canyons. Springs discharge to the Grand Canyon in areas of lower Paleozoic carbonates, and are associated with geologic faults and fractures. Fractures are believed to provide dominant pathways both for vertical circulation in the Paleozoic section, and for lateral collection and transport of water to springs deep in the canyons. The largest springs discharge from the R-aquifer. A smaller number of springs discharge at lower rates from the C-aquifer. Much of the water that could potentially recharge the aquifers is likely released as springs rather than reaching the aquifers.\nStudies of the chemical composition of groundwater at sites across the Grand Canyon region indicate that groundwater contains a fraction of modern water (post-1950), and that many springs have a mix of modern water and older groundwater. Estimated mean ages for South Rim groundwater range from 6 years old (San Francisco Peaks) to nearly 20,000 years old (Bar Four well, Blue Spring). Groundwater age in the South Rim groundwater system also correlates to longitude, with age increasing from east to west from Red Canyon to Boucher springs. Surprisingly, the Canyon Mine Observation well is more similar to Redwall-Muav aquifer wells (R-aquifer) than to the Coconino C-aquifer. This suggests the possibility of a hydrologic connection or similar recharge sources for that hydrologic position. Old groundwater from Havasupai well may have a similar source to the Havasu Spring upwelling from the Redwall-Muav aquifer. Sites with younger estimated mean ages tend to be associated with the unconfined Coconino aquifer. They may recharge quickly as a result of snowmelt, run-off and local precipitation. It is likely that the deeper confined R-aquifer relies primarily on snowmelt from the San Francisco Peaks to recharge.\nOther research has tried to relate groundwater flow paths to possible levels of risk for contamination and identify vulnerability regions for the underlying aquifers. Almost half of the Kaibab plateau's surface was associated with high to very high vulnerability of the unconfined Coconino aquifer (C-aquifer), while about a fifth of the Kaibab Plateau was estimated to be an area of high vulnerability for the Redwall-Muav aquifer (R-aquifer).\nHistory.\nNative Americans.\nThe Ancestral Puebloans were a Native American culture centered on the present-day Four Corners area of the United States. They were the first people known to live in the Grand Canyon area. The cultural group has often been referred to in archaeology as the Anasazi, although the term is not preferred by the modern Puebloan peoples. The word \"Anasazi\" is Navajo for \"enemy ancestors\" or \"alien ancestors\".\nArchaeologists still debate when this distinct culture emerged. The current consensus, based on terminology defined by the Pecos Classification, suggests their emergence was around 1200\u00a0BCE during the Basketmaker II Era. Beginning with the earliest explorations and excavations, researchers have believed that the Ancestral Puebloans are ancestors of the modern Pueblo peoples.\nIn addition to the Ancestral Puebloans, a number of distinct cultures have inhabited the Grand Canyon area. The Cohonina lived to the west of the Grand Canyon, between 500 and 1200\u00a0CE. The Cohonina were ancestors of the Yuman, Havasupai, and Hualapai peoples who inhabit the area today.\nThe Sinagua were a cultural group occupying an area to the southeast of the Grand Canyon, between the Little Colorado River and the Salt River, between approximately 500 and 1425 CE. The Sinagua may have been ancestors of several Hopi clans.\nBy the time of the arrival of Europeans in the 16thcentury, newer cultures had evolved. The Hualapai inhabit a stretch along the pine-clad southern side of the Grand Canyon. The Havasupai have been living in the area near Cataract Canyon since the beginning of the 13thcentury, occupying an area the size of Delaware. The Southern Paiutes live in what is now southern Utah and northern Arizona. The Navajo, or Din\u00e9, live in a wide area stretching from the San Francisco Peaks eastwards towards the Four Corners. Archaeological and linguistic evidence suggests the Navajo descended from the Athabaskan people near Great Slave Lake, Canada, who migrated after the 11thcentury. In the mythology of some Third Mesa Hopi communities, the Grand Canyon was the location humankind arose out of the Third World from a sipapu.\nEuropean arrival and settlement.\nSpanish explorers.\nIn September 1540, under orders from the conquistador Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado to search for the fabled Seven Cities of Cibola, Captain Garc\u00eda L\u00f3pez de C\u00e1rdenas, along with Hopi guides and a small group of Spanish soldiers, traveled to the south rim of the Grand Canyon between Desert View and Moran Point. Pablo de Melgrossa, Juan Galeras, and a third soldier descended some one third of the way into the canyon until they were forced to return because of lack of water. In their report, they noted that some of the rocks in the canyon were \"bigger than the great tower of Seville, Giralda\". It is speculated that their Hopi guides likely knew routes to the canyon floor, but may have been reluctant to lead the Spanish to the river. No Europeans visited the canyon again for more than two hundred years.\nFathers Francisco Atanasio Dom\u00ednguez and Silvestre V\u00e9lez de Escalante were two Spanish priests who, with a group of Spanish soldiers, explored southern Utah and traveled along the north rim of the canyon in Glen and Marble Canyons in search of a route from Santa Fe to California in 1776. They eventually found a crossing, formerly known as the \"Crossing of the Fathers\", that today lies under Lake Powell.\nAlso in 1776, Fray Francisco Garces, a Franciscan missionary, spent a week near Havasupai unsuccessfully attempting to convert a band of Native Americans to Christianity. He described the canyon as \"profound\".\nAmerican exploration.\nJames Ohio Pattie, along with a group of American trappers and mountain men, may have been the next European to reach the canyon, in 1826.\nJacob Hamblin, a Mormon missionary, was sent by Brigham Young in the 1850s to locate suitable river crossing sites in the canyon. Building good relations with local Hualapai and white settlers, he reached the Crossing of the Fathers, crossed the location that would become Lees Ferry on a raft in 1858 and Pearce Ferry (later operated by, and named for, Harrison Pearce). He also acted as an advisor to John Wesley Powell, before his second expedition to the Grand Canyon, serving as a diplomat between Powell and the local native tribes to ensure the safety of his party.\nIn 1857, Edward Fitzgerald Beale was superintendent of an expedition to survey a wagon road along the 35th parallel from Fort Defiance, Arizona to the Colorado River. He led a small party of men in search of water on the Coconino Plateau near the canyon's south rim. On September 19, near present-day National Canyon, they came upon what May Humphreys Stacey described in his journal as \"a wonderful canyon; four thousand feet deep. Everybody in the party admitted that he never before saw anything to match or equal this astonishing natural curiosity.\"\nAlso in 1857, the U.S. War Department asked Lieutenant Joseph Ives to lead an expedition to assess the feasibility of an up-river navigation from the Gulf of California. On December 31, 1857, Ives embarked from the mouth of the Colorado in the stern wheeler steamboat \"Explorer\". His party reached the lower end of Black Canyon on March 8, 1858, then continued on by rowboat past the mouth of the Virgin River after the \"Explorer\" struck a rock. Ives led his party east into the canyon\u00a0\u2013 they may have been the first Europeans to travel the Diamond Creek drainage. In his \"Report Upon the Colorado River of the West\" to the Senate in 1861 Ives states that \"The marvellous story of Cardinas, that had formed for so long a time the only record concerning this rather mythical locality, was rather magnified than detracted from by the accounts of one or two trappers, who professed to have seen the ca\u00f1on\".\nAccording to the \"San Francisco Herald\", in a series of articles run in 1853, Captain Joseph R. Walker in January 1851 with his nephew James T. Walker and six men, traveled up the Colorado River to a point where it joined the Virgin River and continued east into Arizona, traveling along the Grand Canyon and making short exploratory side trips along the way. Walker is reported to have said he wanted to visit the \"Moqui\" (Hopi) Indians. who he had met briefly before and found exceptionally interesting.\nIn 1858, John Strong Newberry became probably the first geologist to visit the Grand Canyon.\nIn 1869, Major John Wesley Powell set out to explore the Colorado River and the Grand Canyon in the first expedition down the canyon. Powell ordered a shipwright to build four reinforced Whitewall rowboats from Chicago and had them shipped west on the newly completed Continental railroad. He hired nine men, including his brother Walter, and collected provisions for ten months. They set out from Green River, Wyoming, on May 24. On June 7, they lost one of their boats, 1/3 of their food, and other badly needed supplies: as a result the team eventually had to subsist on starvation rations. Passing through (or portaging around) a series of dangerous rapids, the group passed down the Green River, reaching its confluence with the Colorado River, near present-day Moab, Utah, on July 17. Continuing on down the Colorado River, the party encountered more rapids and falls.\nOn August 28, 1869, faced with what some felt to be impassable rapids, three men left the expedition on foot in an attempt to reach a settlement away. Ironically, the remaining members went safely through the rapids on August 29, 1869, while Seneca Howland, Oramel Howland, and William H. Dunn were murdered. The area through which the three men traveled was marked by tensions between farming and hunting Shivwits and incoming Mormon settlers. Which group was responsible for killing the three men has been hotly debated. Powell himself visited the area the following year, and was told (through a Mormon interpreter) that the Shivwits had mistakenly killed the men, believing them to be prospectors who had murdered an Indian woman. He chose to smoke a peace pipe with them.\nPowell went on to become the first Director of the U.S. Bureau of Ethnology of the Smithsonian Institution (1879\u20131902) and the second Director of the US Geological Survey (1881\u20131894). He was the first to use the term \"Grand Canyon\", in 1871; previously it had been called the \"Big Canyon\".\nIn 1889, Frank M. Brown wanted to build a railroad along the Colorado River to carry coal. He, his chief engineer Robert Brewster Stanton, and 14 others started to explore the Grand Canyon in poorly designed cedar wood boats, with no life preservers. Brown drowned in an accident near Marble Canyon: Stanton made new boats and proceeded to explore the Colorado all of the way to the Gulf of California.\nThe Grand Canyon became an official national monument in 1908 and a national park in 1919.\nFederal protection: National monument and park.\nU.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Grand Canyon in 1903. An avid outdoorsman and staunch conservationist, Roosevelt established the Grand Canyon Game Preserve on November 28, 1906. Livestock grazing was reduced, but predators such as mountain lions, eagles, and wolves were eradicated. Roosevelt along with other members of his conservation group, the Boone and Crockett Club helped form the National Parks Association, which in turn lobbied for the Antiquities Act of 1906 which gave Roosevelt the power to create national monuments. Once the act was passed, Roosevelt immediately added adjacent national forest lands and redesignated the preserve a U.S. National Monument on January 11, 1908. Opponents such as land and mining claim holders blocked efforts to reclassify the monument as a U.S. National Park for 11 years. Grand Canyon National Park was finally established as the 17th U.S. National Park by an Act of Congress signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on February 26, 1919.\nThe federal government administrators who manage park resources face many challenges. These include issues related to the recent reintroduction into the wild of the highly endangered California condor, air tour overflight noise levels, water rights and management disputes, and forest fire management.\nThe canyon's ecosystem was permanently changed after the construction of the Glen Canyon Dam in 1963. Average flood levels dropped from 85,000 to 8,000 cubic ft/sec. In the absence of natural flooding, sandbars and beaches eroded and invasive species began to displace native species. Federal officials started releasing floods in the Grand Canyon in hopes of restoring its ecosystem beginning with 1996, 2004, and 2008.\nIn 2018, the Department of Interior started experimenting with \"adaptive management\" of the Glen Canyon Dam, using a High-Flow Experiment (HFE) water release to shift volumes of sand and monitoring effects such as the dispersal of invasive tamarisk seeds.\nHowever, as of 2022, extreme drought has caused water levels in Lake Powell to drop so much that a planned release of water has been delayed, to ensure that the Glen Canyon Dam can continue to generate hydropower.\nThere are numerous mining claims in the area around the Grand Canyon\nWeather.\nWeather in the Grand Canyon varies according to elevation. The forested rims are high enough to receive winter snowfall, but along the Colorado River in the Inner Gorge, temperatures are similar to those found in Tucson and other low elevation desert locations in Arizona. Conditions in the Grand Canyon region are generally dry, but substantial precipitation occurs twice annually, during seasonal pattern shifts in winter (when Pacific storms usually deliver widespread, moderate rain and high-elevation snow to the region from the west) and in late summer (due to the North American Monsoon, which delivers waves of moisture from the southeast, causing dramatic, localized thunderstorms fueled by the heat of the day). Average annual precipitation on the South Rim is less than , with of snow; the higher North Rim usually receives of moisture, with a typical snowfall of ; and Phantom Ranch, far below the canyon's rims along the Colorado River at gets just of rain, and snow is a rarity.\nTemperatures vary wildly throughout the year, with summer highs within the Inner Gorge commonly exceeding and winter minimum temperatures sometimes falling below along the canyon's rims. Visitors are often surprised by these potentially extreme conditions, and this, along with the high altitude of the canyon's rims, can lead to unpleasant side effects such as dehydration, sunburn, and hypothermia.\nWeather conditions can greatly affect hiking and canyon exploration, and visitors should obtain accurate forecasts because of hazards posed by exposure to extreme temperatures, winter storms and late summer monsoons. While the park service posts weather information at gates and visitor centers, this is a rough approximation only, and should not be relied upon for trip planning. For accurate weather in the canyon, hikers should consult the National Weather Service's NOAA weather radio or the official National Weather Service website.\nThe National Weather Service has had a cooperative station on the South Rim since 1903. The record high temperature on the South Rim was on June 26, 1974, and the record low temperature was on January 1, 1919, February 1, 1985, and December 23, 1990.\nAir quality.\nAs of 1999[ [update]] the Grand Canyon area had some of the cleanest air in the United States.\nHowever, air quality in the area can be affected by air pollution from coal-fired power plants, mining, oil and gas, vehicles, and urban and industrial pollution from nearby states, California and Mexico. Events such as forest fires and dust storms in the Southwest can have a considerable impact.\nDifferences in visibility tend to be seasonal: best during the winter and poorest during the summer.\nWinter cold fronts tend to carry clean, crisp air from the northwest, a less populated area. However they can also carry pollution from nearby mines and power plants. The average visibility during the winter is 160 miles, with the potential to reach 210 miles under ideal conditions. In the summer, prevailing winds from the southwest carry pollution from major urban and industrial centers, and visibility on average is only 100 miles. Within the canyon itself, smog can be trapped.\nAir quality and visibility in the canyon are affected mainly by sulfates, soils, and organics. The sulfates largely result from urban emissions in southern California, borne on the prevailing westerly winds throughout much of the year, and emissions from Arizona's copper smelter region, borne on southerly or southeasterly winds during the monsoon. Airborne soils originate with windy conditions and road dust. Organic particles result from vehicle emissions, long-range transport from urban areas, and forest fires, as well as from VOCs emitted by vegetation in the surrounding forests. Nitrates, carried in from urban areas, stationary sources, and vehicle emissions; as well as black carbon from forest fires and vehicle emissions, also contribute to a lesser extent.\nA number of actions have been taken to preserve and further improve air quality and visibility at the canyon.\nIn 1990, amendments to the Clean Air Act established the Grand Canyon Visibility Transport Commission (GCVTC) to advise the US EPA on strategies for protecting visual air quality on the Colorado Plateau. The GCVTC released its final report in 1996 and initiated the Western Regional Air Partnership (WRAP), a partnership of state, tribal and federal agencies to help coordinate the implementation of the commission's recommendations.\nIn 1999, the Regional Haze Rule established a goal of restoring visibility in national parks and wilderness areas (Class 1 areas), such as the Grand Canyon, to natural background levels by 2064. Subsequent revisions to the rule provide specific requirements for making reasonable progress toward that goal.\nIn the early 1990s, studies indicated that emissions of SO2, a sulfate precursor, from the Navajo Generating Station affected visibility in the canyon, mainly in the winter.\nAs a result, scrubbers were added to the plant's three units in 1997 through 1999 to reduce SO2 emissions by 90% on an annual average. Before and after observations showed a wintertime decrease of 33% for particulate sulfur (Sp), improving visibility. The plant also installed low-NOx SOFA burners in 2009\u20132011, reducing emissions of NOx, a nitrate precursor, by 40%\nThe plant shut down completely in 2019.\nEmissions from the Mohave Generating Station to the west were similarly found to affect visibility in the canyon. The plant was required to have installed SO2 scrubbers, but was instead shut down in 2005, eliminating its emissions.\nPrescribed fires are typically conducted in the spring and fall in the forests adjacent to the canyon to reduce the potential for severe forest fires and resulting smoke conditions. Although prescribed fires also affect air quality, the controlled conditions allow the use of management techniques to minimize their impact.\nClimate change.\nDue to the increase of greenhouse gases, temperatures have steadily risen making recent years the warmest in the century-long record. Temperatures have increased in Arizona by 2.1 degrees Fahrenheit since 1895. From 1916 to 2014, naturalized streamflow in the Upper Colorado River Basin decreased by 16.5%, in spite of a slight increase of +1.4% in annual precipitation over the same period.\nIncreases in temperature correlate to increased evaporation, loss of reflective snow, and decreases in snowpack, reducing available water in the Colorado River by an estimated 9.3% per degree Celsius of warming.\nOver the last 30 years, the South Rim of the Grand Canyon has averaged 13.4 inches of rainfall per year, while the North Rim has averaged 24 inches. The first dual distribution water system in the United States was built on the South Rim, treating and reclaiming wastewater for nonpotable reuse as early as 1926. Early on, water for human use was brought in by tankers, and pumped up from a spring deeper in the canyon. In the 1960s, the Transcanyon Pipeline was built to carry water from the North Rim down into the canyon and back up to the South Rim.\nEvery day 500,000 gallons of water are pumped from underground springs on the North Rim through the pipeline to supply the more heavily developed South Rim with water.\nAs water consumption continues to soar due to increasing visitation in the park, both the sustainability of the water supply and the condition of the pipeline are in question. As of 2019, plans to replace the aging 16-mile aluminum pipeline were proposed. Another proposal, from the Bureau of Reclamation, recommended that the park drill a well into the Redwall-Muav aquifer to meet the increasing water consumption. However, the aquifer's recharge rate stands to decline over time due to decreases in precipitation and snowpack. Some effects of over pumping aquifers include land subsidence, reduction in rivers and lakes, disrupted riparian systems, and poor water quality.\nIn the National Park Service's \"Climate Action Plan,\" goals were set to reduce greenhouse gases 30 percent below 2008 levels by 2020 and plan and implement measures that best allow the park to adapt to the impacts of climate change. Strategies to accomplish these goals included: \"reduce [greenhouse gases] emissions resulting from activities within and by the park, developing and implementing a plan to adapt to current and future impacts of climate change, increase climate change education and outreach, and monitor progress and identify areas for improvement\".\nBiology and ecology.\nPlants.\nThere are approximately 1,737 known species of vascular plants, 167 species of fungi, 64 species of moss, and 195 species of lichen found in Grand Canyon National Park. This variety is largely due to the elevation change from the Colorado River up to the highest point on the North Rim. Grand Canyon boasts a dozen endemic plants (known only within the Park's boundaries) while only ten percent of the Park's flora is exotic. Sixty-three plants found here have been given special status by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.\nThe Mojave Desert influences the western sections of the canyon, Sonoran Desert vegetation covers the eastern sections, and ponderosa and pinyon pine forests grow on both rims.\nNatural seeps and springs percolating out of the canyon walls are home to 11% of all the plant species found in the Grand Canyon. The canyon itself can act as a connection between the east and the west by providing corridors of appropriate habitat along its length. The canyon can also be a genetic barrier to some species, like the tassel-eared squirrel.\nThe aspect, or direction a slope faces, also plays a major role in adding diversity to the Grand Canyon. North-facing slopes receive about one-third the normal amount of sunlight, so plants growing there are similar to plants found at higher elevations, or in more northern latitudes. The south-facing slopes receive the full amount of sunlight and are covered in vegetation typical of the Sonoran Desert.\nAnimals.\nOf the 90 mammal species found along the Colorado River corridor, 18 are rodents and 22 are bats.\nLife zones and communities.\nThe Park contains several major ecosystems. Its great biological diversity can be attributed to the presence of five of the seven life zones and three of the four desert types in North America. The five life zones represented are the Lower Sonoran, Upper Sonoran, Transition, Canadian, and Hudsonian. This is equivalent to traveling from Mexico to Canada. Differences in elevation and the resulting variations in climate are the major factors that form the various life zones and communities in and around the canyon. Grand Canyon National Park contains 129 vegetation communities, and the composition and distribution of plant species are influenced by climate, geomorphology and geology.\nLower Sonoran.\nThe Lower Sonoran life zone spans from the Colorado River up to . Along the Colorado River and its perennial tributaries, a riparian community exists. Coyote willow, arrowweed, seep-willow, western honey mesquite, catclaw acacia, and exotic tamarisk (saltcedar) are the predominant species. Hanging gardens, seeps and springs often contain rare plants such as the white-flowering western redbud, stream orchid, and \"Flaveria mcdougallii\". Endangered fish in the river include the humpback chub and the razorback sucker.\nThe three most common amphibians in these riparian communities are the canyon tree frog, red-spotted toad, and Woodhouse's Rocky Mountain toad. Leopard frogs are very rare in the Colorado River corridor; they have undergone major declines and have not been seen in the Canyon in several years. There are 33 crustacean species found in the Colorado River and its tributaries within Grand Canyon National Park. Of these 33, 16 are considered true zooplankton organisms.\nOnly 48 bird species regularly nest along the river, while others use the river as a migration corridor or as an overwintering habitat. The bald eagle is one species that uses the river corridor as a winter habitat.\nRiver otters may have disappeared from the park in the late 20th century, and muskrats are extremely rare. Beavers cut willows, cottonwoods, and shrubs for food, and can significantly affect the riparian vegetation. Other rodents, such as antelope squirrels and pocket mice, are mostly omnivorous, using many different vegetation types. Grand Canyon bats typically roost in desert uplands but forage on the abundance of insects along the river and its tributaries. In addition to bats, coyotes, ringtails, and spotted skunks are the most numerous riparian predators and prey on invertebrates, rodents, and reptiles.\nRaccoons, weasels, bobcats, gray foxes, and mountain lions are also present but are much rarer. Ungulate species such as mule deer and desert bighorn sheep frequent the river corridor. Since the removal of 500 feral burros in the early 1980s, bighorn sheep numbers have rebounded. Mule deer are generally not permanent residents along the river but travel down from the rim when food and water resources there become scarce.\nThe insect species commonly found in the river corridor and tributaries are midges, caddisflies, mayflies, stoneflies, black flies, mites, beetles, butterflies, moths, and fire ants. Numerous species of spiders and several species of scorpions, including the bark scorpion and the giant desert hairy scorpion, inhabit the riparian zone.\nEleven aquatic and 26 terrestrial species of mollusks have been identified in and around Grand Canyon National Park. Of the aquatic species, two are bivalves (clams) and nine are gastropods (snails). Twenty-six species of terrestrial gastropods have been identified, primarily land snails and slugs.\nThere are approximately 41 reptile species in Grand Canyon National Park. Ten are considered common along the river corridor and include lizards and snakes. Lizard density tends to be highest along the stretch of land between the water's edge and the beginning of the upland desert community. The two largest lizards in the canyon are gila monsters and chuckwallas. Many snake species, which are not directly dependent on surface water, may be found both within the inner gorge and the Colorado River corridor. Six rattlesnake species have been recorded in the park.\nAbove the river corridor a desert scrub community, composed of North American desert flora, thrives. Typical warm desert species such as creosote bush, white bursage, brittlebush, catclaw acacia, ocotillo, mariola, western honey mesquite, four-winged saltbush, big sagebrush, blackbrush, and rubber rabbitbrush grow in this community. The mammalian fauna in the woodland scrub community consists of 50 species, mostly rodents and bats. Three of the five Park woodrat species live in the desert scrub community.\nExcept for the western banded gecko, which seems to be distributed only near water along the Colorado River, all of the reptiles found near the river also appear in the uplands, but in lower densities. The desert gopher tortoise, a threatened species, inhabits the desert scrublands in the western end of the park.\nSome of the common insects found at elevations above are orange paper wasps, honey bees, black flies, tarantula hawks, stink bugs, beetles, black ants, and monarch and swallowtail butterflies. Solifugids, wood spiders, garden spiders, black widow spiders, and tarantulas can be found in the desert scrub and higher elevations.\nUpper Sonoran and Transition.\nThe Upper Sonoran Life Zone includes most of the inner canyon and South Rim at elevations from . This zone is generally dominated by blackbrush, sagebrush, and pinyon-juniper woodlands. Elevations of are in the Mojave Desert Scrub community of the Upper Sonoran. This community is dominated by the four-winged saltbush and creosote bush; other important plants include Utah agave, narrowleaf mesquite, ratany, catclaw acacia, and various cacti species.\nApproximately 30 bird species breed primarily in the desert uplands and cliffs of the inner canyon. Virtually all bird species present breed in other suitable habitats throughout the Sonoran and Mohave deserts. The abundance of bats, swifts, and riparian birds provides ample food for peregrines, and suitable eyrie sites are plentiful along the steep canyon walls. Also, several critically endangered California condors have made the eastern part of the Park their home, having been re-introduced to the Colorado Plateau on the Arizona Strip earlier.\nThe conifer forests provide habitat for 52 mammal species. Porcupines, shrews, red squirrels, tassel-eared Kaibab and Abert's squirrels, black bear, mule deer, and elk are found at the park's higher elevations on the Kaibab Plateau.\nAbove the desert scrub and up to is a pinyon pine forest and one seed juniper woodland. Within this woodland one can find big sagebrush, snakeweed, Mormon tea, Utah agave, banana and narrowleaf Yucca, winterfat, Indian ricegrass, dropseed, and needlegrass. There are a variety of snakes and lizards here, but one species of reptile, the mountain short-horned lizard, is a particularly abundant inhabitant of the pi\u00f1on-juniper and ponderosa pine forests.\nPonderosa pine forests grow at elevations between , on both North and South rims in the Transition life zone. The South Rim includes species such as gray fox, mule deer, bighorn sheep, rock squirrels, pinyon pine, and Utah juniper. Additional species such as Gambel oak, New Mexico locust, mountain mahogany, elderberry, creeping mahonia, and fescue have been identified in these forests. The Utah tiger salamander and the Great Basin spadefoot toad are two amphibians that are common in the rim forests. Of the approximately 90 bird species that breed in the coniferous forests, 51 are summer residents and at least 15 of these are known to be neotropical migrants.\nCanadian and Hudsonian.\nElevations of are in the Canadian Life Zone, which includes the North Rim and the Kaibab Plateau. Spruce-fir forests characterized by Engelmann spruce, blue spruce, Douglas fir, white fir, aspen, and mountain ash, along with several species of perennial grasses, groundsels, yarrow, cinquefoil, lupines, sedges, and asters, grow in this sub-alpine climate. Mountain lions, Kaibab squirrels, and American goshawks are found here.\nMontane meadows and subalpine grassland communities of the Hudsonian life zone are rare and located only on the North Rim. Both are typified by many grass species. Some of these grasses include blue and black grama, big galleta, Indian ricegrass, and three-awns. The wettest areas support sedges and forbs.\nTourism.\nGrand Canyon National Park is one of the world's premier natural attractions, attracting about five million visitors per year. According to a survey conducted of visitors to the canyon between September 2003 through August 2004, 83% were from the United States: California (12%), Arizona (9%), Texas (5%), Florida (3%) and New York (4%) represented the top domestic visitors. Seventeen percent of visitors were from outside the United States; the most prominently represented nations were the United Kingdom (3%), Canada (4%), Japan (2%), Germany (2%) and the Netherlands (1%).\nThe South Rim is open all year, weather permitting. The North Rim is generally open mid-May to mid-October.\nActivities.\nThere are many viewing points on all sides of the canyon, with the most accessible locations inside Grand Canyon National Park and the Hualapai Indian Reservation. About 90% of tourists visit the South Rim from Arizona State Route 64, which averages above sea level. The South Rim houses two visitor centers, a geological museum, art gallery/bookstore, and other attractions near Grand Canyon Village. Further east along the South Rim is the Desert View Watchtower. Grand Canyon National Park also has a visitor center in an easterly area known as the North Rim, via Arizona State Route 67; the center and the road are closed in winter months. On the Hualapai reservation, Grand Canyon West is the third major area with tourist services, about driving from Las Vegas and about by road from Grand Canyon Village at the South Rim. The tribe opened the glass-bottomed Grand Canyon Skywalk in 2007, which has since attracted \"thousands of visitors a year, most from Las Vegas\". Also at Grand Canyon West is Guano Point, which features a narrow peninsula surrounded on all sides by steep dropoffs. On the north side of the canyon to the west, the Grand Canyon\u2013Parashant National Monument has no paved roads and no visitor services.\nRafting, hiking, running, and helicopter tours are also popular in the canyon area. The floor of the valley is accessible by foot, muleback, or by boat or raft from upriver. Hiking down to the river and back up to the rim in one day is discouraged by park officials because of the distance, steep and rocky trails, change in elevation, and danger of heat exhaustion from the much higher temperatures at the bottom. Rescues are required annually of unsuccessful rim-to-river-to-rim travelers. Nevertheless, hundreds of fit and experienced hikers complete the trip every year.\nCamping on the North and South rims is generally restricted to established campgrounds and reservations are highly recommended, especially at the busier South Rim. There is at large camping available along many parts of the North Rim managed by Kaibab National Forest. North Rim campsites are only open seasonally due to road closures from weather and winter snowpack. All overnight camping below the rim requires a backcountry permit from the Backcountry Office (BCO). Each year Grand Canyon National Park receives approximately 30,000 requests for backcountry permits. The park issues 13,000 permits, and close to 40,000 people camp overnight. The earliest a permit application is accepted is the first of the month, four months before the proposed start month.\nTourists wishing for a more vertical perspective can go skydiving, board helicopters and small airplanes in Boulder, Las Vegas, Phoenix, Grand Canyon West Airport, and Grand Canyon National Park Airport (seven miles from the South Rim) for canyon flyovers. Scenic flights are no longer allowed to fly within of the rim within the national park because of a late 1990s crash. The last aerial video footage from below the rim was filmed in 1984. However, some helicopter flights land on the Havasupai and Hualapai Indian Reservations within the Grand Canyon (outside of the park boundaries).\nIn 2016, skydiving at the Grand Canyon become possible with the first Grand Canyon Skydiving operation opening up at the Grand Canyon National Park Airport, on the South Rim.\nIn 2014, a developer announced plans to build a multimedia complex on the canyon's rim called the Grand Canyon Escalade. On there would be shops, an IMAX theater, hotels and an RV park. A gondola would enable easy visits to the canyon floor where a \"riverwalk\" of \"connected walkways, an eatery, a tramway station, a seating area and a wastewater package plant\" would be situated. On October 31, 2017, the Navajo Nation Council voted against the project.\nFatalities.\nAbout 770 deaths have occurred between the mid-1800s and 2015. Of the fatalities that occurred from 1869 to 2001, the most common cause was airplane and helicopter crashes, with 242 deaths (128 of them in the 1956 disaster mentioned below), along with the following: 53 resulted from falls; 65 were attributable to environmental causes, including heat stroke, cardiac arrest, dehydration, and hypothermia; 7 were caught in flash floods; 79 were drowned in the Colorado River; 25 died in freak errors and accidents, including lightning strikes and rock falls; and 23 were the victims of homicides. Nearly all deaths that occur are preventable.\nOn October 3, 2020, former Major League Baseball player Charlie Haeger was found dead from a self-inflicted gunshot wound on a canyon trail. He was under investigation for the murder of his ex-girlfriend which had taken place the day before in Scottsdale.\nIn 1956, the Grand Canyon was the site of the deadliest commercial aviation disaster in history at the time when two commercial planes en route from Los Angeles collided at 21,000 feet above the canyon. The disaster killed all 128 passengers and crew members aboard both planes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nHistory\nTravel and sites\nMultimedia"}
{"id": "46990", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46990", "title": "Punic wars", "text": ""}
{"id": "46991", "revid": "11639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46991", "title": "Bryce Canyon National Park", "text": "National park in Utah, United States\nBryce Canyon National Park () is a national park of the United States located in southwestern Utah. The major feature of the park is Bryce Canyon, which despite its name, is not a canyon but a collection of giant natural amphitheaters along the eastern side of the Paunsaugunt Plateau. Bryce is distinctive due to geological structures called hoodoos, formed by frost weathering and stream erosion of the river and lake bed sedimentary rock. The red, orange, and white colors of the rocks provide distinctive views for park visitors. Bryce Canyon National Park is much smaller and sits at a much higher elevation than nearby Zion National Park. The rim at Bryce varies from .\nThe area is in portions of Garfield County and Kane County. It was settled by Mormon pioneers in the 1850s and was named after Ebenezer Bryce, who homesteaded in the area in 1874. The area was originally designated as a national monument by President Warren G. Harding in 1923 and was redesignated as a national park by Congress in 1928. The park covers and receives substantially fewer visitors than Zion National Park (nearly 4.3 million in 2016) or Grand Canyon National Park (almost 6 million in 2016), largely due to Bryce's more remote location. In 2024, Bryce Canyon received almost 2.5million visitors.\nGeography.\nThe park covers in southwestern Utah, at an altitude of . The park is about northeast of and higher than Zion National Park.\nBryce Canyon National Park lies within the Colorado Plateau geographic province of North America and straddles the southeastern edge of the Paunsaugunt Plateau west of Paunsaugunt Faults (\"Paunsaugunt\" is Paiute for \"home of the beaver\"). Park visitors arrive at the plateau and look over its edge toward a valley containing the fault and the Paria River just beyond it (\"Paria\" is Paiute for \"muddy or elk water\"). The Kaiparowits Plateau is on the eastern opposite side of the valley.\nBryce Canyon was not formed from erosion initiated from a central stream, meaning it technically is not a canyon. Instead headward erosion excavated large amphitheater-shaped features in the Cenozoic-aged rocks of the Paunsaugunt Plateau. This erosion resulted in colorful pinnacles called hoodoos that are up to high. A series of amphitheaters extends more than north-to-south within the park. The largest is Bryce Amphitheater, which is long, wide and deep. A nearby example of amphitheaters with hoodoos in the same formation but at a higher elevation is in Cedar Breaks National Monument, which is to the west on the Markagunt Plateau.\nRainbow Point, the highest part of the park at , is at the end of the scenic drive. From there, Aquarius Plateau, Bryce Amphitheater, the Henry Mountains, the Vermilion Cliffs and the White Cliffs can be seen. Yellow Creek, where it exits the park in the northeast section, is the lowest part of the park at .\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, the park has a continental climate with warm, dry summers (\"Dsb\"). Dsb climates are defined by having their coldest month at a mean temperature below , all months with a mean temperature below , at least four months with a mean temperature above , and three times as much precipitation in the wettest winter month compared to the driest summer month. The plant hardiness zone at the visitor center is 5b with an average annual extreme minimum air temperature of .\nThe weather in Bryce Canyon is cooler and receives more precipitation than Zion: a total of per year. Yearly temperatures vary from an average minimum of in January to an average maximum of in July, but extreme temperatures can range from . The record high temperature in the park was in July 2002, while the record low temperature was in December 1972.\nHistory.\nNative American habitation.\nLittle is known about early human habitation in the area. Archaeological surveys of the Paunsaugunt Plateau indicate that people have lived in the area for at least 10,000\u00a0years. Basketmaker Anasazi artifacts thousands of years old were found south of the park. Other artifacts from the Pueblo-period Anasazi and the Fremont culture (up to the mid-12th century) were found.\nThe Paiute Native Americans moved into the area around the time that the other cultures left. These Native Americans hunted and gathered for most of their food, while supplementing their diet with cultivated plants. The Paiute developed a mythology surrounding the hoodoos. They believed that they were the Legend People whom the trickster Coyote turned to stone due to their bad deeds. One older Paiute said his culture called the hoodoos \"Anka-ku-was-a-wits\", which is Paiute for \"red painted faces\".\nEuropean American exploration and settlement.\nIn the late 18th and early 19th century the first European Americans explored the area. Mormon scouts visited in the 1850s to gauge its potential for agriculture, grazing, and settlement.\nThe first major scientific expedition was led by U.S. Army Major John Wesley Powell in 1872. Powell, along with a team of mapmakers and geologists, surveyed the Sevier and Virgin River area as part of a larger survey of the Colorado Plateaus. His mapmakers used many Paiute place names.\nSmall groups of Mormon pioneers followed and attempted to settle east of Bryce Canyon along the Paria River. The Kanarra Cattle Company began grazing cattle there in 1873.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sent Scottish immigrant Ebenezer Bryce and his wife Mary to settle land in the Paria Valley to apply his carpentry skills. The Bryce family settled right below Bryce Amphitheater\u2014the main collection of hoodoos. Bryce grazed his cattle inside what are now park borders, and is reputed to have said that the amphitheaters were a \"helluva place to lose a cow.\" He built a road to the plateau to retrieve firewood and timber, and a canal to irrigate his crops and water his animals. Other settlers soon started to call the canyon at the end of road \"Bryce's Canyon\", and the name stuck.\nA combination of drought, overgrazing, and flooding eventually drove the remaining Paiutes from the area and prompted the settlers to attempt to build a water diversion channel from the Sevier River drainage. That effort failed, leading most settlers, including the Bryce family, to abandon the area. Bryce moved his family to Arizona in 1880. The remaining settlers dug a ditch from the Sevier's east fork into Tropic Valley.\nCreation of the park.\nThese scenic areas were first described to the public in magazine articles published by Union Pacific and Santa Fe railroads in 1916. Forest Supervisor J. W. Humphrey among others promoted the scenic wonders of Bryce Canyon's amphitheaters, and by 1918 additional articles helped generate public interest. Ruby Syrett, Harold Bowman, and the Perry brothers later established lodging and \"touring services\". Syrett later served as the first postmaster. By the early 1920s, the Union Pacific Railroad became interested in expanding rail service into southwestern Utah to accommodate tourists.\nConservation advocates became alarmed by the damage overgrazing, logging, and unregulated visitation was inflicting on the canyon. A protection effort soon began, and National Park Service Director Stephen Mather responded by proposing that Bryce Canyon be made into a state park. However, the governor of Utah and the Utah State Legislature lobbied for national protection. Mather relented and sent his recommendation to President Warren G. Harding, who on June 8, 1923, established Bryce Canyon National Monument.\nA road was built the same year on the plateau to provide access to outlooks over the amphitheaters. From 1924 to 1925, Bryce Canyon Lodge was built from local timber and stone.\nMembers of the United States Congress started work in 1924 on upgrading Bryce Canyon's protection status from national monument to national park to establish Utah National Park. A process led by the Utah Parks Company for transferring ownership of private and state-held land to the federal government started in 1923. The last of the land was acquired four years later, and on February 25, 1928, Bryce Canyon National Park was established.\nIn 1931, President Herbert Hoover annexed an adjoining area south of the park, and in 1942 an additional was added. This brought the park's total area to the ultimate . Rim Road, a scenic drive, was completed in 1934 by the Civilian Conservation Corps. Park administration was conducted from Zion National Park until 1956 when Bryce Canyon's first superintendent started work.\nLater.\nThe USS \"Bryce Canyon\", named for the park, served as a supply and repair ship in the U.S. Pacific Fleet from September 15, 1950, to June 30, 1981.\nBryce Canyon Natural History Association (BCNHA) is a non-profit organization, established in 1961. It runs the bookstore inside the park visitor center and support interpretive, educational, and scientific activities.\nResponding to increased visitation and traffic congestion, NPS implemented a voluntary, summer-only, in-park shuttle system in June 2000.\nGeology.\nThe Bryce Canyon area experienced soil deposition that spans from the last part of the Cretaceous period and the first half of the Cenozoic era. The ancient depositional environment varied. Dakota Sandstone and Tropic Shale were deposited in the warm, shallow waters of the advancing and retreating Cretaceous Seaway (outcrops of these rocks are found just outside park borders).\nOther formations were created, but mostly eroded away following two major periods of uplift. The Laramide orogeny affected the entire western part of what would become North America starting about 70\u00a0million to 50\u00a0MYA. This event helped to build the Rocky Mountains and in the process closed the Cretaceous Seaway. The Straight Cliffs, Wahweap, and Kaiparowits formations were victims of this uplift. The Colorado Plateaus rose 16\u00a0MYA and were segmented into plateaus, separated by faults and each having its own uplift rate.\nThis uplift created vertical joints, which over time preferentially eroded. The soft Pink Cliffs of the Claron Formation eroded to form freestanding hoodoo pinnacles in badlands, while the more resistant White Cliffs formed monoliths. The dominant bright orange colors are from hematite (iron oxide; ); the yellows from limonite (); and the purples are from pyrolusite ().\nEcology.\nMore than 1000 plant species live in the park.\nThe park spans three life zones, depending on elevation.\nThe park has 59 mammal species, more than 45 species of butterflies and moths, over 100 species of birds, and a large number of insect species. The forests and meadows support diverse animal life, including ringtails. Larger mammals include deer, antelope, elk, and mountain lions. Birds of the park include peregrine falcons, ospreys, jays, and hummingbirds. Eleven species of reptiles and four species of amphibians have been found. Reptiles include the Great Basin rattlesnake, short-horned lizard, side-blotched lizard, striped whipsnake, and amphibians include the tiger salamander.\nThe park forms part of the habitat of three wildlife species listed under the Endangered Species Act: the Utah prairie dog, the California condor, and the southwestern willow flycatcher. The Utah prairie dog is a threatened species that was reintroduced to the park. The largest protected population is found in the park.\nAlso in the park are the black, lumpy, very slow-growing colonies of cryptobiotic soil, which are a mix of lichens, algae, fungi, and cyanobacteria. Together these organisms slow erosion, add nitrogen to the soil, and help it to retain moisture.\nActivities.\nBryce Canyon has eight marked and maintained day hikes:\n\"Easy to moderate hikes\"\n\"Moderate hikes\"\n\"Strenuous hikes\"\nSeveral of the trails intersect, allowing hikers to arrange routes for more challenging hikes.\nThe park has two trails designated for overnight trips: the Riggs Spring Loop Trail and the Under-the-Rim Trail.\nOn clear days the Navajo Mountain and the Kaibab Plateau can be seen away in Arizona from Yovimpa and Rainbow points and the Black Mesas of eastern Arizona and western New Mexico can be seen away.\nThe park has a 7.4\u00a0magnitude night sky, one of the darkest in North America and patrons can see approximately 7,500 stars. Park rangers host public stargazing events and evening programs on astronomy, nocturnal animals, and night sky protection. The Bryce Canyon Astronomy Festival, typically held in June, attracts thousands of visitors. In honor of this festival, was named after the national park.\nThe two campgrounds are North Campground and Sunset Campground. Loop A in North Campground is open year-round. Additional loops and Sunset Campground are open from late spring to early autumn.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46992", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46992", "title": "Czech literature", "text": " \nCzech literature can refer to literature written in Czech, in the Czech Republic (formerly Czechoslovakia, earlier the Lands of the Bohemian Crown), or by Czech people. Most literature in the Czech Republic is now written in Czech, but historically, a considerable part of Czech literary output was written in other languages as well, including Latin and German.\nMiddle Latin works.\nBohemia was Christianized in the late 9th to 10th centuries, and the earliest written works associated with the kingdom of Bohemia are Middle Latin works written in the 12th to 13th centuries (with the exception of the Latin \"Legend of Christian\", supposedly of the 10th century but of dubious authenticity).\nThe majority of works from this period are chronicles and hagiographies. Bohemian hagiographies focus exclusively on Bohemian saints (Sts. Ludmila, Wenceslas, Procopius, Cyril and Methodius, and Adalbert), although numerous legends about Bohemian saints were also written by foreign authors. The most important chronicle of the period is the Chronica Boemorum (Bohemian Chronicle) by Cosmas, though it does approach its topics with then-contemporary politics in mind, and attempts to legitimize the ruling dynasty. Cosmas' work was updated and extended by several authors in the latter part of the 12th and during the 13th centuries.\nDuring the first part of the 13th century, the P\u0159emyslid rulers of Bohemia expanded their political and economic influence westward and came into contact with the political and cultural kingdoms of Western Europe. This cultural exchange was evident in literature through the introduction of German courtly poetry, or Minnesang, in the latter part of the 13th century. After the murder of Wenceslas III and the subsequent upheavals in the kingdom in 1306, however, the Bohemian nobles distanced themselves from German culture and looked for literature in their native language. Despite this, German remained an important literary language in Bohemia until the 19th century. This new literature in Czech consisted largely of epic poetry of two types: the legend and the knightly epic, both based on apocryphal tales from the Bible, as well as hagiographic legends of earlier periods. Prose was also first developed during this period: administrative and instructional texts, which necessitated the development of a more extensive and specialized vocabulary; the first Czech-Latin dictionaries date from this time. Extensive chronicles, of which the \"Chronicle of Dalimil\" and \"Chronicon Aulae Regiae\" (the \"Zbraslav Chronicle\") are the most striking examples, and artistic prose (e.g. Smil Fla\u0161ka z Pardubic and Johannes von Saaz) were also written.\nReformation.\nThe Hussite revolution of the 15th century created a definite break in the literary evolution of Czech literature and forms its own separate history within Czech literature. The main aim of this literature was to communicate and argue for a specific religious doctrine and its form was generally prose. Jan Hus theological writing first appears at the beginning of the 15th century; he wrote first in Latin, later in Czech, and this divide remained for much of the later period: poetry and intellectual prose used primarily Latin, whereas popular prose was written in Czech or German. Hus writings center on technical, theological questions; however, he did publish a set of his Czech sermons and created rules of orthography and grammar that would be used to create the foundations of modern Czech in the 17th and 18th centuries. \nOnly fragments remain of the literary works of the radical Taborite faction \u2013 these were generally Latin apologia defending the Taborite doctrine (Mikul\u00e1\u0161 Biskupec z Pelh\u0159imova, Petr Chel\u010dick\u00fd). In general, Hussite writings differed from the preceding era by their focus on social questions \u2013 their audience consisted of the lower and lower middle classes. Works defending Catholicism and attacking the Hussite utraquists were also written, one example being Jan Rokycana's works. The Hussite period also developed the genre of Czech religious songs as a replacement for Latin hymns and liturgy, e.g. the \"Jistebnick\u00fd kancion\u00e1l\", the Jistebnice Hymnal.\nAfter the election of George of Pod\u011bbrady to the Czech throne following the Hussite wars, a new cultural wave swept into Bohemia. Humanism saw in the classics of antiquity an ideal for literature and culture. The main feature of the literature of this period is the competition between Catholics writing in Latin, e.g. Bohuslav Hasi\u0161tejnsk\u00fd z Lobkovic and Jan Dubravius) and Protestants writing in Czech, e.g. Viktorin Kornel of V\u0161ehrdy and V\u00e1clav H\u00e1jek. New literary devices incited scholars, e.g. Veleslav\u00edn, to construct a more complex grammatical structure, based on Latin, as well as an influx of loan words. Gutenberg's printing press rendered books and pamphlets more accessible, which slowly changed literature's status in society.\nBaroque period.\nThe demise of the Czech Protestants after the Battle of the White Mountain decidedly affected Czech literary development. The forceful re-Catholicization and Germanization of Bohemia and the ensuing confiscations and expulsions virtually eliminated the Protestant middle classes and split the literature into two parts: the domestic Catholic and the \u00e9migr\u00e9 Protestant branches. Unlike in other European countries of the time, the nobility in Bohemia was not a part of the literary audience and thus this split of literary effort led to a certain lack of development and stagnation of Czech baroque literature in comparison to other European countries of the time, especially in genres that were written for noble courts. The largest personality of Czech evangelical baroque writing is John Comenius, who spent his youth in Bohemia but was forced into exile later in life. He was a pedagogue, theologian, reformer of education, and philosopher; his works include grammars, theoretical tracts on education, and works on theology. With his death in the late 17th century, Protestant literature in Czech virtually disappeared. Catholic baroque works span two types: religious poetry such as that of Adam Michna z Otradovic, Fridrich Bridel and V\u00e1clav Jan Rosa, and religious prose writings (i.e. homiletic prose and hagiographies), and historical accounts (Bohuslav Balb\u00edn), as well as the Jesuit St. Wenceslas Bible.\nThe Enlightenment.\nAt the end of the 18th century, the Bohemian lands underwent a considerable change \u2013 the Habsburg emperor Josef II put an end to the feudal system and supported a new religious and ideological tolerance. Enlightened classicism emerged, which sought to apply the principles of rational science to all aspects of daily life. A national culture and literature in one's own national language began to be seen as a prerequisite for the unification of a nation. In literature, this constituted a renewed interest in prose novels (e.g. V\u00e1clav Mat\u011bj Kramerius), in Czech history and in the historical development of Czech culture (e.g. Josef Dobrovsk\u00fd, who re-codified the grammar of Czech and Anton\u00edn Jaroslav Puchmayer, who systematically set out to develop a Czech poetic style). The literary audience evolved from priests and monks to the laity and general public and literature began to be seen as a vehicle of artistic expression. Bohemia and Moravia, however, remained within the sphere of Austrian and German cultural influence. The new national literature thus firstly mimicked popular German genres and would only later evolve into an independent creative effort; this was especially true for drama, e.g. V\u00e1clav Kliment Klicpera.\n19th century.\nPre-romanticism formed the transition between enlightened classicism and romanticism \u2013 the pre-romantics did not completely abandon the emphasis on poetic forms drawn from antiquity, but relaxed the strict separation between the genres and turned away from didactic genres toward more lyric, folk-inspired works (e.g. J\u00e1n Koll\u00e1r and Franti\u0161ek \u010celakovsk\u00fd). It was during this period that the idea of a truly national literature and culture developed, as a rejection of Bernard Bolzano's vision of a bilingual and bicultural Czech-German state. The perhaps greatest figure of this era is Josef Jungmann, who translated many classics of world literature and spent his life establishing Czech literature as a serious, rich literature capable of great development. Franti\u0161ek Palack\u00fd and Pavel Jozef \u0160af\u00e1rik took up the challenge of reexamining Czech history. As part of the effort to establish a pedigree for Czech literature and culture, Czech historians of the time sought evidence of heroic epics of the Middle Ages. They appeared to find such evidence in the \"Rukopis kr\u00e1lov\u00e9dvorsk\u00fd\" and \"Rukopis zelenohorsk\u00fd\" (the \"Dv\u016fr Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 Manuscript\" and the \"Zelen\u00e1 Hora Manuscript\", respectively), although both were later proven forgeries.\nBy the 1830s, the foundations of Czech literature were laid and authors now began to focus more on the artistic merits of their work and less on developing the idea of Czech literature and culture as a whole. During this time period two main types of literature were produced: Biedermeier literature, which strove to educate the readers and encourage them to be loyal to the Austro-Hungarian Empire (e.g. Karel Jarom\u00edr Erben and Bo\u017eena N\u011bmcov\u00e1), and romanticism, which emphasized the freedom of the individual and focused on subjectivity and the subconscious (e.g. Karel Hynek M\u00e1cha, V\u00e1clav Bolem\u00edr Nebesk\u00fd.) These authors were generally published in either newspapers or in the literary magazine \"Kv\u011bty\" (\"Blossoms\") published by Josef Kajet\u00e1n Tyl.\nThe year 1848 brought to the fore a new generation of Czech authors who followed in the footsteps of M\u00e1cha, and published their work in the new almanac \"M\u00e1j\" (\"May\") (e.g. V\u00edt\u011bzslav H\u00e1lek, Karolina Sv\u011btl\u00e1 and Jan Neruda). These authors rejected the narrow ideal of a purely national culture and favored one that incorporated Czech literature into European culture and drew inspiration from the progress made outside of the Czech lands. Their work, however, also commented on the encroachment of industrialization and focused increasingly on the simple life as opposed to the unfettered romantic ideal.\nThe May generation was followed by the neo-romantics, who continued in the romantic tradition, but also incorporated more contemporary styles: realism, Symbolism, and decadence. Three periods are apparent: the first reacted to the disappointment due to the lack of political and social progress during the 1870s (e.g. V\u00e1clav \u0160olc); the second was the great return to poetry, especially epic poetry (e.g. Josef V\u00e1clav Sl\u00e1dek); and the third focused on prose (e.g. Alois Jir\u00e1sek).\nIn conversation with the neo-romantics, the next generation of authors leaned toward realism and naturalism, the ordinary and banal. They favored contemporary subjects over historical ones, and sought to deemphasize the personal voice of the author in comparison to the often highly colored speech of the characters. Two main topics were of interest: the exploration of the Czech village and the extent to which it remained an oasis of good morals (Jan Herben, Karel V\u00e1clav Rais, Alois Mr\u0161t\u00edk); and Prague, especially the life of the lower classes (Ign\u00e1t Herrman, Karel Mat\u011bj \u010capek Chod).\nThe last literary generation of the 19th century signaled a decided break with the past and the advent of modernism \u2013 after the wave of optimism in the wake of the French Revolution at the beginning of the century, the lack of progress in implementing these ideals of freedom and brotherhood led to both a skepticism toward the possibility of ever achieving these ideals, and renewed efforts to do so. The common link between authors of this generation is their adherence to a particular style over their own voices, and their often very critical perspectives on the work of the previous generations. The modernists also inaugurated the cult of the artist, and this period saw the birth of the literary critic as an independent profession, as an ally of the artist, helping to both define and present work to the public (Franti\u0161ek Xaver \u0160alda). Notable poets of this period drew on the works and translations of the poet Jaroslav Vrchlick\u00fd and include, among others, Josef Svatopluk Machar, Anton\u00edn Sova, Otokar B\u0159ezina, and Karel Hlav\u00e1\u010dek); prose authors include Vil\u00e9m Mr\u0161t\u00edk, R\u016f\u017eena Svobodov\u00e1, and Josef Karel \u0160lejhar.\n20th century.\nThe turn of the 20th century marked a profound shift in Czech literature \u2014 after nearly a century of work, literature finally freed itself from the confines of needing to educate and serve the nation and spread Czech culture, and became literature simply for the sake of art. The orientation toward France, Northern Europe, and Russia intensified, and new demands were laid on the cultural knowledge of authors and their audience.\nThe new generation of poets distanced themselves from both the neo-romantics and the modernists: led by S. K. Neumann, their work focused on concrete reality, free of any pathos, or complicated symbolism. Many of the new poets (Karel Toman, Fr\u00e1\u0148a \u0160r\u00e1mek, Viktor Dyk, Franti\u0161ek Gellner, Petr Bezru\u010d) allied themselves with anarchism and the women's movement, although this influence waned throughout the decade. In prose, the work of the modernist generation was only now coming into its own, but the different stylistic waves that affected their prose are also evident in the work of the new generation \u2014 naturalism (A. M. Tilschov\u00e1); impressionism (\u0160r\u00e1mek, Gellner, Ji\u0159\u00ed Mahen, Jan Opolsk\u00fd, Rudolf T\u011bsnohl\u00eddek); the Vienna Secession (R\u016f\u017eena Svobodov\u00e1, Ji\u0159\u00ed Kar\u00e1sek ze Lvovic).\nAfter their rebellious first decade, the new generation of poets (Toman, Neumann, \u0160r\u00e1mek) turned toward nature and life in their work. This decade also marked the return of Catholic authors (Josef Florian, Jakub Deml, Jaroslav Durych, Josef V\u00e1chal) and the first entrance of the avant-garde into Czech literature, seeking to document the rapid changes in society and modernization. The first avantgarde style was neoclassicism, which soon gave way to cubism, futurism, and civilism (S. K. Neumann, the young brothers \u010capek).\nWorld War I brought with it a wave of repression of the newly emergent Czech culture, and this meant a return to the past, to traditional Czech values and history: the Hussites and the Awakening. The war, however, also precipitated a crisis of values, of faith in progress, religion, and belief, which found outlet in expressionism (Ladislav Kl\u00edma, Jakub Deml, Richard Weiner), civilism (\u010capek brothers) and visions of a universal brotherhood of mankind (Ivan Olbracht, Karel Mat\u011bj \u010capek Chod, F. X. \u0160alda).\nThe interwar period, coinciding with the First Republic, is one of the apogees of Czech literature \u2014 the new state brought with it a plurality of thinking, religion, and philosophy, leading to a great flowering of literature and culture. The first major theme of the interwar period was the war \u2014 the inhumanity, violence, and terror, but also the heroic actions of the Czech Legion (Rudolf Medek, Josef Kopta, Franti\u0161ek Langer, Jaroslav Ha\u0161ek). An antiwar comedy novel \"The Good Soldier \u0160vejk\" by Jaroslav Ha\u0161ek is the most translated novel of the Czech literature (58 languages as of 2013).\nA new generation of poets ushered in the return of the avantgarde: poetry of the heart (early Ji\u0159\u00ed Wolker, Zden\u011bk Kalista) and naivism (\u010capek brothers, Josef Hora, Jaroslav Seifert, and S. K. Neumann). The avantgarde soon split, however, into the radical proletarian socialist and communist authors (Wolker, Neumann, Karel Teige, Anton\u00edn Mat\u011bj P\u00ed\u0161a, Hora, Jind\u0159ich Ho\u0159ej\u0161\u00ed), the Catholics (Durych, Deml), and to the centrists (brothers \u010capek, Dyk, Fischer, \u0160r\u00e1mek, Langer, Jan Herben). A specifically Czech literary style, poetism, was developed by the group Dev\u011btsil (V\u00edt\u011bzslav Nezval, Jaroslav Seifert, Konstantin Biebl, Karel Teige), which argued that poetry should pervade everyday life, that poetry is inseparable from daily life, that everyone is a poet. Prose of the interwar period distanced itself even more from the traditional, single perspective prose of the previous century, in favor of multiple perspectives, subjectivity, and fractured narratives. Utopian and fantastic literature came into the forefront (Jan Weiss, Karel \u010capek, Eduard Bass, Ji\u0159\u00ed Haussmann), as well as the genres of documentary prose, which sought to paint as accurate a picture of the world as possible (Karel \u010capek, Egon Erwin Kisch, Ji\u0159\u00ed Weil, Rudolf T\u011bsnohl\u00eddek, Eduard Bass, Jarom\u00edr John, Karel Pol\u00e1\u010dek); lyrical, imaginative prose that allied itself with the poetic poetry of the time (Karel Konr\u00e1d, Jaroslav Jan Paul\u00edk, Vladislav Van\u010dura); and Catholically-oriented prose (Jaroslav Durych, Jan \u010cep, Jakub Deml). The drama of the time also followed the same stylistic evolution as poetry and prose \u2014 expressionism, followed by a return to realistic, civilian theater (Franti\u0161ek Langer, Karel \u010capek). Along with avantgarde poetry, avantgarde theater also flourished, focusing on removing the barriers between actors and audience, breaking the illusion of the unity of a theatrical work (Osvobozen\u00e9 divadlo, Ji\u0159\u00ed Voskovec and Jan Werich).\nAfter the heady optimism of the 1920s, the 1930s brought with them an economic crisis, which helped spur a political crisis: both the left (Communist) and right (anti-German and fascist) parties radicalized and threatened the stability of the democracy. This led the authors of the time to focus on public matters and spirituality; Catholicism gained in importance (Kalista, Karel Schulz, Halas, Van\u010dura, Durych). Changes were apparent first in poetry: the new generation of poets (Bohuslav Reynek, Vil\u00e9m Z\u00e1vada, Franti\u0161ek Halas, Vladim\u00edr Holan, Jan Zahradn\u00ed\u010dek) began as poets, but their work is much darker, full of images of death and fear. The older avantgarde (Teige, Nezval) also turned away from poetism to surrealism, and a third group (Hora, Seifert, Franti\u0161ek Hrub\u00edn) turned instead to lyricism, to quiet, memory-filled poetry. Prose, after the years of realistic journalism, turned to epics, existential novels, and subjective perspectives. Folk-inspired ballads (Josef \u010capek, K. \u010capek, Van\u010dura, Ivan Olbracht), social-themed novels (Olbracht, Van\u010dura, Pol\u00e1\u010dek, Marie Majerov\u00e1, Marie Pujmanov\u00e1), and psychological novels (Jarmila Glazarov\u00e1, Egon Hostovsk\u00fd, Jaroslav Havl\u00ed\u010dek) appeared. During this period, Karel \u010capek wrote his most politically charged (and well-known) plays in response to the rise of fascist dictators. After the Munich Agreement in 1938, literature once more mirrored the current political present and called for national solidarity and a return to the past.\nThe German protectorate and World War II left its mark on Czech literature \u2014 many of the authors of the interwar generations did not survive or went into exile. During 1938\u20131940, society was still relatively free, but during 1941, most of the free newspapers, magazines, and publishers were shut down, and authors were silenced. WWII thus marks the origin of the 3-way split of literature that continued throughout the socialist years until 1989: domestic published, domestic illegal, and exile literature. As a result of the war, all forms of literature turned even more toward tradition and history: poetry became more subdued, and greater emphasis was laid upon language as an expression of national identity (Hora, Halas, Seifert, Nezval), and on spirituality and religious values (Hrub\u00edn, Z\u00e1vada, Zahradn\u00ed\u010dek, Holan). The same occurred in prose: gone were the experimental works of the interwar period, but the social and psychological novel (V\u00e1clav \u0158ez\u00e1\u010d, Vladim\u00edr Neff, Milo\u0161 V\u00e1clav Kratochv\u00edl) remained. The historical novel marked a new resurgence (Kratochv\u00edl, Van\u010dura, Durych, Schulz) as a way to write about the present while cloaking it in historical novels, as did prose inspired by folk tales and folk culture (Josef \u0160tefan Kub\u00edn, Jan Drda, Van\u010dura, Jarom\u00edr John, Zden\u011bk Jirotka). The generation of authors that debuted during the war and shortly afterwards (Ji\u0159\u00ed Orten, Group 42) all shared a similar harrowing experience of the war; their works all bear the hallmark of tragedy, existentialist thought, and the focus on the person as an isolated being.\nOne of the most ambitious mediators of Czech literature was Rudolf Fuchs (1890\u20131942). Through his numerous translations of Czech literature into German, he devoted his life to fostering understanding between Czech and German culture\u2014ironically during times of immense political upheaval spanning both World Wars (1914\u20131942). The researcher Konstantin Kountouroyanis, based at Masaryk University in Brno, describes Fuchs as \"an underestimated cultural intermediary and social critic in times of conflict\" and considers his attempts at cultural mediation to be of lasting relevance and \"instructive for the current generation\". Fuchs maintained close correspondence with Petr Bezru\u010d, Franti\u0161ek B\u00edlek, Otokar B\u0159ezina, Oscar Walter Cisek, Josef \u010capek, Karel \u010capek, Jaroslav Durych, Otokar Fischer, and Bla\u017eena Fischerov\u00e1, among others, and translated works by Karel Jarom\u00edr Erben, Franti\u0161ek Ladislav \u010celakovsk\u00fd, Jan Neruda, Jaroslav Vrchlick\u00fd, Anton\u00edn Sova, Otokar B\u0159ezina, Karel Hlav\u00e1\u010dek, Karel Toman, Stanislav Karel Neumann, Fr\u00e1\u0148a \u0160r\u00e1mek, Otokar Theer, Otokar Fischer, Petr K\u0159i\u010dka, Jaroslav Durych, Josef Hora, Ji\u0159\u00ed Wolker, and Petr Bezru\u010d. Fuchs\u2019 efforts came to an abrupt end with his accidental death in exile in London in 1942. A manuscript titled \"German Almanac from Czechoslovakia\" remained unfinished in his estate. \nCzech postwar literature is tightly intertwined with the political state of postwar Czechoslovakia; as during the war, literature broke apart into three main branches: domestic published, domestic illegal, and exile literature. Literature under the communist regime became the refuge of freedom and democracy, and literary works and authors were valued not only for their literary merits, but also for their struggle against the regime. The literature of the entire postwar period thus enjoyed great attention, despite its often precarious position. During the first three years after the end of the war (1945\u20131948), however, literature maintained a certain degree of freedom, although the strengthening of the extreme left gradually pushed out of the public sphere first the Catholic authors (Deml, Durych, \u010cep, Zahradn\u00ed\u010dek), then the moderate Communists.\n1948 brought the ultimate victory of the Communists, and the subsequent end of civil freedoms \u2014 any literature contrary to the official perspective was banned and the authors persecuted. The official literary style became socialist realism and all avantgarde leanings were suppressed. Many authors went into exile \u2014 to Germany, the U.S., the Vatican. Of those that stayed, many chose to write in secret and remain unpublished (the surrealists (Zbyn\u011bk Havl\u00ed\u010dek, Karel Hynek), Holan, Zahradn\u00ed\u010dek, Ji\u0159\u00ed Kol\u00e1\u0159, Josef Jedli\u010dka, Jan Han\u010d, Ji\u0159ina Haukov\u00e1, Josef \u0160kvoreck\u00fd, Egon Bondy, Jan Z\u00e1brana, Bohumil Hrabal). Most of their works were published only during the 1960s and 1990s.\nOnly at the end of the 1950s did the tight censorial control begin to ease \u2014 some poets were allowed to publish again (Hrub\u00edn, Old\u0159ich Mikul\u00e1\u0161ek, Jan Sk\u00e1cel) and a new literary group formed around the magazine \"Kv\u011bten\", striving to break the hold of socialist realism (Miroslav Holub, Karel \u0160iktanc, Ji\u0159\u00ed \u0160otola). Prose lagged behind poetry for much of the period, with the exception of Edvard Valenta and Josef \u0160kvoreck\u00fd. Shorter works, such as the short story also became popular again.\nThe 1960s brought with them the beginnings of reform efforts in the Communist party, and the subsequent liberalization of literature and increasing prestige of authors. Beginning with 1964, literature began to broaden in scope beyond the officially approved style. In poetry, intimate lyricism became popular (Vladim\u00edr Holan), as well as epic poetry (Karel \u0160iktanc, Hrub\u00edn), and the realism of Group 42. In prose, new authors abandoned polemics about socialism and instead turned toward personal and civic morality (Jan Trefulka, Milan Kundera, Ivan Kl\u00edma, Pavel Kohout), the theme of war and occupation (Ji\u0159\u00ed Weil, Arno\u0161t Lustig), especially the fate of Jews. Bohumil Hrabal became the most prominent of the contemporary prose authors, with his works full of colloquialisms and non-traditional narrative structures, and the absence of official moral frameworks. Toward the end of the decade, novels of disillusionment, skepticism, and a need to find one's place in the world and history begin to appear (Vacul\u00edk, M. Kundera, Hrub\u00edn), as do modern historical novels (Old\u0159ich Dan\u011bk, Ji\u0159\u00ed \u0160otola, Vladim\u00edr K\u00f6rner, Ota Filip). The 1960s also brought the debuts of a new generation of authors who grew up during the excesses of Stalinism, and thus had no ideals about world utopias \u2014 their works dealt not with changing the world, but with living in it: authenticity, responsibility both moral and literary. These included the poets Ji\u0159\u00ed Gru\u0161a, Josef Hanzl\u00edk, Anton\u00edn Brousek, Ji\u0159\u00ed Kub\u011bna, and playwrights Ivan Vysko\u010dil, Ji\u0159\u00ed \u0160litr, V\u00e1clav Havel, Milan Uhde, Josef Topol. The close of the reform years also saw a return to experiments: surrealism (Milan N\u00e1pravn\u00edk, Vratislav Effenberger), nonsense poetry (Emanuel Frynta), experimental poetry (Josef Hir\u0161al, Bohumila Gr\u00f6gerov\u00e1, Emil Juli\u0161), abstract poetry and dada (Ladislav Nov\u00e1k), gritty realistic prose (Jan Han\u010d, Vladim\u00edr P\u00e1ral) and ornate, symbol filled fantasy (V\u011bra Linhartov\u00e1). The era of literary freedom and experiments, which reached its apogee during the Prague Spring of 1968, came to an abrupt end the same summer, with the Soviet invasion and subsequent \"normalization.\"\nNormalization reinstated the severe censorship of the 1950s, shut down most of the literary magazines and newspapers, and silenced authors who did not conform. More than ever before, literature split into the legal, illegal, and exile branches. Many authors fled to the U.S. and Canada (Josef \u0160kvoreck\u00fd), Germany (Peroutka), Austria (Kohout), France (M. Kundera), but they generally did not fare much better than their contemporaries in Czechoslovakia, largely due to the absence of a readership. Their works became better known only through translations. The work of experimental, avantgarde authors who continued to publish as \"official\" authors generally shrank in quality, conformed to the official dogma, although in comparison to the 1950s, the literature was less rigid, less wooden. On the border between official and unofficial literature stood authors of historical novels (Korner, Karel Michal), and well as Bohumil Hrabal and Ota Pavel. Seifert, Mikul\u00e1\u0161ek, Sk\u00e1cel were all also barred from publishing; their work was published as samizdat, small underground presses that hand-published much of the work of the underground, illegal authors. Ludv\u00edk Vacul\u00edk, Jan Vladislav, and V\u00e1clav Havel and Jan Lopatka organized the largest samizdat editions. It was many of these illegal authors who signed Charta 77 and were jailed for doing so. Samizdat literature again returned to Catholicism, to memoirs and diaries of daily life (Vacul\u00edk). Memory and history were also chief motifs of samizdat literature (Karel \u0160iktanc, Ji\u0159ina Haukov\u00e1), as were brutally honest, factual testimonials of daily life (Ivan Martin Jirous). The new literary generation of the 1980s was marked by the need to rebel, to act outside of the bounds of society \u2014 their work draws on the war generation (Group 42), and is often brutal, aggressive, and vulgar (J\u00e1chym Topol, Petr Plac\u00e1k, Zuzana Brabcov\u00e1); postmodernism also influenced literature as a whole (Ji\u0159\u00ed Kratochvil, Daniela Hodrov\u00e1).\nThe fall of communism in 1989 marked another break in Czech literature \u2014 plurality and freedom returned. The works of many of the illegal and exiled authors working under the communist regime were published for the first time (for instance Jan K\u0159esadlo and Ivan Blatn\u00fd) and many of them returned to public life and publishing. Although some critics would say that contemporary Czech literature (since 1989) is relatively marginalised in comparison with Czech film-making, writers such as Petr \u0160abach, Ivan Martin Jirous, J\u00e1chym Topol, Milo\u0161 Urban, Patrik Ou\u0159edn\u00edk, Petra H\u016flov\u00e1, Michal Viewegh and Kate\u0159ina Tu\u010dkov\u00e1 are public figures and sell books in large numbers. Contemporary Czech poetry, in Petr Borkovec can boast a poet of European standing.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46993", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46993", "title": "Jaroslav Foglar", "text": "Czech writer (1907\u20131999)\nJaroslav Foglar (6 July 1907 \u2013 23 January 1999) was a Czech writer for children and youth. He wrote many novels about youths (partly also about the Boy Scouts movement) and their adventures in nature and dark city streets. His signature series is \"Rychl\u00e9 \u0161\u00edpy\", which was adapted into comics by Jan Fischer.\nEarly life.\nFoglar was born in 1907 and grew up in Prague. Because his father died prematurely, he was brought up in rather poor material conditions by his mother. To earn some extra money, young Foglar used to copy the popular detective stories, \"cliftonky\", earning 20 heller per copy. (This initially affected his literary style, and some of the first editions of his books were corrected later, to get rid of the literary slag.)\nHe was strongly influenced by the romantic parts of Prague. All of the fictional towns in his novels are more or less derived from it. During the 1920s, Foglar was strongly influenced by the German independent Wandervogel movement as well as the Scout movement led by Anton\u00edn Benjamin Svojs\u00edk under the Czech name Jun\u00e1k.\nWriter and editor career, prohibited writer and the end of life.\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, Foglar worked as a magazine editor in one of the largest Prague publishing houses, Melantrich. He edited several journals for youths:\nand he wrote articles for other journals including the \"Skaut\", \"Slun\u00ed\u010dko\", \"ABC\", and the \"Tramp\".\nAfter the Communist coup in 1948 Foglar was kicked out of the publishing house, his magazines were liquidated and his books prohibited, as was the Scout movement and independent youth clubs. For many years he worked as a tutor in boarding schools and youth homes. During the fall of censorship at the end of the 1960s, he published some new books and re-editions of the older ones. After the Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia his books were once again banned until 1989.\nFoglar lived with his mother, caring for her until her death at an old age, and never married.\nScout versus Youth Club movement.\nAlthough Foglar worked as a Boy Scout leader, his relation to the Scout movement was not straightforward. He portrayed the Boy Scouts only in a few of his novels (especially \"Pod jun\u00e1ckou vlajkou\" and \"Devades\u00e1tka pokra\u010duje\"), preferring to write mostly about his own invention, the boy clubs. \nFoglar's idea of independent boy clubs is basically derived from the German Wandervogel movement. As editor of \"Mlad\u00fd Hlasatel\", Foglar systematically built clubbist ideology (based on friendship, good deeds, personal sacrifice, love of the nature, etc.) on some and traditions and own terminology. Clubs were small groups between 4 and 8 youths. Some of them were informally led by young men few years older than the other youths, like Rikitan in the novel \"Ho\u0161i od Bob\u0159\u00ed \u0159eky\" or by the best of the youths - like the 'exemplary youth' Mirek Du\u0161\u00edn of the Rychl\u00e9 \u0161\u00edpy Club. \nWith Foglar's novels and magazine articles as examples, many Czech youths established such clubs. In the golden age of club movement, there were thousands of such independent clubs, which presented a type of Wandervogel-like alternative to the organized Scout movement. On the other hand, when Scouts were persecuted and forbidden during the German occupation between 1938 and 1945 and during Communism between 1948 and 1989 (with the short exception of renewal of Scout during 1968 and 1969), boy clubs posed an excellent informal alternative of youth life based on ideas similar to those of the Scouts.\nIdeal friendship and Ideal of male education.\nOne of the key themes of Foglar's novels is the tension between the loneliness and close friendship between young male heroes. These are especially distinctive in the novels 'P\u0159\u00edstav vol\u00e1', 'Kdy\u017e duben p\u0159ich\u00e1z\u00ed', 'Chata v Jezern\u00ed kotlin\u011b', 'Modr\u00e1 rokle' and 'Tajemn\u00e1 \u0158\u00e1snovka'. These novels are also non-scout ones, picturing independent life of youths. On the other hand, in a second large group of his novels, a 'group hero' novels, the plot is based on stories of some organized group of youths, with less individual psychology and more action and adventures. The heroes are boy scouts or independent clubbists.\nHomoerotic elements in his novels.\nSome critics argued that Foglar's novels are crammed with covert homoerotic desire, or that the author himself was gay. Foglar was strongly influenced by German Wandervogel romanticism more than the ideas of British scout movement (which emerged in Czech Lands during World War I). Wandervogel movement itself had some elements of male eroticism. Most of Foglar's novels include close friendships between two youths, with some exceptions in relation to the 'group-hero' novels like 'Rychl\u00e9 \u0161\u00edpy' Club and 'Devades\u00e1tka'. \nFoglar's novels are set in a prevalently male world, where women are often irrelevant (old grannies or small girls, often without names). This homosociality was very common in literature of the period, regardless of the sexual orientation of the author. Besides, there are also a few strong female characters in his books, and especially in his comic series \"Rychl\u00e9 \u0161\u00edpy\". Foglar did have a few serious (though eventually unsuccessful) love affairs with women.\nSelected books.\nSome of his books were published in Slovakia, Hungary, Poland and Germany. \"Ho\u0161i od Bob\u0159\u00ed \u0159eky\" was also published in Esperanto.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46996", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46996", "title": "Marcus Licinius Crassus", "text": "Roman general and statesman (115\u201353 BC)\nMarcus Licinius Crassus (; 115\u201353\u00a0BC) was a Roman general and statesman who played a key role in the transformation of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire. He was often called \"the richest man in Rome\".\nCrassus began his public career as a military commander under Lucius Cornelius Sulla during his civil war. Following Sulla's assumption of the dictatorship, Crassus amassed an enormous fortune through property speculation. Crassus rose to political prominence following his victory over the slave revolt led by Spartacus, sharing the consulship with his rival Pompey the Great.\nA political and financial patron of Julius Caesar, Crassus joined Caesar and Pompey in the unofficial political alliance known as the First Triumvirate. Together, the three men dominated the Roman political system, but the alliance did not last long, due to the ambitions, egos, and jealousies of the three men. While Caesar and Crassus were lifelong allies, Crassus and Pompey disliked each other and Pompey grew increasingly envious of Caesar's spectacular successes in the Gallic Wars. The alliance was restabilized at the Luca Conference in 56\u00a0BC, after which Crassus and Pompey again served jointly as consuls. Following his second consulship, Crassus was appointed as the governor of Roman Syria, which he used as the launchpad for a military campaign against the Parthian Empire. Crassus' campaign was a disastrous failure, ending in his defeat at the Battle of Carrhae and death in its aftermath.\nCrassus' death permanently unraveled the alliance between Caesar and Pompey, since his political influence and wealth had been a counterbalance to the two great leaders. Within four years of Crassus' death, Caesar crossed the Rubicon and began a civil war against Pompey and the \"optimates\".\nFamily and background.\nMarcus Licinius Crassus was a member of the \"gens Licinia\", an old and highly respected plebeian family in Rome. He was the second of three sons born to the eminent senator and \"vir triumphalis\" Publius Licinius Crassus (consul 95\u00a0BC, censor 89\u00a0BC). This line was not descended from the wealthy Crassi Divites, although often assumed to be. The eldest brother, Publius (born c.\u2009116 BC), died shortly before the Italic War, and Crassus' father and younger brother were either slain or took their own lives in Rome, in winter 87\u201386\u00a0BC, when being hunted down by the supporters of Gaius Marius, following their victory in the \"Bellum Octavianum\". Crassus had the unusual distinction of marrying his wife Tertulla after she had been widowed by his brother.\nThere were three main branches of the house of the Licinii Crassi in the 2nd and 1st centuries BC, and many mistakes in identifications and lines have arisen owing to the uniformity of Roman nomenclature, erroneous modern suppositions, and the unevenness of information across the generations. In addition, the \"Dives\" cognomen of the Crassi Divites means rich or wealthy, and since Marcus Crassus, the subject here, was renowned for his enormous wealth, this has contributed to hasty assumptions that his family belonged to the Divites. But no ancient source accords him or his father the Dives cognomen; Plutarch says his great wealth was acquired rather than inherited, and that he was raised in modest circumstances.\nCrassus' grandfather of the same name, Marcus Licinius Crassus (praetor c.\u00a0126\u00a0BC), was facetiously given the Greek nickname Agelastus (the unlaughing or grim) by his contemporary Gaius Lucilius, the inventor of Roman satire, who asserted that he smiled once in his whole life. This grandfather was son of Publius Licinius Crassus. The latter's brother, Gaius Licinius Crassus (consul 168\u00a0BC), produced the third line of Licinii Crassi of the period, the most famous of whom was Lucius Licinius Crassus, the greatest Roman orator before Cicero and the latter's childhood hero and model. Marcus Crassus was also a talented orator and one of the most energetic and active advocates of his time.\nYouth and the First Civil War.\nAfter the Marian purges and the subsequent sudden death of Gaius Marius, the surviving consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna (father-in-law of Julius Caesar) imposed proscriptions on those surviving Roman senators and equestrians who had supported Lucius Cornelius Sulla in his 88\u00a0BC march on Rome and overthrow of the traditional Roman political arrangements.\nCinna's proscription forced Crassus to flee to Hispania. He stayed in Spain from 87 to 84\u00a0BC. Here, he recruited 2,500 men (an understrength legion) from his father's clients settled in the area. Crassus used his army to extort money from the local cities to pay for his campaigns, even being accused of sacking Malaca. After Cinna's death in 84\u00a0BC, Crassus went to the Roman province of Africa and joined Metellus Pius, one of Sulla's closest allies, but did not stay there for long because of disagreements with Metellus. He sailed his army to Greece and joined Sulla, \"with whom he stood in a position of special honor.\" During Sulla's civil war, Crassus and Pompey fought a battle in the plain of Spoletium (Spoleto), killed about 3,000 of the men of Papirius Carbo, the leader of the Marian forces, and besieged Carrinas, a Marian commander.\nDuring the decisive Battle of the Colline Gate, Crassus commanded the right flank of Sulla's army. After almost a day of fighting, the battle was going poorly for Sulla; his own center was being pushed back and was on the verge of collapse when he got word from Crassus that he had comprehensively crushed the enemy before him. Crassus wanted to know whether Sulla needed assistance, or whether his men could retire. Sulla told him to advance on the enemy's center, and used the news of Crassus' success to stiffen the resolve of his own troops. By the following morning, the battle was over, and the Sullan army emerged victorious, making Sulla the master of Rome. Sulla's victory, and Crassus' contribution to it, put Crassus in a key position. Sulla was as loyal to his allies as he was cruel towards his enemies, and Crassus had been a very loyal ally.\nRise to power and wealth.\nMarcus Licinius Crassus' next concern was to rebuild the fortunes of his family, which had been confiscated during the Marian-Cinnan proscriptions. Sulla's proscriptions, in which the property of his victims was cheaply auctioned off, found one of the greatest acquirers of this type of property in Crassus: indeed, Sulla was especially supportive of this, because he wished to spread the blame as much as possible among those unscrupulous enough to do so. Sulla's proscriptions ensured that his survivors would recoup their lost fortunes from the fortunes of wealthy adherents to Gaius Marius or Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Proscriptions meant that their political enemies lost their fortunes and their lives; that their female relatives (notably, widows and widowed daughters) were forbidden to marry, remarry or remain married; and that, in some cases, their families' hopes of rebuilding their fortunes and political significance were destroyed. Crassus is said to have made part of his money from proscriptions, notably the proscription of one man whose name was not initially on the list of those proscribed but was added by Crassus, who coveted the man's fortune. \nCrassus' wealth is estimated by Pliny at approximately 200 million sesterces. Plutarch, in his \"Life of Crassus\", says the wealth of Crassus increased from less than 300 talents at first, to 7,100 talents. This represented 229 tonnes of silver, worth about US$167.4\u00a0million at August 2023 silver prices, accounted right before his Parthian expedition, most of which Plutarch declares Crassus got \"by fire and war, making the public calamities his greatest source of revenue.\"\nSome of Crassus' wealth was acquired conventionally, through slave trafficking, production from silver mines, and speculative real estate purchases. Crassus bought property that was confiscated in proscriptions and by notoriously purchasing burnt and collapsed buildings. Plutarch wrote that, observing how frequent such occurrences were, he bought slaves \"who were architects and builders.\" When he had over 500 slaves, he bought houses that had burnt and the adjacent ones \"because their owners would let go at a trifling price.\" He bought \"the largest part of Rome\" in this way, buying them on the cheap and rebuilding them with slave labor.\nThe first ever Roman fire brigade was created by Crassus. Fires were almost a daily occurrence in Rome, and Crassus took advantage of the fact that Rome had no fire department, by creating his own brigade\u2014500 men strong\u2014which rushed to burning buildings at the first cry of alarm. Upon arriving at the scene, however, the firefighters did nothing while Crassus offered to buy the burning building from the distressed property owner, at a miserable price. If the owner agreed to sell the property, his men would put out the fire; if the owner refused, then they would simply let the structure burn to the ground. After buying many properties this way, he rebuilt them, and often leased the properties to their original owners or new tenants.\nCrassus befriended Licinia, a Vestal Virgin, whose valuable property he coveted. Plutarch says \"And yet, when he was further on in years, he was accused of criminal intimacy with Licinia, one of the vestal virgins, and Licinia was formally prosecuted by a certain Plotius. Now, Licinia was the owner of a pleasant villa in the suburbs, which Crassus wished to get at a low price, and it was for this reason that he was forever hovering about the woman and paying his court to her, until he fell under the abominable suspicion. And, in a way, it was his avarice that absolved him from the charge of corrupting the vestal, and he was acquitted by the judges. But he did not let Licinia go until he had acquired her property.\"\nDespite his great wealth, Crassus is said to have avoided excess and luxury at home. Family meals were simple, and entertaining was generous but not ostentatious; Crassus chose his companions during leisure hours on the basis of personal friendship as well as political utility. Although the Crassi, as noble plebeians, would have displayed ancestral images in their atrium, they did not lay claim to a fictionalized genealogy that presumed divine or legendary ancestors, a practice not uncommon among the Roman nobility. \nAfter rebuilding his fortune, Crassus' next concern was his political career. As a wealthy man in Rome, an adherent of Sulla, and a man who hailed from a line of consuls and praetors, Crassus' political future was apparently assured. His problem was that, despite his military successes, he was eclipsed by his contemporary Pompey the Great. Crassus' rivalry with Pompey and his envy of Pompey's triumph would influence his subsequent career.\nCrassus and Spartacus.\nCrassus was elected praetor in 73\u00a0BC and pursued the \"cursus honorum\".\nDuring the Third Servile War, or Spartacus' revolt (73\u201371\u00a0BC), Crassus offered to equip, train, and lead new troops at his own expense, after several legions had been defeated and their commanders killed in battle. Crassus was sent into battle against Spartacus by the Senate. At first, he had trouble both in anticipating Spartacus' moves and in inspiring his army to strengthen their morale. When a segment of his army fled from battle, abandoning their weapons, Crassus revived the ancient practice of decimation \u2013 i.e. executing one out of every ten men, with the victims selected by drawing lots. Plutarch reports that \"many things horrible and dreadful to see\" occurred during the infliction of punishment, which was witnessed by the rest of Crassus' army. Nevertheless, according to Appian, the troops' fighting spirit improved dramatically thereafter, since Crassus had demonstrated that \"he was more dangerous to them than the enemy.\"\nAfterwards, when Spartacus retreated to the Bruttium peninsula in the southwest of Italy, Crassus tried to pen up the slave armies by building a ditch and a rampart across the peninsula of Rhegium in Bruttium, \"from sea to sea.\" Despite this remarkable feat, Spartacus and part of his army still managed to break out. On the night of a heavy snowstorm, they sneaked through Crassus' lines and made a bridge of dirt and tree branches over the ditch, thus escaping.\nSome time later, when the Roman armies led by Pompey and Varro Lucullus were recalled to Italy in support of Crassus, Spartacus decided to fight rather than find himself and his followers trapped between three armies, two of them returning from overseas action. In this last battle, the battle of the Silarius river, Crassus gained a decisive victory, and captured six thousand slaves alive. During the fighting, Spartacus attempted to personally kill Crassus, slaughtering his way toward the general's position, but he succeeded only in killing two of the centurions guarding Crassus. Spartacus himself is believed to have been killed in the battle, although his body was never recovered. The six thousand captured slaves were crucified along the Via Appia by Crassus' orders. At his command, their bodies were not taken down afterwards, but remained rotting along Rome's principal route to the south. This was intended as an object lesson to anyone especially slaves who might think of rebelling against Roman citizens and slave-owners.\nCrassus effectively ended the Third Servile War in 71\u00a0BC. In Plutarch's account, Crassus \"had written to the Senate that they must summon Lucullus from Thrace and Pompey from Spain, but he was sorry now that he had done so, and was eager to bring the war to an end before those generals came. He knew that the success would be ascribed to the one who came up with assistance, and not to himself.\" He decided to attack a splinter group of rebels, and after this, Spartacus withdrew to the mountains. Pompey had arrived from Hispania with his veterans and was sent to provide reinforcements. Crassus hurried to seek the final battle, which he won. Pompey arrived in time to deal with the disorganized and defeated fugitives, writing to the Senate that \"indeed, Crassus had conquered the slaves, but that he himself had extirpated the war.\" \"Crassus, for all his self-approval, did not venture to ask for the major triumph, and it was thought ignoble and mean in him to celebrate even the minor triumph on foot, called the ovation,\" nor did he wish to be honored for subduing slaves.\nIn Plutarch's account, Pompey was asked to stand for the consulship. Crassus wanted to become his colleague and asked Pompey for his assistance. As said in the \"Life of Crassus\", \"Pompey received his request gladly (for he was desirous of having Crassus, in some way or other, always in debt to him for some favor), eagerly promoted his candidature, and finally said in a speech to the assembly that he should be no less grateful to them for the colleague than for the office which he desired.\" However, in office, they did not remain friendly. They \"differed on almost every measure, and by their contentiousness, rendered their consulship barren politically and without achievement.\" Crassus displayed his wealth by realizing public sacrifices to Hercules, entertaining the populace at 10,000 tables and distributing sufficient grain to last each family three months, an act that had the additional ends of performing a previously made religious vow of a tithe to the demigod Hercules and also to gain support among the members of the popular party.\nIn Appian's account, when Crassus ended the rebellion, there was a contention over honors between him and Pompey. Neither men dismissed their armies, with both being candidates for the consulship. Crassus had been praetor as the law of Sulla required. Pompey had been neither praetor nor quaestor, and was only 34 years old, but he had promised the plebeian tribunes to restore much of their power, that had been taken away by Sulla's constitutional reforms. Even when they were both chosen consuls, they did not dismiss their armies stationed near the city. Pompey said that he was awaiting the return of Metellus for his Spanish triumph; Crassus said that Pompey ought to dismiss his army first. In the end, Crassus yielded first, offering Pompey his hand.\nFirst Triumvirate-Alliance with Pompey and Caesar.\nIn 65 BC, Crassus was elected censor with another conservative, Quintus Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus, himself son of a consul. During that decade, Crassus was Julius Caesar's patron in all but name, financing Caesar's successful election to become \"pontifex maximus\". Caesar had formerly been the priest of Jupiter, or \"flamen dialis\", but had been deprived of office by Sulla. Crassus also supported Caesar's efforts to win command of military campaigns. Caesar's mediation between Crassus and Pompey led to the creation of the First Triumvirate in 60\u00a0BC, consisting of Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar (who became consul in 59\u00a0BC). This coalition would last until Crassus' death.\nIn 54\u00a0BC, Crassus looted the Jewish Temple treasury.\nIn 55 BC, after the Triumvirate met at the Luca Conference in 56\u00a0BC, Crassus was again consul with Pompey, and a law was passed assigning the provinces of the two Hispanias and Syria to Pompey and Crassus, respectively, for five years.\nSyrian governorship and death.\nCrassus received Syria as his province, which promised to be an inexhaustible source of wealth. It might have been, had he not also sought military glory and crossed the Euphrates in an attempt to conquer Parthia.\nCrassus attacked Parthia not only because of its great source of riches, but because of a desire to match the military victories of Pompey and Caesar. The king of Armenia, Artavasdes II, offered Crassus the aid of nearly 40,000 troops (10,000 cataphracts and 30,000 infantrymen) on the condition that Crassus invade through Armenia so that the king could not only maintain the upkeep of his own troops but also provide a safer route for his men and Crassus. Crassus refused, and chose the more direct route by crossing the Euphrates, as he had done in his successful campaign in the previous year.\nCrassus received directions from the Osroene chieftain Ariamnes, who had previously assisted Pompey in his eastern campaigns. Ariamnes was in the pay of the Parthians and urged Crassus to attack at once, falsely stating that the Parthians were weak and unorganized. He then led Crassus' army into the desert, far from any water. In 53BC, at the Battle of Carrhae (modern Harran, in Turkey), Crassus' legions were defeated by a numerically inferior Parthian force. Crassus' legions were primarily heavy infantry, and not prepared for an attack by swift mounted archers, a tactic which Parthian troops had mastered. The Parthian horse archers devastated the unprepared Romans with hit-and-run tactics, feigning retreats as they shot to their rear. Crassus refused his quaestor Gaius Cassius Longinus' plans to reconstitute the Roman battle line, and remained in the testudo formation to protect his flanks until the Parthians eventually ran out of arrows. However, the Parthians brought camels carrying arrows to continuously resupply their archers, letting them relentlessly barrage the Romans until dusk. Despite taking severe casualties, the Romans successfully retreated to Carrhae, forced to leave many wounded behind to be slaughtered by the Parthians.\nSubsequently, Crassus' men, being near mutiny, demanded he parley with the Parthians, who had offered to meet with him. Crassus, despondent at the death of his son Publius in the battle, finally agreed to meet the Parthian general Surena. However, when Crassus mounted a horse to ride to the Parthian camp for a peace negotiation, his junior officer Octavius suspected a Parthian trap and grabbed Crassus' horse by the bridle, instigating a sudden fight with the Parthians that left all the Romans dead, including Crassus. A story later emerged that, after Crassus' death, the Parthians poured molten gold into his mouth to mock his thirst for wealth.\nPlutarch's biography of Crassus also mentions that, during the feasting and revelry in the wedding ceremony of Artavasdes' sister to the Parthian king Orodes II's son and heir Pacorus in the Armenian capital of Artashat, Crassus' head was brought to Orodes II. Both kings were enjoying a performance of Euripides' tragedy \"The Bacchae\" when an actor of the royal court, named Jason of Tralles, took the head and sang these verses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We bring from the mountain&lt;br&gt;A tendril fresh-cut to the palace&lt;br&gt;A wonderful prey. Crassus' head was thus used instead of a prop to represent Pentheus and carried by Agave.\nAlso according to Plutarch, Crassus was mocked by dressing up a Roman prisoner, Caius Paccianus, who resembled him, in women's clothing, calling him \"Crassus\" and \"imperator\", and leading him in a spectacular show of a final, satirical \"triumphal procession\", ridiculing the traditional symbols of Roman triumph and authority.\nArtistic representations.\nDrama.\nFilm\nTelevision\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46997", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46997", "title": "Marcus Crassus", "text": ""}
{"id": "46998", "revid": "516856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46998", "title": "Gathering for Gardner", "text": ""}
{"id": "46999", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46999", "title": "Buffer solution", "text": "Aqueous solution of a weak acid and its conjugate base\nA buffer solution is a solution where the pH does not change significantly on dilution or if an acid or base is added at constant temperature. Its pH changes very little when a small amount of strong acid or base is added to it. Buffer solutions are used as a means of keeping pH at a nearly constant value in a wide variety of chemical applications. In nature, there are many living systems that use buffering for pH regulation. For example, the bicarbonate buffering system is used to regulate the pH of blood, and bicarbonate also acts as a buffer in the ocean.\nPrinciples of buffering.\nBuffer solutions resist pH change because of a chemical equilibrium between the weak acid HA and its conjugate base A\u2212:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;HA \u21cc H+ + A\u2212\nWhen some strong acid is added to an equilibrium mixture of the weak acid and its conjugate base, hydrogen ions (H+) are added, and the equilibrium is shifted to the left, in accordance with Le Chatelier's principle. Because of this, the hydrogen ion concentration increases by less than the amount expected for the quantity of strong acid added.\nSimilarly, if strong alkali is added to the mixture, the hydrogen ion concentration decreases by less than the amount expected for the quantity of alkali added. In Figure 1, the effect is illustrated by the simulated titration of a weak acid with p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a04.7. The relative concentration of undissociated acid is shown in blue, and of its conjugate base in red. The pH changes relatively slowly in the buffer region, pH\u00a0=\u00a0p\"K\"a\u00a0\u00b1\u00a01, centered at pH\u00a0=\u00a04.7, where [HA]\u00a0=\u00a0[A\u2212]. The hydrogen ion concentration decreases by less than the amount expected because most of the added hydroxide ion is consumed in the reaction\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;OH\u2212 + HA \u2192 H2O + A\u2212\nand only a little is consumed in the neutralization reaction (which is the reaction that results in an increase in pH)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;OH\u2212 + H+ \u2192 H2O.\nOnce the acid is more than 95% deprotonated, the pH rises rapidly because most of the added alkali is consumed in the neutralization reaction.\nBuffer capacity.\nBuffer capacity is a quantitative measure of the resistance to change of pH of a solution containing a buffering agent with respect to a change of acid or alkali concentration. It can be defined as follows:\nformula_1 \nwhere formula_2 is an infinitesimal amount of added base, or\nformula_3 \nwhere formula_4 is an infinitesimal amount of added acid. pH is defined as \u2212log10[H+], and \"d\"(pH) is an infinitesimal change in pH. \nWith either definition the buffer capacity for a weak acid HA with dissociation constant \"K\"a can be expressed as\nformula_5\nwhere [H+] is the concentration of hydrogen ions, and formula_6 is the total concentration of added acid. \"K\"w is the equilibrium constant for self-ionization of water, equal to 1.0\u00d710\u221214. Note that in solution H+ exists as the hydronium ion H3O+, and further aquation of the hydronium ion has negligible effect on the dissociation equilibrium, except at very high acid concentration. \nThis equation shows that there are three regions of raised buffer capacity (see figure 2).\nApplications of buffers.\nThe pH of a solution containing a buffering agent can only vary within a narrow range, regardless of what else may be present in the solution. In biological systems this is an essential condition for enzymes to function correctly. For example, in human blood a mixture of carbonic acid (HCO) and bicarbonate (HCO) is present in the plasma fraction; this constitutes the major mechanism for maintaining the pH of blood between 7.35 and 7.45. Outside this narrow range (7.40 \u00b1 0.05 pH unit), acidosis and alkalosis metabolic conditions rapidly develop, ultimately leading to death if the correct buffering capacity is not rapidly restored. \nIf the pH value of a solution rises or falls too much, the effectiveness of an enzyme decreases in a process, known as denaturation, which is usually irreversible. The majority of biological samples that are used in research are kept in a buffer solution, often phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at pH\u00a07.4.\nIn industry, buffering agents are used in fermentation processes and in setting the correct conditions for dyes used in colouring fabrics. They are also used in chemical analysis and calibration of pH\u00a0meters.\nSimple buffering agents.\nFor buffers in acid regions, the pH may be adjusted to a desired value by adding a strong acid such as hydrochloric acid to the particular buffering agent. For alkaline buffers, a strong base such as sodium hydroxide may be added. Alternatively, a buffer mixture can be made from a mixture of an acid and its conjugate base. For example, an acetate buffer can be made from a mixture of acetic acid and sodium acetate. Similarly, an alkaline buffer can be made from a mixture of the base and its conjugate acid.\n\"Universal\" buffer mixtures.\nBy combining substances with p\"K\"a values differing by only two or less and adjusting the pH, a wide range of buffers can be obtained. Citric acid is a useful component of a buffer mixture because it has three p\"K\"a values, separated by less than two. The buffer range can be extended by adding other buffering agents. The following mixtures (McIlvaine's buffer solutions) have a buffer range of pH\u00a03 to 8.\nA mixture containing citric acid, monopotassium phosphate, boric acid, and diethyl barbituric acid can be made to cover the pH range 2.6 to 12.\nOther universal buffers are the Carmody buffer and the Britton\u2013Robinson buffer, developed in 1931.\nCommon buffer compounds used in biology.\nFor effective range see Buffer capacity, above. Also see Good's buffers for the historic design principles and favourable properties of these buffer substances in biochemical applications. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCalculating buffer pH.\nMonoprotic acids.\nFirst write down the equilibrium expression\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;HA \u21cc A\u2212 + H+\nThis shows that when the acid dissociates, equal amounts of hydrogen ion and anion are produced. The equilibrium concentrations of these three components can be calculated in an ICE table (ICE standing for \"initial, change, equilibrium\").\nThe first row, labelled I, lists the initial conditions: the concentration of acid is \"C\"0, initially undissociated, so the concentrations of A\u2212 and H+ would be zero; \"y\" is the initial concentration of \"added\" strong acid, such as hydrochloric acid. If strong alkali, such as sodium hydroxide, is added, then \"y\" will have a negative sign because alkali removes hydrogen ions from the solution. The second row, labelled C for \"change\", specifies the changes that occur when the acid dissociates. The acid concentration decreases by an amount \u2212\"x\", and the concentrations of A\u2212 and H+ both increase by an amount +\"x\". This follows from the equilibrium expression. The third row, labelled E for \"equilibrium\", adds together the first two rows and shows the concentrations at equilibrium.\nTo find \"x\", use the formula for the equilibrium constant in terms of concentrations:\nformula_10\nSubstitute the concentrations with the values found in the last row of the ICE table:\nformula_11\nSimplify to formula_12\nWith specific values for \"C\"0, \"K\"a and \"y\", this equation can be solved for \"x\". Assuming that pH\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212log10[H+], the pH can be calculated as pH\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212log10(\"x\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"y\").\nPolyprotic acids.\nPolyprotic acids are acids that can lose more than one proton. The constant for dissociation of the first proton may be denoted as \"K\"a1, and the constants for dissociation of successive protons as \"K\"a2, etc. Citric acid is an example of a polyprotic acid H3A, as it can lose three protons.\nWhen the difference between successive p\"K\"a values is less than about 3, there is overlap between the pH range of existence of the species in equilibrium. The smaller the difference, the more the overlap. In the case of citric acid, the overlap is extensive and solutions of citric acid are buffered over the whole range of pH\u00a02.5 to 7.5.\nCalculation of the pH with a polyprotic acid requires a speciation calculation to be performed. In the case of citric acid, this entails the solution of the two equations of mass balance:\nformula_13\n\"C\"A is the analytical concentration of the acid, \"C\"H is the analytical concentration of added hydrogen ions, \"\u03b2q\" are the cumulative association constants. \"K\"w is the constant for self-ionization of water. There are two non-linear simultaneous equations in two unknown quantities [A3\u2212] and [H+]. Many computer programs are available to do this calculation. The speciation diagram for citric acid was produced with the program HySS.\nN.B. The numbering of cumulative, overall constants is the reverse of the numbering of the stepwise, dissociation constants.\nCumulative association constants are used in general-purpose computer programs such as the one used to obtain the speciation diagram above.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47000", "revid": "23914831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47000", "title": "Colocation centre", "text": "Data center where servers from multiple customers are located\nA colocation centre (also spelled co-location, or shortened to colo) or \"carrier hotel\", is a type of data centre where equipment, space, and bandwidth are available for rental to retail customers. Colocation facilities provide space, power, cooling, and physical security for the server, storage, and networking equipment of other firms and also connect them to a variety of telecommunications and network service providers with a minimum of cost and complexity. The term \"carrier hotel\" can refer to a data center focused on connecting customer and carrier networks together. Colocation centers often host private peering connections between their customers, internet transit providers, cloud providers, meet-me rooms for connecting customers together Internet exchange points, and landing points and terminal equipment for fiber optic submarine communication cables, connecting the internet, for example at the network access point known as NAP of the Americas, which connects many Latin American ISPs with networks in the US.\nConfiguration.\nMany colocation providers sell to a wide range of customers, ranging from large enterprises to small companies. Typically, the customer owns the information technology (IT) equipment and the facility provides power and cooling. Customers retain control over the design and usage of their equipment, but daily management of the data centre and facility are overseen by the multi-tenant colocation provider. They may also have a network operations center (NOC), a help desk, and offices for customer employees, and they may offer remote hands or smart hands service in which on site technicians employed by the colocation provider are allowed to access customer equipment on request to solve customer issues. Some providers also provide roof access to customers for mounting wireless equipment.\nBuilding features.\nBuildings with data centres inside them are often easy to recognize by the amount of cooling equipment located outside or on the roof.\nColocation facilities have many other special characteristics:\nColocation data centres are often audited to prove that they attain certain standards and levels of reliability; the most commonly seen systems are SSAE 16 SOC 1 Type I and Type II (formerly SAS 70 Type I and Type II) and the tier system by the Uptime Institute or TIA. For service organizations today, SSAE 16 calls for a description of its \"system\". This is far more detailed and comprehensive than SAS 70's description of \"controls\". Other data center compliance standards include Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) audit and PCI DSS Standards.\nPower.\nColocation facilities generally have generators that start automatically when utility power fails, usually running on diesel fuel. These generators may have varying levels of redundancy, depending on how the facility is built. Generators do not start instantaneously, so colocation facilities usually have battery backup systems. In many facilities, the operator of the facility provides large inverters to provide AC power from the batteries. In other cases, customers may install smaller UPSes in their racks.\nSome customers choose to use equipment that is powered directly by 48\u00a0VDC (nominal) battery banks. This may provide better energy efficiency, and may reduce the number of parts that can fail, though the reduced voltage greatly increases necessary current, and thus the size (and cost) of power delivery wiring. An alternative to batteries is a motor\u2013generator connected to a flywheel and diesel engine.\nMany colocation facilities can provide redundant, A and B power feeds to customer equipment, and high end servers and telecommunications equipment often can have two power supplies installed.\nColocation facilities are sometimes connected to multiple sections of the utility power grid for additional reliability.\nInternal connections.\nColocation facility owners have differing rules regarding cross-connects between their customers, some of whom may be carriers. These rules may allow customers to run such connections at no charge, or allow customers to order such connections for a monthly fee. They may allow customers to order cross-connects to carriers, but not to other customers. Some colocation centres feature a \"meet-me-room\" where the different carriers housed in the centre can efficiently exchange data.\nMost peering points sit in colocation centres and because of the high concentration of servers inside larger colocation centres, most carriers will be interested in bringing direct connections to such buildings. In many cases, there will be a larger Internet exchange point hosted inside a colocation centre, where customers can connect for peering.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47001", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47001", "title": "Carrier hotel", "text": ""}
{"id": "47003", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47003", "title": "Colocation center", "text": ""}
{"id": "47004", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47004", "title": "Colo (gorilla)", "text": "Western lowland gorilla\nColo (December 22, 1956 \u2013 January 17, 2017) was a western gorilla widely known as the first gorilla to be born in captivity anywhere in the world and the oldest known gorilla in the world in 2017. Colo was born at the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium to Millie Christina (mother) and Baron Macombo (father), and lived there for her entire life. She was briefly called \"Cuddles\" before a contest was held to officially name her. (Mrs. Howard Brannon of Zanesville, Ohio, won the contest.) Colo's name was derived from the place of her birth, Columbus, Ohio.\nLife.\nThe Columbus Zoo first introduced gorillas in 1951. It was in 1956 that two gorillas first produced offspring in the zoo. The gorilla was named Colo, short for Columbus.\nAfter she was rejected at birth by her mother, zookeepers had to hand-raise Colo. They hand-raised her much like a human child, by dressing her in clothes and giving her bottles of formula. At the age of two years, Colo was introduced to a 19-month-old male from Africa called Bongo. Colo and Bongo had three offspring; Emmy on February 1, 1968, Oscar on July 18, 1969, and Toni on December 28, 1971.\nOn April 25, 1979, Columbus Zoo had its first third generation birth. The infant was named Cora, short for Central Ohio Rare Ape. On January 27, 1997, Colo's great-grandson Jantu was born. A birth at the Henry Doorly Zoo made Colo a great-great-grandmother in 2003. Although Colo did not raise any of her own offspring, she reared her twin grandsons, Macombo II and Mosuba, from birth. Colo also acted as a guardian for her grandson, named J.J. after \"Jungle\" Jack Hanna with whom he shares a birthday.\nColo was held at the Columbus Zoo and has been there longer than any other animal in the zoo's captive animal collection. Colo and her progeny, five of whom are still held at the Columbus Zoo, comprised about one-third of the Zoo's 17 captive gorillas as of 2015.\nColo became the oldest living gorilla in captivity following the death of 55-year-old Jenny in September 2008. Colo celebrated her 60th birthday on December 22, 2016. The Columbus Zoo announced that Colo died in her sleep on January 17, 2017.\nGenealogy.\nColo was a mother to three, a grandmother to 16, a great-grandmother to 12, and a great-great-grandmother to three.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47005", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47005", "title": "Telecommunications company", "text": "Organization that provides telephone and/or other telecommunications services\nA telecommunications company is a kind of electronic communications service provider, more precisely a telecommunications service provider (TSP), that provides telecommunications services such as telephony and data communications access. Many traditional solely telephone companies now function as internet service providers (ISPs), and the distinction between a telephone company and ISP has tended to disappear completely over time, as the current trend for supplier convergence in the industry develops. Additionally, with advances in technology development, other traditional separate industries such as cable television, Voice-over IP (VoIP), and satellite providers offer similar competing features as the telephone companies to both residential and businesses leading to further evolution of corporate identity have taken shape.\nDue to the nature of capital expenditure involved in the past, most telecommunications companies were government-owned agencies or privately owned monopolies operated in most countries under close state regulation. But today there are many private players in most regions of the world, and even most of the government-owned companies have been opened up to competition in-line with World Trade Organization (WTO) policy agenda. Historically, these government agencies were often referred to, primarily in Europe, as PTTs (postal, telegraph and telephone services). Telecommunications companies are common carriers, and in the United States are also known as local exchange carriers. With the advent of mobile telephony, telecommunications companies now include wireless carriers, or mobile network operators and even satellite providers (Iridium).\nOver time software companies have also evolved to provide telephone services over the Internet.\nServices.\nThe telecommunications service provider has the responsibility for the acceptance, transmission, and delivery of messages. The telecommunications service user is responsible for the information content of the message.\nFor purposes of regulation by the Federal Communications Commission under the U.S. Communications Act of 1934 and Telecommunications Act of 1996, the definition of telecommunications service is \"the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.\" \"Telecommunications\", in turn, is defined as \"the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user\u2019s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.\"\nHistory.\nIn 1913, the Kingsbury Commitment allowed more than 20,000 independent telecommunications companies in the United States to use the long distance trunks of Bell Telephone Company.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47006", "revid": "15942126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47006", "title": "Binladin", "text": ""}
{"id": "47008", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47008", "title": "Elfstedentocht", "text": "Dutch long-distance skating event\nThe Elfstedentocht (; West Frisian: \"Alvest\u00eadetocht\" , English: \"Eleven cities tour\") is a long-distance tour skating event on natural ice, almost long, which is held both as a speed skating competition (with 300 contestants) and a leisure tour (with 16,000 skaters). The \"Elfstedentocht\" is the biggest ice-skating tour in the world.\nThe tour is held in the province of Friesland in the north of the Netherlands, leading past all eleven historical cities of the province. The tour is held at most once a year, only when the natural ice along the entire course is at least thick; sometimes on consecutive years, other times with gaps that may exceed 20 years. When the ice is suitable, the tour is announced and starts within 48 hours.\nThe Elfstedentocht has been declared to be in danger of \"extinction\" due to climate change. In the past 50 years, the \"Elfstedentocht\" has taken place only three times, most recently in 1997.\nCourse and rules.\nThe tour, almost 200\u00a0km (125 miles) in length, follows a closed or circular route along frozen canals, rivers and lakes visiting the eleven historic Frisian cities: Leeuwarden, Sneek, IJlst, Sloten, Stavoren, Hindeloopen, Workum, Bolsward, Harlingen, Franeker, Dokkum, then returning to Leeuwarden. The tour is held only if the ice is, and remains, at least 15 centimetres (6\") thick along the entire course as about 15,000 amateur skaters take part, putting high requirements on the quality of the ice. The last tours were held in 1985, 1986 and 1997. All skaters must be members of the Association of the Eleven Frisian Towns. A starting permit and bib is required (\u20ac100 in 2017). Skaters must collect a stamp in each city, and at three secret check points, and must finish the course before midnight.\nThere are often points along the route where the ice is too thin to allow mass skating; they are called \"kluning points\" (from West Frisian kl\u00fanje meaning to run on skates over a carpet), and the skaters walk on their skates to the next stretch of good ice. In 1997 ice-transplantation was re-introduced to strengthen weak places in the ice, for instance under bridges.\nThe finishing point of the \"Elfstedentocht\" is a canal near Leeuwarden, called the \"Bonkevaart\", close to the landmark windmill, \"De Bullemolen\", Lekkum.\nPlanning and publicity.\nSince the \"Elfstedentocht\" is such a rare event, its declaration creates excitement all over the country. In the build-up to a possible race in 2012, Mark Rutte, the Dutch Prime Minister remarked \"once every fifteen years our country is not governed from The Hague but by twenty-two district heads in Friesland. And our country is in good hands.\" As soon as a few days pass with below-freezing temperatures, the media start speculating about the chances for an \"Elfstedentocht\". The longer the freezing temperatures stay, the more intense this \"Elfstedenkoorts\" (eleven cities fever) gets, culminating in a national near-frenzy when it is announced that the tour will actually be held. The day before the tour many Dutch flock to Leeuwarden to enjoy the party atmosphere that surrounds the event; that evening, called the \"Nacht van Leeuwarden\" (Night of Leeuwarden), becomes a giant street party (Frisians, who have a reputation for surliness, are said to thaw when it freezes).\nOn the day of the tour many Dutch either stay at home to watch it on television (9.2 million viewers by one estimate), or find a place along the route to cheer the skaters on, either taking the day off or calling in sick for work. In February 2012, Friesland hotels were fully booked and expecting between 1.5 and 2 million visitors in anticipation of a tour before it was announced, as the weather seemed suitable.\nHistory.\nThere has been mention of skaters visiting all eleven cities of Friesland on one day since 1760. The \"Elfstedentocht\" was already part of Frisian tradition when, in 1890, Pim Mulier conceived the idea of an organised tour, which was first held in 1909 when 22 men competed. After this race, the (nl) (Association of the Eleven Frisian Towns) was established to organise the tours.\nIn the 1912 edition Jikke Gaastra was the first woman ever who finished the \"Elfstedentocht\", but could not complete the full tour because the ice was not good enough after Sneek. In the 1917 edition Janna van der Weg was the first woman who finished the tour.\nThe winters of 1939/40, 1940/41 and 1941/42 were particularly severe, with the race being run in each of them. The 1940 race, run three months prior to the German invasion of the Netherlands, saw over 3,000 competitors start at 05:00 on 30 January, with the first five finishing at 16:34. The event dominated the front pages of Dutch newspapers.\nThe \"Elfstedentocht\" of 1963 became known as \"The hell of '63\" when only 69 of the 10,000 participants were able to finish the race, due to the extremely low temperatures of -18\u00a0\u00b0C (0\u00b0F), powder snow and a harsh eastern wind. Conditions were so horrendous that the 1963 winner, Reinier Paping, became a national hero, and the tour itself legendary. Paping could not make out the finishing line as he was snow blind by the end of the race, and many of the contestants had frostbite, broken limbs, and damaged eyes.\nThe next \"Elfstedentocht\" after 1963 was held in 1985; times had changed. Before, one of the best methods to stay warm during the tour was to wear newspapers underneath the clothes. In the 20 years between the tours of 1963 and 1985, clothing, training methods and skates became much more advanced, changing the nature of skating.\nThe tour of 1985 was terminated prematurely because of thawing; as early as 22:00 in the evening skaters were taken off the ice. In 1986 the current Dutch King (at the time still Crown Prince) Willem-Alexander completed the \"Elfstedentocht\" under the name \"W.A. van Buren\", \"Van Buren\" being a traditional pseudonym of the Royal House. In 1997 Piet Kleine, who had previously won a gold medal at the Olympics for speed skating was disqualified because he missed getting a stamp at Hindeloopen despite video evidence that he had been there.\n\"Elfstedentocht\" 2012 \u2013 the race that did not happen.\nThe ten-day cold spell in late January and early February 2012, the 33rd such occurrence since 1901 when temperatures as low as -22.9\u00a0\u00b0C (-9.2\u00b0F) were recorded in Lelystad, heightened the expectation of a 2012 Elfstedentocht \u2013 the expected day of the event, had it taken place, was Saturday 11 February.\nOn 2 February 2012, it was reported that 95% of various locks that controlled the water flow in the canals had been adjusted to maximise the ice thickness. On the same day, the Dutch meteorological institute forecast that temperatures would not rise above freezing until Wednesday 8 February at the earliest and that the thickness of the ice would be 15\u00a0cm (6\") from Tuesday 7 February until Saturday 11 February. On 3 February, the Dutch meteorological institute forecast a probable ice-thickness of 20\u00a0cm (8\") on Saturday 11 February and on 5 February they forecast an ice thickness approaching 25\u00a0cm (10\").\nOn 6 February it was announced that the committee had met the previous evening for the first time in fifteen years. Although there were areas where the ice was not thick enough for the race to be held, the forecast for continuing freezing weather meant that they were optimistic that the race would be held. A press conference was held at 09:30 CET and the committee was due to meet again on 8 February. At the press conference, it was stated that in north Friesland the ice conditions were suitable to hold the race. In south west Friesland, the conditions were not so good, Stavoren being a particular problem where the ice was only 2\u00a0cm (1\") thick in places.\nOn 6 February a prohibition order on navigation on many of the canals in Friesland was extended in order to facilitate the growth of the ice. The following day the Dutch meteorological institute forecast that the cold spell would break on Sunday 12 February or Monday 13 February with the temperature rising above freezing point.\nLate afternoon on the 8 February Wiebe Wieling, chairman of the organising committee, said that the race was off \u2013 the committee had to be realistic \u2013 safety issues had made the race impossible. A ten-day cold spell was insufficient for the event; the 1997 event had taken place at the end of a 12-day cold spell.\nWinners.\nThe time taken for the winner to complete the course is given in hours and minutes. Although temperatures were sometimes above freezing on the day of the tour, all tours were preceded by many days of below-freezing temperatures.\nWomen were first allowed to take part in the tour proper in 1985; before then they had to skate with the amateurs and no award was given. The women to cross the finish line first were:\nThe course can vary slightly from race to race, depending on the quality of the ice. The cumulative distance at each checkpoint in 1997 was:\nSimilar events.\nAlternative Elfstedentocht.\nAn \"alternative Elfstedentocht\" has been held every year in January since 1989 on the Weissensee in Carinthia, Austria.\nThe 930 mAA (3051\u00a0ft) lake is 12\u00a0km long (7 miles) and around 3000 speed skaters do either the 50, 100 or 200\u00a0km (30, 60 or 125 mile) course at what is likely to be the world's largest ice sport event.\nThe Dutch Speed Skating Championship is part of the event and the fastest competitors do the 200 kilometre (125 mile) course in just over five hours.\nFietselfstedentocht (Eleven towns by bicycle).\nThe eleven towns cycle race was first held in 1912 and developed in parallel with its skating counterpart, but unlike the skating race, has taken place on almost every year - apart from the 2001 event which was cancelled due to foot and mouth disease and the 2020 event which was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it has taken place on Whit Monday every year since 1947. The event has become immensely popular and as a safety precaution it ceased to be a race but has become a tour with a maximum average speed of 25\u00a0km/h (15 mph) between checkpoints.\nThe tour, which starts and ends in Bolsward rather than Leeuwarden, is currently limited to 15,000 entrants. Between 05:00 and 08:00, entrants leave Bolsward every eight minutes in batches of about 600 and those who complete the 235\u00a0km (146 mile) course before midnight receive medals.\nIn 2013 the organisers banned velomobiles from the event by limiting the event to two-wheeled vehicles propelled by human power.\nZwemelfstedentocht.\nIn 2018, Dutch long-distance swimmer Maarten van der Weijden attempted to swim the entire eleven city tour. This attempt ended due to poor swimming conditions and illness from \"E. coli\". The following summer he successfully completed the route, arriving at the finish in Leeuwarden on June 24, 2019. His effort raised over \u20ac6.1 million for cancer research.\nElfstedentriathlon.\nThe Eleven Cities Triathlon was completed for the first time by Frisian triathlete Stefan van der Pal in 2020. Within a week he swam 200 kilometres (125 miles) (five days), then cycled the trip (7 hours) and then ran the route again (32.5 hours). He raised \u20ac96000 for a foundation that is committed to research into brain stem cancer in children.\nBetween June 18th and 25th 2023, Maarten van der Weijden completed the Eleven Cities Triathlon. He raised over 3 million euro for cancer research. Unlike van der Pal, who ran, van der Weijden walked the last part.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47009", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47009", "title": "Jakko Jan Leeuwangh", "text": "Dutch speed skater\nJakko Jan Leeuwangh (born 9 September 1972) is a former speed skater from the Netherlands. He finished fourth in the 1998 Olympic 1000 m event. In January 2000 he broke the 1500 m world record in Calgary, Canada, holding the record until it was broken by Lee Kyou-hyuk in March 2001.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47011", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47011", "title": "Arrhenius equation", "text": "Formula for temperature dependence of rates of chemical reactions\nIn physical chemistry, the Arrhenius equation is a formula for the temperature dependence of reaction rates. The equation was proposed by Svante Arrhenius in 1889 on the basis of the work of Dutch chemist Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff, who had noted in 1884 that the Van 't Hoff equation for the temperature dependence of equilibrium constants suggests such a formula for the rates of both forward and reverse reactions. This equation has a vast and important application in determining the rate of chemical reactions and for calculation of energy of activation. Arrhenius provided a physical justification and interpretation for the formula. Currently, it is best seen as an empirical relationship. It can be used to model the temperature variation of diffusion coefficients, population of crystal vacancies, creep rates, and many other thermally induced processes and reactions. The Eyring equation, developed in 1935, also expresses the relationship between rate and energy.\nFormulation.\nThe Arrhenius equation describes the exponential dependence of the rate constant of a chemical reaction on the absolute temperature as\nformula_1\nwhere\nAlternatively, the equation may be expressed as\nformula_2\nwhere\nThe only difference is the unit of \"E\"a: the former form uses energy per mole, which is common in chemistry, while the latter form uses energy per molecule directly, which is common in physics.\nThe different units are accounted for in using either the gas constant, R, or the Boltzmann constant, \"k\"B, as the multiplier of temperature T.\nThe unit of the pre-exponential factor A are identical to those of the rate constant and will vary depending on the order of the reaction. If the reaction is first order it has the unit s\u22121, and for that reason it is often called the \"frequency factor\" or \"attempt frequency\" of the reaction. Most simply, k is the number of collisions that result in a reaction per second, A is the number of collisions (leading to a reaction or not) per second occurring with the proper orientation to react and formula_3 is the probability that any given collision will result in a reaction. It can be seen that either increasing the temperature or decreasing the activation energy (for example through the use of catalysts) will result in an increase in rate of reaction.\nGiven the small temperature range of kinetic studies, it is reasonable to approximate the activation energy as being independent of the temperature. Similarly, under a wide range of practical conditions, the weak temperature dependence of the pre-exponential factor is negligible compared to the temperature dependence of the factor &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;; except in the case of \"barrierless\" diffusion-limited reactions, in which case the pre-exponential factor is dominant and is directly observable.\nWith this equation it can be roughly estimated that the rate of reaction increases by a factor of about 2 to 3 for every 10\u00a0\u00b0C rise in temperature, for common values of activation energy and temperature range.\nThe formula_4 factor denotes the fraction of molecules with energy greater than or equal to formula_5.\nDerivation.\nVan't Hoff argued that the temperature formula_6 of a reaction and the standard equilibrium constant formula_7 exhibit the relation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_8 denotes the apposite standard internal energy change value.\nLet formula_9 and formula_10 respectively denote the forward and backward reaction rates of the reaction of interest, then\n&amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, an equation from which formula_11 naturally follows.\nSubstituting the expression for formula_12 in eq.(1), we obtain &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe preceding equation can be broken down into the following two equations:\nand \nwhere formula_13 and formula_14 are the activation energies associated with the forward and backward reactions respectively, with formula_15.\nIntegrating these equations and taking the exponential yields the results &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, where each pre-exponential factor formula_16 or formula_17 is mathematically the exponential of the constant of integration for the respective indefinite integral in question.\nArrhenius plot.\nTaking the natural logarithm of Arrhenius equation yields:\nformula_18\nRearranging yields:\nformula_19\nThis has the same form as an equation for a straight line:\nformula_20\nwhere \"x\" is the reciprocal of \"T\".\nSo, when a reaction has a rate constant obeying the Arrhenius equation, a plot of ln\u00a0\"k\" versus \"T\"\u22121 gives a straight line, whose slope and intercept can be used to determine \"E\"a and \"A\" respectively. This procedure is common in experimental chemical kinetics. The activation energy is simply obtained by multiplying by (\u2212\"R\") the slope of the straight line drawn from a plot of ln\u00a0\"k\" versus (1/\"T\"):\nformula_21\nModified Arrhenius equation.\nThe modified Arrhenius equation makes explicit the temperature dependence of the pre-exponential factor. The modified equation is usually of the form\nformula_22\nThe original Arrhenius expression above corresponds to \"n\" = 0. Fitted rate constants typically lie in the range \u22121 &lt; \"n\" &lt; 1. Theoretical analyses yield various predictions for \"n\". It has been pointed out that \"it is not feasible to establish, on the basis of temperature studies of the rate constant, whether the predicted \"T\"1/2 dependence of the pre-exponential factor is observed experimentally\". However, if additional evidence is available, from theory and/or from experiment (such as density dependence), there is no obstacle to incisive tests of the Arrhenius law.\nAnother common modification is the stretched exponential form\nformula_23\nwhere \"\u03b2\" is a dimensionless number of order 1. This is typically regarded as a purely empirical correction or \"fudge factor\" to make the model fit the data, but can have theoretical meaning, for example showing the presence of a range of activation energies or in special cases like the Mott variable range hopping.\nTheoretical interpretation.\nArrhenius's concept of activation energy.\nArrhenius argued that for reactants to transform into products, they must first acquire a minimum amount of energy, called the activation energy \"E\"a. At an absolute temperature \"T\", the fraction of molecules that have a kinetic energy greater than \"E\"a can be calculated from statistical mechanics. The concept of \"activation energy\" explains the exponential nature of the relationship, and in one way or another, it is present in all kinetic theories.\nThe calculations for reaction rate constants involve an energy averaging over a Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution with formula_24 as lower bound and so are often of the type of incomplete gamma functions, which turn out to be proportional to formula_25.\nCollision theory.\nOne approach is the collision theory of chemical reactions, developed by Max Trautz and William Lewis in the years 1916\u201318. In this theory, molecules are supposed to react if they collide with a relative kinetic energy along their line of centers that exceeds \"E\"a. The number of binary collisions between two unlike molecules per second per unit volume is found to be\nformula_26\nwhere \"NA\" and \"NB\" are the number densities of \"A\" and \"B\", \"dAB\" is the average diameter of \"A\" and \"B\", \"T\" is the temperature which is multiplied by the Boltzmann constant \"k\"B to convert to energy, and \"\u03bcAB\" is the reduced mass of \"A\" and \"B\".\nThe rate constant is then calculated as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, so that the collision theory predicts that the pre-exponential factor is equal to the collision number \"zAB\". However for many reactions this agrees poorly with experiment, so the rate constant is written instead as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Here \"formula_27\" is an empirical steric factor, often much less than 1.00, which is interpreted as the fraction of sufficiently energetic collisions in which the two molecules have the correct mutual orientation to react.\nTransition state theory.\nThe Eyring equation, another Arrhenius-like expression, appears in the \"transition state theory\" of chemical reactions, formulated by Eugene Wigner, Henry Eyring, Michael Polanyi and M. G. Evans in the 1930s. The Eyring equation can be written:\nformula_28\nwhere formula_29 is the Gibbs energy of activation, formula_30 is the entropy of activation, formula_31 is the enthalpy of activation, formula_32 is the Boltzmann constant, and formula_33 is the Planck constant.\nAt first sight this looks like an exponential multiplied by a factor that is \"linear\" in temperature. However, free energy is itself a temperature-dependent quantity. The free energy of activation formula_34 is the difference of an enthalpy term and an entropy term multiplied by the absolute temperature. The pre-exponential factor depends primarily on the entropy of activation. The overall expression again takes the form of an Arrhenius exponential (of enthalpy rather than energy) multiplied by a slowly varying function of \"T\". The precise form of the temperature dependence depends upon the reaction, and can be calculated using formulas from statistical mechanics involving the partition functions of the reactants and of the activated complex.\nLimitations of the idea of Arrhenius activation energy.\nBoth the Arrhenius activation energy and the rate constant \"k\" are experimentally determined, and represent macroscopic reaction-specific parameters that are not simply related to threshold energies and the success of individual collisions at the molecular level. Consider a particular collision (an elementary reaction) between molecules A and B. The collision angle, the relative translational energy, the internal (particularly vibrational) energy will all determine the chance that the collision will produce a product molecule AB. Macroscopic measurements of \"E\" and \"k\" are the result of many individual collisions with differing collision parameters. To probe reaction rates at molecular level, experiments are conducted under near-collisional conditions and this subject is often called molecular reaction dynamics.\nAnother situation where the explanation of the Arrhenius equation parameters falls short is in heterogeneous catalysis, especially for reactions that show Langmuir-Hinshelwood kinetics. Clearly, molecules on surfaces do not \"collide\" directly, and a simple molecular cross-section does not apply here. Instead, the pre-exponential factor reflects the travel across the surface towards the active site.\nThere are deviations from the Arrhenius law during the glass transition in all classes of glass-forming matter. The Arrhenius law predicts that the motion of the structural units (atoms, molecules, ions, etc.) should slow down at a slower rate through the glass transition than is experimentally observed. In other words, the structural units slow down at a faster rate than is predicted by the Arrhenius law. This observation is made reasonable assuming that the units must overcome an energy barrier by means of a thermal activation energy. The thermal energy must be high enough to allow for translational motion of the units which leads to viscous flow of the material.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47012", "revid": "23914831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47012", "title": "Peering", "text": "Voluntary interconnection of administratively separate Internet networks\nIn computer networking, peering is a voluntary interconnection of administratively separate Internet networks for the purpose of exchanging traffic between the \"down-stream\" users of each network. Peering is settlement-free, also known as \"bill-and-keep\" or \"sender keeps all\", meaning that neither party pays the other in association with the exchange of traffic; instead, each derives and retains revenue from its own customers.\nAn agreement by two or more networks to peer is instantiated by a physical interconnection of the networks, an exchange of routing information through the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), tacit agreement to norms of conduct and, in some extraordinarily rare cases (0.07%), a formalized contractual document.\nIn 0.02% of cases the word \"peering\" is used to describe situations where there is some settlement involved. Because these outliers can be viewed as creating ambiguity, the phrase \"settlement-free peering\" is sometimes used to explicitly denote normal cost-free peering.\nHistory.\nThe first Internet exchange point was the Commercial Internet eXchange (CIX), formed by Alternet/UUNET (now Verizon Business), PSI, and CERFNET to exchange traffic without regard for whether the traffic complied with the acceptable use policy (AUP) of the NSFNet or ANS' interconnection policy. The CIX infrastructure consisted of a single router, managed by PSI, and was initially located in Santa Clara, California. Paying CIX members were allowed to attach to the router directly or via leased lines. After some time, the router was also attached to the Pacific Bell SMDS cloud. The router was later moved to the Palo Alto Internet Exchange, or PAIX, which was developed and operated by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC). Because the CIX operated at , rather than , and because it was not neutral, in the sense that it was operated by one of its participants rather than by all of them collectively, and it conducted lobbying activities supported by some of its participants and not by others, it would not today be considered an Internet exchange point. Nonetheless, it was the first thing to bear that name.\nThe first exchange point to resemble modern, neutral, Ethernet-based exchanges was the Metropolitan Area Ethernet, or MAE, in Tysons Corner, Virginia. When the United States government de-funded the NSFNET backbone, Internet exchange points were needed to replace its function, and initial governmental funding was used to aid the preexisting MAE and bootstrap three other exchanges, which they dubbed NAPs, or \"Network Access Points,\" in accordance with the terminology of the National Information Infrastructure document. All four are now defunct or no longer functioning as Internet exchange points:\nAs the Internet grew, and traffic levels increased, these NAPs became a network bottleneck. Most of the early NAPs utilized FDDI technology, which provided only 100 Mbit/s of capacity to each participant. Some of these exchanges upgraded to ATM technology, which provided OC-3 (155\u00a0Mbit/s) and OC-12 (622\u00a0Mbit/s) of capacity.\nOther prospective exchange point operators moved directly into offering Ethernet technology, such as gigabit Ethernet (1,000\u00a0Mbit/s), which quickly became the predominant choice for Internet exchange points due to the reduced cost and increased capacity offered. Today, almost all significant exchange points operate solely over Ethernet, and most of the largest exchange points offer 10, 40, and even 100 gigabit service.\nDuring the dot-com boom, many exchange point and carrier-neutral colocation providers had plans to build as many as 50 locations to promote carrier interconnection in the United States alone. Essentially all of these plans were abandoned following the dot-com bust, and today it is considered both economically and technically infeasible to support this level of interconnection among even the largest of networks.\nHow peering works.\nThe Internet is a collection of separate and distinct networks referred to as autonomous systems, each one consisting of a set of globally unique IP addresses and a unique global BGP routing policy.\nThe interconnection relationships between Autonomous Systems are of exactly two types:\nTherefore, in order for a network to reach any specific other network on the Internet, it must either:\nThe Internet is based on the principle of \"global\" or \"end-to-end reachability\", which means that any Internet user can transparently exchange traffic with any other Internet user. Therefore, a network is connected to the Internet if and only if it buys transit, or peers with every other network which also does not purchase transit (which together constitute a \"default free zone\" or \"DFZ\").\nPublic peering is done at Internet exchange points (IXPs), while private peering can be done with direct links between networks.\nMotivations for peering.\nPeering involves two networks coming together to exchange traffic with each other freely, and for mutual benefit. This 'mutual benefit' is most often the motivation behind peering, which is often described solely by \"reduced costs for transit services\". Other less tangible motivations can include:\nPhysical interconnections for peering.\nThe physical interconnections used for peering are categorized into two types:\nPublic peering.\nPublic peering is accomplished across a Layer 2 access technology, generally called a \"shared fabric\". At these locations, multiple carriers interconnect with one or more other carriers across a single physical port. Historically, public peering locations were known as network access points (NAPs). Today they are most often called exchange points or \"Internet exchanges\" (\"IXP\"). Many of the largest exchange points in the world can have hundreds of participants, and some span multiple buildings and colocation facilities across a city.\nSince public peering allows networks interested in peering to interconnect with many other networks through a single port, it is often considered to offer \"less capacity\" than private peering, but to a larger number of networks. Many smaller networks, or networks which are just beginning to peer, find that public peering exchange points provide an excellent way to meet and interconnect with other networks which may be open to peering with them. Some larger networks utilize public peering as a way to aggregate a large number of \"smaller peers\", or as a location for conducting low-cost \"trial peering\" without the expense of provisioning private peering on a temporary basis, while other larger networks are not willing to participate at public exchanges at all.\nA few exchange points, particularly in the United States, are operated by commercial carrier-neutral third parties which often are data centers, which are critical for achieving cost-effective data center connectivity.\nPrivate peering.\nPrivate peering is the direct interconnection between only two networks, across a Layer 1 or 2 medium that offers dedicated capacity that is not shared by any other parties. Early in the history of the Internet, many private peers occurred across \"telco\" provisioned SONET circuits between individual carrier-owned facilities. Today, most private peering interconnections occur at carrier hotels data centers or carrier neutral colocation facilities, where a direct crossconnect (private network interconnect, PNI) can be provisioned between participants within the same building, usually for a much lower cost than telco circuits. Colocation centers often host private peering connections between their customers, internet transit providers and cloud providers, meet-me rooms for connecting customers together, Internet exchange points, and landing points and terminal equipment for fiber optic submarine communication cables, connecting the internet.\nMost of the traffic on the Internet, especially traffic between the largest networks, occurs via private peering. However, because of the resources required to provision each private peer, many networks are unwilling to provide private peering to \"small\" networks, or to \"new\" networks which have not yet proven that they will provide a mutual benefit. \nTier 1 networks often do not participate in public Internet Exchanges but rather sell transit services to their participants and engage in private peering. Colocation centers often host private peering connections between their customers, internet transit (tier 1) providers and cloud providers.\nPeering agreement.\nThroughout the history of the Internet, there have been a spectrum of kinds of agreements between peers, ranging from handshake agreements to written contracts as required by one or more parties. Such agreements set forth the details of how traffic is to be exchanged, along with a list of expected activities which may be necessary to maintain the peering relationship, a list of activities which may be considered abusive and result in termination of the relationship, and details concerning how the relationship can be terminated. Detailed contracts of this type are typically used between the largest ISPs, as well as the ones operating in the most heavily regulated economies. As of 2011, such contracts account for less than 0.5% of all peering agreements.\nDepeering.\nBy definition, peering is the voluntary and free exchange of traffic between two networks, for mutual benefit. If one or both networks believes that there is no longer a mutual benefit, they may decide to cease peering: this is known as depeering. Some of the reasons why one network may wish to depeer another include:\nIn some situations, networks which are being depeered have been known to attempt to fight to keep the peering by intentionally breaking the connectivity between the two networks when the peer is removed, either through a deliberate act or an act of omission. The goal is to force the depeering network to have so many customer complaints that they are willing to restore peering. Examples of this include forcing traffic via a path that does not have enough capacity to handle the load, or intentionally blocking alternate routes to or from the other network. Some notable examples of these situations have included:\nModern peering.\nDonut peering model.\nThe \"donut peering\" model describes the intensive interconnection of small and medium-sized regional networks that make up much of the Internet. Traffic between these regional networks can be modeled as a toroid, with a core \"donut hole\" that is poorly interconnected to the networks around it.\nAs detailed above, some carriers attempted to form a cartel of self-described Tier 1 networks, nominally refusing to peer with any networks outside the oligopoly. Seeking to reduce transit costs, connections between regional networks bypass those \"core\" networks. Data takes a more direct path, reducing latency and packet loss. This also improves resiliency between consumers and content providers via multiple connections in many locations around the world, in particular during business disputes between the core transit providers.\nMultilateral peering.\nThe majority of BGP AS-AS adjacencies are the product of multilateral peering agreements, or MLPAs. In multilateral peering, an unlimited number of parties agree to exchange traffic on common terms, using a single agreement to which they each accede. The multilateral peering is typically technically instantiated in a route server or route reflector (which differ from looking glasses in that they serve routes back out to participants, rather than just listening to inbound routes) to redistribute routes via a BGP hub-and-spoke topology, rather than a partial-mesh topology. The two primary criticisms of multilateral peering are that it breaks the shared fate of the forwarding and routing planes, since the layer-2 connection between two participants could hypothetically fail while their layer-2 connections with the route server remained up, and that they force all participants to treat each other with the same, undifferentiated, routing policy. The primary benefit of multilateral peering is that it minimizes configuration for each peer, while maximizing the efficiency with which new peers can begin contributing routes to the exchange. While optional multilateral peering agreements and route servers are now widely acknowledged to be a good practice, mandatory multilateral peering agreements (MMLPAs) have long been agreed to not be a good practice.\nPeering locations.\nThe modern Internet operates with significantly more peering locations than at any time in the past, resulting in improved performance and better routing for the majority of the traffic on the Internet. However, in the interests of reducing costs and improving efficiency, most networks have attempted to standardize on relatively few locations within these individual regions where they will be able to quickly and efficiently interconnect with their peering partners.\nExchange points.\nAs of 2021, the largest exchange points in the world are Ponto de Troca de Tr\u00e1fego Metro S\u00e3o Paulo, in S\u00e3o Paulo, with 2,289 peering networks; OpenIXP in Jakarta, with 1,097 peering networks; and DE-CIX in Frankfurt, with 1,050 peering networks. The United States, with a historically larger focus on private peering and commercial public peering, has much less traffic visible on public peering switch-fabrics compared to other regions that are dominated by non-profit membership exchange points. Collectively, the many exchange points operated by Equinix are generally considered to be the largest, though traffic figures are not generally published. Other important but smaller exchange points include AMS-IX in Amsterdam, LINX and LONAP in London, and NYIIX in New York.\nURLs to some public traffic statistics of exchange points include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPeering and BGP.\nA great deal of the complexity in the BGP routing protocol exists to aid the enforcement and fine-tuning of peering and transit agreements. BGP allows operators to define a policy that determines where traffic is routed. Three things are commonly used to determine routing: local-preference, multi exit discriminators (MEDs) and AS-Path. Local-preference is used internally within a network to differentiate classes of networks. For example, a particular network will have a higher preference set on internal and customer advertisements. Settlement free peering is then configured to be preferred over paid IP transit.\nNetworks that speak BGP to each other can engage in multi exit discriminator exchange with each other, although most do not. When networks interconnect in several locations, MEDs can be used to reference that network's interior gateway protocol cost. This results in both networks sharing the burden of transporting each other's traffic on their own network (or \"cold potato\"). \"Hot-potato\" or nearest-exit routing, which is typically the normal behavior on the Internet, is where traffic destined to another network is delivered to the closest interconnection point.\nLaw and policy.\nInternet interconnection is not regulated in the same way that public telephone network interconnection is regulated. Nevertheless, Internet interconnection has been the subject of several areas of federal policy in the United States. Perhaps the most dramatic example of this is the attempted MCI Worldcom/Sprint merger. In this case, the Department of Justice blocked the merger specifically because of the impact of the merger on the Internet backbone market (thereby requiring MCI to divest itself of its successful \"internetMCI\" business to gain approval). In 2001, the Federal Communications Commission's advisory committee, the Network Reliability and Interoperability Council recommended that Internet backbones publish their peering policies, something that they had been hesitant to do beforehand. The FCC has also reviewed competition in the backbone market in its Section 706 proceedings which review whether advanced telecommunications are being provided to all Americans in a reasonable and timely manner.\nFinally, Internet interconnection has become an issue in the international arena under something known as the International Charging Arrangements for Internet Services (ICAIS). In the ICAIS debate, countries underserved by Internet backbones have complained that it is unfair that they must pay the full cost of connecting to an Internet exchange point in a different country, frequently the United States. These advocates argue that Internet interconnection should work like international telephone interconnection, with each party paying half of the cost. Those who argue against ICAIS point out that much of the problem would be solved by building local exchange points. A significant amount of the traffic, it is argued, that is brought to the US and exchanged then leaves the US, using US exchange points as switching offices but not terminating in the US. In some worst-case scenarios, traffic from one side of a street is brought all the way to a distant exchange point in a foreign country, exchanged, and then returned to another side of the street. Countries with liberalized telecommunications and open markets, where competition between backbone providers occurs, tend to oppose ICAIS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47013", "revid": "3729738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47013", "title": "Free World", "text": "Propaganda term used to refer to the Western Bloc\nThe \"Free World\" is a propaganda term, primarily used during the Second World War and Cold War, to refer to the Allies, Western Bloc and aligned countries.\nDuring the Second World War, the term was primarily used against fascist states. During the Cold War, the term referred more broadly to all liberal democracies collectively, as opposed to communist states. It has traditionally primarily been used to refer to the countries allied and aligned with the United States, the European Union, and NATO. The term \"leader of the free world\" has been used to imply a symbolic and moral leadership, and was mostly used during the Cold War in reference to the president of the United States.\nHistory of the concept.\nOrigins.\nThe term \"Free World\" emerged in the political discourse of the United States in May 1940, following Germany's attack on Belgium, the Netherlands, and France during World War II. It denoted all democracies that resisted authoritarian and world revolutionary states such as Germany, Italy, Japan, and the Soviet Union. In June 1941, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt explicitly used the term when urging Congress to approve military aid. However, following the United States' entry alongside the Soviet Union in the war, Roosevelt used the term primarily in reference to the United Nations in opposition against Germany, Italy, and Japan.\nIn the years that followed the war, particularly during the Cold War, the \"Free World\" came to encompass a bloc of democracies, such as the United States and many Western European nations, along with their anti-communist but authoritarian allies. In 1950, U.S. Representative Daniel J. Flood commented \"He used the phrase 'free world' all the time\u2014the free world, the free world, the free world. That impressed me very much vis-\u00e0-vis the Communist world, for instance. It is a tremendously good propaganda term. Is it being plugged enough?\"\nDuring the Cold War, many neutral countries\u2014either those in what is considered the Third World, or those having no formal alliance with either the United States or the Soviet Union\u2014viewed the claim of \"Free World\" leadership by the United States as grandiose and illegitimate.\n21st century usage.\nWhile \"Free World\" had its origins in the Cold War, the phrase is still used after the end of the Cold War and during the Global War on Terrorism. Samuel P. Huntington said the term has been replaced by the concept of the international community, which, he argued, \"has become the euphemistic collective noun (replacing \"the Free World\") to give global legitimacy to actions reflecting the interests of the United States and other Western powers.\"\nLeadership of the Free World.\nUnited States.\nThe \"Leader of the Free World\" was a colloquialism, first used during the Cold War, to describe either the United States or, more commonly, the president of the United States. The term when used in this context suggested that the United States was the principal democratic superpower, and the U.S. president was by extension the leader of the world's democratic states, i.e. the \"Free World\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut remember, we have differences with our allies all over the world. They are family differences, and sometimes they are acute, but, by and large, the reason we call it \"free world\" is because each nation in it wants to remain independent under its own government and not under some dictatorial form of government.\n \u2014Dwight D. Eisenhower (to the Associated Press, 1 October)\n, \"The Los Angeles Times\", 2 October 1958\nThe phrase has its origin in the 1940s during the Second World War, especially through the anti-fascist \"Free World\" magazine and the American propaganda film series \"Why We Fight\". At this time, the term was criticized for including the Soviet Union (USSR), which critics saw as a totalitarian dictatorship. However, the term became more widely used against the USSR and its allies during the 1950s in the wake of Truman Doctrine, when the United States depicted a foreign policy based on a struggle between \"a democratic alliance and a communist realm set on world domination\", according to the American magazine \"The Atlantic\". The term here was criticized again for including right-wing dictatorships such as Francoist Spain, and Nikita Khrushchev said in the 21st Congress of the Soviet Communist Party that \"the so-called free world constitutes the kingdom of the dollar\".\nAlthough in decline after the mid-1970s, the term was heavily referenced in US foreign policy up until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991. After the presidency of George H. W. Bush the term has largely fallen out of use, in part for its usage in rhetoric critical of U.S. foreign policy. In the late 2010s and into the 2020s, the term was still being used to describe the United States, its president, and as part of rhetoric critical of the president and U.S. policies.\nEuropean Union.\nOn 6 May 2010, upon an address to the plenary chamber of the European Parliament, the then US Vice President Joe Biden, stated that Brussels had a \"legitimate claim\" to the title of \"capital of the free world\", normally a title reserved for Washington. He added that Brussels is a \"great city which boasts 1,000 years of history and serves as capital of Belgium, the home of many of the institutions of the European Union and the headquarters of the NATO alliance.\"\nGermany.\nWhen \"Time\" declared the German Chancellor Angela Merkel Time Person of the Year for 2015, they referred to her as \"Europe's most powerful leader\", and the cover bore the title \"Chancellor of the Free World\".\nFollowing the election of Donald Trump to the US presidency in November 2016, \"The New York Times\" called Merkel \"the Liberal West's Last Defender\", and a number of commentators called her \"the next leader of the free world\". Merkel herself rejected the description. An article by James Rubin in Politico about a White House meeting between Merkel and Trump was ironically titled \"The Leader of the Free World Meets Donald Trump\".\nGerman commentators agreed with Merkel's assessment, and Friedrich Merz, a CDU politician, said that a German chancellor could never be \"leader of the free world\". In April 2017, columnist James Kirchick stressed the importance of the German elections (on which \"the future of the free world\" depended) since America had \"abdicated its traditional role as leader of the free world by electing Trump, the United Kingdom was turning inward after the referendum decision to leave the European Union, and France was also traditionally unilateralist and now had an inexperienced president\"; he called Merkel \"something less than leader of the free world ... but something greater than the leader of just another random country\". References to America's abdication of its role as leader of the free world continued or increased after Donald Trump questioned the unconditional defence of NATO partners and the Paris climate accord.\nJagoda Marini\u0107, writing for \"The New York Times\", noted that \"Barack Obama all but literally passed on the mantle of 'leader of the free world' to Ms. Merkel (and not Mr. Trump), and most Germans feel empowered by that new responsibility\" and that Germany \"is coming to understand its role in standing up for liberal democracy in a world turning more and more authoritarian.\"\nOther commentators\u2014in the United States and Europe\u2014rejected the appellation \"Leader of the Free World\": some argued that there is no single leader of the 'free world'; others queried whether Merkel \"remained\" the \"leader of the free world\" and the champion of liberal values. Questioned about Merkel's standing following her performance in the German elections in September 2017, former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton opined that Merkel was \"the most important leader in the free world\". However, after Merkel's party suffered losses in the 2017 election and there were delays in forming a government, the claim that Merkel is the true leader of the free world was referred to as a \"joke\", described as a media phenomenon, and otherwise called into question.\nWhen Merkel retired as chancellor, Hillary Clinton wrote that \"she led Europe through difficult times with steadiness and bravery, and for four long years, she was the leader of the free world.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47014", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47014", "title": "Metric time", "text": "Measure of time intervals using the metric system\nMetric time is the measure of time intervals using the metric system. The modern SI system defines the second as the base unit of time, and forms multiples and submultiples with metric prefixes such as kiloseconds and milliseconds. Other units of time \u2013 minute, hour, and day \u2013 are accepted for use with SI, but are not part of it. Metric time is a measure of time intervals, while decimal time is a means of recording time of day.\nHistory.\nThe second is derived from the sexagesimal system, which originated with the Sumerians and Babylonians. This system divides a base unit into sixty minutes, each minute into sixty seconds, and each second into sixty tierces. The word \"minute\" comes from the Latin \"pars minuta prima\", meaning \"first small part\", and \"second\" from \"pars minuta secunda\" or \"second small part\". Angular measure also uses sexagesimal units; there, it is the degree that is subdivided into minutes and seconds, while in time, it is the hour.\nIn 1790, French diplomat Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord proposed that the fundamental unit of length for the metric system should be the length of a pendulum with a one-second period, measured at sea level on the 45th parallel (50 grades in the new angular measures), thus basing the metric system on the value of the second. A Commission of Weights and Measures was formed within the French Academy of Sciences to develop the system. The commission rejected the seconds-pendulum definition of the metre the following year because the second of time was an arbitrary period equal to 1/86,400 day, rather than a decimal fraction of a natural unit. Instead, the metre would be defined as a decimal fraction of the length of the Paris Meridian between the equator and the North Pole.\nThe commission initially proposed the decimal time units later enacted as part of the new Republican calendar. In January, 1791, Jean-Charles de Borda commissioned Louis Berthoud to manufacture a decimal chronometer displaying these units. On March 28, 1794, the commission's president, Joseph Louis Lagrange, proposed using the day (French \"jour\") as the base unit of time, with divisions \"d\u00e9ci-jour\" and \"centi-jour,\" and suggested representing 4 \"d\u00e9ci-jours\" and 5 \"centi-jours\" as \"4,5\", \"4/5\", or just \"45\". The final system, as introduced in 1795, included units for length, area, dry volume, liquid capacity, weight or mass, and currency, but not time. Decimal time of day had been introduced in France two years earlier, but mandatory use was suspended at the same time the metric system was inaugurated, and did not follow the metric pattern of a base unit and prefixed units.\nBase units equivalent to decimal divisions of the day, such as 1/10, 1/100, 1/1,000, or 1/100,000 day, or other divisions of the day, such as 1/20 or 1/40 day, have also been proposed, with various names. Such alternative units did not gain any notable acceptance. In China, during the Song dynasty, a day was divided into smaller units, called \"k\u00e8\" (). One \"k\u00e8\" was usually defined as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044100 of a day until 1628, though there were short periods before then where days had 96, 108 or 120 \"k\u00e8\". A k\u00e8 is about 14.4 minutes, or 14 minutes 24 seconds. In the 19th century, Joseph Charles Fran\u00e7ois de Rey-Pailhade endorsed Lagrange\u2019s proposal of using \"centijours,\" but abbreviated \"c\u00e9\", and divided into 10 \"decic\u00e9s\", 100 \"centic\u00e9s\", 1,000 \"millic\u00e9s\", and 10,000 \"dimic\u00e9s\".\nJames Clerk Maxwell and Elihu Thomson (through the British Association for the Advancement of Science, or BAAS) introduced the Centimetre gram second system of units in 1874 to derive electric and magnetic metric units, following the recommendation of Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1832.\nIn 1897, the \"Commission de d\u00e9cimalisation du temps\" was created by the French Bureau of Longitude, with the mathematician Henri Poincar\u00e9 as secretary. The commission proposed making the standard hour the base unit of metric time, but the proposal did not gain acceptance and was eventually abandoned.\nWhen the modern SI system was defined at the 10th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) in 1954, the ephemeris second (1/86400 of a mean solar day) was made one of the system's base units. Because the Earth's rotation is slowly decelerating at an irregular rate and was thus unsuitable as a reference point for precise measurements, the SI second was later redefined more precisely as the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium-133 atom. The international standard atomic clocks use caesium-133 measurements as their main benchmark.\nIn computing.\nIn computing, at least internally, metric time gained widespread use for ease of computation. Unix time gives date and time as the number of seconds since January 1, 1970, and Microsoft's NTFS FILETIME as multiples of 100\u00a0ns since January 1, 1601. VAX/VMS uses the number of 100\u00a0ns since November 17, 1858, and RISC OS the number of centiseconds since January 1, 1900. Microsoft Excel uses number of days (with decimals, floating point) since January 1, 1900.\nAll these systems present time for the user using traditional units. None of these systems is strictly linear, as they each have discontinuities at leap seconds.\nPrefixes.\nMetric prefixes for subdivisions of a second are commonly used in science and technology. Milliseconds and microseconds are particularly common. Prefixes for multiples of a second are rarely used:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47016", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47016", "title": "Commentarii de Bello Gallico", "text": "Account of Gallic wars by Julius Caesar\nCommentarii de Bello Gallico (; ), also Bellum Gallicum (), is Julius Caesar's first-hand account of the Gallic Wars, written as a third-person narrative. In it, Caesar describes the battles and intrigues that took place in the nine years he spent fighting the Celtic and Germanic peoples in Gaul who opposed Roman conquest.\nThe \"Gaul\" to which Caesar refers is ambiguous, as the term had various connotations in Roman writing and discourse during Caesar's time. Generally, Gaul included all of the regions primarily inhabited by Celts, aside from the province of Gallia Narbonensis (modern-day Provence and Languedoc-Roussillon), which had already been conquered in Caesar's time, therefore encompassing the rest of modern France, Belgium, Western Germany, and parts of Switzerland. As the Roman Republic made inroads deeper into Celtic territory and conquered more land, the definition of \"Gaul\" shifted. Concurrently, \"Gaul\" was also used in common parlance as a synonym for \"uncouth\" or \"unsophisticated\", as Romans saw Celtic peoples as uncivilized compared with themselves.\n\"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\" has long been a mainstay in Latin instruction due to its simple, direct prose. It begins with the frequently quoted phrase \"Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres\", meaning \"Gaul is a whole divided into three parts\". The full work is split into eight sections, Book\u00a01 to Book\u00a08, varying in size from approximately 5,000 to 15,000 words. Book 8 was written by Aulus Hirtius, after Caesar's death.\nAlthough most contemporaries and subsequent historians considered the account truthful, 20th-century historians have questioned the outlandish claims made in the work. Of particular note are Caesar's claims that the Romans fought Gallic forces of up to 430,000 (a size believed to be impossible for an army at that time), and that the Romans suffered no deaths against this incredibly large force.\nTitle.\nThe Latin title, \"Commentaries on the Gallic War\", is often retained in English translations of the book, and the title is also translated to \"About the Gallic War\", \"Of the Gallic War\", \"On the Gallic War\", \"The Conquest of Gaul\", and \"The Gallic War\".\nMotivations.\nThe victories in Gaul won by Caesar had increased the alarm and hostility of his enemies at Rome, and his aristocratic enemies, the \"optimates\", were spreading rumors about his intentions once he returned from Gaul. The \"optimates\" intended to prosecute Caesar for abuse of his authority upon his return, when he would lay down his imperium. Such prosecution would not only see Caesar stripped of his wealth and citizenship, but also negate all of the laws he enacted during his term as \"consul\" and his dispositions as \"pro-consul\" of Gaul. To defend himself against these threats, Caesar knew he needed the support of the plebeians, particularly the Tribunes of the Plebs, on whom he chiefly relied for help in carrying out his agenda. The \"Commentaries\" were an effort by Caesar to directly communicate with the plebeians \u2013 thereby circumventing the usual channels of communication that passed through the Senate \u2013 to propagandize his activities as efforts to increase the glory and influence of Rome. By winning the support of the people, Caesar sought to make himself unassailable from the \"boni\".\nSynopsis.\nThe \"Commentarii\" cover the Gallic Wars over a period of eight years, beginning with conflict over the migration of the Helvetii in 58\u00a0BC, which drew in neighboring tribes and the Germanic Suebi. By 57\u00a0BC, Caesar had resolved to conquer all of Gaul, and led campaigns in the east, where the Nervii nearly defeated him. In 56\u00a0BC, Caesar defeated the Veneti in a naval battle and took most of northwest Gaul. In 55\u00a0BC, Caesar sought to boost his public image, and undertook expeditions across the Rhine river and the English Channel that were the first of their kind. Upon his return from Britain, Caesar was hailed as a hero, though he had achieved little beyond landing because his army had been too small and he was unable to land his cavalry. The next year, he went back with a larger army, including cavalry, and was more successful, setting up a friendly king and bringing his rival to terms. However, tribes rose up on the continent, and the Romans suffered a humiliating defeat. 53\u00a0BC saw a draconian campaign against the Gauls in an attempt to pacify them. This failed, and the Gauls staged a mass revolt under the leadership of Vercingetorix in 52\u00a0BC. Gallic forces won a notable victory at the Battle of Gergovia, but the Romans' indomitable siege works at the Battle of Alesia utterly defeated the Gallic coalition.\nIn 51\u00a0BC and 50\u00a0BC, there was little resistance, and Caesar's troops were mostly mopping up. Gaul was conquered, although it would not become a Roman province until 27\u00a0BC, and resistance would continue until as late as 70\u00a0AD. There is no clear end-date for the war, but the imminent Roman Civil War led to the withdrawal of Caesar's troops in 50\u00a0BC. Caesar's wild successes in the war had made him extremely wealthy and provided a legendary reputation. The Gallic Wars were a key factor in Caesar's ability to win the Civil War and declare himself dictator, in what would eventually lead to the end of the Roman Republic and the establishment of the Roman Empire.\nMotifs and peoples in the \"De Bello Gallico\".\nLeaders of the Gallic tribes.\nIn the \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\", Caesar mentions several leaders of the Gallic tribes. Among these, Diviciacus and Vercingetorix are notable for their contributions to the Gauls during war.\nDiviciacus.\nBooks 1 and 6 detail the importance of Diviciacus, a leader of the Haedui (Aedui), which lies mainly in the friendly relationship between Caesar and Diviciacus, said to be \"the one person in whom Caesar had absolute confidence\" (1.41). His brother, Dumnorix had committed several acts against the Romans because he wanted to become king (1.18); thus Caesar was able to make his alliance with Diviciacus even stronger by sparing Dumnorix from punishment while also forcing Diviciacus to control his own brother. Diviciacus had, in tears, begged Caesar to spare the life of his brother, and Caesar saw an opportunity to not only fix his major problem with Dumnorix, but also to strengthen the relationship between Rome and one of its small allies. Another major action taken by Diviciacus was his imploring of Caesar to take action against the Germans and their leader, Ariovistus. His fear of Ariovistus and the general outcry from the Gallic people led Caesar to launch a campaign against the Germans, even though they had been considered friends of the Republic.\nVercingetorix.\nVercingetorix, leader of the Arverni, united the Gallic tribes against Caesar during the winter of 53\u201352 BC. This appears in Book VII, chapters 1\u201313. Vercingetorix's father, Celtillus, was killed after attempting to seize power amongst the Arverni; for that reason, Vercingetorix was a social outcast and had much to gain from a rebellion. When it was clear that Caesar had defeated the Gallic rebellion, Vercingetorix offered to sacrifice himself, and put himself at the mercy of Caesar, in order to ensure that his kinsmen were spared. After the defeat, Vercingetorix was brought to Rome and imprisoned for six years before being brought out to adorn Caesar's triumph over Gaul and then publicly executed. Today, Vercingetorix is seen in the same light as others who opposed Roman conquest; he is now considered a national hero in France and a model patriot.\nThe Germanic peoples.\nIn \"De Bello Gallico\" 6.21\u201328, Julius Caesar provides his audience with a picture of Germanic lifestyle and culture. He depicts the Germans as primitive hunter gatherers with diets mostly consisting of meat and dairy products who only celebrate earthly gods such as the sun, fire, and the moon (6.21\u201322). German women reportedly wear small cloaks of deer hides and bathe in the river naked with their fellow men, yet their culture celebrates men who abstain from sex for as long as possible (6.21). Caesar concludes in chapters 25\u201328 by describing the Germans living in the almost-mythological Hercynian forest full of oxen with horns in the middle of their foreheads, elks without joints or ligatures, and uri who kill every man they come across.\nHowever, the distinguishing characteristic of the Germans for Caesar, as described in chapters 23 and 24, is their warring nature, which they believe is a sign of true valour (6.23). The Germans have no neighbors, because they have driven everyone out from their surrounding territory (6.23). Their greatest political power resides in the wartime magistrates, who have power over life and death (6.23). While Caesar certainly respects the warring instincts of the Germans, he directs his readers to see that their cultures are simply too barbaric, especially when contrasted with the high-class Gallic Druids described at the beginning of chapter six. For example, Caesar writes that robberies committed outside of the state are legalized in hopes of teaching young people discipline and caution, an idea nearly offensive to the judicial practices of the Romans (6.23). Caesar's generalizations, alongside the writings of Tacitus, form the barbaric identity of the Germans for the ancient world.\nThe Druids.\nCaesar's account of the Druids and the \"superstitions\" of the Gallic nations are documented in Book 6, chapters 13, 14 and 16\u201318 of \"De Bello Gallico\". In chapter 13, he mentions the importance of Druids in the culture and social structure of Gaul at the time of his conquest. Chapter 14 addresses the education of the Druids and the high social standing that comes with their position. He first comments on the role of sacrificial practices in their daily lives in chapter 16. Caesar highlights the sacrificial practices of the Druids containing innocent people and the large sacrificial ceremony where hundreds of people were burnt alive at one time to protect the whole from famine, plague, and war (6.16). Chapter 17 and 18 focuses on the divinities the Gauls believed in and Dis, the god which they claim they were descended from. This account of the Druids highlights Caesar's interest in the order and importance of the Druids in Gaul.\nCaesar spent a great amount of time in Gaul and his book is one of the best preserved accounts of the Druids from an author who was in Gaul. However, although Caesar provides what is seemingly a first-hand account, much of his knowledge of the Druids comes not from personal experience, but rather from the hearsay of others, and is regarded as anachronistic. Caesar based some of his account on that of Posidonius, who wrote a clear and well-known account of the Druids in Gaul. Caesar provides his account of the Druids as a means of sharing his knowledge and educating the Roman people on the foreign conquests.\nThere is no doubt that the Druids offered sacrifices to their god. However, scholars are still uncertain about what kind of offerings they made. Caesar and other Roman authors assert that the Druids would offer human sacrifices on numerous occasions for relief from disease and famine or for a successful war campaign. Caesar provides a detailed account of the manner in which the supposed human sacrifices occurred in chapter 16, claiming that \"they have images of immense size, the limbs of which are framed with twisted twigs and filled with living persons. These being set on fire, those within are encompassed by the flames\" (6.16).\nCaesar, however, also observes and mentions a civil Druid culture. In chapter 13, he claims that they selected a single leader who ruled until his death, and a successor would be chosen by a vote or through violence. Also in chapter 13, he mentions that the Druids studied \"the stars and their movements, the size of the cosmos and the earth, the nature of the world, and the powers of immortal deities,\" signifying to the Roman people that the Druids were also versed in astrology, cosmology, and theology. Although Caesar is one of the few primary sources on the Druids, many believe that he had used his influence to portray the Druids to the Roman people as both barbaric, as they performed human sacrifices, and civilized in order to depict the Druids as a society worth assimilating to Rome (6.16).\nVorenus and Pullo.\nLucius Vorenus and Titus Pullo were two centurions in the garrison of Quintus Tullius Cicero, brother of Marcus Tullius Cicero, and are mentioned in Book 5.44 of \"De Bello Gallico\". They were bitter rivals who both sought to achieve the greatest honors \"and every year used to contend for promotion with the utmost animosity\" (5.44). Their garrison had come under siege during a rebellion by the tribes of the Belgae led by Ambiorix. They showed their prowess during this siege by jumping from the wall and directly into the enemy despite being completely outnumbered. During the fighting, they both find themselves in difficult positions and are forced to save each other, first Vorenus saving Pullo and then Pullo saving Vorenus. Through great bravery they are both able to make it back alive slaying many enemies in the process. They return to the camp showered in praise and honors by their fellow soldiers. Though they started out in competition, they both showed themselves to be worthy of the highest praise and equal to each other in bravery (5.44).\nCaesar uses this anecdote to illustrate the courage and bravery of his soldiers. Since his forces had already been humiliated and defeated in previous engagements, he needed to report a success story to Rome that would lift the spirits of the people. Furthermore, the tale of unity on the battlefield between two personal rivals is in direct opposition to the disunity of Sabinus and Cotta, which resulted in the destruction of an entire legion. He relates this particular account to illustrate that, despite the losses against Ambiorix and his army, Rome is still able to trust in the valor of its soldiers. Thus, Caesar turns a military blunder into a positive propaganda story.\nHostage exchanges.\nIn the first two books of \"De Bello Gallico\", there are seven examples of hostage exchanges. First, the Helveti exchange hostages with the Sequani as a promise that the Sequani will let the Helveti pass and that the Helveti will not cause mischief (1.9 and 1.19). The Helveti also give Caesar hostages to ensure that the Helveti keep their promises (1.14). Then the Aedui gave hostages to the Sequani, during the Sequani's rise to power (1.31). In Book 2, the Belgae were exchanging hostages to create an alliance against Rome (2.1) and the Remi offered Caesar hostages in their surrender (2.3, 2.5). Later in the book Caesar receives 600 hostages from the Aedui (2.15) and other hostages from most of Gaul (2.35). This practice of exchanging hostages continues to be used throughout Caesar's campaigns in diplomacy and foreign policy.\nToday the term hostage has a different connotation than it did for the Ancient Romans, which is shown in the examples above. Where the Romans did take prisoners of war, hostages could also be given or exchanged in times of peace. The taking of hostages as collateral during political arrangements was a common practice in ancient Rome. The idea of the practice was that important people from each side were given to ensure that both sides kept their word; a type of contract. Two examples of this: Caesar demanding the children of chieftains (2.5) and accepting the two sons of King Galba (2.13). However, as seen by Caesar, sometimes it was only a one-way exchange, with Caesar taking hostages but not giving any.\nThere is evidence though, particularly in Caesar's \"De Bello Gallico\", indicating that the practice was not always effective. Cities often moved to rebel against Rome, even though hostages were in Roman custody. Occasionally, hostages would be entrusted to a neutral or mediating party during a rebellion, such as the time one hundred hostages surrendered by the Senones were placed in the custody of the Aedui who helped negotiate between the dissidents and Caesar. Some sources say there is not much evidence that hostages were even harmed, at least severely, in retribution of the broken agreements. It is commonly noted that Caesar never mentions penalties being dealt to hostages. Taking hostages did benefit Rome in one particular way: since hostages were commonly the sons of political figures and would typically be under Roman watch for a year or more, Romans had ample time to introduce those hostages to the Roman customs in hopes that when they were freed, they would go on to become influential political leaders themselves and favor Rome in subsequent foreign relations.\nModern influence.\nEducational use.\nThis book is often lauded for its polished, clear Latin; in particular, German historian Hans Herzfeld describes the work as \"a paradigm of proper reporting and stylistic clarity\".\nIt is traditionally the first authentic text assigned to students of Latin, as Xenophon's \"Anabasis\" is for students of Ancient Greek; they are both autobiographical tales of military adventure told in the third person. It contains many details and employs many stylistic devices to promote Caesar's political interests.\nThe books are valuable for the many geographical and historical claims that can be retrieved from the work. Notable chapters describe Gaulish custom (6.13), their religion (6.17), and a comparison between Gauls and Germanic peoples (6.24).\nManuscripts and publication history.\nSince the work of Karl Nipperdey in 1847, the existing manuscripts have been divided into two classes. The first (\u03b1) encompasses manuscripts containing only \"De Bello Gallico\" and characterized by colophons with allusions to late antique \"correctores\". The oldest manuscript in this class is MS. Amsterdam 73, written at Fleury Abbey in the later ninth century. The second (\u03b2) encompasses manuscripts containing all of the related works\u2014not only \"De Bello Gallico\", but \"De Bello Civili\", \"De Bello Alexandrino\", \"De Bello Africo\", and \"De Bello Hispaniensi\", always in that order. The oldest manuscript in this class is MS Paris lat. 3864, written at Corbie in the last quarter of the ninth century. For \"De Bello Gallico\", the readings of \u03b1 are considered better than \u03b2. In total, there are some 240 medieval manuscripts preserving the text and besides the aforementioned groupings, the stemma codicum is not fully understood.\nThe \"editio princeps\" was published by Giovanni Andrea Bussi at Rome in 1469.\nThe original publication time of the \"Bello Gallico\" is uncertain. It had been definitely published by 46 BC, when Cicero reviewed it and gave it great praise. It is unclear whether the books were released individually, or all at once. Nipperdey's 1847 account believed that they had been mostly all composed at once in 50 BC. Frank Adcock suggested in 1956 that they had been written in stages, but then published simultaneously. T. P. Wiseman believed they were written and published yearly, as Caesar would have gained enormous utility from keeping the public informed about his exploits. The debate as to the time and nature of publication continues, with critical examination of the evolution of the writing style the chief tool for dating the work. Even if the works were published after the wars, it was clear that Caesar was waging a propaganda campaign during the war, including writing copious letters to his political allies back in Rome. Because of the questionable nature of the war, and threats by his enemies to have him essentially tried for war crimes, winning the public relations battle was critical for Caesar.\nHistoriography.\nAccuracy.\nCaesar's account was largely taken as truthful and accurate until the 20th century. Nipperdey's manuscript in 1847 was considered \"monumental\", and was the first critical examination of the text, which considered Caesar to be infallible. Nipperdey even chose to modify his translation of the text where it contradicted itself, giving Caesar the benefit of any doubts. Even in 1908, Camille Jullian wrote a comprehensive history of Gaul and took Caesar's account as unerring. But after World War II historians began to question if Caesar's claims stood up.\nHistorian David Henige takes particular issue with the supposed population and warrior counts. Caesar claims that he was able to estimate the population of the Helvetii because in their camp there was a census, written in Greek on tablets, which would have indicated 263,000 Helvetii and 105,000 allies, of whom exactly one quarter (92,000) were combatants. But Henige points out that such a census would have been difficult to achieve by the Gauls, that it would make no sense to be written in Greek by non-Greek tribes, and that carrying such a large quantity of stone or wood tablets on their migration would have been a monumental feat. Henige finds it oddly convenient that exactly one quarter were combatants, suggesting that the numbers were more likely ginned up by Caesar than outright counted by census. Contemporary authors estimated that the population of the Helvetii and their allies were lower. Livy, for example, surmised that there were 157,000 overall \u2014 a number Henige argues is also inaccurate.\nDuring the campaign against the Usipetes and the Tenceri, Caesar makes the incredible claim that the Romans faced an army of 430,000 Gauls, that the Roman victory was overwhelming, that the Romans lost not a single soldier, and that upon their loss the Gauls committed mass suicide. Henige finds this entire story impossible, as did Ferdinand Lot, writing in 1947. Lot was one of the first modern authors who directly questioned the validity of Caesar's numbers, finding a fighting force of 430,000 to have been unbelievable for the time.\nNot all contemporaries of Caesar believed the account to have been accurate. Gaius Asinius Pollio, who served under Caesar, noted that the account had been put together without much care or regard for the truth. Still, Pollio attributed this to mistakes by Caesar's lieutenants, or even that Caesar intended to rewrite the text more accurately. Up until the 20th century authors tended to follow Pollio's thinking, attributing mistakes not to Caesar but to the process, such as errors in translation and transcription throughout time. Ernest Desjardins, writing in 1876, suggested (in what Henige considers to be very charitable on Desjardins part) that the error in numbers in the Usipetes campaign was the result of a mis-transcription of \"CCCCXXX\" instead of \"XXXXIII\", which would mean that the real size of the Gaulic force was actually just 43,000. But even Henige suggests that it is possible the numbers have not always been accurately written down, and that the earliest surviving manuscripts are only from the ninth to twelfth centuries.\nPart of the dispute over the historiography of the \"Commentarii\" revolves around modern authors trying to use it to estimate the pre-Roman population of Gaul. In the 18th century, authors extrapolated from the text populations of 40\u2013200 million. Authors in the 19th century guessed in the 15\u201320 million range based on the text. 20th century authors guessed as low as 4 million, with Henige giving a modern range of 4\u201348 million between authors.\nUltimately, Henige sees the \"Commentarii\" as a very clever piece of propaganda written by Caesar, built to make Caesar appear far grander than he was. Henige notes that Caesar's matter of fact tone and easy to read writing made it all the easier to accept his outlandish claims. Caesar sought to portray his fight as a justified defense against the barbarity of the Gauls (which was important, as Caesar had actually been the aggressor contrary to his claims). By making it appear that he had won against overwhelming odds and suffered minimal casualties, he further increased the belief that he and the Romans were godly and destined to win against the godless barbarians of Gaul. Overall, Henige concludes that \"Julius Caesar must be considered one of history's earliest \u2013 and most durably successful \u2013 'spin doctors'\".\nAuthorship.\nClassicist Ruth Breindal believes it likely that Caesar did not directly write the work, but instead dictated most of it to a scribe at one time and the scribe wrote as Caesar spoke, or that the scribe took notes and wrote the account afterwards. Still, she does believe that Caesar had an overwhelming hand in creating the work, but believes much of the grammar and clarity of the work to be the result of the scribe or scribes involved. Breindal also considers the main point of the work to be as a propaganda piece to protect Caesar's reputation in the vicious politics of Rome. The final chapters of book eight were written after Caesar's death in 44 BC by consul Aulus Hirtius; Hirtius must have written the book before his own death in the civil war in 43 BC.\nThe author portrays Caesar's thoughts frequently, with an emphasis on making Caesar seem efficient, decisive, and straightforward, and that his view on how war should be waged is the same. The work paints the conflict as inevitable and necessary.\nThe tradition which attributes the entire eighth commentary to Aulus Hirtius has been criticised by the classical philologist Luciano Canfora as it is based on an incorrect interpretation of the words of Suetonius, who defines Caesar's commentary as \"last and incomplete\" (\"novissimum imperfectumque\"), adding that the final chapters \"could have been added\" (\"suppleverit\") by Hirtius, with the same terms used with respect to Sulla's final commentary, which was also \"completed\" (\"supplevit\") by the freedman Epicadus. The letter to Balbus, bearing the unlikely epigraph \u00abHircius Pansa\u00bb and handed down as a preface to the eighth commentary, would also be a fabrication from the late antique period, as it is based on the already explained incorrect interpretation of Suetonius and refers to contents absent within the commentary.\nAs literature.\nFrom the 1970s, some critics began to regard the work less as history than literature, in the tradition of poets following the model of Homer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47017", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47017", "title": "Package manager", "text": "Application for handling software\nA package manager or package management system (PMS) is a collection of software tools that automates the process of installing, upgrading, configuring, and removing computer programs for a computer in a consistent manner.\nA package manager deals with \"packages\", distributions of software and data in archive files. Packages contain metadata, such as the software's name, description of its purpose, version number, vendor, checksum (usually a cryptographic hash function), and a list of dependencies necessary for the software to run properly. Upon installation, metadata is stored in a local package database. Package managers typically maintain a database of software dependencies and version information to prevent software mismatches and missing prerequisites. They work closely with software repositories, binary repository managers, and app stores.\nPackage managers are designed to eliminate the need for manual installs and updates. This can be particularly useful for large enterprises whose operating systems (OSes) typically consist of hundreds or even tens of thousands of distinct packages.\nHistory.\nAn early package manager was SMIT (and its backend install) from IBM AIX. SMIT was introduced with AIX 3.0 in 1989. Package managers like dpkg have existed as early as 1994. Early package managers, from around 1994, had no automatic dependency resolution but could already simplify the process of adding and removing software from a running system.\nBy around 1995, beginning with CPAN, package managers began handling package repository downloads, and dependency resolution and installation as needed, making it easier to install, uninstall and update software.\nFunctions.\nA software package is an archive file containing a computer program as well as necessary metadata for its deployment. The program may be in source code that has to be compiled and built first. Package metadata include the software's description, version number, and dependencies.\nPackage managers are charged with the task of finding, installing, maintaining or uninstalling packages upon the user's command. Typical functions of a package management system include:\nChallenges with shared libraries.\nComputer systems that rely on dynamic library linking, instead of static library linking, share executable libraries of machine instructions across packages and applications. In these systems, conflicting relationships between different packages requiring different versions of libraries results in a situation called \"dependency hell\". On Microsoft Windows systems, this is also called \"DLL hell\" when working with dynamically-linked libraries.\nModern package managers have mostly solved these problems by allowing parallel installation of multiple library versions (e.g. OPENSTEP's \"Framework\" system), a dependency of any kind (e.g. \"slots\" in Gentoo Portage), and even packages compiled with different compiler versions (e.g. dynamic libraries built by the Glasgow Haskell Compiler, where a stable ABI does not exist), in order to enable other packages to specify which version they are linked or installed against.\nFront-ends for locally-compiled packages.\nSystem administrators may install and maintain software using tools other than package managers. For example, a local administrator may download unpackaged source code, compile it, and install it. This may cause the local system to fall out of synchronization with the package manager's database. The local administrator will be required to take additional measures, such as manually managing some dependencies or integrating the changes into the package manager.\nThere are tools to ensure that locally-compiled packages are integrated with the package management. For operating systems based on .deb and .rpm files as well as Slackware Linux, there is CheckInstall, and for recipe-based systems such as Gentoo Linux and hybrid systems such as Arch Linux, it is possible to write a recipe first, which then ensures that the package fits into the local package database.\nMaintenance of configuration.\nUpgrades of configuration files may be particularly troublesome. Since package managers, at least on Unix systems, originated as extensions of file archivers, they can usually only overwrite or retain configuration files, rather than apply rules to them. There are exceptions to this that usually apply to kernel configuration (which, if broken, will render the computer unusable after a restart). Problems can be caused if the configuration file format changes; for instance, if the old file does not explicitly disable new options that should be disabled. Some package managers, such as Debian's dpkg, allow configuration during installation. In other situations, packages are installed with the default configuration, which is then overwritten, for example in headless installations to a large number of computers. This kind of pre-configured installation is also supported by dpkg.\nRepositories.\nTo give users more control over the software they allow to be installed on their systems, and sometimes due to legal or convenience reasons on the distributors' side, packages are often downloaded from software repositories.\nUpgrade suppression.\nWhen a user is upgrading a package with package management software, it is customary for them to be presented with the actions to be executed (usually the list of packages to be upgraded, and possibly the old and new version numbers), and allow them to either accept the upgrade in bulk, or select individual packages for upgrading. Many package managers can be configured to never upgrade certain packages, or to upgrade them only when critical vulnerabilities or instabilities are found in the previous version, as defined by the packager of the software. This process is called \"upgrade suppression\", or \"version pinning\". For instance, to prevent upgrades to the OpenOffice program:\nCascading package removal.\nSome of the more advanced package management features offer \"cascading package removal\", in which all packages that depend on the target package and all packages that only it depends on are also removed.\nComparison of commands.\nAlthough commands are specific to each package manager, they are translatable to a large extent, as most package managers offer similar functions. The Arch Linux wiki offers an extensive overview of commands.\nPrevalence.\nLinux distributions oriented to binary packages rely heavily on package management systems as their primary means of managing and maintaining software. Mobile operating systems such as Android (Linux-based) and iOS (Unix-based) rely almost exclusively on their respective vendors' app stores and thus use their own dedicated package management systems.\nSimilar programs and platforms.\nInstallers.\nA package manager is often called an \"install manager\", which can lead to a confusion between package managers and installers. The differences include:\nBuild automation utilities.\nMost software configuration management systems treat building software and deploying software as separate, independent steps. A build automation utility typically takes human-readable source code files already on a computer, and automates the process of converting them into an executable package on the same or a remote computer. Later, a package manager typically running on another computer downloads the pre-built executable and installs it.\nHowever, both kinds of tools have many commonalities:\nA few tools, such as Maak and A-A-P, are designed to handle both building and deployment, and can be used as either build automation utilities, package managers, or both.\nApp stores.\nApp stores can also be considered application-level package managers (without the ability to install all levels of programs). Unlike traditional package managers, app stores are designed to enable payment for the software itself (instead of for software development), and may only offer monolithic packages with no dependencies or dependency resolution. They are usually limited in their management functionality, due to focusing on ease-of-use over power or emergence, and are common in commercial operating systems and smart devices.\nPackage managers also often have only human-reviewed code. Many app stores, such as Google Play and Apple's App Store, mainly screen apps using automated tools only; malware can pass these tests by detecting when the app is being tested, and delaying malicious activity. There are exceptions: the npm package database, for instance, relies entirely on postpublication review of its code, while the Debian package database has an extensive human review process before any package goes into the main database. The XZ Utils backdoor used years of trust-building to insert a backdoor, which was nonetheless caught while in the testing database.\nCommon package managers and formats.\nUniversal package manager.\nAlso known as binary repository manager, it is a software tool designed to optimize the download and storage of binary files, artifacts and packages used and produced in the software development process. These package managers aim to standardize the way enterprises treat all package types. They give users the ability to apply security and compliance metrics across all artifact types. Universal package managers have been referred to as being at the center of a DevOps toolchain.\nPackage formats.\nEach package manager relies on the format and metadata of the packages in its repository. That is, package managers need groups of files to be bundled along with appropriate metadata, such as dependencies. Often, a core set of utilities manages the basic installation from these packages and multiple package managers use these utilities to provide additional functionality.\nFor example, yum relies on rpm as a backend. Yum extends the functionality of rpm by adding features such as simple configuration for maintaining a network of systems. As another example, the Synaptic Package Manager provides a graphical user interface by using the Advanced Packaging Tool (apt) library, which in turn relies on dpkg for core functionality.\nAlien is a program that converts between different Linux package formats, supporting conversion between Linux Standard Base (LSB) compliant .rpm packages, .deb, Stampede (.slp), Solaris (.pkg) and Slackware (.tgz, .txz, .tbz, .tlz) packages.\nFor mobile operating systems, Google Play uses the Android application package (APK) package format while Microsoft Store uses the APPX and XAP formats. Both Google Play and Microsoft Store have eponymous package managers.\nFree and open source software systems.\nBy the nature of free and open-source software (FOSS), packages under similar and compatible licenses are available on a number of operating systems. These packages can be combined and distributed using configurable packaging systems to handle many permutations of software and manage version-specific dependencies and conflicts. Some managers of FOSS packages are released as FOSS themselves. One typical difference between package management in proprietary operating systems, such as Mac OS X and Windows, and those in free and open source software, such as Linux, is that free and open source software systems permit third-party packages to also be installed and upgraded through the same mechanism, whereas the package managers of Mac OS X and Windows will only upgrade software provided by Apple and Microsoft, respectively (with the exception of some third party drivers in Windows). The ability to continuously upgrade third-party software is typically added by adding the URL of the corresponding repository to the package management's configuration file.\nApplication-level package managers.\nBesides system-level application managers, there are add-on package managers for operating systems with limited capabilities and for programming languages in which developers need the latest libraries.\nUnlike system-level package managers, application-level package managers focus on a small part of the software system. They typically reside within a directory tree that is not maintained by the system-level manager, such as c:\\cygwin or /opt/sw. This may not be the case for managers that deal with programming libraries, leading to possible conflicts, as both managers may claim to own a file and may break upgrades.\nImpact.\nIan Murdock commented that package management is \"the single biggest advancement Linux has brought to the industry\", that it blurs the boundaries between operating systems and applications, and that it makes it \"easier to push new innovations [...] into the marketplace and [...] evolve the OS\".\nThere is also a conference for package manager developers known as PackagingCon. It was established in 2021 with the aim to understand different approaches to package management.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47018", "revid": "1879095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47018", "title": "Internet exchange", "text": ""}
{"id": "47019", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47019", "title": "OBL", "text": "OBL or \u00d6BL may refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47020", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47020", "title": "ObL", "text": ""}
{"id": "47021", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47021", "title": "Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus", "text": ""}
{"id": "47022", "revid": "46460927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47022", "title": "Osama", "text": "Osama or Usama may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47023", "revid": "50563464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47023", "title": "London Internet Exchange", "text": "Internet exchange point in London\nThe London Internet Exchange (LINX) is an Internet exchange point (IXP) providing peering to over 950 different autonomous systems (ASNs). Established in 1994 in London, LINX operates IXPs in London, Manchester, Scotland, and Wales in the United Kingdom, as well as in Northern Virginia, United States.\nFounded by a consortium of Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and educational networks, LINX is a founding member of Euro-IX, a Europe-wide alliance of Internet exchanges. It is one of the largest neutral IXPs in Europe by average throughput.\nLINX functions as a non-profit organization, structured as a company limited by guarantee. Membership involves signing a memorandum of understanding, with each member collectively owning the company. All members hold a single vote at Annual General Meetings (AGMs) and Extraordinary General Meetings (EGMs) on issues related to finances, the constitution, and the scope of LINX activities. The members periodically elect the non-executive board of directors and convene at regular meetings to discuss technical, corporate governance, and regulatory matters. LINX operates under a mandate to avoid direct competition with its members.\nHistory.\nIn November 1994, using a donated piece of equipment no bigger than a video recorder and without any written contracts, five UK-based Internet service providers (ISPs) linked their networks to exchange data and avoid paying high transatlantic bandwidth costs.\nLINX effectively began when two ISPs (PIPEX and UK Net) linked their networks via a 64-kilobit serial link to save the cost and time delay involved in routing data across the Atlantic to US Internet exchanges.\nWhen Demon Internet, UKERNA \u2013 the UK academic network \u2013 and other ISPs showed interest in establishing similar serial links, Keith Mitchell, then chief technical officer of PIPEX, initiated a meeting with BT to discuss the creation of a London-based Internet exchange.\nPIPEX provided the LINX founders with a Cisco Catalyst\u00a01200 switch with eight 10-megabit ports. Rack space was leased at a then virtually empty data center operated by Telehouse International Corporation of Europe Ltd at Coriander Avenue in London's Dockland.\nSwitching the first data through the Telehouse hub was accomplished by primarily technical specialists who were unconcerned about the formalities of legal contracts. However, while PIPEX continued to provide administrative and technical oversight, the need for a formal constitution was eventually recognized.\nThe solution was to form a company limited by guarantee. Lawyers produced a draft memorandum and constitution which was extensively modified by members. The company was formed in 1995, and a board of five non-executive directors was elected, with Keith Mitchell as the initial chairman.\nNot for profit organization.\nFrom the beginning, it was agreed that LINX would be a non-profit organization run for the benefit of members and governed collectively through regular member meetings, a practice which continues to this day.\nWhile PIPEX continued to provide administrative oversight \u2013 charged at cost to LINX \u2013 member meetings were held every two months (now every three months) to decide strategic direction. Eventually, it was accepted that the purely co-operative system of operation at LINX was becoming overly demanding. Then, in late 1996, Keith Mitchell accepted the role of full-time chairman, working with a personal assistant from offices in Peterborough.\nIn the summer of 1996, LINX became the first Internet exchange in the world to deploy a 100-megabit switch \u2013 a Cisco Catalyst 5000. In January 1999, it pioneered the implementation of a Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) running over gigabit Ethernet connections.\nAs the Internet grew in popularity, legislators and law enforcement agencies began to call for its regulation. LINX increasingly found itself taking on non-core activities, such as providing expert advice on behalf of its members (and, therefore, the whole industry) to a wide range of official agencies.\nIn 1999, LINX appointed its first full-time regulation officer in Roland Perry to advise organizations such as the Home Office Internet Task Force, the National Hi-Tech Crime Unit, the Department of Trade and Industry and relevant departments of the EU Commission. In 2003, Roland was succeeded by Malcolm Hutty when Roland left to form his own advisory group.\nLINX also actively and financially supports the Internet Watch Foundation which, since 1996, has worked to eradicate child abuse images from the UK Internet. Initial funding from LINX was instrumental in enabling the IWF to launch and the decision to create the IWF and define its charter was taken at a LINX member meeting in Heathrow.\nLINX in the twenty-first century.\n2000 \u2013 A training manager was appointed to introduce an accredited training program for Internet engineers and technicians.\n2001 \u2013 LINX amended its corporate structure to make the post of chairman non-executive and appointed its first chief executive officer, John Souter, previously UK managing director of German-owned Varetis Communications.\n2002 \u2013 LINX was the first exchange to introduce 10G Ethernet operation, using equipment from Foundry Networks \u2013 in fact, the second of their worldwide customers to deploy their technology.\n2003 \u2013 This year saw the launch of the 'LINX from Anywhere' service, a facility that permits smaller ISPs to piggyback on the networks of existing members to obtain a secure, virtual presence on the LINX exchange without incurring the manpower and Rackspace costs of having their own installation in London.\n2004 \u2013 LINX considerably expanded its footprint, with four new points of presence (Pop's) \u2013 all in the Docklands area of London.\n2005 \u2013 LINX members voted to make public affairs one of the company's \"core functions\", placing it on an equal footing with peering and interconnection.\n2006 \u2013 LINX membership reached 200.\n2008 \u2013 LINX expanded again opening three new PoPs, this time adding considerably to the geographical diversity by doing so in the City of London, North Acton and Slough. It also heralded new relationships with data centre operators, with the addition of Interxion and Equinix (to the pre-existing ones of Telehouse and Telecity).\n2011 \u2013 The LINX primary LAN was redesigned to a VPLS-based infrastructure with a new vendor, Juniper Networks.\n2012 \u2013 The Connection reseller Programme launched. Also this year LINX became the first Internet exchange in the world to install a Juniper PTX5000 in a live network and the exchange opened its first site outside London in Manchester (IX Manchester).\n2013 \u2013 Two additional local exchanges, IX Scotland in Edinburgh and LINX NOVA in North Virginia, USA, were launched. They were the exchange's first sites outside England.\n2014 \u2013 Another local exchange, IX Cardiff in Wales, was launched.\n2016 \u2013 Sees the introduction of new hardware and a restructuring of LON2 with hardware from https://\n2017 \u2013 Following the passage of the Investigatory Powers Act, a new constitution was proposed which would ban directors from reporting the installation of surveillance equipment to members. This caused dissension among members, many of which are non-UK based ISPs operating from countries where mass surveillance is, like in the UK, not legal. This interpretation of the constitutional change was disputed on the official LINX website. Voting on the constitutional revision took place during a hastily called Extraordinary General Meeting (EGM) on 21 February; although a majority supported the change the number attending was too small for the motion to be carried.\n2021 \u2013 LINX reported a record level of UK Traffic at 6.05\u00a0Tbit/s.\n2022 \u2013 LINX joined the long list of organizations supporting Ukraine by disconnecting Russian services from its networks.\nTechnology.\nIn London, LINX operates two physically separate networks, or switching platforms, on different architectures using equipment from different manufacturers (Extreme Networks and Juniper Networks). These networks are deployed over ten locations, each connected by multiple 100 Gigabit Ethernet or 10 Gigabit Ethernet connections over fibre networks.\nThe LINX Engineering team restructured its secondary LAN in London, LON2, in 2018 using software and hardware from two different suppliers.\nLINX data center facilities are found at sixteen locations throughout London, including:\nConnecting is also possible from remote locations via the 'LINX from Anywhere' scheme via a range of layer 2 service/MPLS carriers.\nRedundancy of the network is managed using rapid-failover protection mechanisms such a VPLS service over an MPLS core (MPLS/VPLS) from Juniper and Extreme's Ethernet Automatic Protection System (EAPS). These restore connectivity within tenths of a second in the event of the loss of a network segment.\nIn addition to the main peering infrastructure, LINX provides managed private interconnections (via Single Mode Fiber) between LINX members, and works with a number of fibre carriers to provide rapid connection between LINX members for private circuits. These PI circuits may be used for any purpose, but are mainly intended for Private Peering arrangements between members. Private Peering is sometimes more appropriate for managing large flows of traffic between ISPs and/or Content Providers.\nTelehouse hosts the vast majority of internet peering traffic from LINX.\nPublic affairs.\nOne of LINX's core functions is to represent its members in matters of public policy. LINX's Public Affairs department works to obtain advance warning of public policy developments that could affect LINX members, to inform members about important policy developments at a time when it is still possible to influence them, and to educate, inform and influence regulators and legislators.\nAt the UK level, LINX liaises directly with policymakers on matters such as content regulation, telecoms regulation, privacy and data protection, e-mail spam, online fraud/phishing, law enforcement, counter-terrorism, and any other topics that affect LINX members.\nAt the European level, LINX is an active member of Euro ISPA and works with Euro ISPA's other national associations to influence European policy.\nLINX also works actively with partner organizations such as the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF) and the Internet Society (ISOC). LINX was instrumental in the creation of the Internet Watch Foundation, the UK hotline for reporting and removing child sexual abuse material from the Internet, and continues to advise the IWF as a member of its Funding Council.\nAs a mutual, membership-based organization, all of LINX's public affairs activity is informed and guided by extensive and ongoing consultation with LINX members.\nLocal exchanges.\nLINX Manchester.\nLaunched in April 2012 IX Manchester, now known as LINX Manchester was initially a single-site platform based on a stand-alone Brocade BigIron RX-16 switch, repurposed from the primary LAN in London. A new design extends the network to two new sites \u2013 M247's Ice Colo &amp; Joule House and brings in completely new hardware from Extreme Networks.\nThe new network will be configured as an EAPS protected ring, topology currently used for the secondary LINX LAN in London. All sites will use a Summit X670v switch, capable of connecting 48x10\u00a0Gb member ports. Telecity Williams will also have a smaller Summit X460 switch for terminating slower ports.\nThe links between sites will be provisioned on a dark fibre provided by NTL and lit by LINX with the use of SFP+ DWDM transceivers and passive DWDM MUX units. Initial ISL capacity will be configured at 20\u00a0Gbit/s but easily upgradeable to 80\u00a0Gbit/s if required.\nLINX Scotland.\nLocated in Pulsant's South Gyle data center in Edinburgh (formerly Scolocate), IX Scotland, now known as LINX Scotland, was officially launched in November 2013. The site will use the latest hardware from Extreme Networks enabling all the advanced features expected from a modern exchange.\nLINX Wales.\nLocated in BT's Stadium House data center in Cardiff. IX Cardiff, then LINX Cardiff, now known as LINX Wales was officially launched on 15 October 2014 in an effort to decentralize UK internet traffic.\nAs of July 2018, LINX Wales has a typical peak of 0.9976\u00a0Gbit/s of network traffic with a maximum peak of 1.03\u00a0Gbit/s as of 1 December 2017.\nLINX NOVA.\nFollowing discussions with the US network community, and its own members, LINX decided to launch an open peering exchange in North America in late 2013. Formally to be known as LINX NoVA, the exchange will be closely aligned with, and endorsed by, the newly formed Open-IX, using systems and processes that have proved successful in Europe and the wider world for nearly 20 years.\nBased in the North Virginia/Washington DC area, LINX NoVA initially spanned three data centers \u2013 Evo Switch in Manassas, Digital Realty in Ashburn and Coresite in Reston \u2013 and will be connected using dark fiber lit by LINX. An agreement for a fourth Colo site, also in Ashburn, is expected shortly.\nThe LINX NOVA exchange will use MX960 router equipment from Juniper Networks capable of delivering 100G member ports from launch with the three PoPs all connected by diverse dark fiber lit by LINX.\nLINX NoVA will be developed in the same way as the LINX primary LAN in London (VPLS, separated core and edge, etc.) but as a stand-alone site not requiring a connection to the LANs operated in the London, UK.\nOther activities.\nLINX also carries on a number of non-core activities (NCAPs) from time to time, for example the LINX Accredited Internet Technician (LAIT) training Program.\nOther services provided include a time service using atomic clocks, as well as hosting for other \"Good of the Internet\" services including various Internet statistics projects, numerous secondary name servers for various ccTLD domains, and instances of the F, K and I root nameservers.\nLatest news for 2018/19 sees LINX launch an IXP partner relationship with Japan IX allowing customers to connect to LINX in London and also LINX and Saudi Telecom Company (STC), on 7 December 2018 marked the start of JED-IX driven by LINX, an Internet exchange in Jeddah (JED-IX), Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA).\nSee also.\nSome other Internet exchange points in London:\nLINX hosts a number of meetings where network operators can exchange information: see Internet network operators' group for a list of other organizations holding similar meetings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47024", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47024", "title": "Horse (game)", "text": ""}
{"id": "47025", "revid": "2164608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47025", "title": "Half-line", "text": "Half-line may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47026", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47026", "title": "Routing information", "text": ""}
{"id": "47027", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47027", "title": "Cinna (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "47028", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47028", "title": "Painter's algorithm", "text": "Algorithm for visible surface determination in 3D graphics\nThe painter's algorithm (also depth-sort algorithm and priority fill) is an algorithm for visible surface determination in 3D computer graphics that works on a polygon-by-polygon basis rather than a pixel-by-pixel, row by row, or area by area basis of other hidden-surface determination algorithms. The painter's algorithm creates images by sorting the polygons within the image by their depth and placing each polygon in order from the farthest to the closest object.\nThe painter's algorithm was initially proposed as a basic method to address the hidden-surface determination problem by Martin Newell, Richard Newell, and Tom Sancha in 1972, while all three were working at CADCentre. The name \"painter's algorithm\" refers to the technique employed by many painters where they begin by painting distant parts of a scene before parts that are nearer, thereby covering some areas of distant parts. Similarly, the painter's algorithm sorts all the polygons in a scene by their depth and then paints them in this order, farthest to closest. It will paint over the parts that are normally not visible \u2014 thus solving the visibility problem \u2014 at the cost of having painted invisible areas of distant objects. The ordering used by the algorithm is called a \"'depth order'\" and does not have to respect the numerical distances to the parts of the scene: the essential property of this ordering is, rather, that if one object obscures part of another, then the first object is painted after the object that it obscures. Thus, a valid ordering can be described as a topological ordering of a directed acyclic graph representing occlusions between objects.\nAlgorithm.\nConceptually Painter's Algorithm works as follows:\nPseudocode.\n sort \"polygons\" by \"depth\"\n for each \"polygon\" \"p\":\n for each \"pixel\" that \"p\" covers:\n paint \"p.color\" on \"pixel\"\nTime complexity.\nThe painter's algorithm's time-complexity depends on the sorting algorithm used to order the polygons. Assuming an optimal sorting algorithm, painter's algorithm has a worst-case complexity of \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n + m*n\"), where \"n\" is the number of polygons and \"m\" is the number of pixels to be filled.\nSpace complexity.\nThe painter's algorithm's worst-case space-complexity is \"O\"(\"n+m\"), where \"n\" is the number of polygons and \"m\" is the number of pixels to be filled.\nAdvantages.\nThere are two primary technical requisites that favor the use of the painter's algorithm.\nBasic graphical structure.\nThe painter's algorithm is not as complex in structure as its other depth sorting algorithm counterparts. Components such as the depth-based rendering order, as employed by the painter's algorithm, are one of the simplest ways to designate the order of graphical production. This simplicity makes it useful in basic computer graphics output scenarios where an unsophisticated render will need to be made with little struggle. \nMemory efficiency.\nIn the early 70s, when the painter's algorithm was developed, physical memory was relatively small. This required programs to manage memory as efficiently as possible to conduct large tasks without crashing. The painter's algorithm prioritizes the efficient use of memory but at the expense of higher processing power since all parts of all images must be rendered.\nLimitations.\nThe algorithm can fail in some cases, including cyclic overlap or piercing polygons.\nCyclical overlapping.\nIn the case of cyclic overlap, as shown in the figure to the right, Polygons A, B, and C overlap each other in such a way that it is impossible to determine which polygon is above the others. In this case, the offending polygons must be cut to allow sorting.\nPiercing polygons.\nThe case of piercing polygons arises when one polygon intersects another. Similar to cyclic overlap, this problem may be resolved by cutting the offending polygons.\nEfficiency.\nIn basic implementations, the painter's algorithm can be inefficient. It forces the system to render each point on every polygon in the visible set, even if that polygon is occluded in the finished scene. This means that, for detailed scenes, the painter's algorithm can overly tax the computer hardware.\nReducing visual errors.\nThere are a few ways to reduce the visual errors that can happen with sorting:\nBinary Space Partitioning.\nBSP is a method that involves making a BSP tree, and splitting triangles where they intersect. It can be extremely hard to implement, but it fixes most visual errors.\nBackface culling.\nBackface culling involves calculations to see if a triangles points will appear clockwise or counter-clockwise once projected to the screen, and doesn't draw triangles that shouldn't be visible anyway. It reduces some visual errors, as well as reducing the total triangles drawn.\nVariants.\nExtended painter's algorithm.\nNewell's algorithm, proposed as the extended algorithm to painter's algorithm, provides a method for cutting cyclical and piercing polygons.\nReverse painter's algorithm.\nAnother variant of painter's algorithm includes reverse painter's algorithm. Reverse painter's algorithm paints objects nearest to the viewer first \u2014 with the rule that paint must never be applied to parts of the image that are already painted (unless they are partially transparent). In a computer graphic system, this can be very efficient since it is not necessary to calculate the colors (using lighting, texturing, and such) for parts of a distant scene that are hidden by nearby objects. However, the reverse algorithm suffers from many of the same problems as the standard version.\nOther computer graphics algorithms.\nThe flaws of painter's algorithm led to the development of Z-buffer techniques, which can be viewed as a development of the painter's algorithm by resolving depth conflicts on a pixel-by-pixel basis, reducing the need for a depth-based rendering order. Even in such systems, a variant of the painter's algorithm is sometimes employed. As Z-buffer implementations generally rely on fixed-precision depth-buffer registers implemented in hardware, there is scope for visibility problems due to rounding error. These are overlaps or gaps at joints between polygons. To avoid this, some graphics engines implement \"over-rendering\", drawing the affected edges of both polygons in the order given by the painter's algorithm. This means that some pixels are actually drawn twice (as in the full painter's algorithm), but this happens on only small parts of the image and has a negligible performance effect."}
{"id": "47029", "revid": "27925711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47029", "title": "Scanline rendering", "text": "3D computer graphics image rendering method\nScanline rendering (also scan line rendering and scan-line rendering) is an algorithm for visible surface determination, in 3D computer graphics, that works on a row-by-row basis rather than a polygon-by-polygon or pixel-by-pixel basis. All of the polygons to be rendered are first sorted by the top y coordinate at which they first appear, then each row or scan line of the image is computed using the intersection of a scanline with the polygons on the front of the sorted list, while the sorted list is updated to discard no-longer-visible polygons as the active scan line is advanced down the picture.\nThe main advantage of this method is that sorting vertices along the normal of the scanning plane reduces the number of comparisons between edges. Another advantage is that it is not necessary to translate the coordinates of all vertices from the main memory into the working memory\u2014only vertices defining edges that intersect the current scan line need to be in active memory, and each vertex is read in only once. The main memory is often very slow compared to the link between the central processing unit and cache memory, and thus avoiding re-accessing vertices in main memory can provide a substantial speedup.\nThis kind of algorithm can be easily integrated with many other graphics techniques, such as the Phong reflection model or the Z-buffer algorithm.\nAlgorithm.\nThe usual method starts with edges of projected polygons inserted into buckets, one per scanline; the rasterizer maintains an active edge table (\"AET\"). Entries maintain sort links, X coordinates, gradients, and references to the polygons they bound. To rasterize the next scanline, the edges no longer relevant are removed; new edges from the current scanlines' Y-bucket are added, inserted sorted by X coordinate. The active edge table entries have X and other parameter information incremented. Active edge table entries are maintained in an X-sorted list, effecting a change when 2 edges cross. After updating edges, the active edge table is traversed in X order to emit only the visible spans, maintaining a Z-sorted active Span table, inserting and deleting the surfaces when edges are crossed.\nVariants.\nA hybrid between this and Z-buffering does away with the active edge table sorting, and instead rasterizes one scanline at a time into a Z-buffer, maintaining active polygon spans from one scanline to the next.\nIn another variant, an ID buffer is rasterized in an intermediate step, allowing deferred shading of the resulting visible pixels.\nHistory.\nThe first publication of the scanline rendering technique was probably by Wylie, Romney, Evans, and Erdahl in 1967.\nOther early developments of the scanline rendering method were by Bouknight in 1969, and Newell, Newell, and Sancha in 1972. Much of the early work on these methods was done in Ivan Sutherland's graphics group at the University of Utah, and at the Evans &amp; Sutherland company in Salt Lake City.\nUse in realtime rendering.\nThe early Evans &amp; Sutherland ESIG line of image-generators (IGs) employed the technique in hardware 'on the fly', to generate images one raster-line at a time without a framebuffer, saving the need for then costly memory. Later variants used a hybrid approach.\nThe Nintendo DS is the latest hardware to render 3D scenes in this manner, with the option of caching the rasterized images into VRAM.\nThe sprite hardware prevalent in 1980s games machines can be considered a simple 2D form of scanline rendering.\nThe technique was used in the first Quake engine for software rendering of environments (but moving objects were Z-buffered over the top). Static scenery used BSP-derived sorting for priority. It proved better than Z-buffer/painter's type algorithms at handling scenes of high depth complexity with costly pixel operations (i.e. perspective-correct texture mapping without hardware assist). This use preceded the widespread adoption of Z-buffer-based GPUs now common in PCs.\nSony experimented with software scanline renderers on a second Cell processor during the development of the PlayStation 3, before settling on a conventional CPU/GPU arrangement.\nSimilar techniques.\nA similar principle is employed in tiled rendering (most famously the PowerVR 3D chip); that is, primitives are sorted into screen space, then rendered in fast on-chip memory, one tile at a time. The Dreamcast provided a mode for rasterizing one row of tiles at a time for direct raster scanout, saving the need for a complete framebuffer, somewhat in the spirit of hardware scanline rendering.\nSome software rasterizers use 'span buffering' (or 'coverage buffering'), in which a list of sorted, clipped spans are stored in scanline buckets. Primitives would be successively added to this datastructure, before rasterizing only the visible pixels in a final stage.\nComparison with Z-buffer algorithm.\nThe main advantage of scanline rendering over Z-buffering is that the number of times visible pixels are processed is kept to the absolute minimum which is always one time if no transparency effects are used\u2014a benefit for the case of high resolution or expensive shading computations.\nIn modern Z-buffer systems, similar benefits can be gained through rough front-to-back sorting (approaching the 'reverse painters algorithm'), early Z-reject (in conjunction with hierarchical Z), and less common deferred rendering techniques possible on programmable GPUs.\nScanline techniques working on the raster have the drawback that overload is not handled gracefully.\nThe technique is not considered to scale well as the number of primitives increases. This is because of the size of the intermediate datastructures required during rendering\u2014which can exceed the size of a Z-buffer for a complex scene.\nConsequently, in contemporary interactive graphics applications, the Z-buffer has become ubiquitous. The Z-buffer allows larger volumes of primitives to be traversed linearly, in parallel, in a manner friendly to modern hardware. Transformed coordinates, attribute gradients, etc., need never leave the graphics chip; only the visible pixels and depth values are stored.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47030", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47030", "title": "Lucius Cornelius Cinna", "text": "1st century BC Roman consul\nLucius Cornelius Cinna (before 130\u00a0BC \u2013 early 84\u00a0BC) was a four-time consul of the Roman republic. Opposing Sulla's march on Rome in 88\u00a0BC, he was elected to the consulship of 87\u00a0BC, during which he engaged in an armed conflict \u2013 the Bellum Octavianum \u2013 with his co-consul, Gnaeus Octavius. Emerging victorious, Cinna initiated with his ally, Gaius Marius, the murders of their enemies. In the aftermath, he dominated the republic for the next three years, serving continuously as consul.\nWhile his domination was not complete \u2013 he largely contented himself with securing the consulship for himself and allies \u2013 his political rule set a \"crucial precedent\" for later strongmen in the republic. Through 85 and 84\u00a0BC, he prepared for war against Sulla, who was soon to return from the First Mithridatic War. Cinna was killed by his own troops, who mutinied during his attempt to cross the Adriatic at Ancona early in 84\u00a0BC.\nEarly life and family.\nCinna was born some time before 130\u00a0BC into a patrician family that was not recently distinguished. Theodor Mommsen considered the Cornelii Cinnae to be plebeians, but most modern authors view them as patricians. His father may have been consul in 127\u00a0BC.\nHe married a woman named Annia, with whom he had three children: two daughters and one homonymous son. His eldest daughter married Gaius Julius Caesar (the dictator and consul of 59\u00a0BC), probably during Cinna's second consulship in 86\u00a0BC; his younger daughter married Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (who died in 81\u00a0BC). Cinna's homonymous son escaped Sulla's retribution by fleeing to Quintus Sertorius \u2013 one of Cinna's legates \u2013 after Sulla's civil war, before being given amnesty in the \"lex Plautia\" and returning to Rome. Afterwards, he became praetor in 44\u00a0BC.\nBefore 90\u00a0BC, Cinna must have served as praetor. It is known that he also served during the Social War; T.R.S. Broughton believed Cinna was one of the legates who led the successful Roman offensive against the Marsi during the war in 89\u00a0BC. Little is known of Cinna's life or career before his election as consul.\nFirst consulship, 87\u00a0BC.\nElectoral context.\nIn 88\u00a0BC, there were two major questions in Roman politics. The first was the Italian question. During the Social War, the Roman republic had granted basically all the Italian allies Roman citizenship. Publius Sulpicius Rufus, a plebeian tribune, sought to curry their favour by enrolling them equally into the thirty-five tribes (voting units); in this, he was opposed by politicians who wished to pack the numerous Italians into a limited number of existing \u2013 or eight newly-created \u2013 tribes. The other question was one of command. Mithridates VI Eupator, king of Pontus, had recently invaded the province of Asia. The commander of the Roman response would have a great opportunity to become wealthy and influential from the plunder and glory of the war.\nSulpicius attempted to link the two matters by securing transfer of then-consul Lucius Cornelius Sulla's command against Mithridates to the aged general Gaius Marius in exchange for Marius' support for Italian enrolment. But after he passed the legislation transferring Sulla's command to Marius, Sulla suborned his army into marching on Rome to overturn Sulpicius' actions. After doing so, he invalidated Sulpicius' laws and banished twelve men, Sulpicus and Marius included. Sulla justified his actions by claiming that as consul he had a duty to free the state from dangerous demagogues. He also may have passed legislation in 88\u00a0BC to change the Roman constitution by reducing the powers and legislative initiative of the plebeian tribunes; however, some scholars have suggested these reforms are retrojections of Sulla's later actions as dictator. Sulla's reasons and putative reforms notwithstanding, his march on Rome was the subject of deep and broad revulsion at the elections.\nOne of Cinna's goals during his consulship was holding Sulla legally responsible for his march on Rome; he promised that if elected he would have Sulla prosecuted at the expiration of his term. Sulla did not support Cinna and instead put forward Publius Servilius Vatia Isauricus, an ally who had recently celebrated a triumph. The \"comitia\", still indignant over Sulla's march and treatment of Sulpicius and Marius, rejected Sulla's candidate and elected Cinna with Gnaeus Octavius as his colleague instead. The two \"consules designati\" may have, at the time, been friends. Before the results were officially announced, Sulla realised they would be personally unfavourable; seeking not to interfere in the elections directly, he instead tried for a religious solution to protect his actions. Before he declared the winners, he first induced Cinna and Octavius to swear not to overturn Sulla's arrangements publicly. The consuls-designate did so because Sulla as presiding consul had the power to refuse announcement of the winners and invalidate the results. While Octavius seemed to take the oath seriously, Cinna did not.\nWar on Octavius.\nExpulsion.\nCinna's first act as consul was to have a plebeian tribune prosecute Sulla, possibly for his killing of Sulpicius, who when killed had been a serving and sacrosanct plebeian tribune. This was meant to stop Sulla from leaving Italy at the head of an army, strip him of his \"imperium\", and deprive him of his Mithridatic command. It was, however, unenforceable: Sulla ignored the tribunician summons and departed with his army for Greece.\nAccording to Appian, Cinna accepted bribes to support the equal enrolment of the new Italian citizens into the thirty-five tribes. Bribed or not, Cinna declared publicly his support for such enrolment, which brought him immediately into conflict with his co-consul Octavius. Both Cinna and Octavius' partisans quickly armed themselves. Attempts by Cinna to promulgate legislation to distribute the new citizens into the tribes were met by tribunician vetoes backed by Octavius, leading to a riot against the tribunes. A \"senatus consultum ultimum\" then may have been moved against the rioters; Octavius quickly executed it, taking his hastily armed supporters down the \"via Sacra\" and killing the rioters.\nCinna was unharmed and left the city with some of his major supporters, including Quintus Sertorius, Gaius Milonius, Marcus Marius Gratidianus, and six of the ten tribunes of the plebs. After his departure for Italian towns to raise men and money, the Senate illegally and unconstitutionally stripped Cinna of his consulship and declared him a public enemy (\"hostis\"), electing Lucius Cornelius Merula (also the flamen Dialis) in his place. Due to Merula's priestly duties and taboos, Octavius served as \"de facto\" sole consul.\nMarch on Rome.\nCinna reached Nola, an Italian town still holding against Roman siege, where he appeared before the army stationed there in consular regalia. He addressed them as a mistreated consul who had been unjustly deprived of a gift of the people by the senate, who thereby made a mockery of popular sovereignty. The army raised him up and declared their support. Cinna then administered an oath of loyalty for the officers and men. Following this, he travelled around Italian towns saying that he needed their support and that he had been attacked for his pro-Italian advocacy. Octavius and Merula acted to fortify the city.\nGaius Marius, one of the Sullan exiles, returned to Italy and pledged his loyalty to Cinna. Cinna acknowledged Marius as proconsul but Marius scrupulously refused the title before drumming up support among the Italians and returning to Cinna's camp with some 6,000 men. The Senate and Octavius had ordered Pompey Strabo \u2013 a commander in the northern theatre of the Social war \u2013 to return to Rome and defend the city with his army. Encamped outside the city, he was not prepared to commit for either side before treating with both of them. Cinna's forces then arrived and besieged the city. He led the main force opposite the Colline Gate, with two detachments under Sertorius and Marius on the north and south of the city, respectively. Strabo eventually sided with Octavius; the Senate, seeking support, also ordered Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius, who was in the field against the Samnites, to make an honourable peace immediately and return to defend the city.\nWhen Metellus negotiated with the Samnites, they demanded citizenship for themselves and all those who had fled to them, release of all war prisoners, and non-reciprocal return of all plunder. Metellus and the Senate refused; Cinna and Marius seized the opportunity and offered the concessions, gaining the Samnites as allies. After one of the military tribunes in Rome defected and opened the gates to the Janiculum, Cinna and Marius' forces moved to storm the city; they were stopped by six cohorts from Strabo's army. Strabo, seeking to leverage his military forces into a second consulship, initiated secret negotiations with Cinna but soon died of plague. Extending the siege, Cinna's forces fanned out across the countryside and cut Rome's food supply. The Senate then sent envoys to Cinna to negotiate a truce. Initially put off by Cinna's demand that they address him as consul, the Senate acquiesced on this point after Merula abdicated his consulship.\nExtra-legal killings.\nThe envoys secured a promise from Cinna that he would not willingly kill anyone but his ally Marius silently stood behind his chair. Cinna then entered the city and promulgated a law recalling Marius and the Sullan exiles. A squadron of his cavalry, led by Gaius Marcius Censorinus killed the consul Octavius, who had refused to flee. Censorinus then presented the consul's head to Cinna; this was the first time a consul's head was displayed as a prize to another Roman.\nCinna and Marius then moved to purge some of their political opponents, Gaius and Lucius Julius Caesar were killed without trial, along with Publius Licinius Crassus and Marcus Antonius. Merula \u2013 the recently abdicated suffect consul \u2013 and Marius' old rival, Quintus Lutatius Catulus, were brought up on trial before the people, possibly for usurpation of the consulship and \"perduellio\", respectively; they committed suicide before the verdict.\nThe killings were not broad across the political class and likely reflected Marius' grudges; nor were the victims then linked to Sulla. There is no evidence that the purge targeted the victim's families. While later sources \u2013 including Dio, Velleius, Livy, Diodorus, and Plutarch \u2013 claim that Cinna and Marius butchered and ravaged their way through the city for five days, these claims are likely Sullan propaganda filtered through Sulla's memoirs. Cicero, more contemporaneous and speaking to men who lived during the Cinnan regime, indicates that Cinna and Marius targeted only political enemies and did not threaten all of Rome's inhabitants or otherwise sack the city.\n\"Dominatio\" and death.\nWhen he returned to the city he dominated public affairs and took measures against Sulla. Sulla was declared \"hostis\" and stripped of his priesthood. His property was confiscated, his house demolished, and his legislation repealed. His wife and children fled the city for the protection of Sulla's army in Greece. At elections in late 87\u00a0BC, Cinna had himself and Marius elected as consuls \u2013 contrary to some ancient sources, an electoral comitia was likely held, just the two were the only candidates \u2013 for 86\u00a0BC. Marius, though, died just thirteen days after assuming his seventh consulship, possibly of pneumonia. In Marius' place, Cinna elevated Lucius Valerius Flaccus. During 86\u00a0BC, a census was conducted by Lucius Marcius Philippus and Marcus Perperna. Although Cinna supported the registration of the Italians as citizens, the number counted in that year \u2013 just 463,000 \u2013 indicates most of the newly enfranchised Italians were yet unregistered. Flaccus, Cinna's co-consul, also brought and passed legislation reducing all outstanding debts by three quarters.\nAt the close of the year, Flaccus departed for Greece, ostensibly to assume command over a leaderless army \u2013 Sulla's command had officially been vacated because he was declared an outlaw \u2013 but was soon assassinated by one of his legates, Gaius Flavius Fimbria, who then assumed command. Sulla eventually drove Mithridates from Asia and secured a peace, the Treaty of Dardanos, with generous terms for Pontus by 85\u00a0BC. He also suborned Fimbria's army in the east, causing Fimbria to commit suicide.\nFor the year 85\u00a0BC, Cinna chose Gnaeus Papirius Carbo as his consular colleague. Sulla's peace with Pontus, widely regarded as generous so to give Sulla a free hand against his enemies in Italy, and other actions in Asia indicated that he would return in arms. Cinna and Carbo responded by immediately beginning military preparations and a propaganda campaign. They stockpiled money and provisions from all of Italy while levying men and giving warnings that Sulla would, if victorious, overturn Italian enfranchisement. The warnings, given Sulla's violent action against Sulpicius in 88\u00a0BC, seemed legitimate.\nLate in 85\u00a0BC, Sulla sent a letter to the Senate in Rome reciting his achievements in the Mithridatic war and complaining against the regime in Rome. He then promised that he would avenge himself upon those enemies in the name of his murdered friends, his exiled family and Rome. Against Cinna's claims, he also asserted he had no intention to overturn Italian enfranchisement. The Senate responded to the letter by dispatching an embassy to Sulla to try to reconcile him with his political opponents. The Senate also instructed Cinna and Carbo stop military preparations; they agreed to do so but ignored the Senate and continued recruiting. Cinna's strategy seems to have been to force their way east into Greece and fight Sulla there.\nCinna and Carbo continued in office as consuls for 84\u00a0BC; early in that year, Cinna started to embark his men across the Adriatic to Liburnia, in the northern Adriatic, meaning that Cinna was not intending to challenge Sulla in Greece. When transiting the Adriatic, the first set of ships transited safely. But the second set encountered a storm. Some of the ships sank and many men deserted, saying they were unwilling to fight fellow citizens. The remaining men waiting to depart at Ancona then refused to embark. Appian reports that when Cinna called an assembly, he attempted to impose discipline, which culminated in his men mutinying and killing him. Plutarch delivers a different story centring around soldiers fearing that Cinna had assassinated the then-young Pompey; this story, however, is not credible. After his death, his co-consul Carbo was recalled to Rome hold elections for his replacement, but after two attempts to hold elections received bad omens, the elections were indefinitely postponed and Carbo held office without colleague for the rest of the year.\nThe Senate's envoys brought news of Cinna's death to Sulla. Sulla then rejected the Senate's offers, refused to disband his army, and demanded that the Senate restore his legal status, property, and offices. Sulla's rejection of terms was met poorly. Eventually, Sulla invaded Italy in 83\u00a0BC, triggering a civil war, in which he was eventually victorious, the next year.\nAssessment.\nThe \"dominatio Cinnae\" is not well documented. According to Robin Seager, in the \"Cambridge Ancient History\", \"assessment [of it] is rendered painfully difficult by the way in which our scrappy sources are pervaded by the insidious influence of Sulla's own version of events, diffused without competition after his victory\" in the civil war. Cinna and his faction, however, were the first to transform force into political domination. Their methods did not accord with republican principles, setting a precedent later followed by Sulla, Caesar, and Octavian.\nThe short length and partial nature of his \"dominatio\" \u2013 Cinna seems only to have wanted to be consul every year \u2013 have made it difficult to develop a clear assessment of his politics or character. Previous scholarship and ancient narratives, which painted Cinna as an appendage to Marius, are now largely rejected. He was competent at using \"popularis\"-style argumentation but had no diagnoses for the republic's more structural flaws.\nHis support for Italian enfranchisement and distribution among the thirty-five tribes was opportunistic and he only haltingly followed through on his Italian promises once entrenched in power. After the initial wave of killings with Marius in 86\u00a0BC, there are no signs of extra-legal persecutions. The nature of politics during his \"dominatio\" was relatively traditional though the consul and the Senate acted largely independently and were also largely willing to ignore the other. While there must have been resentment over Cinna's monopolisation of the consulship, the political class in Rome during his consulships was largely not personally threatened and left alone.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47032", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47032", "title": "Cornelia Cinna", "text": ""}
{"id": "47035", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47035", "title": "Undersea telegraph cable", "text": ""}
{"id": "47037", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47037", "title": "Offa of Mercia", "text": "King of Mercia from 757 to 796\nOffa (c.\u2009730 \u2013 29 July 796 AD) was King of Mercia, a kingdom of Anglo-Saxon England, from 757 until his death in 796. The son of Thingfrith and a descendant of Eowa, Offa came to the throne after a period of civil war following the assassination of \u00c6thelbald. Offa defeated the other claimant, Beornred. In the early years of Offa's reign, it is likely that he consolidated his control of Midland peoples such as the Hwicce and the Magons\u00e6te. Taking advantage of instability in the kingdom of Kent to establish himself as overlord, Offa also controlled Sussex by 771, though his authority did not remain unchallenged in either territory. In the 780s he extended Mercian Supremacy over most of southern England, allying with Beorhtric of Wessex, who married Offa's daughter Eadburh, and regained complete control of the southeast. He also became the overlord of East Anglia and had King \u00c6thelberht II of East Anglia beheaded in 794, perhaps for rebelling against him.\nOffa was a Christian king who came into conflict with the Church, particularly with J\u00e6nberht, the Archbishop of Canterbury. Offa persuaded Pope Adrian I to divide the archdiocese of Canterbury in two, creating a new archdiocese of Lichfield. This reduction in the power of Canterbury may have been motivated by Offa's desire to have an archbishop consecrate his son Ecgfrith as king, since it is possible J\u00e6nberht refused to perform the ceremony, which took place in 787. Offa had a dispute with the Bishop of Worcester, which was settled at the Council of Brentford in 781.\nMany surviving coins from Offa's reign carry elegant depictions of him, and the artistic quality of these images exceeds that of the contemporary Frankish coinage. Some of his coins carry images of his wife, Cynethryth\u2014the only Anglo-Saxon queen ever depicted on a coin. Only three gold coins of Offa's have survived: one is a copy of an Abbasid dinar of 774 and carries Arabic text on one side, with \"Offa Rex\" on the other. The gold coins are of uncertain use but may have been struck to be used as alms or for gifts to Rome.\nMany historians regard Offa as the most powerful Anglo-Saxon king before Alfred the Great. His dominance never extended to Northumbria, though he gave his daughter \u00c6lffl\u00e6d in marriage to the Northumbrian king \u00c6thelred I in 792. Historians once saw his reign as part of a process leading to a unified England, but this is no longer the majority view: in the words of historian Simon Keynes, \"Offa was driven by a lust for power, not a vision of English unity; and what he left was a reputation, not a legacy.\" His son Ecgfrith succeeded him after his death, but reigned for less than five months before Coenwulf of Mercia became king.\nBackground and sources.\nIn the first half of the 8th century, the dominant Anglo-Saxon ruler was King \u00c6thelbald of Mercia, who by 731 had become the overlord of all the provinces south of the River Humber. \u00c6thelbald was one of a number of strong Mercian kings who ruled from the mid-7th century to the early 9th, and it was not until the reign of Egbert of Wessex in the 9th century that Mercian power began to wane.\nThe power and prestige that Offa attained made him one of the most significant rulers in early medieval Britain, though no contemporary biography of him survives. A key source for the period is the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", a collection of annals in Old English narrating the history of the Anglo-Saxons. The \"Chronicle\" was a West Saxon production, however, and is sometimes thought to be biased in favour of Wessex; hence it may not accurately convey the extent of power achieved by Offa, a Mercian. That power can be seen at work in charters dating from Offa's reign. Charters were documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen and were witnessed by the kings who had the authority to grant the land. A charter might record the names of both a subject king and his overlord on the witness list appended to the grant. Such a witness list can be seen on the Ismere Diploma, for example, where \u00c6thelric, son of king Oshere of the Hwicce, is described as a \"subregulus\", or subking, of \u00c6thelbald's. The eighth-century monk and chronicler the Venerable Bede wrote a history of the English church called ; the history only covers events up to 731, but as one of the major sources for Anglo-Saxon history it provides important background information for Offa's reign.\nOffa's Dyke, most of which was probably built in his reign, is a testimony to the extensive resources Offa had at his command and his ability to organise them. Other surviving sources include a problematic document known as the Tribal Hidage, which may provide further evidence of Offa's scope as a ruler, though its attribution to his reign is disputed. A significant corpus of letters dates from the period, especially from Alcuin, an English deacon and scholar who spent over a decade at Charlemagne's court as one of his chief advisors, and corresponded with kings, nobles and ecclesiastics throughout England. These letters in particular reveal Offa's relations with the continent, as does his coinage, which was based on Carolingian examples.\nAncestry and family.\nOffa's ancestry is given in the Anglian collection, a set of genealogies that include lines of descent for four Mercian kings. All four lines descend from Pybba, who ruled Mercia early in the 7th century. Offa's line descends through Pybba's son Eowa and then through three more generations: Osmod, Eanwulf and Offa's father, Thingfrith. \u00c6thelbald, who ruled Mercia for most of the forty years before Offa, was also descended from Eowa according to the genealogies: Offa's grandfather, Eanwulf, was \u00c6thelbald's first cousin. \u00c6thelbald granted land to Eanwulf in the territory of the Hwicce, and it is possible that Offa and \u00c6thelbald were from the same branch of the family. In one charter Offa refers to \u00c6thelbald as his kinsman, and Headbert, \u00c6thelbald's brother, continued to witness charters after Offa rose to power.\nOffa's wife was Cynethryth, whose ancestry is unknown. The couple had a son, Ecgfrith, and at least three daughters: \u00c6lffl\u00e6d, Eadburh and \u00c6thelburh. It has been speculated that \u00c6thelburh was the abbess who was a kinswoman of King Ealdred of the Hwicce, but there are other prominent women named \u00c6thelburh during that period.\nEarly reign, the midland territories and the Middle and East Saxons.\n\u00c6thelbald, who had ruled Mercia since 716, was assassinated in 757. According to a later continuation of Bede's \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" (written anonymously after Bede's death) the king was \"treacherously murdered at night by his own bodyguards\", though the reason why is unrecorded. \u00c6thelbald was initially succeeded by Beornred, about whom little is known. The continuation of Bede comments that Beornred \"ruled for a little while, and unhappily\", and adds that \"the same year, Offa, having put Beornred to flight, sought to gain the kingdom of the Mercians by bloodshed.\" It is possible that Offa did not gain the throne until 758, however, since a charter of 789 describes Offa as being in the thirty-first year of his reign.\nThe conflict over the succession suggests that Offa needed to re-establish control over Mercia's traditional dependencies, such as the Hwicce and the Magons\u00e6te. Charters dating from the first two years of Offa's reign show the Hwiccan kings as \"reguli\", or kinglets, under his authority; and it is likely that he was also quick to gain control over the Magons\u00e6te, for whom there is no record of an independent ruler after 740. Offa was probably able to exert control over the kingdom of Lindsey at an early date, as it appears that the independent dynasty of Lindsey had disappeared by this time.\nLittle is known about the history of the East Saxons during the 8th century, but what evidence there is indicates that both London and Middlesex, which had been part of the kingdom of Essex, were finally brought under Mercian control during the reign of \u00c6thelbald. Both \u00c6thelbald and Offa granted land in Middlesex and London as they wished; in 767 a charter of Offa's disposed of land in Harrow without a local ruler as witness. It is likely that both London and Middlesex were quickly under Offa's control at the start of his reign. The East Saxon royal house survived the 8th century, so it is probable that the kingdom of Essex retained its native rulers, but under strong Mercian influence, for most or all of the 8th century.\nIt is unlikely that Offa had significant influence in the early years of his reign outside the traditional Mercian heartland. The overlordship of the southern English which had been exerted by \u00c6thelbald appears to have collapsed during the civil strife over the succession, and it is not until 764, when evidence emerges of Offa's influence in Kent, that Mercian power can be seen expanding again.\nKent and Sussex.\nOffa appears to have exploited an unstable situation in Kent after 762. Kent had a long tradition of joint kingship, with east and west Kent under separate kings, though one king was typically dominant. Prior to 762 Kent was ruled by \u00c6thelberht II and Eadberht I; Eadberht's son Eardwulf is also recorded as a king. \u00c6thelberht died in 762, and Eadberht and Eardwulf are last mentioned in that same year. Charters from the next two years mention other kings of Kent, including Sigered, Eanmund and Heahberht. In 764, Offa granted land at Rochester in his own name, with Heahberht on the witness list as king of Kent. Another king of Kent, Ecgberht, appears on a charter in 765 along with Heahberht; the charter was subsequently confirmed by Offa. Offa's influence in Kent at this time is clear, and it has been suggested that Heahberht was installed by Offa as his client. There is less agreement among historians on whether Offa had general overlordship of Kent thereafter. He is known to have revoked a charter of Ecgberht's on the grounds that \"it was wrong that his thegn should have presumed to give land allotted to him by his lord into the power of another without his witness\", but the date of Ecgberht's original grant is unknown, as is the date of Offa's revocation of it. It may be that Offa was the effective overlord of Kent from 764 until at least 776. The limited evidence for Offa's direct involvement in the kingdom between 765 and 776 includes two charters of 774 in which he grants land in Kent; but there are doubts about their authenticity, so Offa's intervention in Kent prior to 776 may have been limited to the years 764\u201365.\nThe \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" records that \"the Mercians and the inhabitants of Kent fought at Otford\" in 776, but does not give the outcome of the battle. It has traditionally been interpreted as a Mercian victory, but there is no evidence for Offa's authority over Kent until 785: a charter from 784 mentions only a Kentish king named Ealhmund, which may indicate that the Mercians were in fact defeated at Otford. The cause of the conflict is also unknown: if Offa was ruling Kent before 776, the battle of Otford was probably a rebellion against Mercian control. However, Ealhmund does not appear again in the historical record, and a sequence of charters by Offa from the years 785\u201389 makes his authority clear. During these years he treated Kent \"as an ordinary province of the Mercian kingdom\", and his actions have been seen as going beyond the normal relation of overlordship and extending to the annexation of Kent and the elimination of a local royal line. After 785, in the words of one historian, \"Offa was the rival, not the overlord, of Kentish kings\". Mercian control lasted until 796, the year of Offa's death, when Eadberht Pr\u00e6n was temporarily successful in regaining Kentish independence.\nEalhmund was probably the father of Egbert of Wessex, and it is possible that Offa's interventions in Kent in the mid-780s are connected to the subsequent exile of Egbert to Francia. The \"Chronicle\" claims that when Egbert invaded Kent in 825, the men of the southeast turned to him \"because earlier they were wrongly forced away from his relatives\". This is likely to be an allusion to Ealhmund, and may imply that Ealhmund had a local overlordship of the southeastern kingdoms. If so, Offa's intervention was probably intended to gain control of this relationship and take over the dominance of the associated kingdoms.\nThe evidence for Offa's involvement in the kingdom of Sussex comes from charters, and as with Kent there is no clear consensus among historians on the course of events. What little evidence survives that bears on Sussex's kings indicates that several kings ruled at once, and it may never have formed a single kingdom. It has been argued that Offa's authority was recognised early in his reign by local kings in western Sussex, but that eastern Sussex (the area around Hastings) submitted to him less readily. Symeon of Durham, a twelfth-century chronicler, records that in 771 Offa defeated \"the people of Hastings\", which may record the extension of Offa's dominion over the entire kingdom. However, doubts have been expressed about the authenticity of the charters which support this version of events, and it is possible that Offa's direct involvement in Sussex was limited to a short period around 770\u201371. After 772, there is no further evidence of Mercian involvement in Sussex until c. 790, and it may be that Offa gained control of Sussex in the late 780s, as he did in Kent.\nEast Anglia, Wessex and Northumbria.\nIn East Anglia, Beonna probably became king in about 758. Beonna's first coinage predates Offa's own, and implies independence from Mercia. Subsequent East Anglian history is quite obscure, but in 779 \u00c6thelberht II became king, and was independent long enough to issue coins of his own. In 794, according to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", \"King Offa ordered King \u00c6thelberht's head to be struck off\". Offa minted pennies in East Anglia in the early 790s, so it is likely that \u00c6thelberht rebelled against Offa and was beheaded as a result. Accounts of the event have survived in which Aethelberht is killed through the machinations of Offa's wife Cynethryth, but the earliest manuscripts in which these possibly legendary accounts are found date from the 11th and 12th centuries, and recent historians do not regard them with confidence. The legend also claims that \u00c6thelberht was killed at Sutton St. Michael and buried to the south at Hereford, where his cult flourished, becoming at one time second only to Canterbury as a pilgrimage destination.\nTo the south of Mercia, Cynewulf came to the throne of Wessex in 757 and recovered much of the border territory that \u00c6thelbald had conquered from the West Saxons. Offa won an important victory over Cynewulf at the Battle of Bensington (in Oxfordshire) in 779, reconquering some of the land along the Thames. No indisputably authentic charters from before this date show Cynewulf in Offa's entourage, and there is no evidence that Offa ever became Cynewulf's overlord. In 786, after the murder of Cynewulf, Offa may have intervened to place Beorhtric on the West Saxon throne. Even if Offa did not assist Beorhtric's claim, it seems likely that Beorhtric to some extent recognised Offa as his overlord shortly thereafter. Offa's currency was used across the West Saxon kingdom, and Beorhtric had his own coins minted only after Offa's death. In 789, Beorhtric married Eadburh, a daughter of Offa; the \"Chronicle\" records that the two kings combined to exile Egbert to Francia for \"three years\", adding that \"Beorhtric helped Offa because he had his daughter as his queen\". Some historians believe that the \"Chronicle\"'s \"three years\" is an error, and should read \"thirteen years\", which would mean Egbert's exile lasted from 789 to 802, but this reading is disputed. Eadburh is mentioned by Asser, a 9th-century monk who wrote a biography of Alfred the Great: Asser says that Eadburh had \"power throughout almost the entire kingdom\", and that she \"began to behave like a tyrant after the manner of her father\". Whatever power she had in Wessex was no doubt connected with her father's overlordship.\nIf Offa did not gain the advantage in Wessex until defeating Cynewulf in 779, it may be that his successes south of the river were a necessary prerequisite to his interventions in the south-east. In this view, Egbert of Kent's death in about 784 and Cynewulf's death in 786 were the events that allowed Offa to gain control of Kent and bring Beorhtric into his sphere of influence. This version of events also assumes that Offa did not have control of Kent after 764\u201365, as some historians believe.\nOffa's marital alliances extended to Northumbria when his daughter \u00c6lffl\u00e6d married \u00c6thelred I of Northumbria at Catterick in 792. However, there is no evidence that Northumbria was ever under Mercian control during Offa's reign.\nWales and Offa's Dyke.\nOffa was frequently in conflict with the various Welsh kingdoms. There was a battle between the Mercians and the Welsh at Hereford in 760, and Offa is recorded as campaigning against the Welsh in 778, 784 and 796 in the tenth-century \"Annales Cambriae\".\nThe best known relic associated with Offa's time is Offa's Dyke, a great earthen barrier that runs approximately along the border between England and Wales. It is mentioned by the monk Asser in his biography of Alfred the Great: \"a certain vigorous king called Offa\u00a0... had a great dyke built between Wales and Mercia from sea to sea\". The dyke has not been dated by archaeological methods, but most historians find no reason to doubt Asser's attribution. Early names for the dyke in both Welsh and English also support the attribution to Offa. Despite Asser's comment that the dyke ran \"from sea to sea\", it is now thought that the original structure only covered about two-thirds of the length of the border: in the north it ends near Llanfynydd, less than from the coast, while in the south it stops at Rushock Hill, near Kington in Herefordshire, less than from the Bristol Channel. The total length of this section is about . Other earthworks exist along the Welsh border, of which Wat's Dyke is one of the largest, but it is not possible to date them relative to each other and so it cannot be determined whether Offa's Dyke was a copy of or the inspiration for Wat's Dyke.\nThe construction of the dyke suggests that it was built to create an effective barrier and to command views into Wales. This implies that the Mercians who built it were free to choose the best location for the dyke. There are settlements to the west of the dyke that have names that imply they were English by the 8th century, so it may be that in choosing the location of the barrier the Mercians were consciously surrendering some territory to the native Britons. Alternatively, it may be that these settlements had already been retaken by the Welsh, implying a defensive role for the barrier. The effort and expense that must have gone into building the dyke are impressive, and suggest that the king who had it built (whether Offa or someone else) had considerable resources at his disposal. Other substantial construction projects of a similar date do exist, however, such as Wat's Dyke and Danevirke, in what is now Germany as well as such sites as Stonehenge from millennia earlier. The dyke can be regarded in the light of these counterparts as the largest and most recent great construction of the preliterate inhabitants of Britain.\nChurch.\nOffa ruled as a Christian king, but despite being praised by Charlemagne's advisor, Alcuin, for his piety and efforts to \"instruct [his people] in the precepts of God\", he came into conflict with J\u00e6nberht, the Archbishop of Canterbury. J\u00e6nberht had been a supporter of Ecgberht II of Kent, which may have led to conflict in the 760s when Offa is known to have intervened in Kent. Offa rescinded grants made to Canterbury by Egbert, and it is also known that J\u00e6nberht claimed the monastery of Cookham, which was in Offa's possession.\nIn 786 Pope Adrian I sent papal legates to England to assess the state of the church and provide canons (ecclesiastical decrees) for the guidance of the English kings, nobles and clergy. This was the first papal mission to England since Augustine had been sent by Pope Gregory the Great in 597 to convert the Anglo-Saxons. The legates were Bishop George of Ostia, and Theophylact, the bishop of Todi. They visited Canterbury first, and then were received by Offa at his court. Both Offa and Cynewulf, king of the West Saxons, attended a council where the goals of the mission were discussed. George then went to Northumbria, while Theophylact visited Mercia and \"parts of Britain\". A report on the mission, sent by the legates to Pope Adrian, gives details of a council held by George in Northumbria, and the canons issued there, but little detail survives of Theophylact's mission. After the northern council George returned to the south and another council was held, attended by both Offa and J\u00e6nberht, at which further canons were issued.\nIn 787, Offa succeeded in reducing the power of Canterbury through the establishment of a rival archdiocese at Lichfield. The issue must have been discussed with the papal legates in 786, although it is not mentioned in the accounts that have survived. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" reports a \"contentious synod\" in 787 at Chelsea, which approved the creation of the new archbishopric. It has been suggested that this synod was the same gathering as the second council held by the legates, but historians are divided on this issue. Hygeberht, already Bishop of Lichfield, became the new archdiocese's first and only archbishop, and by the end of 788 he received the pallium, a symbol of his authority, from Rome. The new archdiocese included the sees of Worcester, Hereford, Leicester, Lindsey, Dommoc and Elmham; these were essentially the midland Anglian territories. Canterbury retained the sees in the south and southeast.\nThe few accounts of the creation of the new archbishopric date from after the end of Offa's reign. Two versions of the events appear in the form of an exchange of letters between Coenwulf, who became king of Mercia shortly after Offa's death, and Pope Leo III, in 798. Coenwulf asserts in his letter that Offa wanted the new archdiocese created out of enmity for J\u00e6nberht; but Leo responds that the only reason the papacy agreed to the creation was because of the size of the kingdom of Mercia. Both Coenwulf and Leo had their own reasons for representing the situation as they did: Coenwulf was entreating Leo to make London the sole southern archdiocese, while Leo was concerned to avoid the appearance of complicity with the unworthy motives Coenwulf imputed to Offa. These are therefore partisan comments. However, both the size of Offa's territory and his relationship with J\u00e6nberht and Kent are indeed likely to have been factors in Offa's request for the creation of the new archdiocese. Coenwulf's version has independent support, with a letter from Alcuin to Archbishop \u00c6thelheard giving his opinion that Canterbury's archdiocese had been divided \"not, as it seems, by reasonable consideration, but by a certain desire for power\". \u00c6thelheard himself later said that the award of a pallium to Lichfield depended on \"deception and misleading suggestion\".\nAnother possible reason for the creation of an archbishopric at Lichfield relates to Offa's son, Ecgfrith of Mercia. After Hygeberht became archbishop, he consecrated Ecgfrith as king; the ceremony took place within a year of Hygeberht's elevation. It is possible that J\u00e6nberht refused to perform the ceremony, and that Offa needed an alternative archbishop for that purpose. The ceremony itself is noteworthy for two reasons: it is the first recorded consecration of any English king, and it is unusual in that it asserted Ecgfrith's royal status while his father was still alive. Offa would have been aware that Charlemagne's sons, Pippin and Louis, had been consecrated as kings by Pope Adrian, and probably wished to emulate the impressive dignity of the Frankish court. Other precedents did exist: \u00c6thelred of Mercia is said to have nominated his son Coenred as king during his lifetime, and Offa may have known of Byzantine examples of royal consecration.\nDespite the creation of the new archdiocese, J\u00e6nberht retained his position as the senior cleric in the land, with Hygeberht conceding his precedence. When J\u00e6nberht died in 792, he was replaced by \u00c6thelheard, who was consecrated by Hygeberht, now senior in his turn. Subsequently, \u00c6thelheard appears as a witness on charters and presides at synods without Hygeberht, so it appears that Offa continued to respect Canterbury's authority.\nA letter from Pope Adrian to Charlemagne survives which makes reference to Offa, but the date is uncertain; it may be as early as 784 or as late as 791. In it Adrian recounts a rumour that had reached him: Offa had reportedly proposed to Charlemagne that Adrian should be deposed, and replaced by a Frankish pope. Adrian disclaims all belief in the rumour, but it is clear it had been a concern to him. The enemies of Offa and Charlemagne, described by Adrian as the source of the rumour, are not named. It is unclear whether this letter is related to the legatine mission of 786; if it predates it, then the mission might have been partly one of reconciliation, but the letter might well have been written after the mission.\nOffa was a generous patron of the church, founding several churches and monasteries, often dedicated to St Peter. Among these was St Albans Abbey, which he probably founded in the early 790s. He also promised a yearly gift of 365 mancuses to Rome; a mancus was a term of account equivalent to thirty silver pennies, derived from Abbasid gold coins that were circulating in Francia at the time. Control of religious houses was one way in which a ruler of the day could provide for his family, and to this end Offa ensured (by acquiring papal privileges) that many of them would remain the property of his wife or children after his death. This policy of treating religious houses as worldly possessions represents a change from the early 8th century, when many charters showed the foundation and endowment of small minsters, rather than the assignment of those lands to laypeople. In the 770s, an abbess named \u00c6thelburh (who may have been the same person as Offa's daughter of that name) held multiple leases on religious houses in the territory of the Hwicce; her acquisitions have been described as looking \"like a speculator assembling a portfolio\". \u00c6thelburh's possession of these lands foreshadows Cynethryth's control of religious lands, and the pattern was continued in the early 9th century by Cwoenthryth, the daughter of King Coenwulf.\nEither Offa or Ine of Wessex is traditionally supposed to have founded the Schola Saxonum in Rome, in what is today the Roman rione, or district, of Borgo. The Schola Saxonum took its name from the militias of Saxons who served in Rome, but it eventually developed into a hostelry for English visitors to the city.\nEuropean connections.\nOffa's diplomatic relations with Europe are well documented, but appear to belong only to the last dozen years of his reign. In letters dating from the late 780s or early 790s, Alcuin congratulates Offa for encouraging education and greets Offa's wife and son, Cynethryth and Ecgfrith. In about 789, or shortly before, Charlemagne proposed that his son Charles marry one of Offa's daughters, most likely \u00c6lffl\u00e6d. Offa countered with a request that his son Ecgfrith should also marry Charlemagne's daughter Bertha: Charlemagne was outraged by the request, and broke off contact with Britain, forbidding English ships from landing in his ports. Alcuin's letters make it clear that by the end of 790 the dispute was still not resolved, and that Alcuin was hoping to be sent to help make peace. In the end diplomatic relations were restored, at least partly by the agency of Gervold, the abbot of St Wandrille.\nCharlemagne sought support from the English church at the council of Frankfurt in 794, where the canons passed in 787 at the Second Council of Nicaea were repudiated, and the heresies of two Spanish bishops, Felix and Elipandus, were condemned. In 796 Charlemagne wrote to Offa; the letter survives and refers to a previous letter of Offa's to Charlemagne. This correspondence between the two kings produced the first surviving documents in English diplomatic history. The letter is primarily concerned with the status of English pilgrims on the continent and with diplomatic gifts, but it reveals much about the relations between the English and the Franks. Charlemagne refers to Offa as his \"brother\", and mentions trade in black stones, sent from the continent to England, and cloaks (or possibly cloths), traded from England to the Franks. Charlemagne's letter also refers to exiles from England, naming Odberht, who was almost certainly the same person as Eadberht Pr\u00e6n, among them. Egbert of Wessex was another refugee from Offa who took shelter at the Frankish court. It is clear that Charlemagne's policy included support for elements opposed to Offa; in addition to sheltering Egbert and Eadberht he also sent gifts to \u00c6thelred I of Northumbria.\nEvents in southern Britain to 796 have sometimes been portrayed as a struggle between Offa and Charlemagne, but the disparity in their power was enormous. By 796 Charlemagne had become master of an empire which stretched from the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Hungarian Plain, and Offa and then Coenwulf were clearly minor figures by comparison.\nGovernment.\nThe nature of Mercian kingship is not clear from the limited surviving sources. There are two main theories regarding the ancestry of Mercian kings of this period. One is that descendants of different lines of the royal family competed for the throne. In the mid-7th century, for example, Penda had placed royal kinsmen in control of conquered provinces. Alternatively, it may be that a number of kin-groups with local power-bases may have competed for the succession. The sub-kingdoms of the Hwicce, the Toms\u00e6te and the unidentified Gaini are examples of such power-bases. Marriage alliances could also have played a part. Competing magnates, those called in charters \"dux\" or \"princeps\" (that is, leaders), may have brought the kings to power. In this model, the Mercian kings are little more than leading noblemen. Offa seems to have attempted to increase the stability of Mercian kingship, both by the elimination of dynastic rivals to his son Ecgfrith, and the reduction in status of his subject kings, sometimes to the rank of ealdorman. He was ultimately unsuccessful, however; Ecgfrith only survived in power for a few months, and ninth-century Mercia continued to draw its kings from multiple dynastic lines.\nThere is evidence that Offa constructed a series of defensive \"burhs\", or fortified towns; the locations are not generally agreed on but may include Bedford, Hereford, Northampton, Oxford and Stamford. In addition to their defensive uses, these \"burhs\" are thought to have been administrative centres, serving as regional markets and indicating a transformation of the Mercian economy away from its origins as a grouping of midland peoples. The \"burhs\" are forerunners of the defensive network successfully implemented by Alfred the Great a century later to deal with the Danish invasions. However, Offa did not necessarily understand the economic changes that came with the \"burhs\", so it is not safe to assume he envisioned all their benefits. In 749, \u00c6thelbald of Mercia had issued a charter that freed ecclesiastical lands from all obligations except the requirement to build forts and bridges\u2014obligations which lay upon everyone, as part of the trinoda necessitas. Offa's Kentish charters show him laying these same burdens on the recipients of his grants there, and this may be a sign that the obligations were being spread outside Mercia. These burdens were part of Offa's response to the threat of \"the pagan seaman\".\nOffa issued laws in his name, but no details of them have survived. They are known only from a mention by Alfred the Great, in the preface to Alfred's own law code. Alfred says that he has included in his code those laws of Offa, Ine of Wessex and \u00c6thelberht of Kent which he found \"most just\". The laws may have been an independent lawcode, but it is also possible that Alfred is referring to the report of the legatine mission in 786, which issued statutes that the Mercians undertook to obey.\nCoinage.\nAt the start of the 8th century, sceattas were the primary circulating coinage. These were small silver pennies, which often did not bear the name of either the moneyer or the king for whom they were produced. To contemporaries these were probably known as pennies, and are the coins referred to in the laws of Ine of Wessex. This light coinage (in contrast to the heavier coins minted later in Offa's reign) can probably be dated to the late 760s and early 770s. A second, medium-weight coinage can be identified before the early 790s. These new medium-weight coins were heavier, broader and thinner than the pennies they replaced, and were prompted by the contemporary Carolingian currency reforms. The new pennies almost invariably carried both Offa's name and the name of the moneyer from whose mint the coins came. The reform in the coinage appears to have extended beyond Offa's own mints: the kings of East Anglia, Kent and Wessex all produced coins of the new heavier weight in this period.\nSome coins from Offa's reign bear the names of the archbishops of Canterbury, J\u00e6nberht and, after 792, \u00c6thelheard. J\u00e6nberht's coins all belong to the light coinage, rather than the later medium coinage. There is also evidence that coins were issued by Eadberht, who was Bishop of London in the 780s and possibly before. Offa's dispute with J\u00e6nberht may have led him to allow Eadberht coining rights, which may then have been revoked when the see of Lichfield was elevated to an archbishopric.\nThe medium-weight coins often carry designs of high artistic quality, exceeding that of the contemporary Frankish currency. Coin portraits of Offa have been described as \"showing a delicacy of execution which is unique in the whole history of the Anglo-Saxon coinage\". The depictions of Offa on the coins include a \"striking and elegant\" portrait showing him with his hair in voluminous curls, and another where he wears a fringe and tight curls. Some coins show him wearing a necklace with a pendant. The variety of these depictions implies that Offa's die-cutters were able to draw on varied artistic sources for their inspiration.\nOffa's wife Cynethryth was the only Anglo-Saxon queen ever named or portrayed on coinage, in a remarkable series of pennies struck by the moneyer Eoba. These were probably derived from contemporary coins from the reign of the Byzantine emperor Constantine VI, who minted a series showing a portrait of his mother, the later Empress Irene, though the Byzantine coins show a frontal bust of Irene rather than a profile, and so cannot have been a direct model.\nAround the time of J\u00e6nberht's death and replacement with \u00c6thelheard in 792\u201393, the silver currency was reformed a second time: in this \"heavy coinage\" the weight of the pennies was increased again, and a standardised non-portrait design was introduced at all mints. None of J\u00e6nberht's or Cynethryth's coins occur in this coinage, whereas all of \u00c6thelheard's coins are of the new, heavier weight.\nThere are also surviving gold coins from Offa's reign. One is a copy of an Abbasid dinar struck in 774 by Caliph Al-Mansur, with \"Offa Rex\" inserted into three lines of arabic, which are inverted. The inscription is the shahadah, the Islamic declaration of faith, and reads \" \u0645\u062d\u0645\u062f \u0631\u0633\u0648\u0644 \ufdf2 \" (\"Mu\u1e25ammad ras\u016bl All\u0101h\") which translates as \"Muhammad, messenger [of] God\". It is likely that the moneyer had no understanding of Arabic as the Arabic text is poorly reproduced. The coin may have been produced to trade with Islamic Spain; or it may be part of the annual payment of 365 mancuses that Offa promised to Rome. There are other Western copies of Abbasid dinars of the period, but it is not known whether they are English or Frankish. Two other English gold coins of the period survive, from two moneyers, Pendraed and Ciolheard: the former is thought to be from Offa's reign but the latter may belong either to Offa's reign or to that of Coenwulf, who came to the throne in 796. Nothing definite is known about their use, but they may have been struck to be used as alms.\nAlthough many of the coins bear the name of a moneyer, there is no indication of the mint where each coin was struck. As a result, the number and location of mints used by Offa is uncertain. Current opinion is that there were four mints, in Canterbury, Rochester, East Anglia and London.\nStature.\nThe title Offa used on most of his charters was \"rex Merciorium\", or \"king of the Mercians\", though this was occasionally extended to \"king of the Mercians and surrounding nations\". Some of his charters use the title \"Rex Anglorum\", or \"King of the English\", and this has been seen as a sweeping statement of his power. There is debate on this point, however, as several of the charters in which Offa is named \"Rex Anglorum\" are of doubtful authenticity. They may represent later forgeries of the 10th century, when this title was standard for kings of England. The best evidence for Offa's use of this title comes from coins, not charters: there are some pennies with \"Of \u211e A\" inscribed, but it is not regarded as definite that this stood for \"Offa Rex Anglorum\".\nIn \"Anglo-Saxon England\", Stenton argued that Offa was perhaps the greatest king of the English kingdoms, commenting that \"no other Anglo-Saxon king ever regarded the world at large with so\u00a0... acute a political sense\". Many historians regard Offa's achievements as second only to Alfred the Great among the Anglo-Saxon kings. Offa's reign has sometimes been regarded as a key stage in the transition to a unified England, but this is no longer the general view among historians in the field. In the words of Simon Keynes, \"Offa was driven by a lust for power, not a vision of English unity; and what he left was a reputation, not a legacy.\" It is now believed that Offa thought of himself as \"King of the Mercians\", and that his military successes were part of the transformation of Mercia from an overlordship of midland peoples into a powerful and aggressive kingdom.\nDeath and succession.\nOffa died on 29 July 796, and may be buried in Bedford, though it is not clear that the \"Bedeford\" named in that charter was actually modern Bedford. In 1837 a Saxon coffin was unearthed in the graveyard of St Mary's Church, Hemel Hempstead which bore an inscription that it held the \"ashes of King Offa of the Mercians\".\nHe was succeeded by his son, Ecgfrith of Mercia, but according to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" Ecgfrith died after a reign of only 141 days. A letter written by Alcuin in 797 to a Mercian ealdorman named Osbert makes it apparent that Offa had gone to great lengths to ensure that his son Ecgfrith would succeed him. Alcuin's opinion is that Ecgfrith \"has no died for his own sins; but the vengeance for the blood his father shed to secure the kingdom has reached the son. For you know very well how much blood his father shed to secure the kingdom on his son.\" It is apparent that in addition to Ecgfrith's consecration in 787, Offa had eliminated dynastic rivals. This seems to have backfired, from the dynastic point of view, as no close male relatives of Offa or Ecgfrith are recorded, and Coenwulf, Ecgfrith's successor, was only distantly related to Offa's line."}
{"id": "47041", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47041", "title": "The English Patient (1996 movie)", "text": ""}
{"id": "47046", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47046", "title": "Long Valley caldera, California", "text": ""}
{"id": "47047", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47047", "title": "Long Valley, California", "text": "Long Valley, California may refer to several places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "47048", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47048", "title": "Long Valley caldera", "text": ""}
{"id": "47052", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47052", "title": "King of England", "text": ""}
{"id": "47053", "revid": "1583318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47053", "title": "Kings of England", "text": ""}
{"id": "47054", "revid": "491427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47054", "title": "Kings of United Kingdom", "text": ""}
{"id": "47055", "revid": "86733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47055", "title": "King of United Kingdom", "text": ""}
{"id": "47056", "revid": "502769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47056", "title": "King of Scotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "47058", "revid": "1128843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47058", "title": "Kings of Scotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "47060", "revid": "491427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47060", "title": "Kings of Britain", "text": ""}
{"id": "47061", "revid": "14604687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47061", "title": "King of Britain", "text": ""}
{"id": "47062", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47062", "title": "Queen Elizabeth's School, Barnet", "text": "Queen Elizabeth's School, Barnet is a boys' grammar school in Barnet, northern Greater London, which was founded in 1573 by Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester, and others, in the name of Queen Elizabeth I.\nIt is consistently ranked as one of the most academically successful secondary schools in England, having topped A-level league tables for grammar schools for five consecutive years, as of 2016, and was chosen by the \"Sunday Times\" as \"State School of the Year\" in 2007. An Ofsted report published in January 2008 stated: \"It is held in very high regard by the vast majority of students and their parents, and rightly so.\" It has also been a Training school since April 2009 .\nHistory.\nFoundation and location.\nThe school was founded in 1573 by Queen Elizabeth I, petitioned by Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, and assisted by local alderman Edward Underne. Elizabeth I's charter of 1573 describes the school's purpose thus:\n Bringing up and instruction of boys and youth, to be brought up in grammar and other learning, and the same to continue for ever, and the said School for one Master and one Usher for ever to continue and remain and that there shall be for ever four-and-twenty discreet, honest governors \nThe original Tudor building, known as Tudor Hall, was erected in 1577 opposite the Church of St John the Baptist on Wood Street, with money raised by the first governors of the school and by collections in London churches. It was repaired in 1597 and again in 1637. During the 17th century, further extensive repairs were carried out, in spite of a poor financial situation following the Civil War. Financial conditions became progressively more comfortable during the 18th century.\nThe trustees of Elizabeth Allen's Charity, which had been established by her will dated 10 February 1725, gave financial assistance to save it from a state \"very ruinous and unfit for habitation\". It then became a private boarding school. In 1851, Charles Dickens criticised the school, using a disguised name for it, in an article called \"A Free (and Easy) School\"; an account of Queen Elizabeth's \"Royal Grammar School at Thistledown\"\", in his magazine \"Household Words\". He said that the school was failing to carry out the purpose for which it had been established. It was closed in 1872 and restored in 1874 with many additions. In 1885 a governor, H. E. Chetwynd Stapylton, bought a plot of land behind the Jesus Hospital, a building in Wood Street dating back to 1679; today the Stapylton Field stands in front of the main school building and is used for rugby and cricket.\nAs the number of pupils outgrew the capacity of Tudor Hall, so the school was transferred in 1932 to a new site in Queen's Road, which backed on to the Stapylton Field. It was administered by the South Herts Division of Hertfordshire County Council, until 1965 when it became part of the borough of Barnet. In the 1960s, there were around 550 boys with 150 in the sixth form. Tudor Hall was restored in 1968 by the London Borough of Barnet, and is now part of Barnet and Southgate College.\nTwo plaques are located on the walls of the original school building, Tudor Hall. Inscribed on the stone plaque is: This is to commemorate the original school founded here by Queen Elizabeth and built in 1573. The school was removed in 1932 to new building in Queens Road, Barnet. This plaque was erected by the Visitors of Jesus Hospital Charity, the owners in 1952. A more recent blue plaque was erected by the London borough of Barnet which dictates: This Tudor Hall housed the free grammar school of Queen Elizabeth I who granted its charter in 1573.\nGrammar school reinstatement.\nIn the 1980s, the local authority planned to close the school, as it was identified as a failing school. Under Eamonn Harris (headmaster from 1984 to 1999), it returned to its previous selective grammar school status in August 1994, having opted out of the London borough and become a grant-maintained school in 1989. Other schools in Greater London did this, and many became partially selective (up to 50%) at this time. In the 1990s it went on to become England's top state school for A-levels.\nThe girls' school remained a comprehensive.\nQE has been criticised by many current and former pupils for a strict approach to discipline. In April 2000, this led a group of current and former pupils to create a website where they could talk about their experiences. This was known as 'QE Boys: The Truth'. It gained more hits than the official website, and the school excluded three pupils for posting messages on it.\nCulture and sports.\nQueen Elizabeth's School is divided into six houses, named after famous old boys, patrons and former teachers. They are Broughton, Harrisons', Leicester, Pearce, Stapylton and Underne.\nThe school's sports facilities include a swimming pool and a field. Rugby union, played during the winter and spring terms, is compulsory for boys in their first four years at the school, as are cross country running and most other school sports, which include orienteering, swimming, water polo, basketball, tennis, cricket, Eton fives, and athletics.\nThe percentage of boys attending the school who are eligible for free school meals is 3.7%.\nFounder's Day F\u00eate.\nThe Founder's Day F\u00eate, and the preceding service of celebration at St John the Baptist's Church, Barnet, is held every year, regardless of weather, on the third Saturday in June, and celebrates the founding of the school in 1573.\nAcademic excellence.\nIn 2007, QE came first in the A-level league table for state schools, and twelfth in the GCSE league table. In 2008 QE again topped the league table in A-level results.\nNotable staff.\nDuring the Second World War the athletics coach Franz Stampfl taught physical education at the school until his internment in 1940 as an enemy alien. The future headmaster of Eton, John Lewis, briefly taught Latin in the early 1970s.\nCrispin Bonham-Carter, a former television and film actor, has been assistant headteacher at the school since 2019.\nOther information.\nAdmissions procedure.\nAdmission to the school is strictly by academic selection, and boys may apply to join the school for Year 7. Roughly 3,600 applicants compete in a series of examinations to be awarded one of the 192 places offered annually, making places at the grammar school some of the most sought after and oversubscribed in the country.\nParents of boys not admitted to the school have protested against the school's selective admissions policy. Sometimes this has been because the prospective boy's parents have moved to the area assuming a place will be guaranteed, when this is not the case. The school was also on a list of schools breaching admissions laws in England. The Barnet education authority asked for an investigation by Her Majesty's Inspectorate.\nContribution requests.\nIn 2014 it was reported that the school, despite not being of independent school status, was making regular requests to parents for 'voluntary donations' in order to provide the facilities pupils needed, with parents contributing monthly, usually around \u00a360. The school justified these requests by saying that state funding was not sufficient to provide a sound education and \"the polish for boys to go on to the best universities\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47063", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47063", "title": "Monarchy of the United Kingdom", "text": "The monarchy of the United Kingdom, commonly referred to as the British monarchy, is the form of government used by the United Kingdom by which a hereditary monarch reigns as the head of state, with their powers regulated by the British constitution. The term may also refer to the role of the royal family within the UK's broader political structure. The monarch since 8 September 2022 is King Charles III, who ascended the throne on the death of Queen Elizabeth II, his mother.\nThe monarch and their immediate family undertake various official, ceremonial, diplomatic and representational duties. Although formally the monarch has authority over the government\u2014which is known as \"His/Her Majesty's Government\"\u2014this power may only be used according to laws enacted in Parliament and within constraints of convention and precedent. In practice the monarch's role, including that of Head of the Armed Forces, is limited to functions such as bestowing honours and appointing the prime minister, which are performed in a non-partisan manner. The UK Government has called the monarchy \"a unique soft power and diplomatic asset\". The Crown also occupies a unique cultural role, serving as an unofficial brand ambassador for British interests and values abroad, increasing tourism at home, and promoting charities throughout civil society.\nThe British monarchy traces its origins from the petty kingdoms of Anglo-Saxon England and early medieval Scotland, which had consolidated into the separate kingdoms of England and Scotland by the 10th century. England was conquered by the Normans in 1066, after which Wales also gradually came under the control of Anglo-Normans. The process was completed in the 13th century when the Principality of Wales became a client state of the English kingdom. The Anglo-Normans also established the Lordship of Ireland. Meanwhile, Magna Carta began the process of reducing the English monarch's political powers. In the 16th century, English and Scottish monarchs played a central role in what became the religious English Reformation and Scottish Reformation, and the English king became King of Ireland. Beginning in 1603, the English and Scottish kingdoms were ruled by a single sovereign when the Scottish King James VI acceded to the throne of England as James I. From 1649 to 1660, the tradition of monarchy was broken by the republican Commonwealth of England, which followed the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. Following the installation of William III and Mary II as co-monarchs in the Glorious Revolution, the Bill of Rights 1689, and its Scottish counterpart the Claim of Right Act 1689, further curtailed the power of the monarchy and excluded Catholics from succession to the throne. In 1707, the kingdoms of England and Scotland were merged to create the Kingdom of Great Britain, and in 1801, the Kingdom of Ireland joined to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.\nBeginning in the 16th century, the monarch was the nominal head of what came to be the vast British Empire, which covered a quarter of the world's land area at its greatest extent in 1921. The title Emperor of India was added to the British monarch's titles between 1876 and 1948. The Balfour Declaration of 1926 recognised the evolution of the Dominions of the Empire into separate, self-governing countries within a Commonwealth of Nations. Also in this period, the monarchy in Ireland eventually became limited to Northern Ireland. In the years after World War II, the vast majority of British colonies and territories became independent, effectively bringing the Empire to an end. George VI and his successors adopted the title Head of the Commonwealth as a symbol of the free association of its independent member states. The United Kingdom and fourteen other independent sovereign states that share the same person as their monarch are called Commonwealth realms. Although the monarch is shared, each country is sovereign and independent of the others, and the monarch has a different, specific, and official national title and style for each realm. Although the term is rarely used today, the fifteen Commonwealth realms are, with respect to their monarch, in personal union. The monarch is also head of state of the Crown Dependencies and the British Overseas Territories.\nConstitutional role.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the uncodified Constitution of the United Kingdom, the monarch (exclusively referred to in legislation as \"the Sovereign\", and styled \"His\" or \"Her Majesty\") is the head of state. The monarch's image is used to signify British sovereignty and government authority\u00a0\u2013 their profile, for instance, appears on Bank of England notes and all British coins and their portrait in government buildings. The Sovereign is further both mentioned in and the subject of songs, loyal toasts, and salutes. \"God Save the King\" (or, alternatively, \"God Save the Queen\") is the British national anthem. Oaths of allegiance are made to the Sovereign and their lawful successors.\nThe monarch takes little direct part in government. The authority to use the sovereign's formal powers is almost all delegated, either by statute or by convention, to ministers or officers of the Crown, or other public bodies. Thus the acts of state done in the name of the Crown, such as Crown Appointments, even if personally performed by the monarch, such as the King's Speech and the State Opening of Parliament, depend upon decisions made elsewhere. In formal terms:\nThe sovereign's role as a constitutional monarch is largely limited to non-partisan functions, such as granting honours. This role has been recognised since the 19th century. The constitutional writer Walter Bagehot identified the monarchy in 1867 as the \"dignified\" rather than the \"efficient\" part of government.\nRoyal prerogative.\nThat part of the government's executive authority which remains theoretically and nominally vested in the sovereign is known as the royal prerogative. The monarch acts within the constraints of convention and precedent, exercising prerogative powers only on the advice of ministers responsible to Parliament, often through the prime minister or Privy Council. In practice, prerogative powers are exercised only on the prime minister's advice \u2013 the prime minister, and not the sovereign, has control. The monarch holds a weekly audience with the prime minister; no records of these audiences are taken and the proceedings remain fully confidential. The monarch may express his or her views, but, as a constitutional ruler, must ultimately accept the decisions of the prime minister and Cabinet, who by definition enjoy the confidence of the House of Commons. In Bagehot's words: \"the sovereign has, under a constitutional monarchy\u00a0... three rights \u2013 the right to be consulted, the right to encourage, the right to warn.\"\nAlthough the royal prerogative is extensive and parliamentary approval is not formally required for its exercise, it is limited. Many Crown prerogatives have fallen out of use or have been permanently transferred to Parliament. For example, the sovereign cannot impose and collect new taxes; such an action requires the authorisation of an Act of Parliament. According to a parliamentary report, \"The Crown cannot invent new prerogative powers\", and Parliament can override any prerogative power by passing legislation.\nThe royal prerogative includes the powers to appoint and dismiss ministers, regulate the civil service, issue passports, declare war, make peace, direct the actions of the military, and negotiate and ratify treaties, alliances, and international agreements. However, a treaty cannot alter the domestic laws of the United Kingdom; an Act of Parliament is necessary in such cases. The sovereign is the Head of the Armed Forces (the Royal Navy, the British Army, and the Royal Air Force), and accredits British High commissioners and ambassadors, and receives heads of missions from foreign states.\nAppointment of the prime minister.\nThe sovereign has the power to appoint the prime minister. In accordance with unwritten constitutional conventions, the monarch appoints the individual who commands the support of the House of Commons, usually the leader of a party or coalition that has a majority in that House. The prime minister takes office by attending the monarch in a private audience, and after \"kissing hands\" that appointment is immediately effective without any other formality or instrument. The sovereign also has the power to dismiss the prime minister, but the last time this power was exercised was in 1834, when William IV dismissed Lord Melbourne; since then, prime ministers have only left office upon their resignation, which they are expected to offer to the monarch upon losing their majority in the House of Commons.\nWhile the sovereign also appoints and may dismiss every other Minister of the Crown, by convention they do so only on the recommendation of the prime minister. It is therefore the prime minister who controls the composition of the government.\nIn a hung parliament where no party or coalition holds a majority, the monarch has an increased degree of latitude in choosing the individual likely to command the most support, though it would usually be the leader of the largest party. Since 1945, there have only been three hung parliaments. The first followed the February 1974 general election when Harold Wilson was appointed prime minister after Edward Heath resigned following his failure to form a coalition. Although Wilson's Labour Party did not have a majority, they were the largest party. The second followed the May 2010 general election, in which the Conservatives (the largest party) and Liberal Democrats (the third-largest party) agreed to form the first coalition government since World War II. The third occurred shortly thereafter, in June 2017, when the Conservative Party lost its majority in a snap election, though the party remained in power as a minority government.\nSummons, prorogation and dissolution of Parliament.\nThe sovereign has the power to summon, prorogue and dissolve Parliament. Each parliamentary session begins with the sovereign's summons. The new parliamentary session is marked by the State Opening of Parliament, during which the monarch reads the speech from the throne in the chamber of the House of Lords, outlining the Government's legislative agenda. Prorogation usually occurs about one year after a session begins, and formally concludes the session. Dissolution ends a parliamentary term, and is followed by a general election for all seats in the House of Commons. If not dissolved sooner, Parliaments are automatically dissolved after five years.\nThe Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 temporarily removed the sovereign's authority to dissolve Parliament; however, this power was restored by the Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022. The sovereign's power of prorogation was unaffected, which is a regular feature of the parliamentary calendar.\nIn 1950 the Monarch's Private Secretary Sir Alan \"Tommy\" Lascelles, writing pseudonymously to \"The Times\" newspaper, asserted a constitutional convention: according to the Lascelles Principles, if a minority government asked to dissolve Parliament to call an early election to strengthen its position, the monarch could refuse and would do so under three conditions. When Harold Wilson requested a dissolution late in 1974, Queen Elizabeth II granted his request as Heath had already failed to form a coalition. The resulting general election gave Wilson a small majority. The monarch could in theory unilaterally dismiss the prime minister, but in practice, the prime minister's term nowadays comes to an end only by electoral defeat, death, or resignation.\nOther royal prerogatives.\nBefore a bill passed by the legislative Houses can become law, royal assent (the monarch's approval) is required. In theory, assent can either be granted (making the bill law) or withheld (vetoing the bill), but since 1708 assent has always been granted.\nThe sovereign has a similar relationship to the devolved governments of Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland as to the government of the UK. The sovereign appoints the First Minister of Scotland on the nomination of the Scottish Parliament, and the First Minister of Wales on the nomination of the Senedd. In Scottish matters, the sovereign acts on the advice of the Scottish Government. However, as devolution is more limited in Wales, in Welsh matters the monarch acts on the advice of the prime minister and Cabinet of the United Kingdom. The sovereign can veto any law passed by the Northern Ireland Assembly, if it is deemed unconstitutional by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.\nThe sovereign is deemed the \"fount of justice\"; although the monarch does not personally rule in judicial cases, judicial functions are performed in his or her name. For instance, prosecutions are brought on the sovereign's behalf, and courts derive their authority from the Crown. The common law holds that the sovereign \"can do no wrong\", and so cannot be prosecuted for criminal offences. The Crown Proceedings Act 1947 allows civil lawsuits against the Crown in its public capacity (that is, lawsuits against the government), but not lawsuits against the monarch personally. The sovereign exercises the \"prerogative of mercy\", which is used to pardon convicted offenders or reduce sentences.\nThe sovereign is the \"fount of honour\", the source of all honours and dignities in the United Kingdom. The Crown creates all peerages, appoints members of the orders of chivalry, grants knighthoods and awards other honours. Although peerages and most other honours are granted on the advice of the prime minister, some honours are within the personal gift of the sovereign and are not granted on ministerial advice. The sovereign alone appoints members of the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Royal Victorian Order and the Order of Merit.\nSovereign immunity.\nThe sovereign is personally immune from criminal prosecution or arrest, as well as from civil actions, and their property is not subject to execution or foreclosure. The Crown, however, as distinct from the sovereign, can be the subject of proceedings for tort and contract since 1947.\nThere are more than 160 laws granting express immunity to the sovereign or their property in various respects. For example, the sovereign is exempt from anti-discrimination legislation and other workers' rights, health and safety, or pensions laws, as well as numerous taxes, and environmental inspectors cannot enter the sovereign's property without permission.\nHistory.\nEnglish monarchy.\nFollowing Viking raids and settlement in the ninth century, the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex emerged as the dominant English kingdom. Alfred the Great secured Wessex, achieved dominance over western Mercia, and assumed the title \"King of the Anglo-Saxons\". His grandson \u00c6thelstan was the first king to rule over a unitary kingdom roughly corresponding to the present borders of England, though its constituent parts retained strong regional identities. The 11th century saw England become more stable, despite a number of wars with the Danes, which resulted in a Danish monarchy for one generation. The conquest of England in 1066 by William, Duke of Normandy, was crucial in terms of both political and social change. The new monarch continued the centralisation of power begun in the Anglo-Saxon period, while the feudal system continued to develop.\nWilliam was succeeded by two of his sons: William II, then Henry I. Henry made a controversial decision to name his daughter Matilda (his only surviving child) as his heir. Following Henry's death in 1135, his nephew, Stephen, claimed the throne and took power with the support of most of the barons. Matilda challenged his reign; as a result, England descended into a period of disorder known as the Anarchy. Stephen maintained a precarious hold on power, but agreed to a compromise under which Matilda's son Henry II would succeed him. Henry accordingly became the first Angevin king of England and the first monarch of the Plantagenet dynasty in 1154.\nThe reigns of most of the Angevin monarchs were marred by civil strife and conflicts between the monarch and the nobility. Henry II faced rebellions from his own sons, including the future monarchs Richard I and John, but nevertheless managed to expand his kingdom, forming what is retrospectively known as the Angevin Empire. Upon Henry's death, his eldest surviving legitimate son Richard succeeded to the throne; Richard was absent from England for most of his reign, for he left to fight in the Crusades. He was killed whilst besieging a castle; John succeeded him. Arthur I, Duke of Brittany, son of John's deceased elder brother Duke Geoffrey II and himself former heir of Richard, was dissatisfied but disappeared the following year after being captured by John in 1202; Arthur's sister, Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany was placed under house arrest by John.\nJohn's reign was marked by conflict with the barons, particularly over the limits of royal power. In 1215, the barons coerced the king into issuing Magna Carta (Latin for \"Great Charter\") to guarantee the rights and liberties of the nobility. Soon afterwards, further disagreements plunged England into a civil war known as the First Barons' War, and French Prince Louis also claimed the throne as Louis I with the support of the rebellious princes as John's nephew-in-law. The war abruptly ended when John died in 1216, leaving the Crown to his nine-year-old son Henry III. Many rebellious lords also turned to support Henry III. In 1217, Louis was defeated and renounced the English throne. Eleanor's claim was not upheld, but according to John's will, she remained under house arrest until her death in 1241. The London Chronicle referred to her as the rightful heir to the throne, while the Lanercost Chronicle recorded a legend of Henry III giving her a golden crown before her death. With Geoffrey leaving no descendants, Henry III became the hereditary heir of the royal family.\nLater in Henry's reign, Simon de Montfort led the barons in another rebellion, beginning the Second Barons' War. The war ended in a clear royalist victory and in the death of many rebels, but not before the king had agreed to summon a parliament in 1265. In 1268, Henry III ordered the Amesbury Priory to commemorate both Arthur and Eleanor in commemoration of past kings and queens as well.\nThe next monarch, Edward Longshanks, was far more successful in maintaining royal power and was responsible for the conquest of Wales. He attempted to establish English domination of Scotland. However, gains in Scotland were reversed during the reign of his successor, Edward II, who also faced conflict with the nobility. In 1311, Edward II was forced to relinquish many of his powers to a committee of baronial \"ordainers\"; however, military victories helped him regain control in 1322. Edward was deposed by his wife Isabella and his son, Edward III, became king.\nEdward III claimed the French Crown, setting off the Hundred Years' War between England and France. His campaigns conquered much French territory, but by 1374, all the gains had been lost. Edward's reign was also marked by the further development of Parliament, which came to be divided into two Houses; he died in 1377, leaving the Crown to his 10-year-old grandson Richard II. Like many of his predecessors, Richard II conflicted with the nobles by attempting to concentrate power in his own hands. In 1399, while he was campaigning in Ireland, his cousin Henry Bolingbroke seized power. Richard was deposed, imprisoned, and eventually murdered, probably by starvation, and Henry became king as Henry IV.\nHenry IV was the grandson of Edward III and the son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster; hence, his dynasty was known as the House of Lancaster. For most of his reign, Henry IV was forced to fight off plots and rebellions; his success was partly due to the military skill of his son, the future Henry V. Henry V's own reign, which began in 1413, was largely free from domestic strife, leaving the king free to pursue the Hundred Years' War in France. Although he was victorious, his sudden death in 1422 left his infant son Henry VI on the throne and gave the French an opportunity to overthrow English rule.\nThe unpopularity of Henry VI's counsellors and his consort, Margaret of Anjou, as well as his own ineffectual leadership, led to the weakening of the House of Lancaster. The Lancastrians faced a challenge from the House of York, so-called because its head, a descendant of Edward III, was Richard, Duke of York, who was at odds with the Queen. Although the Duke of York died in battle in 1460, his eldest son, Edward IV, led the Yorkists to victory in 1461, overthrowing Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou. Edward IV was constantly at odds with the Lancastrians and his own councillors after his marriage to Elizabeth Woodville, with a brief return to power for Henry VI. Edward IV prevailed, winning back the throne at Barnet and killing the Lancastrian heir, Edward of Westminster, at Tewkesbury. Afterwards he captured Margaret of Anjou, eventually sending her into exile, but not before killing Henry VI while he was held prisoner in the Tower. The Wars of the Roses, nevertheless, continued intermittently during his reign and those of his son Edward V and brother Richard III. Edward V disappeared, presumably murdered by Richard. Ultimately, the conflict culminated in success for the Lancastrian branch led by Henry Tudor, in 1485, when Richard III was killed in the Battle of Bosworth Field.\nKing Henry VII then neutralised the remaining Yorkist forces, partly by marrying Elizabeth of York, daughter of King Edward IV and a Yorkist heir. Through skill and ability, Henry re-established absolute supremacy in the realm, and the conflicts with the nobility that had plagued previous monarchs came to an end. The reign of the second Tudor king, Henry VIII, was one of great political change. Religious upheaval and disputes with the Pope, and the fact that his marriage to Catherine of Aragon produced only one surviving child, a daughter, led the monarch to break from the Roman Catholic Church and establish the Church of England (the Anglican Church) and divorce his wife to marry Anne Boleyn.\nWales \u2013 which had been conquered centuries earlier, but had remained a separate dominion \u2013 was annexed to England under the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542. Henry VIII's son and successor, the young Edward VI, continued with further religious reforms, but his early death in 1553 precipitated a succession crisis. He was wary of allowing his Catholic elder half-sister Mary I to succeed, and therefore drew up a will designating Lady Jane Grey as his heiress. Jane's reign, however, lasted only nine days; with tremendous popular support, Mary deposed her and declared herself the lawful sovereign. Mary I married Philip of Spain, who was declared king and co-ruler. He pursued disastrous wars in France and she attempted to return England to Roman Catholicism (burning Protestants at the stake as heretics in the process). Upon her death in 1558, the pair were succeeded by her Protestant half-sister Elizabeth I. England returned to Protestantism and continued its growth into a major world power by building its navy and exploring the New World.\nScottish monarchy.\n \nIn Scotland, as in England, monarchies emerged after the withdrawal of the Roman Empire from Great Britain in the early fifth century. The three groups that lived in Scotland at this time were the Picts north of the Forth and Clyde, the Britons in the south, including the Kingdom of Strathclyde, and the Gaels or Scotti (who would later give their name to Scotland), of the Irish petty kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata in Argyll and the southern Hebrides. Kenneth MacAlpin is traditionally viewed as the first king of a united Scotland (known as Scotia to writers in Latin, or Alba to the Scots). The expansion of Scottish dominions continued over the next two centuries, as other territories such as Strathclyde were absorbed.\nEarly Scottish monarchs did not inherit the Crown directly; instead, the custom of tanistry was followed, where the monarchy alternated between different branches of the House of Alpin. There was an elective element to early Scottish kings and this practice lingered for much longer in Scotland. For example, the first Stewart monarch, Robert II, was selected from among eligible royal males at Linlithgow in 1370 by the Three Estates of the Scottish Parliament. However, as a result of this elective element, the rival dynastic lines clashed, often violently. From 942 to 1005, seven consecutive monarchs were either murdered or killed in battle. In 1005, Malcolm II ascended the throne having killed many rivals. He continued to ruthlessly eliminate opposition, and when he died in 1034 he was succeeded by his grandson, Duncan I, instead of a cousin, as had been usual. In 1040, Duncan suffered defeat in battle at the hands of Macbeth, who was killed himself in 1057 by Duncan's son Malcolm. The following year, after killing Macbeth's stepson Lulach, Malcolm ascended the throne as Malcolm III.\nWith a further series of battles and deposings, five of Malcolm's sons as well as one of his brothers successively became king. Eventually, the Crown came to his youngest son, David I. David was succeeded by his grandsons Malcolm IV, and then by William the Lion, the longest-reigning King of Scots before the Union of the Crowns. William participated in a rebellion against King Henry II of England but when the rebellion failed, William was captured by the English. In exchange for his release, William was forced to acknowledge Henry as his feudal overlord. The English King Richard I agreed to terminate the arrangement in 1189, in return for a large sum of money needed for the Crusades. William died in 1214 and was succeeded by his son Alexander II. Alexander II, as well as his successor Alexander III, attempted to take over the Western Isles, which were still under the overlordship of Norway. During the reign of Alexander III, Norway launched an unsuccessful invasion of Scotland; the ensuing Treaty of Perth recognised Scottish control of the Western Isles and other disputed areas.\nAlexander III's death in a riding accident in 1286 precipitated a major succession crisis. Scottish leaders appealed to King Edward I of England for help in determining who was the rightful heir. Edward chose Alexander's three-year-old Norwegian granddaughter, Margaret. On her way to Scotland in 1290, however, Margaret died at sea, and Edward was again asked to adjudicate between 13 rival claimants to the throne. A court was set up and after two years of deliberation, it pronounced John Balliol to be king. Edward proceeded to treat Balliol as a vassal and tried to exert influence over Scotland. In 1295, when Balliol renounced his allegiance to England, Edward I invaded. During the first ten years of the ensuing Wars of Scottish Independence, Scotland had no monarch, until Robert the Bruce declared himself king in 1306.\nRobert's efforts to control Scotland culminated in success and Scottish independence was acknowledged in 1328. However, only one year later, Robert died and was succeeded by his five-year-old son, David II. On the pretext of restoring John Balliol's rightful heir, Edward Balliol, the English again invaded in 1332. During the next four years, Balliol was crowned, deposed, restored, deposed, restored, and deposed until he eventually settled in England, and David remained king for the next 35 years.\nDavid II died childless in 1371 and was succeeded by his nephew Robert II of the House of Stuart. The reigns of both Robert II and his successor, Robert III, were marked by a general decline in royal power. When Robert III died in 1406, regents had to rule the country; the monarch, Robert III's son James I, had been taken captive by the English. Having paid a large ransom, James returned to Scotland in 1424; to restore his authority, he used ruthless measures, including the execution of several of his enemies. He was assassinated by a group of nobles. James II continued his father's policies by subduing influential noblemen but he was killed in an accident at the age of thirty, and a council of regents again assumed power. James III was defeated in a battle against rebellious Scottish earls in 1488, leading to another boy-king: James IV.\nIn 1513 James IV launched an invasion of England, attempting to take advantage of the absence of the English King Henry VIII. His forces met with disaster at Flodden Field; the king, many senior noblemen, and hundreds of soldiers were killed. As his son and successor, James V, was an infant, the government was again taken over by regents. James V led another disastrous war with the English in 1542, and his death in the same year left the Crown in the hands of his six-day-old daughter, Mary. Once again, a regency was established.\nMary, a Roman Catholic, reigned during a period of great religious upheaval in Scotland. As a result of the efforts of reformers such as John Knox, a Protestant ascendancy was established. Mary caused alarm by marrying her Catholic cousin, Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, in 1565. After Lord Darnley's assassination in 1567, Mary contracted an even more unpopular marriage with the Earl of Bothwell, who was widely suspected of Darnley's murder. The nobility rebelled against the queen, forcing her to abdicate. She fled to England, and the Crown went to her infant son James VI, who was brought up as a Protestant. Mary was imprisoned and later executed by the English queen Elizabeth I.\nPersonal union and republican phase.\nElizabeth I's death in 1603 ended Tudor rule in England. Since she had no children, she was succeeded by the Scottish monarch James VI, who was the great-grandson of Henry VIII's older sister and hence Elizabeth's first cousin twice removed. James VI ruled in England as James I after what was known as the \"Union of the Crowns\". Although England and Scotland were in personal union under one monarch \u2013 James I &amp; VI became the first monarch to style himself \"King of Great Britain\" in 1604 \u2013 they remained two separate kingdoms. James I &amp; VI's successor, Charles I, experienced frequent conflicts with the English Parliament related to the issue of royal and parliamentary powers, especially the power to impose taxes. He provoked opposition by ruling without Parliament from 1629 to 1640, unilaterally levying taxes and adopting controversial religious policies (many of which were offensive to the Scottish Presbyterians and the English Puritans). His attempt to enforce Anglicanism led to organised rebellion in Scotland and ignited the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. In 1642, the conflict between the king and Parliament reached its climax and the English Civil War began.\nThe Civil War culminated in the execution of the king in 1649, the overthrow of the English monarchy, and the establishment of the Commonwealth of England. Charles I's son, Charles II, was proclaimed King of Great Britain in Scotland, but he was forced to flee abroad after he invaded England and was defeated at the Battle of Worcester. In 1653, Oliver Cromwell, the most prominent military and political leader in the nation, seized power and declared himself Lord Protector (effectively becoming a military dictator, refusing the title of king). Cromwell ruled until his death in 1658, when he was succeeded by his son Richard. The new Lord Protector had little interest in governing, and he soon resigned. The lack of clear leadership led to civil and military unrest, and to a popular desire to restore the monarchy. In 1660, the monarchy was restored and Charles II returned to Britain.\nCharles II's reign was marked by the development of the first modern political parties in England. Charles had no legitimate children and was due to be succeeded by his Roman Catholic brother, James, Duke of York. A parliamentary effort to exclude James from the line of succession arose; the \"Petitioners\", who supported exclusion, became the Whig Party, whereas the \"Abhorrers\", who opposed exclusion, became the Tory Party. The Exclusion Bill failed; on several occasions, Charles II dissolved Parliament because he feared that the bill might pass. After the dissolution of the Parliament of 1681, Charles ruled without a Parliament until his death in 1685. When James succeeded Charles, he pursued a policy of offering religious tolerance to Roman Catholics, thereby drawing the ire of many of his Protestant subjects. Many opposed James's decisions to maintain a large standing army, appoint Roman Catholics to high political and military offices, and imprison Church of England clerics who challenged his policies. As a result, a group of Protestants known as the Immortal Seven invited James II &amp; VII's daughter Mary and her husband William III of Orange to depose the king. William obliged, arriving in England on 5 November 1688 to great public support. Faced with the defection of many of his Protestant officials, James fled the realm and William and Mary (rather than James II &amp; VII's Catholic son) were declared joint Sovereigns of England, Scotland and Ireland.\nJames's overthrow, known as the Glorious Revolution, was one of the most important events in the long evolution of parliamentary power. The Bill of Rights 1689 affirmed parliamentary supremacy and declared that the English people held certain rights, including freedom from taxes imposed without parliamentary consent. The Bill of Rights required future monarchs to be Protestants and provided that, after any children of William and Mary, Mary's sister Anne would inherit the Crown. Mary II died childless in 1694, leaving William III &amp; II as the sole monarch. By 1700, a political crisis arose, as all of Anne's children had died, leaving her as the only individual left in the line of succession. Parliament was afraid that the former James II or his supporters, known as Jacobites, might attempt to reclaim the throne. Parliament passed the Act of Settlement 1701, which excluded James and his Catholic relations from the succession and made William's nearest Protestant relations, the family of Sophia, Electress of Hanover, next in line to the throne after his sister-in-law Anne. Soon after the passage of the Act, William III &amp; II died, leaving the Crown to Anne.\nAfter the 1707 Acts of Union.\nAfter Anne's accession, the problem of succession re-emerged. The Scottish Parliament, infuriated that the English Parliament did not consult them on the choice of Sophia's family as the next heirs, passed the Act of Security 1704, threatening to end the personal union between England and Scotland. The Parliament of England retaliated with the Alien Act 1705, threatening to devastate the Scottish economy by restricting trade. The Scottish and English parliaments negotiated the Acts of Union 1707, under which England and Scotland were united into a single Kingdom of Great Britain, with succession under the rules prescribed by the Act of Settlement.\nIn 1714, Queen Anne was succeeded by her second cousin, and Sophia's son, George I, Elector of Hanover, who consolidated his position by defeating Jacobite rebellions in 1715 and 1719. The new monarch was less active in government than many of his British predecessors, but retained control over his German kingdoms, with which Britain was now in personal union. Power shifted towards George's ministers, especially to Sir Robert Walpole, who is often considered the first British prime minister, although the title was not then in use.\nThe next monarch, George II, witnessed the end of the Jacobite threat in 1746 when the Catholic Stuarts were completely defeated. During the long reign of his grandson, George III, thirteen of Britain's American colonies were lost when they formed the United States of America after the American Revolutionary War, but British influence elsewhere in the world continued to grow. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was created by the Acts of Union 1800.\nFrom 1811 to 1820, George III was rendered incapable of ruling by a mental illness. His son, the future George IV, ruled in his stead as regent. During the Regency and his own reign, the power of the monarchy declined, and by the time of his successor, William IV, the monarch was no longer able to interfere effectively with parliamentary power. In 1834, William dismissed the Whig Prime Minister, William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne, and appointed a Tory, Sir Robert Peel. In the ensuing elections, however, Peel lost. The king had no choice but to recall Lord Melbourne. During William IV's reign, the Reform Act 1832, which reformed parliamentary representation, was passed. Together with others passed later in the century, the Act led to an expansion of the electoral franchise and the rise of the House of Commons as the most important branch of Parliament.\nThe final transition to a constitutional monarchy was made during the long reign of William IV's successor, Victoria. As a woman, Victoria could not rule Hanover, which permitted succession only in the male line, so the personal union of the United Kingdom and Hanover came to an end. The Victorian era was marked by great cultural change, technological progress, and the establishment of the United Kingdom as one of the world's foremost powers. In recognition of British rule over India, Victoria was declared Empress of India in 1876. However, her reign was also marked by increased support for the republican movement, due in part to Victoria's permanent mourning and lengthy period of seclusion following the death of her husband in 1861.\nVictoria's son, Edward VII, became the first monarch of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha in 1901. In 1917, the next monarch, George V, changed \"Saxe-Coburg and Gotha\" to \"Windsor\" in response to the anti-German sentiment aroused by the First World War. George V's reign was marked by the separation of Ireland into Northern Ireland, which remained a part of the United Kingdom, and the Irish Free State, an independent nation, in 1922.\nShared monarchy.\nDuring the twentieth century, the Commonwealth of Nations evolved from the British Empire. Prior to 1926, the British Crown reigned over the British Empire collectively; the Dominions and Crown Colonies were subordinate to the United Kingdom. The Balfour Declaration of 1926 gave complete self-government to the Dominions, effectively creating a system whereby a single monarch operated independently in each separate Dominion. The concept was solidified by the Statute of Westminster 1931, which has been likened to \"a treaty among the Commonwealth countries\".\nThe monarchy thus ceased to be an exclusively British institution, although it is often still referred to as \"British\" for legal and historical reasons and for convenience. The monarch became separately monarch of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and so forth; one person reigning in multiple distinct sovereign states, in a relationship likened to a personal union.\nGeorge V's death in 1936 was followed by the accession of Edward VIII, who caused a public scandal by announcing his desire to marry the divorced American Wallis Simpson, even though the Church of England opposed the remarriage of divorcees. Accordingly, Edward announced his intention to abdicate; the Parliaments of the United Kingdom and of other Commonwealth countries granted his request. Edward VIII and any children by his new wife were excluded from the line of succession, and the Crown went to his brother, George VI. George served as a rallying figure for the British people during World War II, making morale-boosting visits to the troops as well as to munitions factories and areas bombed by Nazi Germany. In June 1948 George VI relinquished the title \"Emperor of India\", although remaining head of state of the Dominion of India.\nAt first, every member of the Commonwealth retained the same monarch as the United Kingdom, but when the Dominion of India became a republic in 1950, it would no longer share in a common monarchy. Instead, the British monarch was acknowledged as \"Head of the Commonwealth\" in all Commonwealth member states, whether they were realms or republics. The position is purely ceremonial, and is not inherited by the British monarch as of right but is vested in an individual chosen by the Commonwealth heads of government. Member states of the Commonwealth that share the same person as monarch are informally known as Commonwealth realms.\nMonarchy in Ireland.\nIn 1155 the only English Pope, Adrian IV, authorised King Henry II of England to take possession of Ireland as a feudal territory nominally under papal overlordship. The Pope wanted the English monarch to annex Ireland and bring the Irish church into line with Rome, despite this process already being underway in Ireland by 1155. An all-island kingship of Ireland had been created in 854 by M\u00e1el Sechnaill mac M\u00e1ele Ruanaid. His last successor was Ruaidr\u00ed Ua Conchobair, who had become High King of Ireland in early 1166 and exiled Diarmait Mac Murchada, the King of Leinster, a vassal kingdom. Diarmait asked Henry II for help, gaining a group of Anglo-Norman aristocrats and adventurers, led by Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, to help him regain his throne. Diarmait and his Anglo-Norman allies succeeded and he became King of Leinster again. De Clare married Diarmait's daughter, and when Diarmait died in 1171, de Clare became King of Leinster. Henry was afraid that de Clare would make Ireland a rival Norman kingdom, so he took advantage of the papal bull and invaded, forcing de Clare and the other Anglo-Norman aristocrats in Ireland and the major Irish kings and lords to recognise him as their overlord.\nBy 1542, King Henry VIII of England had broken with the Church of Rome and declared himself Supreme Head of the Church of England. The Pope's grant of Ireland to the English monarch became invalid, so Henry summoned a meeting of the Irish Parliament to change his title from \"Lord of Ireland\" to \"King of Ireland\".\nIn 1800, as a result of the Irish Rebellion of 1798, the Act of Union merged the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Ireland into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The whole island of Ireland continued to be a part of the United Kingdom until 1922 when what is now the Republic of Ireland won independence as the Irish Free State, a separate Dominion within the Commonwealth. The Irish Free State was renamed Ireland in 1937, and in 1949 declared itself a republic, left the Commonwealth and severed all ties with the monarchy. Northern Ireland remained within the Union. In 1927, the United Kingdom changed its name to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, while the monarch's style for the next twenty years became \"of Great Britain, Ireland and the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India\".\nModern status and popularity.\nIn the 1990s, republicanism in the United Kingdom grew, partly on account of negative publicity associated with the royal family (for instance, immediately following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales). However, \"The Independent\" maintained polls from 2002 to 2007 showed that around 70\u201380% of the British public supported the continuation of the monarchy. In September 2022, shortly after the death of Elizabeth II, \"The Guardian\" reported that a YouGov poll showed that 68% of British people felt positively about the monarchy. The newspaper speculated that some of this may have been a reaction to the Queen's death, and said it showed dissatisfaction is higher among young people; 47% of people aged between 18 and 24 wanted the monarchy to continue, compared to 86% aged 65 and over. In May 2022, before the Queen's death, the newspaper reported that polling showed 33% of those aged between 18 and 24 wanted the monarchy to continue. In January 2023, a YouGov survey of roughly 1,700 UK people found that 64% thought that the country should continue to have a monarchy.\nReligious role.\nThe sovereign is the supreme governor of the established Church of England. Archbishops and bishops are appointed by the monarch, on the advice of the prime minister, who chooses the appointee from a list of nominees prepared by a Church Commission. The Crown's role in the Church of England is titular; the most senior clergyman, the Archbishop of Canterbury, is the spiritual leader of the Church and of the worldwide Anglican Communion. The monarch takes an oath to preserve the Church of Scotland and he or she holds the power to appoint the Lord High Commissioner to the Church's General Assembly, but otherwise plays no part in its governance, and exerts no powers over it. The sovereign plays no formal role in the disestablished Church in Wales or Church of Ireland.\nSuccession.\nThe relationship between the Commonwealth realms is such that any change to the laws governing succession to the shared throne requires the unanimous consent of all the realms. Succession is governed by statutes such as the Bill of Rights 1689, the Act of Settlement 1701 and the Acts of Union 1707. The rules of succession may only be changed by an Act of Parliament; it is not possible for an individual to renounce his or her right of succession. The Act of Settlement restricts the succession to the legitimate Protestant descendants of Sophia of Hanover (1630\u20131714), a granddaughter of James I and VI.\nUpon demise of the Crown (the death of a sovereign), their heir immediately and automatically succeeds (hence the phrase \"The king is dead, long live the king!\"), and the accession of the new sovereign is publicly proclaimed by an Accession Council that meets at St James's Palace. Upon their accession, a new sovereign is required by law to make and subscribe several oaths: the Accession Declaration as first required by the Bill of Rights, and an oath that they will \"maintain and preserve\" the Church of Scotland settlement as required by the Act of Union. The monarch is usually crowned in Westminster Abbey, normally by the Archbishop of Canterbury. A coronation is not necessary for a sovereign to reign; indeed, the ceremony usually takes place many months after accession to allow sufficient time for its preparation and for a period of mourning.\nWhen an individual ascends the throne, it is expected they will reign until death. The only voluntary abdication, that of Edward VIII, had to be authorised by a special Act of Parliament, His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act 1936. The last monarch involuntarily removed from power was James II and VII, who fled into exile in 1688 during the Glorious Revolution.\nRestrictions by sex and religion.\nSuccession was by male-preference cognatic primogeniture, under which sons inherit before daughters, and elder children inherit before younger ones of the same sex. The British prime minister, David Cameron, announced at the 2011 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting that all 16 Commonwealth realms, including the United Kingdom, had agreed to abolish the male-preference rule for anyone born after the date of the meeting, 28 October 2011. They also agreed that future monarchs would no longer be prohibited from marrying a Roman Catholic \u2013 a law which dated from the Act of Settlement 1701. However, since the monarch is also the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, the laws which restrict the throne to Protestants remain. The necessary UK legislation making the changes received the royal assent on 25 April 2013 and was brought into force in March 2015 after the equivalent legislation was approved in all the other Commonwealth realms.\nThough Catholics are prohibited from succeeding and are deemed \"naturally dead\" for succession purposes, the disqualification does not extend to the individual's legitimate Protestant descendants.\nRegency.\nThe Regency Acts allow for regencies in the event of a monarch who is a minor or who is physically or mentally incapacitated. When a regency is necessary, the next qualified individual in the line of succession automatically becomes regent, unless they themselves are a minor or incapacitated. Special provisions were made for Queen Elizabeth II by the Regency Act 1953, which stated that Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (her husband) could act as regent in these circumstances.\nDuring a temporary physical infirmity or an absence from the kingdom, the sovereign may temporarily delegate some of his or her functions to counsellors of state, chosen from the monarch's spouse and the first four adults in the line of succession. The present counsellors of state are: Queen Camilla; William, Prince of Wales; Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex; Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor; Princess Beatrice; Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh; and Anne, Princess Royal. While still able to serve, the Duke of Sussex and Duke of York no longer carry out royal duties. With the accession of Charles III and planned overseas trips in 2023, it was decided to expand the list of those eligible to serve as counsellors of state. On 14 November 2022, the King sent a message to both Houses of Parliament, formally asking for a change in the law that would allow Princess Anne and Prince Edward to be added to the list of counsellors of state. The next day, a bill to that end was introduced in Parliament and it received royal assent on 6 December, coming into force on 7 December.\nFinances.\nUntil 1760, the monarch met all official expenses from hereditary revenues, which included the profits of the Crown Estate (the royal property portfolio). King George III agreed to surrender the hereditary revenues of the Crown in return for the Civil List, and this arrangement persisted until 2012. An annual Property Services grant-in-aid paid for the upkeep of the royal residences, and an annual Royal Travel Grant-in-Aid paid for travel. The Civil List covered most expenses, including those for staffing, state visits, public engagements, and official entertainment. Its size was fixed by Parliament every 10 years; any money saved was carried forward to the next 10-year period. From 2012, the Civil List and Grants-in-Aid were replaced with a single Sovereign Grant, which was initially set at 15% of the revenues generated by the Crown Estate and increased to 25% in March 2017. The programme of overseas visits by the monarch is determined by the Royal Visits Committee, a Cabinet Office committee.\nThe Crown Estate is one of the largest property portfolios in the United Kingdom, with holdings of \u00a315.6\u00a0billion in 2022. It is held in trust, and cannot be sold or owned by the sovereign in a private capacity. In modern times, the profits surrendered from the Crown Estate to the Treasury have exceeded the Sovereign Grant. For example, the Crown Estate produced \u00a3312.7\u00a0million in the financial year 2021\u201322, whereas the Sovereign Grant for the monarch was \u00a386.3\u00a0million during the same period.\nLike the Crown Estate, the land and assets of the Duchy of Lancaster, a property portfolio valued at \u00a3383\u00a0million in 2011, are held in trust. The revenues of the Duchy form part of the Privy Purse, and are used for expenses not borne by the parliamentary grants. The Paradise Papers, leaked in 2017, show that the Duchy of Lancaster held investments in the British tax havens of the Cayman Islands and Bermuda. The Duchy of Cornwall is a similar estate held in trust to meet the expenses of the monarch's eldest son. The Royal Collection, which includes artworks and the Crown Jewels, is not owned by the sovereign personally and is held in trust, as are the occupied palaces in the United Kingdom such as Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle.\nThe sovereign is subject to indirect taxes such as value-added tax, and since 1993 the monarch has paid income tax and capital gains tax on personal income. Parliamentary grants to the sovereign are not treated as income as they are solely for official expenditure. Republicans estimated in 2012 that the real cost of the monarchy, including security and potential income not claimed by the state, such as profits from the duchies of Lancaster and Cornwall and rent of Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle, was \u00a3334\u00a0million () a year.\nEstimates of Queen Elizabeth II's wealth varied, depending on whether assets owned by her personally or held in trust for the nation were included. \"Forbes\" magazine estimated her wealth at US$450\u00a0million in 2010, but no official figure was available. In 1993, the Lord Chamberlain said estimates of \u00a3100\u00a0million were \"grossly overstated\". Jock Colville, who was her former private secretary and a director of her bank, Coutts, estimated her wealth in 1971 at \u00a32\u00a0million (the equivalent of about \u00a3 today). The \"Sunday Times Rich List 2020\" estimated Elizabeth II's personal wealth at \u00a3350\u00a0million.\nResidences.\nThe sovereign's official residence in London is Buckingham Palace. It is the site of most state banquets, investitures, royal christenings and other ceremonies. Another official residence is Windsor Castle, the largest occupied castle in the world, which is used principally at weekends, Easter and during Royal Ascot, an annual race meeting that is part of the social calendar. The sovereign's official residence in Scotland is the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh. The monarch stays at Holyrood for at least one week each year, and when visiting Scotland on state occasions.\nHistorically, the Palace of Westminster and the Tower of London were the main residences of the English monarch until Henry VIII acquired the Palace of Whitehall. Whitehall was destroyed by fire in 1698, leading to a shift to St James's Palace. Although replaced as the monarch's primary London residence by Buckingham Palace in 1837, St James's is still the senior palace and remains the ceremonial royal residence. For example, foreign ambassadors are accredited to the Court of St James's, and the Palace is the site of the meeting of the Accession Council. It is also used by other members of the royal family.\nOther residences include Clarence House and Kensington Palace. The palaces belong to the Crown; they are held in trust for future rulers and cannot be sold by the monarch. Sandringham House in Norfolk and Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire are privately owned by the monarch.\nStyle.\nThe present sovereign's full style and title is \"Charles the Third, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of His other Realms and Territories, King, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith\". The title \"Head of the Commonwealth\" is held by the king personally, and is not vested in the British Crown. Pope Leo X first granted the title \"Defender of the Faith\" to King Henry VIII in 1521, rewarding him for his support of the Papacy during the early years of the Protestant Reformation, particularly for his book the Defence of the Seven Sacraments. After Henry broke from the Roman Catholic Church, Pope Paul III revoked the grant, but Parliament passed a law authorising its continued use.\nThe sovereign is known as \"His Majesty\" or \"Her Majesty\". The form \"Britannic Majesty\" appears in international treaties and on passports to differentiate the British monarch from foreign rulers. The monarch chooses his or her regnal name, not necessarily his or her first name \u2013 George VI, Edward VII and Victoria did not use their first names.\nIf only one monarch has used a particular name, no ordinal is used; for example, Queen Victoria is not known as \"Victoria I\", and ordinals are not used for English monarchs who reigned before the Norman conquest of England. The question of whether numbering for British monarchs is based on previous English or Scottish monarchs was raised in 1953 when Scottish nationalists challenged the Queen's use of \"Elizabeth II\", on the grounds that there had never been an \"Elizabeth I\" in Scotland. In \"MacCormick v Lord Advocate\", the Scottish Court of Session ruled against the plaintiffs, finding that the Queen's title was a matter of her own choice and prerogative. The Home Secretary told the House of Commons that monarchs since the Acts of Union had consistently used the higher of the English and Scottish ordinals, which in the applicable four cases has been the English ordinal. The prime minister confirmed this practice but noted that \"neither The Queen nor her advisers could seek to bind their successors\". \nArms.\nThe coat of arms of the United Kingdom is \"Quarterly, I and IV Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or [for England]; II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules [for Scotland]; III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent [for Ireland]\". The supporters are the Lion and the Unicorn; the motto is \"\" (French: \"God and my Right\"). Surrounding the shield is a representation of a Garter bearing the motto of the Chivalric order of the same name; \"\". (Old French: \"Shame be to him who thinks evil of it\"). In Scotland, the monarch uses an alternative form of the arms in which quarters I and IV represent Scotland, II England, and III Ireland. The mottoes are \" (an abbreviated form of the Scots \") and the motto of the Order of the Thistle, \"'\" (Latin: \"No-one provokes me with impunity\"); the supporters are the unicorn and lion, who support both the escutcheon and lances, from which fly the flags of Scotland and England.\nThe monarch's official flag in the United Kingdom is the Royal Standard, which depicts the Royal Arms in banner form. It is flown only from buildings, vessels and vehicles in which the sovereign is present. The Royal Standard is never flown at half-mast because there is always a sovereign: when one dies, his or her successor becomes the sovereign instantly.\nWhen the monarch is not in residence, the Union Flag is flown at Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle and Sandringham House, whereas in Scotland the Royal Banner of Scotland is flown at Holyrood Palace and Balmoral Castle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47064", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47064", "title": "Half line", "text": ""}
{"id": "47066", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47066", "title": "Sir Mix-a-Lot", "text": "American rapper (born 1963)\nAnthony L. Ray (born August 12, 1963), better known by his stage name Sir Mix-a-Lot or his CB handle Prime Minista, is an American rapper. He is best known for his 1992 hit song \"Baby Got Back\", which peaked at number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nEarly life.\nAnthony Ray was born on August 12, 1963, in Auburn, Washington, and grew up in Seattle's Central District. In Ray's youth, his mother worked as a licensed practical nurse at the King County Jail. Ray was a fan of hip hop and started rapping in the early 1980s.\nWhile living in the Bryant Manor apartments on 19th Ave and East Yesler Way, Anthony Ray started school at Roosevelt High School, near the University District, when the Seattle Public School District was in the throes of what would be a 21-year experiment to integrate the school system. Students were bused from their neighborhoods to schools at the other end of the city. From 1978 to 1999, when the busing program was in operation, minorities were the chief beneficiaries of busing, going from the South End and the Central Area to predominantly white schools in the North End.\nRay said he knew that some North End residents did not want black children bused into their neighborhoods. But for him, the experience offered respite from the projects. \"I've heard things like, 'Forced integration is not good,' 'I want my kid to be able to go to school in our community; that's why we moved here' \u2013 all those things I totally understand,\" he said. \"But from my perspective, I didn't have the luxury of living in a neighborhood where a good school was. We didn't make that kind of money. So from my perspective, it was the best thing that could have happened to me.\" A music teacher at Eckstein Middle School introduced Ray to the possibility of a music career.\nRay was interested in electronics and CB radio from a young age. One of his early jobs was working at a pinball arcade servicing machines, and during that time he started to fix keyboards and other musical equipment. He still works with electronics as a hobby.\nCareer.\n1980s.\nSoon after high school, he began DJing parties at local community centers. By 1983, Sir Mix-a-Lot had begun playing weekends regularly at the Rainier Vista Boys and Girls Club in South Seattle. Soon he moved locations and started hosting his parties at the Rotary Boys and Girls Club in the Central District. It was there that he met 'Nasty' Nes Rodriguez, a local radio DJ and host of Fresh Tracks, the West Coast's first rap radio show on Seattle station KKFX (K-Fox).\nSir Mix-a-Lot partnered with Nasty Nes and local businessman Ed Locke to found the Nastymix record label in 1983. The first song to gain popularity outside of Seattle was \"Square Dance Rap\" in 1986. Mix-a-Lot had originally decided to rap the entire song slowly, then speed it up and increase its pitch in post production, Mix later told \"Seattle Refined\" in 2018 that \"I didn't want to rap, that's why I use this weird Smurf voice\". After the song was picked up by DJs in clubs nationwide, he toured Florida, New York, and other states. While in Arizona, he noticed a street named Broadway with a restaurant named Dick's, just like Seattle. This gave him the idea to write his next hit, \"Posse on Broadway\". The title referred to Broadway in Seattle's Capitol Hill district. Released in 1987, the single made the Top 100 but quickly disappeared, although it remains popular in the Seattle area for its references to many local landmarks.\n\"Swass\", Sir Mix-a-Lot's debut album, was released in 1988 with two other singles: \"Square-Dance Rap\" and \"Iron Man\", a rap metal track sampling from the song of the same name by Black Sabbath; it was backed by the band Metal Church. In 1990, the Recording Industry Association of America certified \"Swass\" platinum.\n\"Seminar\", released in 1989, featured \"My Hooptie\", \"Beepers\", \"Gortex\" and \"I Got Game\".\n1990s.\nIn 1991, Sir Mix-a-Lot signed to the Def American label, which also bought the rights to his first two albums, and released his third album \"Mack Daddy\" in 1992. The single \"Baby Got Back\" was a number one hit that went double platinum and won the 1993 Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance. MTV aired the music video for the song only after 9 PM because of \"many, many, complaints.\"\nIn 1993, Sir Mix-a-Lot collaborated with Seattle-based grunge band Mudhoney for the song \"Freak Momma\" on the \"Judgment Night\" soundtrack.\nIn 1994, he released the album \"Chief Boot Knocka\", which reached No. 69 on the Billboard 200 and No. 28 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Chart. The album featured the hit single \"Put 'Em On The Glass\". \"Just Da Pimpin' in Me\" was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance but lost to \"Let Me Ride\" by Dr. Dre.\nWhen his 1996 album \"Return of the Bumpasaurus\" was only given a low label promotion, leading to lackluster sales, Sir Mix-a-Lot left Def American.\nIn 1999\u20132000, he worked closely with the band The Presidents of the United States of America under the group name \"Subset\" with a combination of rock and rap music. They released some songs online and toured, but nothing was ever officially released.\n2000s.\nSir Mix-a-Lot signed with the independent label Artist Direct for his 2003 album \"Daddy's Home\" with \"Big Johnson\" as its lead single. The next year, he released a DVD entitled \"Shhhh... Don't Tell 'Em That\" to promote the album.\n2010s.\nIn 2010, Sir Mix-a-Lot announced his next album, \"Dun 4got About Mix\". The lead single \"Carz\" was released to YouTube on 23 Nov 2010. By June 2011, the video had had over a million views, although no release date for the album has been set as of 2023. In the same year, his \"F.U.B.a.R. Remix\" for the song \"Conditions Of My Parole\" appeared on Puscifer's remix album \"All Re-Mixed Up\".\nIn 2013, Sir Mix-a-Lot produced the album \"Dream\" for the urban rock band Ayron Jones and The Way. He opened their album release party at Neumos on November 2. That Christmas season, he promoted the Washington State Lottery over the Christmas season, with advertisements featuring his music appearing on Spotify.\nOn June 6, 2014, Sir Mix-a-Lot collaborated and performed with the Seattle Symphony on a new composition by Gabriel Prokofiev as part of the symphony's Sonic Evolution series of new orchestral pieces inspired by Seattle's music icons.\nIn 2014, rapper Nicki Minaj released the single \"Anaconda\", which prominently featured samples from \"Baby Got Back\". Sir Mix-a-Lot praised both the artist and the song, calling it the \"new and improved version\" of \"Baby Got Back\".\nIn March 2016, Sir Mix-a-Lot collaborated with TNT and LK on the track and video, \"Streets Don't Love Me\".\nFrom 2017 to 2019, Sir Mix-a-Lot hosted a morning radio show based in Seattle on Hot 103.7 FM.\nHe owns multiple residences, including one in Auburn, Washington, where he has continued to maintain a strong presence performing at small festivals across the country.\nTelevision work.\nIn 1995, Sir Mix-a-Lot was the regular host of the short-lived UPN anthology drama series \"The Watcher\", in which, in 2000, he was quoted in \"Vibe\" magazine as saying \"in retrospect, I wish I hadn't done (the show)\".\nIn 2006, Sir Mix-a-Lot appeared on Adult Swim's \"Tom Goes to the Mayor\" and the 17th Treehouse of Horror on Fox's \"The Simpsons\". In 2008, he appeared on Adult Swim's \"Robot Chicken\" singing a song entitled \"Table Be Round\". It was sung in the style of \"Baby Got Back\", but was about to King Arthur's creation of the Round Table. He also voiced politician Hans Blix and singer Stevie Wonder in the season 3 finale. He appeared in \"The Judge\" episode of Season 4 of \"BoJack Horseman\" playing himself. Then in 2025, He appeared in the episode, \"Lois C.K.\" on Fox's \"Family Guy\" while singing a song entitled \"Lady Kneecaps\". Which was also sung in the style of \"Baby Got Back\", but was about big thighs.\nSir Mix-a-Lot provides narration and commentary in \"Wheedle's Groove\", a 2009 documentary about the Seattle 1960s and 70s funk and soul scene.\nIn June 2018, the DIY Network aired a special called \"Sir Mix-A-Lot's House Remix\", which involved Sir Mix-a-Lot buying and flipping a house in Seattle.\nIn 2019, he became the spokesperson for Cards Against Humanity's \"Ass Pack\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47067", "revid": "37068836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47067", "title": "Pope Anicetus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from c. 157 to 168\nPope Anicetus (Greek: \u0391\u03bd\u03af\u03ba\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) was the bishop of Rome from c. 157 to his death in April 168. According to the \"Annuario Pontificio\", the start of his papacy may have been 153. Anicetus actively opposed Gnosticism and Marcionism. He welcomed Polycarp of Smyrna to Rome to discuss the Easter controversy.\nBiography.\nAccording to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Anicetus was a Syrian from the city of Emesa (modern-day Homs).\nAccording to Irenaeus, it was during his pontificate that the aged Polycarp of Smyrna, a disciple of John the Evangelist, visited Rome to discuss the celebration of Easter with Anicetus. Polycarp and his Church of Smyrna celebrated the crucifixion on the fourteenth day of Nisan, which coincides with Pesach (or Passover) regardless of which day of the week upon this date fell, while the Roman Church celebrated Easter on Sunday\u2014the weekday of Jesus's resurrection. The two did not agree on a common date, but Anicetus conceded to Polycarp and the Church of Smyrna the ability to retain the date to which they were accustomed. The controversy was to grow heated in the following centuries.\nThe Christian historian Hegesippus also visited Rome during Anicetus's pontificate. This visit is often cited as a sign of the early importance of the Roman See.\nAnicetus actively opposed the Gnostics and Marcionism. The \"Liber Pontificalis\" records that Anicetus decreed that priests are not allowed to have long hair (perhaps because the Gnostics wore long hair).\nAccording to church tradition, Anicetus suffered martyrdom during the reign of Emperor Lucius Verus, but there are no historical grounds for this account. 16, 17 and 20 April are all cited as the date of his death, but 20 April is currently celebrated as his feast day. Before 1970, the date chosen was 17 April. The \"Liber Pontificalis\" states he was buried in the cemetery of Callistus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47071", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47071", "title": "SCOTUS", "text": ""}
{"id": "47072", "revid": "10190671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47072", "title": "Catherine of Valois", "text": "Queen of England from 1420 to 1422\nCatherine of Valois or Catherine of France (27 October 1401 \u2013 3 January 1437) was Queen of England from 1420 until 1422. A daughter of King Charles VI of France, she married King Henry V of England and was the mother of King Henry VI. Catherine's marriage was part of a plan to eventually place Henry V on the throne of France, and perhaps end what is now known as the Hundred Years' War. But, although her son Henry VI was later crowned in Paris, the war continued. \nAfter Henry V's death, Catherine's unexpected marriage to Sir Owen Tudor helped lead to the rise of the House of Tudor's fortunes and to her Tudor grandson's eventual elevation to the throne as King Henry VII of England.\nEarly life.\nCatherine of Valois was the youngest daughter of King Charles VI of France and his wife Isabeau of Bavaria. She was born at the H\u00f4tel Saint-Pol (a royal palace in Paris) on 27 October 1401. Early on, there had been a discussion of marrying her to the Prince of Wales, the son of Henry IV of England, but the king died before negotiations could begin. In 1414, the prince, now Henry V, re-opened discussion of the match, along with a large dowry and acknowledgement of his right to the throne of France.\nSome authors, such as Agnes Strickland, have maintained that Catherine was neglected as a child by her mother, with Strickland claiming that the princess and her sisters were left \u2018in a piteous state.\u2019 However, modern examination of the evidence suggests otherwise. According to the financial accounts of her mother, toys and gifts befitting a French princess were purchased, including pet turtledoves for Catherine. Religious texts were also provided, and Catherine was sent to the convent at Poissy, where her sister Marie had been consecrated, to receive an education. In 1417, Catherine accompanied her mother during her imprisonment at Tours.\nRoyal marriage.\nHenry V went to war with France, and even after the victory at Agincourt, plans for the marriage continued. Catherine was said to be very attractive, and when Henry finally met her at Meulan, he became enamoured. On 21 May 1420, a peace agreement was made between England and France, the Treaty of Troyes, and Charles acknowledged Henry of England as his heir. Catherine and Henry were married at the Parish Church of St John or at Troyes Cathedral on 2 June 1420. Catherine went to England with her new husband and was crowned queen in Westminster Abbey on 23 February 1421. On 10 June 1421, Henry returned to France to continue his military campaigns.\nBy this time, Catherine was several months pregnant and gave birth to a son, whom she named Henry, on 6 December 1421 at Windsor. Her husband never saw their child. During the siege of Meaux, he became sick and died on 31 August 1422, just before his 36th birthday. Catherine was not quite 21 and was left a queen dowager. Charles VI died a couple of months after Henry V, making the young Henry VI king of England and English-occupied northern France. Catherine doted on her son during his early childhood.\nRelationship with Owen Tudor.\nCatherine was still young and marriageable, a source of concern to her brother-in-law Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, the guardian of her son. Rumours abounded that Catherine planned to marry Edmund Beaufort, Count of Mortain, her late husband's cousin. The Duke of Gloucester was strongly against the match, however, and the Parliament of 1427\u20138 passed a bill which set forth the provision that if the queen dowager remarried without the king's consent, her husband would forfeit his lands and possessions, although any children of the marriage would not suffer punishment. The king's consent was contingent upon his having attained his majority. At that time, the king was only six years old.\nCatherine lived in the king's household, presumably so she could care for her young son, but the arrangement also enabled the councillors to watch over the queen dowager herself. Nevertheless, Catherine entered into a sexual relationship with Welshman Owen Maredudd Tudor, who, in 1421, in France, had been in the service of Henry V's steward Sir Walter Hungerford. Tudor was probably appointed keeper of Catherine's household or wardrobe. The relationship began when Catherine lived at Windsor Castle, and she became pregnant with their first child there. At some point, she stopped living in the King's household, and in May 1432, Parliament granted Owen the rights of an Englishman. This was important because of Henry IV's laws limiting the rights of Welshmen.\nThere is no known date of Catherine's marriage to Owen, and yet there is no contemporaneous evidence that the validity of the marriage and the legitimacy of her children were questioned in secular or canon law. From the relationship of Owen Tudor and Queen Catherine descended the Tudor dynasty of England, starting with King Henry VII. Tudor historians asserted that Owen and Catherine had been married, for their lawful marriage would add respectability and stronger royal ties to the claims of the Tudor dynasty.\nOwen and Catherine had at least six children. Edmund, Jasper and Edward (who became a monk and died young) were all born away from court. They had one daughter, Margaret, who became a nun and also died young.\nDeath and aftermath.\nCatherine died on 3 January 1437, shortly after childbirth, in London, and was \"buried in the old Lady chapel\" of Westminster Abbey. Other records state that she did not die as a result of childbirth, but entered Bermondsey Abbey, possibly seeking a cure for an illness that had troubled her for some time. She made her will three days before her death. She is buried at Westminster Abbey in Henry V's Chantry Chapel. After her death, Catherine's enemies decided to proceed against Owen for violating the law of the remarriage of the queen dowager. Owen appeared before the Council, was subsequently arrested, and taken to Newgate Prison. He tried to escape from there in early 1438 and eventually ended up at Windsor Castle in July of that year.\nMeanwhile, Owen and Catherine's two older sons, Edmund and Jasper, went to live with Katherine de la Pole, Abbess of Barking, and sister of William de la Pole, 1st Duke of Suffolk. Sometime after 1442, the king (their half-brother) took a role in their upbringing. Owen, their father, was eventually released on \u00a32000 bail, but was pardoned in November 1439 (and the bail cancelled in 1440). Owen was treated well afterwards and was a member of the king's household until the mid-1450s. He lived until 1461, when he was executed by the Yorkists following the Battle of Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire. Their surviving sons were given earldoms by Catherine's son King Henry VI. Edmund married Margaret Beaufort, a descendant of John of Gaunt who had consequently a distant but disputed claim to the throne; following the elimination by war of most other candidates, their son became King Henry VII.\nThe wooden funeral effigy which was carried at Catherine's funeral still survives at Westminster Abbey, and was previously on display in the Westminster Abbey Museum in the Undercroft. It is now displayed in the new Queen's Diamond Jubilee Gallery in the abbey triforium. Her tomb originally boasted an alabaster memorial, which was deliberately destroyed during extensions to the abbey in the reign of her grandson, Henry VII. It has been suggested that Henry ordered her memorial to be removed to distance himself from his illegitimate ancestry. At this time, her coffin lid was accidentally raised, revealing her corpse, which for generations became a tourist attraction. In 1669 the diarist Samuel Pepys kissed the long-deceased queen on his birthday: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On Shrove Tuesday 1669, I to the Abbey went, and by favour did see the body of Queen Catherine of Valois, and had the upper part of the body in my hands, and I did kiss her mouth, reflecting upon it I did kiss a Queen: and this my birthday and I thirty-six years old and I did kiss a Queen.\u2014\u200a\nCatherine's remains were not properly re-interred until the reign of Queen Victoria.\nCultural depictions.\nPlays\nIn historical fiction\nIn film and TV\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47074", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47074", "title": "Free Software", "text": ""}
{"id": "47075", "revid": "47044861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47075", "title": "GNU/Linux distribution", "text": ""}
{"id": "47077", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47077", "title": "Manzanar internment camp", "text": ""}
{"id": "47078", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47078", "title": "Manzanar relocation camp", "text": ""}
{"id": "47079", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47079", "title": "Manzanar National Historic Site, California", "text": ""}
{"id": "47080", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47080", "title": "Manzanar National Historic Site", "text": ""}
{"id": "47081", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47081", "title": "CSMA/CD", "text": ""}
{"id": "47082", "revid": "19339494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47082", "title": "Fishbourne Roman Palace", "text": "Archaeological site in Fishbourne, Sussex, United Kingdom\nFishbourne Roman Palace or Fishbourne Villa is in the village of Fishbourne, near Chichester in West Sussex. The palace is the largest known Roman residence north of the Alps, and has an unusually early date of 75\u00a0AD, around thirty years after the Roman conquest of Britain.\nMuch of the palace has been excavated and is preserved, along with an on-site museum. The rectangular palace surrounded formal gardens, the northern parts of which have been reconstructed.\nExtensive alterations were made in the second and third centuries AD, when many of the original black and white mosaics were overlaid with more sophisticated coloured work, including the perfectly preserved Dolphin mosaic in the north wing. More alterations were in progress when the palace burnt down in around 270\u00a0AD, after which it was abandoned.\nDiscovery and excavation.\nThe site was accidentally discovered in 1805, during the construction of a new home on the grounds of the ancient Roman ruin.\u00a0 Workers discovered pavement as well as fragments of columns. In the following years, additional remains such as pottery fragments and portions of mosaic tiles were unearthed by local inhabitants who lived near to the site. However, the locals were unable to conceive the fact that the findings were part of a larger unknown structure that remained below the surface. It wasn't until 1960, that Aubrey Barrett, an engineer working for the Portsmouth Water Company, discovered the foundations of a \u201cmasonry building\u201d located north of the main road while digging a trench for a water main.\nThis rediscovery of the ancient structure caught the attention of the Sussex Archaeological Society and triggered the first series of excavations, directed by the archeologist Barry Cunliffe and his team in 1961. Cunliffe's findings from his digs provide the most significant portion of the information associated with the site.\u00a0 In the years following the initial excavations led by Cunliffe, a series of further excavations were conducted, each of which focused on unearthing various other areas of the ancient site.\nTo the surprise of archeologists and historians alike, each stage of excavations revealed previously unknown details surrounding the site's vast and complex history. For instance, from 1995 to 1999, the archeologists John Manley and David Rudkin conducted digs that focused on southern portions of the site, which exposed significant evidence of human activity prior to the Roman conquest in 43\u00a0AD. \u00a0Over the course of five years, Manley's team of archeologists discovered nearly twelve thousand artifacts, including flint tools that are believed to date back to the Mesolithic period (around 5000\u20134000\u00a0BC) and could indicate the presence of a hunter and gatherer settlement near the present-day location of the Fishbourne palace. However, the most intriguing and significant evidence of pre-Roman human activity at the site comes from a ditch containing nearly seven hundred fragments of pottery and a cup that can be traced back to a period within the Late Iron Age. The findings made by Manley and his team challenge Cunliffe's earlier assumptions by suggesting the likely presence of significant human activity at Fishbourne prior to 43\u00a0AD.\nThe site of the excavated Roman villa \u00a0was so large that it became known as Fishbourne Roman Palace. In size, it is approximately equivalent to Nero's Golden House in Rome or to the Villa Romana del Casale near to Piazza Armerina in Sicily, and in plan it closely mirrors the basic organization of the Emperor Domitian's palace, the Domus Flavia, completed in 92\u00a0AD upon the Palatine Hill in Rome. Fishbourne is by far the largest Roman residence known north of the Alps. At about , it has a larger footprint than Buckingham Palace.\nSiting.\nThe location of Fishbourne, in proximity to Chichester (\"Noviomagus Reginorum\"), is often looked to when discussing the opulent wealth represented at Fishbourne as well as solidification for the claim of Tiberius Claudius Cogidubnus as the villa owner. The city of Chichester was in the heart of the dominant Atrebates tribe, but their early introduction to Roman imperialism created a pseudo-friendly relationship between the Romans and the Atrebates. The tribal people in the area were later called the \"Regni\" after being ruled by Roman client kings for so long. A research article written by David Tomalin, suggests that the Fishbourne palace may have possibly been designated as a \"seat of lordship\", which meant that it may have had greater financial and social authority as opposed to other palaces or villas in its vicinity. Furthermore, the palace's proximity to the Fishbourne channel, which provided ships with access to the sea, meant that it could have potentially had its own harbour that received trading ships at one point.\nHistory and description.\nThe first buildings on the site were granaries, over long, apparently a supply base for the Roman army constructed in the early part of the conquest in 43\u00a0AD. Later, two residential timber-frame buildings were constructed, one with clay and mortar floors and plaster walls which appears to have been a house of some comfort.\nThese buildings were demolished around 60\u00a0AD and replaced nearby with an elaborate and substantial stone-walled villa, or proto-palace, in about 65\u00a0AD which included a courtyard garden with colonnades and a bath suite, together with two other buildings, and using material taken from the earlier buildings. It was decorated with wall paintings, stucco mouldings and \"opus sectile\" marble polychrome panels. The life-size head of a young man carved in marble, found during excavations in May 1964, and identified as a likeness of Nero aged 13 created at, or shortly after, his formal adoption by the Emperor Claudius in 50\u00a0AD probably originated from the proto-palace. Foreign, probably Italian, craftsmen had to be employed at this early period. This building was not unique in this area as the villa at Angmering was similar in many respects and suggests a number of aristocrats living in the area who must have used the same workforce.\nThe full-size palace with four residential wings surrounding a formal courtyard garden of was built in around 75\u201380\u00a0AD and took around five years to complete, incorporating the proto-palace in its south-east corner. Massive levelling of the vast site reached up to in places. The gardens were surrounded by colonnades in the form of a peristyle.\nThe north and east wings each consisted of suites of rooms built around courtyards, with a monumental entrance in the middle of the east wing. In the north-east corner was a huge aisled assembly hall. The west wing contained state rooms, a large ceremonial reception room, and a gallery. The south wing probably contained the owner's private apartments although the north wing has the most elaborate visible mosaics. The palace included as many as 50 excellent mosaic floors, under-floor central heating and an integral bathhouse. The garden was shown to contain elaborate plantings of shaped beds for hedges and trees with water supplies for fountains. In addition the south wing overlooked a vast artificial terrace laid out as a rectangular garden extending 300\u00a0ft towards the sea where there was a quay wall. This garden was planted as a \"natural\" landscape with trees and shrubs, and with a pond and stream. It also had colonnades on at least one side.\nThe decoration of the palace was elaborate, including wall paintings, stucco mouldings and \"opus sectile\", marble polychrome panels, examples of which are in the museum. As in the proto-palace, foreign craftsmen had to be employed at this early period.The palace outlasted the original owner and was extensively re-modelled early in the 2nd century, and maybe subdivided into two or more separate villas with the addition of a baths suite in the north wing. A remarkable new Medusa mosaic was also laid over an earlier one in the centre of the north wing in about 100\u00a0AD.\nIn the middle of the second century AD, further major redesign included demolition of the recent baths suite and the eastern end of the north wing, probably due to subsidence from underlying earlier infill. New baths were built in the garden and peristyle in front of the east wing and a wall across the garden enclosed the northern half. The north wing was also extensively altered in plan, with four new polychrome mosaics including the Cupid mosaic dating from about 160\u00a0AD. Further redevelopment was done at times in the late third century. The final alterations were incomplete when the north wing was destroyed in a fire c.\u2009270\u00a0AD.\nOwner.\nThe accepted theory, first proposed by Barry Cunliffe, is that the early phase of the palace was the residence of Tiberius Claudius Cogidubnus (or Togidubnus), a pro-Roman local chieftain who was installed as king of a number of territories following the first stage of the conquest. Cogidubnus is known from a reference to his loyalty in Tacitus's \"Agricola\", and from an inscription commemorating a temple dedicated to Neptune and Minerva found in nearby Chichester. Furthermore, around 60\u00a0AD, Cogidubnus was granted the prominent title of \"legatus Augusti\", which normally restricted to the statesmen and aristocrats of Rome. Cunliffe correlates this event with the construction of a large masonry extension of the palace in 70\u00a0AD, which was fitting for an individual of such a high status in order to support his theory.\nAnother theory is that it was built for another native, Sallustius Lucullus, a Roman governor of Britain of the late 1st century who may have been the son of the British prince Adminius. Two inscriptions recording the presence of Lucullus have been found in Chichester and the re-dating, by Miles Russell, of the palace to the early 90s\u00a0AD, would fit far more securely with such an interpretation. If the palace was designed for Lucullus, then it may have only been in use for a few years, for the Roman historian Suetonius records that Lucullus was executed by the delusional Emperor Domitian in or shortly after 93\u00a0AD.\nAdditional theories suggest that owner of the palace was either Verica, a British client king of the Roman Empire in the years preceding the Claudian invasion, or even one Tiberius Claudius Catuarus, whose gold signet ring was discovered nearby in 1995.\nDestruction and aftermath.\nThere is overwhelming evidence that the north wing was completely destroyed in a fire around 270\u00a0AD. For instance, some of the rubble from the collapsed roof as well as its tiles and melted fittings were scattered on the ground floor, while some of the burnt doors remained standing. There is also evidence of extreme heat that can be found on the tiles, which were discoloured. The fire did not consume the east wing of the palace, although the decision was later made to demolish the baths located in that wing around 290\u00a0AD.\nIt is unclear whether the fire was accidental or intentional; however, its destruction correlated with a period of instability. During this period, Rome's control over Britain was contested by a former Roman military commander named Carausius, who revolted against the Roman hegemony and declared himself ruler of the Isle around 280\u00a0AD. In turn, it is possible that the palace's destruction was a part of a more widespread period of disruption caused by the revolt, although this scenario is not certain.\nAll objects and furnishings within the palace were completely destroyed and the only thing that remained standing was the palace walls. The damage was too great to repair, and the palace was abandoned and later dismantled. Furthermore, the rising water levels and subsequent flooding in the surrounding area may have also influenced the decision not to restore the structure. Over the course of the following years, the local inhabitants of Chichester raided the site for its building stones, which is why the ground-stone foundations of the walls are the only part of the ancient structure remaining today.\nThe site of the palace was later used as a burial ground during the early Saxon period, which became clear upon the discovery of four corpses within the foundation of the ancient ruin. During the Medieval period, the palace lay below several feet of built-up soil and was forgotten about until its re-discovery in the 19th century.\nLegacy.\nA museum was erected over the excavated palace by the Sussex Archaeological Society, in order to protect and preserve some of the remains \"in situ\". The museum incorporates most of the visible remains, including one wing of the palace. The gardens were re-planted using authentic plants from the Roman period, including roses, lilies, rosemary, various fruit trees and boxed hedges. A team of volunteers and professional archaeologists are involved in a continuing research archaeological excavation on the site of nearby, possible military buildings as well as a harbour area located on the southern portion of the Fishbourne site. The latest excavation season was conducted in 2002.\nThe Fishbourne Roman Palace Museum was closed to the public in March 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Sussex Archaeological Society lost an estimated \u00a31 million in income from visitors, and in June began a fundraising appeal so that it could continue maintaining Fishbourne Roman Palace along with other properties. The Fishbourne Roman Palace has since reopened to the public.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47083", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47083", "title": "Carrier-sense multiple access", "text": "System allowing transmitters to take turns on a shared media\nCarrier-sense multiple access (CSMA) is a medium access control (MAC) protocol in which a node verifies the absence of other traffic before transmitting on a shared transmission medium, such as an electrical bus or a band of the electromagnetic spectrum.\nUnder CSMA, a transmitter uses a carrier-sense mechanism to determine whether another transmission is in progress before initiating a transmission. That is, it tries to detect the presence of a carrier signal from another node before attempting to transmit. If a carrier is sensed, the node waits for the transmission in progress to end before initiating its own transmission. Using CSMA, multiple nodes may, in turn, send and receive on the same medium. Transmissions by one node are generally received by all other nodes connected to the medium.\nVariations on basic CSMA include addition of collision-avoidance (CSMA/CA), collision-detection (CSMA/CD) and collision-resolution techniques.\nAccess modes.\nVariations of CSMA use different algorithms to determine when to initiate transmission onto the shared medium. A key distinguishing feature of these algorithms is how aggressive or persistent they are in initiating transmission. A more aggressive algorithm may begin transmission more quickly and utilize a greater percentage of the available bandwidth of the medium. This is typically at the expense of an increased likelihood of collision with other transmitters.\n1-persistent.\n1-persistent CSMA is an aggressive transmission algorithm. When the transmitting node is ready to transmit, it senses the transmission medium for idle or busy. If idle, then it transmits immediately. If busy, then it senses the transmission medium continuously until it becomes idle, then transmits the message (a frame) unconditionally (i.e. with probability=1). In case of a collision, the sender waits for a random period of time and attempts the same procedure again. 1-persistent CSMA is used in CSMA/CD systems including Ethernet.\nNon-persistent.\nNon persistent CSMA is a non-aggressive transmission algorithm. When the transmitting node is ready to transmit data, it senses the transmission medium for idle or busy. If idle, then it transmits immediately. If busy, it jumps to the final random waiting step of 1-persistent CSMA directly before repeating the whole logic cycle again: it does not persist in checking the busy channel trying to get its transmission through, hence the name. This approach reduces the chance of collision and results in overall higher medium throughput but with a penalty of longer initial delay compared to 1\u2013persistent.\nP-persistent.\nThis approach lies between the 1-persistent and non-persistent CSMA access modes. When the transmitting node is ready to transmit data, it senses the transmission medium for idle or busy. If idle, then it transmits immediately. If busy, then it senses the transmission medium continuously until it becomes idle, then transmits with probability \"p\". If the node does not transmit (the probability of this event is \"1-p\"), it waits for a random period of time before re-attempting the same procedure, using the same probability \"p\". If the transmission medium is not busy, it transmits again with the same probability \"p\". This probabilistic hold-off repeats until the frame is finally transmitted or when the medium is found to become busy again (i.e. some other node has already started transmitting). In the latter case the node repeats the whole logic cycle (which started with sensing the transmission medium for idle or busy) again. p-persistent CSMA is used in CSMA/CA systems including Wi-Fi and other packet radio systems. Note that \"p = 0\"-persistent CSMA is different from non-persistent CSMA. Both can only transmit at the start of the procedure (if the channel is idle), but their behaviour on a busy channel differs: non-persistent CSMA doesn't attempt to sense the channel and restarts its logical cycle, whilst \"p = 0\" necessarily gets stuck in an infinite loop of waiting (since it has zero probability of transmission even if the channel goes back to being idle).\nO-persistent.\nEach node is assigned a transmission order by a supervisory node. When the transmission medium goes idle, nodes wait for their time slot in accordance with their assigned transmission order. The node assigned to transmit first transmits immediately. The node assigned to transmit second waits one time slot (but by that time the first node has already started transmitting). Nodes monitor the medium for transmissions from other nodes and update their assigned order with each detected transmission (i.e. they move one position closer to the front of the queue). O-persistent CSMA is used by CobraNet, LonWorks and the controller area network.\nProtocol modifications.\nWhen broadcasting over vehicular ad hoc networks, the original 1-persistence and p-persistence strategies often cause the broadcast storm problem. To improve performance, engineers developed three modified techniques: weighted p-persistence, slotted 1-persistence, and slotted p-persistence.\nCarrier-sense multiple access with collision detection.\nCSMA/CD is used to improve CSMA performance by terminating transmission as soon as a collision is detected, thus shortening the time required before a retry can be attempted. CSMA/CD is used by Ethernet.\nCarrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance.\nIn CSMA/CA collision avoidance is used to improve the performance of CSMA. If the transmission medium is sensed busy before transmission, then the transmission is deferred for a random interval. This random interval reduces the likelihood that two or more nodes waiting to transmit will simultaneously begin transmission upon termination of the detected transmission, thus reducing the incidence of collision. CSMA/CA is used by Wi-Fi.\nCSMA with Collision Resolution.\nCSMA/CR uses priorities in the frame header to avoid collisions. It is used in the Controller Area Network.\nVirtual time CSMA.\nVTCSMA is designed to avoid collision generated by nodes transmitting signals simultaneously, used mostly in hard real-time systems. It uses two clocks to prioritize messages based on their deadline.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47084", "revid": "913893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47084", "title": "Lima (disambiguation)", "text": "Lima is the capital of Peru.\nLima or LIMA may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47085", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47085", "title": "List of Welsh people", "text": "This is a list of Welsh people; an ethnic group and nation associated with Wales.\nHistorian John Davies argues that the origin of the Welsh nation can be traced to the late 4th and early 5th centuries, following the Roman departure from Britain, although Brythonic or other Celtic languages seem to have been spoken in Wales since much earlier.\nThis list is for people of Welsh heritage and descent, and for those otherwise perceived as Welsh; through either birth or adoption. Only those meeting are included. A few people appear in more than one section of the list.\nActors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArchitects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArtists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDesigners.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEntrepreneurs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilm directors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHumourists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInventors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJournalists and broadcasters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMilitary men.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMonarchs and princes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMusicians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoliticians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReligious figures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScientists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports people.\nAthletes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBoxers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCricketers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMotor sports.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRugby players.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis list includes league, female and uncapped players\nSnooker players.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSport shooters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSurfers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSwimmers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWrestlers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTrade union leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWriters.\nFor Welsh writers, see:\nOther notables.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47086", "revid": "14835592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47086", "title": "Mac OS X Server", "text": "Server software for macOS\nMac OS\u00a0X Server is a series of discontinued Unix-like server operating systems developed by Apple, based on macOS. It provided server functionality and system administration tools, and tools to manage both macOS-based computers and iOS-based devices, network services such as a mail transfer agent, AFP and SMB servers, an LDAP server, and a domain name server, as well as server applications including a Web server, database, and calendar server.\nStarting with OS X Lion, Apple stopped selling a standalone server operating system, instead releasing an add-on Server app marketed as OS X Server (and later macOS Server), which was sold through the Mac App Store. The Server app lacked many features from Mac OS X Server, and later versions of the app only included functionality related to user and group management, Xsan, and mobile device management through profiles. The Server app was discontinued on April 21, 2022, and Apple said that later versions of macOS would drop support for it.\nHistory.\nMac OS X Server is based on an open source foundation called Darwin and uses open industry standards and protocols. Mac OS X Server was provided as the operating system for Xserve computers, and rack-mounted server computers designed by Apple. It was optionally pre-installed on the Mac Mini and Mac Pro and was sold separately for use on any Macintosh computer meeting its minimum requirements.\nMac OS X Server 1.0 (Rhapsody).\nMac OS X Server 1.0 was released in March 1999, predating the release of the consumer version of Mac OS X by two years. Mac OS X Server 1.0 was based on Rhapsody, a hybrid of OPENSTEP from NeXT Computer and Mac OS 8.5.1. The GUI looked like a mixture of Mac OS 8's Platinum appearance with OPENSTEP's NeXT-based interface. It included a runtime layer called Blue Box for running legacy Mac OS-based applications within a separate window. There was discussion of implementing a 'transparent blue box' which would intermix Mac OS applications with those written for Rhapsody's Yellow Box environment, but this would not happen until Mac OS X's Classic environment. Apple File Services, Macintosh Manager, QuickTime Streaming Server, WebObjects, and NetBoot were included with Mac OS X Server 1.0. It could not use FireWire devices. The last release is Mac OS X Server 1.2v3.\nMac OS X Server 10.0 (Cheetah).\nMac OS X Server 10.0 (released May 21, 2001) included the new Aqua user interface, Apache, PHP, MySQL, Tomcat, WebDAV support, Macintosh Manager, and NetBoot.\nMac OS X Server 10.1 (Puma).\nMac OS X Server 10.1 (released September 25, 2001) featured improved performance, increased system stability, and decreased file transfer times compared to Mac OS X Server 10.0. Support was added for RAID 0 and RAID 1 storage configurations, and Mac OS 9.2.1 in NetBoot.\nMac OS X Server 10.2 (Jaguar).\nMac OS X Server 10.2 (released August 23, 2002) includes updated Open Directory user and file management, which with this release is based on LDAP, beginning the deprecation of the NeXT-originated NetInfo architecture. The new Workgroup Manager interface improved configuration significantly. The release also saw major updates to NetBoot and NetInstall. Many common network services are provided such as NTP, SNMP, web server (Apache), mail server (Postfix and Cyrus), LDAP (OpenLDAP), AFP, and print server. The inclusion of Samba version 3 allows tight integration with Windows clients and servers. MySQL v4.0.16 and PHP v4.3.7 are also included.\nMac OS X Server 10.3 (Panther).\nMac OS X Server 10.3 (released October 24, 2003) release includes updated Open Directory user and file management, which with this release is based on LDAP, beginning the deprecation of the NeXT-originated NetInfo architecture. The new Workgroup Manager interface improved configuration significantly. Many common network services are provided such as NTP, SNMP, web server (Apache), mail server (Postfix and Cyrus), LDAP (OpenLDAP), AFP, and print server. The inclusion of Samba version 3 allows tight integration with Windows clients and servers. MySQL v4.0.16 and PHP v4.3.7 are also included.\nMac OS X Server 10.4 (Tiger).\nThe 10.4 release (April 29, 2005) adds 64-bit application support, Access Control Lists, Xgrid, link aggregation, e-mail spam filtering (SpamAssassin), virus detection (ClamAV), Gateway Setup Assistant, and servers for Software Update, iChat Server using XMPP, Boot Camp Assistant, Dashboard, and Weblog Server based on the open-source Blojsom project (Java).\nOn August 10, 2006, Apple announced the first Universal Binary release of Mac OS X Server, version 10.4.7, supporting both PowerPC and Intel processors. At the same time Apple announced the release of the Intel-based Mac Pro and Xserve systems.\nMac OS X Server 10.5 (Leopard).\nLeopard Server (released October 26, 2007) sold for $999 for an unlimited-client license. Mac OS\u00a0X Server version 10.5.x \u2018Leopard\u2019 was the last major version of Mac OS\u00a0X Server to support PowerPC-based servers and workstations, such as the Apple Xserve G5 and Power Mac G5.\nFeatures:\nMac OS X Server 10.6 (Snow Leopard).\nMac OS X Snow Leopard Server (released August 28, 2009) sold for $499 and included unlimited client licenses.\nNew Features:\nServer app.\nIn releasing the developer preview of Mac OS X Lion in February 2011, Apple indicated that beginning with Lion, Mac OS X Server would be bundled with the operating system and would not be marketed as a separate product. However, a few months later, the company said it would instead sell the server components as a US$49.99 add-on to Lion, distributed through the Mac App Store (as well as Lion itself). The combined cost of an upgrade to Lion and the purchase of the OS X Server add-on, which costs approximately US$50, was nonetheless significantly lower than the retail cost of Snow Leopard Server (US$499). Lion Server came with unlimited client licenses as did Snow Leopard Server. Lion Server includes new versions of iCal Server, Wiki Server, and Mail Server. More significantly, Lion Server can be used for iOS mobile device management. Starting with Apple Mac OS\u00a0X Server Version 10.7 \u201cLion,\u201d PostgreSQL replaces MySQL as the database provided with Mac OS\u00a0X Server, coinciding with Oracle Corporation\u2019s acquisition of Sun Microsystems and Oracle\u2019s subsequent attempts to tighten MySQL\u2019s licensing restrictions and to exert influence on MySQL\u2019s previously open and independent development model.\nLike Lion, Mountain Lion had no separate server edition. An OS X Server package was available for Mountain Lion from the Mac App Store for US$19.99, which included a server management application called Server, as well as other additional administrative tools to manage client profiles and Xsan. Mountain Lion Server, like Lion Server, was provided with unlimited client licenses, and once purchased could be run on an unlimited number of systems.\nServer 5.7 (released September 28, 2018) stopped bundling open source services such as Calendar Server, Contacts Server, the Mail Server, DNS, DHCP, VPN Server, and Websites. Included services are now limited to Profile Manager, Open Directory and Xsan.\nServer 5.8 (released March 25, 2019) added new restrictions, payloads, and commands to Profile Manager.\nThe Server app does not support versions of macOS newer than Monterey, marking the end of Mac OS X Server product line.\nBundled applications.\nPrior to OS X Mountain Lion.\nOne of Mac OS X Server's main administrative tools was the Server Administrator app, which allowed users to configure server services, and turn them on or off.\nRAID Admin was a utility for administering and controlling RAIDs, usually Xserve RAIDs. It was written in Java, and could run on Windows or Linux.\nOther bundled tools include:\nAfter OS X Mountain Lion.\nBeginning with the release of OS X Mountain Lion (version 10.8), there is only one Administrative tool, an app called \"Server\", which can be bought and downloaded from the Mac App Store, and is updated independently of OS X. This Server tool is used to configure, maintain and monitor one or more macOS Server installations.\nServer services.\nApple's Address Book Server, iCal Server, Wiki Server, and Web Server are mostly written in the Python programming language, relying on the Twisted framework. Most of these services were discontinued and removed in version 5.7.1 of the Server app, released on September 30, 2018.\nAddress Book Server.\nAddress Book Server is a contacts server, and the first commercial server to have implemented CardDAV, which relies on the WebDAV protocol. It was added in Mac OS X Server 10.6.\niCal Server.\niCal Server is the first commercial calendar server to have implemented the CalDAV standard, built on top of WebDAV. iCal Server was added in Mac OS X Server 10.5, and was also released under the open-source Apache License 2.0 as Darwin Calendar Server.\nThe server, named \"caldavd\", is a daemon background service. It has been ported to non-Apple computer platforms. It is currently possible to install it on FreeBSD and several flavours of Linux. The server uses an SQL database for storage of calendar data.\niChat Server.\niChat Server is an XMPP server that was added in Mac OS X Server 10.4, and was upgraded to version 2 with the release of Mac OS X 10.5 Server in October 2007. iChat Server was originally based on jabberd 1.4.3 and is named after Apple's iChat online chat client software. Version 2 of the software is based on jabberd2 2.0s9 and supports server federation, which allows chat clients to talk directly with other systems that support XMPP. It also supports server-based chat archiving.\nWiki Server.\nWiki Server was a set of services which have shipped with all versions of Mac OS X Server since v10.5 until macOS High Sierra. Mac OS X Server includes web-based Wiki, Weblog, Calendaring, and Contact services. Additionally, it includes a Cocoa application called Directory which allows directory viewing as well as enabling of group services.\nServer 5.7.1, the version aligned with macOS 10.14 and released on September 30, 2018, removed the Wiki Server functionality from Server.app.\nDiscontinuation.\nOn April 21, 2022, Apple announced that they have discontinued macOS Server and that the most popular features (Caching Server, File Sharing Server, and Time Machine Server) are already bundled with every copy of macOS High Sierra and later, so customers will still have access to them. Existing macOS Server customers can still download and use the app with macOS Monterey.\nTechnical specifications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47087", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47087", "title": "AIBO", "text": "Series of entertainment robotic dogs\nAIBO (Artificial Intelligence RoBOt, homonymous with , \"pal\" or \"partner\" in Japanese) is a series of robotic dogs designed and manufactured by Sony. Sony announced a prototype Aibo in mid-1998, and the first consumer model was introduced on 11 May 1999. New models were released every year until 2006. Although most models were inspired by dogs, other inspirations included lion cubs and space explorers. Only the ERS-7, ERS-110/111 and ERS-1000 versions were explicitly a \"robotic dog\", but the 210 can also be considered a dog due to its Jack Russell Terrier appearance and face.\nIn 2006, AIBO was added into the Carnegie Mellon University Robot Hall of Fame.\nOn 26 January 2006 Sony announced that it would discontinue AIBO and several other products in an effort to make the company more profitable. Sony's AIBO customer support was withdrawn gradually, with support for the final ERS-7M3 ending in March 2013.\nIn July 2014, Sony stopped providing repairs for AIBO products and did not provide customer support or repair for the older AIBO robots.\nIn November 2017, Sony announced a new generation of AIBO. The fourth generation model, ERS-1000, was launched in Japan on 11 January 2018. The second lottery sale was set on 6 February 2018.\nHistory.\nThe AIBO product line was developed at Sony's Computer Science Laboratory (CSL). Founded in 1990, CSL was set up to emulate the innovation center at the Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). CSL's first product was the Aperios operating system, which later formed the base software used by some AIBO models. When Nobuyuki Idei became president of Sony in 1995, he sought to adopt a digital agenda and gave greater prominence to CSL.\nDr. Toshitada Doi is credited as AIBO's original progenitor: in 1994 he had started work on robots at CSL with artificial intelligence expert Masahiro Fujita. Fujita felt that the robots' behaviors needed to \"be sufficiently complex or unexpected so that people keep an interest in watching or taking care of it\". Fujita argued at the time that, while technologies such as voice recognition and vision were not mature enough for critical applications, their limited capabilities could be a novel, interesting and attractive feature for \"appropriately designed entertainment robots\". His early monkey-like prototype \"MUTANT\" included behaviors such as tracking a yellow ball, shaking hands, karate strikes and sleeping, all of which were later adopted in AIBOs. Fujita received the IEEE Inaba Technical Award for Innovation Leading to Production for AIBO as \"the world's first mass-market consumer robot for entertainment applications\".\nArtist Hajime Sorayama was enlisted to create the initial designs for the AIBO's body. Those designs are now part of the permanent collections of the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) and the Smithsonian Institution. The first generation AIBO design won Japan's prestigious Good Design Award, Grand Prize and a special Intelligent Design award at the 2000 German Red Dot awards. AIBO was also included in \",\" a 2025 exhibition at the MoMA featuring \"widely recognized design icons [...] highlighting pivotal moments in design history.\"\nIn 1997 Doi received backing from Idei to form Sony's Digital Creatures Lab. Believing that robots would be commonplace in households by 2010, but aware of the shortcomings of available technology for functional uses, he decided to focus on robots for entertainment. Depending on the software and model, AIBO can respond to over 100 voice commands in either their own tonal language or voice recordings to mimic human speech, as well as make other noises. Two of the first generation AIBOs exported into the US came to New York, NY and one remains in the archives and displays at Artspace Company Y LLC.\nLater models of AIBOs were designed jointly with prestigious Japanese designers, and continued to gain design awards. The ERS-210 design was inspired by lion cubs. The bodies of the \"ERS-3x\" series (Latte and Macaron, the round-headed AIBOs released in 2001) were designed by visual artist Katsura Moshino winning the Good Design Award. The sleek and futuristic, space-exploration inspired body of the \"ERS-220\" was designed by Shoji Kawamori, winning the Good Design Award and a Design for Asia award. The ERS-7 also won a Good Design Award.\nAlmost ten years later, Idei's successor, Howard Stringer closed down AIBO and other robotic projects. Doi then staged a mock funeral, attended by more than 100 colleagues from Sony. At the ceremony, Doi said that the AIBO was a symbol of a risk-taking spirit at Sony that was now dead.\nIn November 2017, Sony Corporation announced that AIBO would return with a new model that would be capable of forming an emotional bond with users.\nModels.\nPrototypes.\nSeveral prototypes have been displayed by Sony. Early models were insect-like with six legs. The specifications and design of the 1997 and 1998 prototypes, described in a Sony press release, closely match those of the first generation AIBOs. Differences include the use of PC-Cards for memory (rather than MemoryStick media), the use of two batteries, and the option to use a 2-wheeled \"rolling module\" in place of legs.\nFirst generation models (11x).\nERS-110.\nThe first commercially available AIBO, the ERS-110 has a beagle-like appearance and is silver with a golden-brown hue and grey claws. There was a limited production of 5,000 units: 3,000 for Japan and 2,000 for the US market. Sales began on 1\u00a0June 1999 and sold out via the Internet in 20\u00a0minutes. It is often considered the rarest model of AIBO. The ERS-110 cost 250,000 yen, or US$2,500, which would convert to over $3,500 as of 2020.\nERS-111.\nThe ERS-111 was released in November\u00a01999 and was an improved version of the original AIBO marketed at the same price. It has a similar appearance to ERS-110, with differently shaped ears and a slightly shorter tail, and was available in metallic black or shiny silver with black claws. 40,000 units were manufactured.\nSecond generation models (2x0, 31x).\nERS-210.\nThe ERS-210 was designed to look like a lion cub but was essentially a dog-shape with a flat bull terrier face and Jack Russell Terrier appearance, initially available in black, silver and gold, but later released in a variety of Special Edition colors (Holiday Red, Holiday White, Spring White, Spring Orange, Everest White (pearlescent with pink and blue undertones), Mazeran Green, Sapphire Violet and Cyber Blue). It featured speech recognition capabilities and was the most popular AIBO model with over 65,000 units sold. It sold for around $1,500 at launch which was later reduced to less than $1,000.\nERS-220.\nThe ERS-220 had a more futuristic design based on a space exploration robot concept by Shoji Kawamori. It had a chrome finish with a retractable headlight and colored LEDs. Between 5,000 and 7,000 units were sold, priced at 180,000 yen. Remote operation was possible through an optional wireless local area network. Specifications: height 29.6\u00a0cm, 1.5\u00a0kg weight, 1.5 hours (default) continuous operation time, 2.5 hours or more operation with a re-celled battery, 16 degrees of freedom (drive unit).\nERS-210At/220A.\nVariants of ERS-210/220 were later released with an improved CPU and head clutch. Nearly identical in appearance to the earlier models, they were distinguished by the Super Core logo on the underside of the body. They cost US$1299 at launch.\nERS-31x (Latte and Macaron).\nThe ERS-31x models had an \"AIBO's heart\" slogan. The original production design illustrator was Katsura Moschino. The price was 98,000 yen or US$950.\nThe \"Latte\" (ERS-311) is an off-white/cream color with purple eyes and is considered the \"friendly\" model. The \"Macaron\" (ERS-312) is mostly black with cream accents and blue eyes and is considered the \"naughty\" model. The \"Pug\" (ERS-31L) is the least common of the three and was $200 cheaper. The ERS-31L has the same body shape but a different face design and is a light brown color. The 31x series dogs are considered to look like a bichon puppy or a bear cub.\nERS 31xB.\nThese models are aesthetically identical to the ERS-311 and ERS-312 and feature Bluetooth connection to a handheld viewer (released only in Japan) which would \"translate Aibos thoughts and feelings into text\" and enable the handler to play games with them.\nThird generation models (7Mx).\nThe ERS-7 and its successive iterations were the third generation of AIBO robots and the final ones released before the product line's 2006 discontinuation. They were first sold in 2003 and priced between $1500 and $2000. It has been estimated that ERS-7 sold 15,000 units of each variant, M1 to M3, for a total of 45,000 units. The ERS-7M1 was released only in white, the ERS-7M2 was released in white and black, and the ERS-7M3 was released in white, black, and champagne brown.\nFourth generation models.\nERS-1000.\nThe ERS-1000 was the first aibo model in the product line's revival, released in January\u00a02018. It is equipped with an LTE SIM card to support interaction and learning via cloud computing, requiring a persistent Internet connection to function fully. This model has a less-robotic and \"cuter\" appearance than other models. The ERS-1000 can recognize up to 100 faces, responds to over 50 voice commands, and can learn a customizable trick. It sold for about $3,000.\nQRIO.\nThe humanoid QRIO robot was designed as the successor to AIBO and runs the same base R-CODE and Aperios operating system. Its development was halted prior to commercial release.\nHardware.\nThe initial ERS-110 AIBO's hardware includes a 64-bit RISC processor, 16 megabytes of RAM, sensors (touch, camera, range-finder, microphone, acceleration, angular velocity), a speaker, and actuators (legs, neck, mouth, tail). As the series developed, more sensors and actuators were added. During the latter half of the second aibo model, 2x0, a revised model named Super Core was released which fixed a flaw in the robots' head clutch which over time caused tilting, panning, and drooping issues, also known as PAS, TAS, and DHS. These revision models also included a much faster processor, hence the name Super Core. Wi-Fi was available as an add-on for some second-generation AIBOs. The third family of AIBOs, the ERS-7s, have multiple head and body sensors, clicking ear actuators, a chest-mounted proximity sensor, expressive \"Illume-Face\" and Wi-Fi connectivity.\nAll AIBOs were bundled with accessories including a charging station and pink ball toy. Late-model ERS7's were bundled with a pink AIBone bone-shaped toy (as did the AIBO ERS-1000 models), playing cards, and a charging station with a pole and marker mat for autonomous docking.\nSoftware.\nAll AIBO models prior to the ERS-1000 were bundled with AIBOLife software, enabling the robot to walk, \"see\" its environment via camera, recognize spoken commands (English and Spanish, or Japanese), and develop a \"personality\". AIBO's sounds were programmed by Japanese DJ/avant-garde composer Nobukazu Takemura, fusing mechanical and organic concepts. The sounds and music in the ERS-7's Mind series of software were composed by Japanese musician and game designer Masaya Matsuura.\nAperios and Open-R.\nAperios is Sony's Proprietary Real-Time Operating system, used in all AIBOs, QRIO and some other consumer devices. Aperios OS was intended to be widely deployed, using real-time capabilities to handle multiple audio and visual data streams concurrently. The operating system was not widely adopted, and by 2003 Sony had stopped active development with COO Kunitake Ando commenting \"Aperios was an operating system of a pre-Internet age and we decided that it isn't adequate for the future\".\nThe OPEN-R architecture is specific to entertainment robots. The architecture involves the use of modular hardware components, such as appendages that can be easily removed and replaced to change the shape and function of the robots, and modular software components that can be interchanged to change their behavior and movement patterns. AIBO's creator, Doi, called OPEN-R the \"masterpiece\" of the AIBO development project, arguing it would minimize the need for programming individual movements or responses, and its \"open\" nature would encourage a global community of robot specialists and programmers to add capability.\nAIBOware.\nFirst and second generation models of AIBO can load different software packages sold by Sony. AIBOware (a trademark of Sony corporation) is the title given to the software the AIBO runs on its pink Memory Stick.\nPopular examples include:\nThe \"Life\" AIBOware: allows the robot to be raised from pup to fully grown adult while going through various stages of development as its owner interacts with it. \"Life 2\" was later released, adding new features such as Owner Registration, allowing the AIBO to call its owner's name in its tonal language.\nThe \"Explorer\" AIBOware: allows the owner to interact with a fully mature robot able to understand (though not necessarily willing to obey) 100 voice commands.\nWithout AIBOware, AIBOs run in \"clinic mode\" and can only perform basic actions.\nThird generation ERS-7 models have a sole \"MIND\" series of software that includes capabilities of AIBOLife and other AIBOware packages. MIND software also includes a docking process, allowing ERS-7s to recharge autonomously. Upgrades in MIND2 include the AIBO Entertainment Player, a Wi-Fi based connection to a PC, and upgrades in MIND3 include speech, blogging and autonomous room mapping. While each MIND revision was released alongside each ERS-7 revision (ie. MIND1 released alongside ERS-7M1, MIND2 released alongside ERS-7M2, etc.) any ERS-7 model is capable of running any revision of MIND software.\nAIBO's complete vision system uses the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) algorithm to recognise its charging station. The vision system is an implementation of Evolution Robotics ERVision.\nNotable AIBOware software\nNotable third-party software\nFree third-party software is available from providers such as Robot App Store.\nAIBO Software Development Environment.\nInitially, access to programming capabilities was limited to Sony and organizations participating in Robocup. By reverse-engineering AIBO, users developed their own software that operated together with AIBOware such as \"DiscoAibo\" which made the robotic canine dance to music.\nIn a significant copyright milestone, Sony invoked the Digital Millennium Copyright Act in October 2001, and sent a cease-and-desist notice demanding that \"Aibopet\" stop distributing code that was retrieved by bypassing the copy protection mechanisms. In the face of complaints by many outraged AIBO owners, Sony backed down and subsequently released a programmer's kit for \"non-commercial\" use.\nThe kit was eventually expanded into three distinct tools: R-CODE, the OPEN-R SDK (software development kit) and the AIBO Remote Framework (ERS-7 only). These three tools are combined under the name AIBO Software Development Environment. R-CODE and AIBO Remote Framework were free to download and could be used for commercial or non-commercial purposes, while OPEN-R SDK is specifically for non-commercial use.\nOPEN-R SDK.\nThe OPEN-R SDK is a C++ based programming SDK, based on open-source tools (like gcc and newlib), that allows the creation of software for AIBO platforms. This SDK is considered low-level and allows control of everything from the gain values of AIBO's actuators to retrieving AIBO's camera data and performing computer vision computations. No pre-built \"standard\" AIBO functionality is provided, such as it is with R-Code and AIBO Remote Framework. It thus permits low-level robotic research.\nR-CODE and R-CODE plus.\nR-Code is a high-level scripting language for AIBO, allowing creation of simple programs for an AIBO to execute. Remoting is possible via a simple WiFi terminal socket connection. Commercial usage is allowed, and the license fee is free.\nR-CodePlus is a derivative of R-Code by AiboPet with several added functionalities. R-CodePlus is a superset of R-Code in terms of language, so everything written in standard R-Code will work on an R-CodePlus MemoryStick (for the same Model AIBO). R-CodePlus exposes new AIBO functions such as simple face recognition, name registration, and camera adjustment settings. In addition to the standard R-Code terminal socket for remoting, R-CodePlus supplies a \"Telemetry\" socket for several binary data transfers such as AIBO's camera image and sending/receiving sound.\nAibnet offers a development environment for R-Code programming.\nSimplified drag-and-drop customizing of behavior is available via the user-created YART (\"Yet Another RCode Tool\").\nAIBO Remote Framework.\nAIBO remote framework allows one to remotely access capabilities of AIBO MIND, including behaviors and pattern recognition, from a Windows PC. The same functionality is used in the AIBO Entertainment Player. The AIBO Remote Framework is a Windows PC API based on Visual C++. The Framework can be used to write code that can remotely control an AIBO running MIND2 or MIND3 Aiboware via a wireless LAN. Commercial usage is allowed, and the license fee is free.\nOther Development Environments.\nSeveral robot software development frameworks have been developed that support AIBOs, including URBI, Tekkotsu, and Pyro.\nCurrent Projects.\nAiBO+ is a replacement personality for the ERS-7. The project provides an AEP-like application (AiBO+ Client) to connect to the robot under Ubuntu Linux, Windows, Mac OS X, iOS, and Android. The owner can control the dog, play a game and see the robot state.\nAIBO Control allows Android users to control AIBO ERS-7s running URBI.\nThe Open-R and GCC based toolchain has been updated by the community to use GCC 5.4, Binutils 2.24 and Newlib 1.15. This improvement brings the latest C++11/C++14 features and modern software to program the robot. The packaged version of the old and updated AIBO toolchain is available for Ubuntu in a PPA.\nAIBOs in education and academia.\nAIBOs were used extensively in education. For example, Carnegie Mellon offered an AIBO-centred robotics course covering models of perception, cognition, and action for solving problems. Robotbenchmark also features an online simulation challenge based on an AIBO ERS-7 model called \"Visual Tracking\".\nRoboCup Four-Legged League.\nThe AIBO has seen much use as an inexpensive platform for artificial intelligence education and research because it integrates a computer, vision system, and articulators in a package vastly cheaper than conventional research robots. One focal point for that development has been the Robocup Leagues.\nThe Four-Legged League was the initial name for the RoboCup Standard Platform League, a robot soccer league in which all teams compete with identical robots. The robots operate fully autonomously, with no external control by humans nor computers. The specific AIBO version changed over time: ERS-110 (1999\u20132000), ERS-210 (2001\u20132002), ERS-210A SuperCore (2003), ERS-7 (2004\u20132008). The replacement and current standard platform is the humanoid NAO by Aldebaran Robotics.\nSony provided AIBOs support and sponsorship to universities around the world to participate in the RoboCup autonomous soccer Four-Legged Robot Soccer League. Competing teams would program a team of AIBO robots to play games of autonomous robot soccer against other competing teams. The Four-Legged League ran from 1999 to 2008, although in the final year, many big-name universities did not compete as they had moved to the new NAO platform. The University of New South Wales was the most successful team in the League, making the final six times and winning three times.\nInternational AIBO Convention.\nThe International AIBO Convention takes place every year at Sony Robotics Tower in the Shinjuku prefecture of Tokyo, Japan. The first convention took place on 15\u00a0May 1999. It was then set to 2\u20134\u00a0May. The 2009 convention, being in its tenth year, set attendance records. The convention usually features AIBO advertisements, free posters, free accessories, freeware/open-source downloads and AIBO demonstrations.\nBreed lineage.\nAfter model name: body-color choices; release date; units sold.\nSecond generation models.\nThe most widespread/best-selling AIBO series: estimated amount of 210/220 AIBOs sold: between 65,000 and 100,000.\nEstimated amount sold: between 30,000 and 35,000.\nThird Generation Models.\nEstimated sales for all ERS-7s: 40,000 to 50,000\nAnimation.\nThe AIBO television series was a series of animated shorts (approximately 6 minutes each) based around AIBO ERS-31xes, Latte and Macaron. The animated series triggered sounds and actions from viewers' ERS-31xes in media-link mode on the proper software.\nThe 23-episode series was broadcast on Fuji TV from 11\u00a0October 2001, to 21\u00a0March 2002.\nIn popular culture.\nWhen AIBO was introduced, \"The New Yorker\" published a cartoon by Jack Ziegler showing AIBO \"urinating\" nuts and bolts on a fire hydrant.\nThe AIBO ERS-111 was used in Janet Jackson's \"Doesn't Really Matter\" music video, and received increased market demand and commercial success after being featured with Jackson in the clip.\nThe AIBO ERS-311 was featured in the Swedish girl group Play's music video for their song \"Us Against The World\".\nIn an episode of \"Frasier\", Frasier gives his dad an AIBO ERS-210 to keep him company while he is visiting Roz in Wisconsin. There is a scene with Eddie interacting with the AIBO, while Martin Crane complains to Sony about not being able to get it to work.\nIn the \"Futurama\" episode \"Jurassic Bark\", Bender is seen with a robotic dog resembling an AIBO named Robo-Puppy.\nIn the film \"Click\", Kevin's new Robo-dog an AIBO ERS-7, was run over by the dad's car.\nA pair of robotic dogs based on AIBO appear in \"Tokyo Jungle\", a video game published by Sony Computer Entertainment. The very first AIBO model, ERS-110, is seen in this game, too.\nAn AIBO ERS-210 can be seen in the title sequence of the 2017 TV adaptation of Neil Gaiman's \"American Gods\".\nAn AIBO ERS-1000 and ERS-111 appears in \"Kamen Rider Zero-One,\" from episodes 38, 39 and 45 respectively, as Gai Amatsu's AI dog named Thouser. Between July 19 and August 2, 2020, owners of fifth generation AIBO received a limited-time update that will allow to perform a special dance as seen in the 39th episode.\nThe AIBO ERS-110 and ERS-1000 models also appear in the 2024 Team Asobi-developed video game Astro Bot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47088", "revid": "48281269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47088", "title": "Nice", "text": "Prefecture of Alpes-Maritimes, Southern France\nNice ( ; ) is a French city located in the prefecture of the Alpes-Maritimes department. The Nice agglomeration extends far beyond the administrative city limits, with a population of nearly one million on an area of . Located on the French Riviera, the southeastern coast of France on the Mediterranean Sea, at the foot of the French Alps, Nice is the second-largest French city on the Mediterranean coast and second-largest city in the Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur region after Marseille. Nice is approximately from the principality of Monaco and from the French\u2013Italian border. Nice's airport serves as a gateway to the region.\nThe city is nicknamed ( in Ni\u00e7ard), meaning 'Nice the Beautiful', which is also the title of the unofficial anthem of Nice, written by Menica Rondelly in 1912. The area of today's Nice contains Terra Amata, an archaeological site which displays evidence of a very early use of fire 380,000 years ago. Around 350\u00a0BC, Greeks of Marseille founded a permanent settlement and called it \"Nikaia\", after Nike, the goddess of victory. Through the ages, the town has changed hands many times. Its strategic location and port significantly contributed to its maritime strength. From 1388, it was a dominion of Savoy, then became part of the French First Republic between 1792 and 1815, when it was returned to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, the legal predecessor of the Kingdom of Italy, until its annexation by France in 1860.\nThe natural environment of the Nice area and its mild Mediterranean climate came to the attention of the English upper classes in the second half of the 18th century, when an increasing number of aristocratic families began spending their winters there. In 1931, following its refurbishment, the city's main seaside promenade, the Promenade des Anglais (\"Walkway of the English\"), was inaugurated by Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught; it owes its name to visitors to the resort. These included Queen Victoria along with her son Edward VII who spent winters there, as well as Henry Cavendish, born in Nice, who discovered hydrogen.\nThe clear air and soft light have particularly appealed to notable painters, such as Marc Chagall, Henri Matisse, Niki de Saint Phalle, and Arman. Their work is commemorated in many of the city's museums, including Mus\u00e9e Marc Chagall, Mus\u00e9e Matisse and Mus\u00e9e des Beaux-Arts. International writers have also been attracted and inspired by the city. Frank Harris wrote several books, including his autobiography \"My Life and Loves\", in Nice. Friedrich Nietzsche spent six consecutive winters in Nice, and wrote \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\" there. Additionally, Russian writer Anton Chekhov completed his play \"Three Sisters\" while living in Nice.\nNice's appeal extended to the Russian upper classes. Prince Nicholas Alexandrovich, heir apparent to Imperial Russia, died in Nice and was a patron of the Russian Orthodox Cemetery, Nice where Princess Catherine Dolgorukova, morganatic wife of the Tsar Alexander II of Russia, is buried. Also buried there are General Dmitry Shcherbachev and General Nikolai Yudenich, leaders of the anti-Communist White Movement.\nThose interred at the Cimeti\u00e8re du Ch\u00e2teau include celebrated jeweler Alfred Van Cleef, Emil Jellinek-Mercedes, founder of the Mercedes car company, film director Louis Feuillade, poet Agathe-Sophie Sasserno, dancer Carolina Otero, \"Asterix\" comics creator Ren\u00e9 Goscinny, \"The Phantom of the Opera\" author Gaston Leroux, French prime minister L\u00e9on Gambetta, and the first president of the International Court of Justice Jos\u00e9 Gustavo Guerrero.\nBecause of its historical importance as a winter resort town for the European aristocracy and the resulting mix of cultures found in the city, UNESCO proclaimed Nice a World Heritage Site in 2021. The city has the second largest hotel capacity in the country, and it is the second most visited metropolis in Metropolitan France, receiving four million tourists every year. It also has the third busiest airport in France, after the two main Parisian ones. It is the historical capital city of the County of Nice (, Ni\u00e7ard: ). Nice will be the main venue for the 2030 Winter Olympics.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nThe first known hominid settlements in the Nice area date back about 400,000 years (\"Homo erectus\"); the \"Terra Amata\" archeological site shows one of the earliest uses of fire, construction of houses, as well as flint findings dated to around 230,000 years ago. Nice was probably founded around 350\u00a0BC by colonists from the Greek city of Phocaea in western Anatolia. It was given the name of \"N\u00edkaia\" () in honour of a victory over the neighbouring Ligurians (people from the northwest of Italy, probably the Vediantii kingdom); Nike () was the Greek goddess of victory. The city soon became one of the busiest trading ports on the Ligurian coast; but it had an important rival in the Roman town of Cemenelum, which continued to exist as a separate city until the time of the Lombard invasions. The ruins of Cemenelum are in Cimiez, now a district of Nice.\nEarly development.\nIn the 7th century, Nice joined the Genoese League formed by the towns of Liguria. In 729 the city repulsed the Saracens; but in 859 and again in 880 the Saracens pillaged and burned it, and for most of the 10th century remained masters of the surrounding country.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Nice participated in the wars and history of Italy. As an ally of Pisa it was the enemy of Genoa, and both the King of France and the Holy Roman Emperor endeavoured to subjugate it; despite this, it maintained its municipal liberties. During the 13th and 14th centuries the city fell more than once into the hands of the Counts of Provence, but it regained its independence even though related to Genoa.\nThe medieval city walls surrounded the Old Town. The landward side was protected by the River Paillon, which was later covered over and is now the tram route towards the Acropolis. The east side of the town was protected by fortifications on Castle Hill. Another river flowed into the port on the east side of Castle Hill. Engravings suggest that the port area was also defended by walls. Under Monoprix in Place de Garibaldi are excavated remains of a well-defended city gate on the main road from Turin.\nDuchy of Savoy.\nIn 1388, the commune placed itself under the protection of the Counts of Savoy, thus becoming the County of Nice.\nThe maritime strength of Nice now rapidly increased until it was able to cope with the Barbary pirates; the fortifications were largely extended and the roads to the city improved. In 1561 Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy abolished the use of Latin as an administrative language and established the Italian language as the official language of government affairs in Nice.\nDuring the struggle between Francis I and Charles V great damage was caused by the passage of the armies invading Provence; pestilence and famine raged in the city for several years. In 1538, in the nearby town of Villeneuve-Loubet, through the mediation of Pope Paul III, the two monarchs concluded a ten years' truce.\nIn 1543, Nice was attacked by the united Franco-Ottoman forces of Francis I and Barbarossa Hayreddin Pasha, in the Siege of Nice; though the inhabitants repulsed the assault which followed the terrible bombardment, they were ultimately compelled to surrender, and Barbarossa was allowed to pillage the city and to carry off 2,500 captives. Pestilence appeared again in 1550 and 1580.\nIn 1600, Nice was briefly taken by the Duke of Guise. By opening the ports of the county to all nations, and proclaiming full freedom of trade (1626), the commerce of the city was given great stimulus, the noble families taking part in its mercantile enterprises.\nCaptured by Nicolas Catinat in 1691, Nice was restored to Savoy in 1696; but it was again besieged by the French in 1705, and in the following year its citadel and ramparts were demolished.\nKingdom of Sardinia.\nThe Treaty of Utrecht (1713) once more gave the city back to the Duke of Savoy, who was on that same occasion recognised as King of Sicily. In the peaceful years which followed, the \"new town\" was built. From 1744 until the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) the French and Spaniards were again in possession.\nIn 1775 the king, who in 1718 had swapped his sovereignty of Sicily for the Kingdom of Sardinia, destroyed all that remained of the ancient liberties of the commune. Conquered in 1792 by the armies of the First French Republic, the County of Nice continued to be part of France until 1814; but after that date it reverted to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia.\nFrench annexation.\nAfter the Treaty of Turin was signed in 1860 between the Sardinian king and Napoleon III as a consequence of the Plombi\u00e8res Agreement, the county was again and definitively ceded to France as a territorial reward for French assistance in the Second Italian War of Independence against Austria, which saw Lombardy united with Piedmont-Sardinia. King Victor-Emmanuel II, on 1 April 1860, solemnly asked the population to accept the change of sovereignty, in the name of Italian unity, and the cession was ratified by a regional referendum. Italophile manifestations and the acclamation of an \"Italian Nice\" by the crowd are reported on this occasion. A plebiscite was voted on 15 and 16 April 1860. The opponents of annexation called for abstention, hence the very high abstention rate. The \"yes\" vote won 83% of registered voters throughout the county of Nice and 86% in Nice, partly thanks to pressure from the authorities. This is the result of a masterful operation of information control by the French and Piedmontese governments, in order to influence the outcome of the vote in relation to the decisions already taken. The irregularities in the plebiscite voting operations were evident. The case of Levens is emblematic: the same official sources recorded, faced with only 407 voters, 481 votes cast, naturally almost all in favor of joining France.\nThe Italian language, which was the official language of the County, used by the Church, at the town hall, taught in schools, used in theaters and at the Opera, was immediately abolished and replaced by French. Discontent over annexation to France led to the emigration of a large part of the Italophile population, also accelerated by Italian unification after 1861. A quarter of the population of Nice, around 11,000 people from Nice, decided to voluntarily exile to Italy. The emigration of a quarter of the Ni\u00e7ard Italians to Italy took the name of Ni\u00e7ard exodus. Many Italians from Nizza then moved to the Ligurian towns of Ventimiglia, Bordighera and Ospedaletti, giving rise to a local branch of the movement of the Italian irredentists which considered the re-acquisition of Nice to be one of their nationalist goals. Giuseppe Garibaldi, born in Nice, strongly opposed the cession to France, arguing that the ballot was rigged by the French. Furthermore, for the ni\u00e7ard general his hometown was unquestionably Italian. Politically, the liberals of Nice and the partisans of Garibaldi also appreciated very little Napoleonic authoritarianism. Elements on the right (aristocrats) as on the left (Garibaldians) therefore wanted Nice to return to Italy. Savoy was also transferred to the French crown by similar means.\nIn 1871, during the first free elections in the County, the pro-Italian lists obtained almost all the votes in the legislative elections (26,534 votes out of 29,428 votes cast), and Garibaldi was elected deputy at the National Assembly. Pro-Italians took to the streets cheering \"\"Viva Nizza! Viva Garibaldi!\".\" The French government sent 10,000 soldiers to Nice, closed the Italian newspaper \"Il Diritto di Nizza\" and imprisoned several demonstrators. The population of Nice rose up from 8 to 10 February and the three days of demonstration took the name of \"Ni\u00e7ard Vespers\". The revolt was suppressed by French troops. On 13 February, Garibaldi was not allowed to speak at the French parliament meeting in Bordeaux to ask for the reunification of Nice to the newborn Italian unitary state, and he resigned from his post as deputy. The failure of Vespers led to the expulsion of the last pro-Italian intellectuals from Nice, such as Luciano Mereu or Giuseppe Bres, who were expelled or deported.\nThe pro-Italian irredentist movement persisted throughout the period 1860\u20131914, despite the repression carried out since the annexation. The French government implemented a policy of Francization of society, language and culture. The toponyms of the communes of the ancient County were francized, with the obligation to use French in Nice, as well as certain surnames (for example the Italian surname \"Bianchi\" was francized into \"Leblanc\", and the Italian surname \"Del Ponte\" was francized into \"Dupont\").\nItalian-language newspapers in Nice were banned. In 1861, \"La Voce di Nizza\" was closed (temporarily reopened during the Ni\u00e7ard Vespers), followed by \"Il Diritto di Nizza\", closed in 1871. In 1895 it was the turn of \"Il Pensiero di Nizza\", accused of irredentism. Many journalists and writers from Nice wrote in these newspapers in Italian. Among these are Enrico Sappia, Giuseppe Andr\u00e9, Giuseppe Bres, Eugenio Cais di Pierlas and others.\nDuring the repression of January and February 1894, the police conducted raids targeting the Italian anarchists living there, without much success.\n20th century.\nIn 1900, the Tramway de Nice electrified its horse-drawn streetcars and spread its network to the entire \"d\u00e9partement\" from Menton to Cagnes-sur-Mer. By the 1930s more bus connections were added in the area. In the 1930s, Nice hosted international car racing in the Formula Libre (predecessor to Formula One) on the so-called Circuit Nice. The circuit started along the waterfront just south of the Jardin Albert I, then headed westward along the Promenade des Anglais followed by a hairpin turn at the Hotel Negresco to come back eastward and around the Jardin Albert I before heading again east along the beach on the Quai des \u00c9tats-Unis.\nAs war broke out in September 1939, Nice became a city of refuge for many displaced foreigners, notably Jews fleeing the Nazi progression into Eastern Europe. From Nice many sought further shelter in the French colonies, Morocco and North and South America. After July 1940 and the establishment of the Vichy Regime, antisemitic aggressions accelerated the exodus, starting in July 1941 and continuing through 1942. On 26 August 1942, 655 Jews of foreign origin were rounded up by the Laval government and interned in the Auvare barracks. Of these, 560 were deported to Drancy internment camp on 31 August 1942. Due to the activity of the Jewish banker Angelo Donati and of the Capuchin friar P\u00e8re Marie-Beno\u00eet the local authorities hindered the application of anti-Jewish Vichy laws.\nThe first \"r\u00e9sistants\" to the new regime were a group of high school seniors of the Lyc\u00e9e de Nice, now Lyc\u00e9e Mass\u00e9na, in September 1940, later arrested and executed in 1944 near Castellane. The first public demonstrations occurred on 14 July 1942 when several hundred protesters took to the streets along the Avenue de la Victoire and in the Place Mass\u00e9na. In November 1942 German troops moved into most of unoccupied France, but Italian troops moved into a smaller zone including Nice. A certain ambivalence remained among the population, many of whom were recent immigrants of Italian ancestry. However, the resistance gained momentum after the Italian surrender in 1943 when the German army occupied the former Italian zone. Reprisals intensified between December 1943 and July 1944, when many partisans were tortured and executed by the local Gestapo. American paratroopers entered the city on 30 August 1944 and Nice was finally liberated. The consequences of the war were heavy: the population decreased by 15% and economic life was totally disrupted.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, Nice enjoyed an economic boom primarily driven by tourism and construction. Two men dominated this period: Jean M\u00e9decin, mayor for 33 years from 1928 to 1943 and from 1947 to 1965, and his son Jacques, mayor for 24 years from 1966 to 1990. Under their leadership, there was extensive urban renewal, including many new constructions. These included the convention centre, theatres, new thoroughfares and expressways. The arrival of the Pieds-Noirs, refugees from Algeria after 1962 independence, also gave the city a boost and somewhat changed the make-up of its population and traditional views. By the late 1980s, rumors of political corruption in the city government surfaced; and eventually formal accusations against Jacques M\u00e9decin forced him to flee France in 1990. Later arrested in Uruguay in 1993, he was extradited back to France in 1994, convicted of several counts of corruption and associated crimes and sentenced to imprisonment.\nOn 16 October 1979, a landslide and an undersea slide caused two tsunamis that hit the western coast of Nice; these events killed between 8 and 23 people.\n21st century.\nIn February 2001, European leaders met in Nice to negotiate and sign what is now the Treaty of Nice, amending the institutions of the European Union.\nIn 2003, local Chief Prosecutor \u00c9ric de Montgolfier alleged that some judicial cases involving local personalities had been suspiciously derailed by the local judiciary, which he suspected of having unhealthy contacts through Masonic lodges with the defendants. A controversial official report stated later that Montgolfier had made unwarranted accusations.\nOn 14 July 2016, a truck was deliberately driven into a crowd of people by Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel on the Promenade des Anglais. The crowd was watching a fireworks display in celebration of Bastille Day. A total of 87 people were killed, including the perpetrator, who was shot dead by police. Another 434 were injured, with 52 in critical care and 25 in intensive care, according to the Paris prosecutor. On 29 October 2020, a stabbing attack killed three people at the local Notre-Dame de Nice. One of the victims, a woman, was beheaded by the attacker. Several additional victims were injured. The attacker, who was shot by the police, was taken into custody. The Islamic state claimed responsibility for both attacks.\nIn 2021, the city was proclaimed a World Heritage Site by UNESCO as \"Nice, Winter Resort Town of the Riviera\".\nOn 18 July 2024, seven people from the same family, including three young children, three adults and a teenager were killed in an arson attack. The fire also critically injured one other person and caused thirty other people to suffer from smoke inhalation.\nArchitecture.\nThe Promenade des Anglais (\"Walkway of the English\") is a promenade along the Baie des Anges (\"Bay of the Angels\"), which is a bay of the Mediterranean in Nice. Before Nice was urbanised, the coastline at Nice was just bordered by a deserted stretch of shingle beach (covered with large pebbles). The first houses were located on higher ground well away from the sea, as wealthy tourists visiting Nice in the 18th century did not come for the beach, but for the gentle winter weather. The areas close to the water were home to Nice's dockworkers and fishermen.\nIn the second half of the 18th century, many wealthy English people took to spending the winter in Nice, enjoying the panorama along the coast. This early aristocratic English colony conceived the building of a promenade with the leadership and financial support of Rev. Lewis Way. With the initial promenade completed, the city of Nice, intrigued by the prospect, greatly increased the scope of the work. The Promenade was first called the \"Camin dei Angl\u00e8s\" (the English Way) by the Ni\u00e7ois in their native dialect Nissart. In 1823, the promenade was named \"La Promenade des Anglais\" by the French, a name that would stick after the annexation of Nice by France in 1860.\nThe Hotel Negresco on the Promenade des Anglais was named after Henri Negresco who had the palatial hotel constructed in 1912. In keeping with the conventions of the time, when the Negresco first opened in 1913 its front opened on the side opposite the Mediterranean.\nBeginning at Place Mass\u00e9na, heading east and parallel to the Promenade des Anglais, there is a \"Zone Pi\u00e9tonne\", or \"Pedestrian Zone\". Cars are not allowed (with the exception of delivery trucks), making this avenue a popular walkway.\nOld Nice is also home to the Op\u00e9ra de Nice. It was constructed at the end of the 19th century under the design of Fran\u00e7ois Aune, to replace King Charles F\u00e9lix's Maccarani Theater. Today, it is open to the public and provides a regular program of performances.\nOther sights include:\nReligious buildings.\nReligious buildings in the city include:\nSquares.\nPlace Mass\u00e9na.\nThe \"Place Mass\u00e9na\" is the main square of the city. Before the Paillon River was covered over, the Pont-Neuf was the only practicable way between the old town and the modern one. The square was thus divided into two parts (North and South) in 1824. With the demolition of the Mass\u00e9na Casino in 1979, the Place Mass\u00e9na became more spacious and less dense and is now bordered by red ochre buildings of Italian architecture.\nThe recent rebuilding of the tramline gave the square back to the pedestrians, restoring its status as a real Mediterranean square. It is lined with palm trees and stone pines. Since its construction, the Place Mass\u00e9na has been the spot for public events. It is used for concerts, the summer festivals, the \"Corso carnavalesque\" (carnival parade) in February, the military procession on the 14th of July (Bastille Day) and other traditional celebrations and banquets.\nThe Place Mass\u00e9na is a two-minute walk from the Promenade des Anglais, old town, town center, and Albert I Garden (\"Jardin Albert Ier\"). It is also a large crossroads between several of the main streets of the city: avenue Jean M\u00e9decin, \"avenue F\u00e9lix Faure\", \"boulevard Jean Jaur\u00e8s\", \"avenue de Verdun\" and \"rue Gioffredo\".\nPlace Garibaldi.\nThe \"Place Garibaldi\" also stands out for its architecture and history. It is named after Giuseppe Garibaldi, hero of the Italian unification (born in Nice in 1807 when Nice was part of the Napoleonic Empire, before reverting to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia). The square was built at the end of the 18th century and served as the entry gate to the city and end of the road from Turin. It took several names between 1780 and 1870 (Pla\u00e7a Pairouli\u00e8ra, Place de la R\u00e9publique, Place Napol\u00e9on, Place d'Armes, Place Saint-Augustin, Piazza Vittorio) and finally Place Garibaldi in September 1870.\nA statue of Garibaldi, who was fiercely in favour of the union of Nice with Italy, stands in the centre of the square. The rebuilding of the area to accommodate a new tramway line gave almost the entire square to pedestrians. The architecture is in line with the Turin model, which was the norm of urban renewal throughout the entire realm of the House of Savoy.\nIt is a crossroads between the \"Vieux Nice\" (old town) and the town center. Place Garibaldi is close to the eastern districts of Nice, \"Port Lympia\" (Lympia Harbour), and the TNL commercial centre.\nPlace Rossetti.\nEntirely enclosed and pedestrianised, this square is located in the old town. With typical buildings in red and yellow ochres surrounding the square, the \"cath\u00e9drale Sainte-R\u00e9parate\" and there is a fountain in the center. By day, the place is filled by the terraces of traditional restaurants and ice-cream makers. By night, the environment changes radically, with tourists and young people flocking to the square.\nPlace Rossetti is in the centre of the old town, streets \"Jesus\", \"Rossetti\", \"Masco\u00efnat\" and the \"Pont-vieux\" (old bridge).\nCours Saleya.\nThe Cours Saleya is situated parallel to the \"Quai des \u00c9tats-Unis\". In the past, it belonged to the upper classes. It hosts a daily market with flowers, art vendors, and antiques.\nPlace du Palais.\nThe \"Place du Palais\" is where the \"Palais de la Justice\" (Law courts) of Nice is located. On this square, there also is the \"Palais Rusca\", which also belongs to the justice department (home of the \"tribunal de grande instance\").\nAdministration.\nLocated in the Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur region, Nice is a commune and the prefecture (administrative capital) of the Alpes-Maritimes d\u00e9partement. However, it is also the largest city in France that is not a regional capital; the much larger Marseille is its regional capital. Christian Estrosi, its mayor, is a member of Horizons (formerly a member of The Republicans). He has been incumbent since 2017. The city council is based at the H\u00f4tel de Ville.\nThe city is divided into nine cantons: Nice-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Nice appeared for the first time in a copy of the \"Regulations\" of Amadeus VIII, probably written around 1430. The Nice is symbolised by a red eagle on silver background, placed on three mountains, which can be described in French heraldic language as \"d'argent \u00e0 une aigle de gueule pos\u00e9e sur trois coupeaux\". (\"Upon silver a red eagle is displayed, posed upon three mounds.\") The arms have only undergone minor changes: the eagle has become more and more stylised, it now \"wears\" a coronet for the County of Nice, and the three mountains are now surrounded by a stylised sea.\nThe presence of the eagle, an imperial emblem, shows that these arms are related to the power of the House of Savoy. The eagle standing over the three hills is a depiction of Savoy, referring to its domination over the country around Nice. The combination of silver and red (argent and gules) is a reference to the colours of the flag of Savoy. The three mountains symbolise a territorial honour, without concern for geographic realism.\nGeography.\nNice consists of two large bays. Villefranche-sur-Mer sits on an enclosed bay, while the main expanse of the city lies between the old port city and the Aeroport de C\u00f4te d'Azur, across a gently curving bay. The city rises from the flat beach into gentle rising hills, then is bounded by surrounding mountains that represent the Southern and nearly the Western extent of the Ligurian Alps range.\nFlora.\nThe natural vegetation of Nice is typical for a Mediterranean landscape, with a heavy representation of broadleaf evergreen shrubs. Trees tend to be scattered but form dense forests in some areas. Large native tree species include evergreens such as holm oak, stone pine and arbutus. Many introduced species grow in parks and gardens. Palms, eucalyptus and citrus fruits are among the trees which give Nice a subtropical appearance. But there are also species familiar to temperate areas around the world; examples include horse chestnut, linden and even Norway spruce.\nClimate.\nNice has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"), enjoying mild winters with moderate rainfall. It is one of the warmest Mediterranean climates for its latitude. Summers are warm to hot, dry, and sunny. Rainfall is rare in this season, and a typical July month only records one or two days with measurable rainfall. The temperature is typically above but rarely above . The climate data is recorded from the airport, located just metres from the sea. Summer temperatures, therefore, are often higher in the city. The average maximum temperature in the warmest months of July and August is about . The highest recorded temperature was on 1 August 2006. Autumn generally starts sunny in September and becomes more cloudy and rainy towards October, while temperatures usually remain above until November where days start to cool down to around .\nWinters are characterised by mild days (), cool nights (), and variable weather. Days can be either sunny and dry or damp and rainy. The average minimum temperature in January is around . Frost is unusual and snowfalls are rare. The most recent snowfall in Nice was on 26 February 2018. Nice also received a dusting of snow in 2005, 2009 and 2010. Spring starts cool and rainy in late March, and Nice becomes increasingly warm and sunny around June.\nEconomy and tourism.\nNice is the seat of the Chambre de commerce et d'industrie Nice C\u00f4te d'Azur, which manages the Port of Nice. Investors from France and abroad can benefit from the assistance of the C\u00f4te d'Azur Economic Development Agency Team C\u00f4te d'Azur.\nNice has one conference centre: the Palais des Congr\u00e8s Acropolis. The city also has several business parks, including l'Arenas, Nice the Plain, Nice M\u00e9ridia, Saint Isidore, and the Northern Forum.\nIn addition, the city features several shopping centres such as Nicetoile on Avenue Jean M\u00e9decin, Cap3000 in Saint-Laurent-du-Var (the 5th-biggest mall in France by surface area), Nice TNL, Nice Lingosti\u00e8re, Northern Forum, St-Isidore, the Trinity (around the Auchan hypermarket) and Polygone Riviera in Cagnes-sur-Mer.\nSophia Antipolis is a technology park northwest of Antibes. Much of the park is within the commune of Valbonne. Established between 1970 and 1984, it primarily houses companies in the fields of computing, electronics, pharmacology and biotechnology. Several institutions of higher learning are also located here, along with the European headquarters of W3C. It is known as \"Europe's first science and technology hub\" and is valued at more than 5 billion euros.\nThe Nice metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $47.7 billion, and $34,480 per capita, slightly lower than the French average.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nPort.\nThe main port of Nice is also known as Lympia port. This name comes from the Lympia spring which fed a small lake in a marshy zone where work on the port was started in 1745. Today this is the principal harbour installation of Nice \u2013 there is also a small port in the Carras district. The port is the first port cement manufacturer in France, linked to the treatment plants of the rollers of the valley of Paillon. Fishing activities remain but the number of professional fishermen is now less than 10. Nice, being the point of continental France nearest to Corsica, has ferry connections with the island developed with the arrival of NGV (\"navires \u00e0 grande vitesse\") or high-speed craft. The connections are provided by Corsica Ferries \u2013 Sardinia Ferries. Located in front of the port, the Place Cassini has been renamed Place of Corsica.\nAirport.\nNice C\u00f4te d'Azur Airport is the third busiest airport in France after Charles de Gaulle Airport and Orly Airport, both near Paris. It is on the Promenade des Anglais, near l'Ar\u00e9nas and has two terminals. Due to its proximity to the Principality of Monaco, it also serves as that city\u2013state's airport. A helicopter service provided by Heli Air Monaco and Monacair links the city and airport. It is run by the ACA (A\u00e9roports C\u00f4te d'Azur), which includes Cannes \u2013 Mandelieu Airport and La M\u00f4le \u2013 Saint-Tropez Airport. Public transportation into the city proper is serviced by the Tramway line 2 (T2).\nRail.\nThe main railway station is Nice-Ville, served both by high-speed TGV trains connecting Paris and Nice in less than 6 hours and by local commuter TER services. Marseille is reached in 2.5 hours. Nice also has international connections to Italy, Switzerland, Belgium, and Russia. Nice is also served by several suburban stations including Nice St-Augustin, Nice St-Roch, Nice Pont-Michel and Nice Riquier.\nNice is also the southern terminus of the independently run Chemins de Fer de Provence railway line which connects the city with Digne in approximately 4 hours from the Nice CP station. A metro-like suburban service is also provided on the southern part of the line.\nTram.\nTramway de Nice began operating horse-drawn trams in 1879. Electrified in 1900, the combined length of the network reached by 1930. The replacement of trams with trolleybuses began in 1948 and was completed in 1953.\nIn 2007, the new Tramway de Nice linked the northern and eastern suburbs via the city centre. Two other lines are currently operating. The second line runs east\u2013west from Jean M\u00e9decin to the Nice C\u00f4te d'Azur Airport and reaches the Port, while the third line provides a connection to the future TGV Nice Saint-Augustin and to Lingosti\u00e8re railway station. A fourth line is set to run from the future TGV Nice Saint-Augustin to Cagnes-sur-Mer.\nRoad.\nThe A8 autoroute and the Route nationale 7 pass through the Nice agglomeration.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2018[ [update]], the urban area (\"unit\u00e9 urbaine\") of Nice, defined by INSEE, was home to 944,321 inhabitants (seventh most populous in France) and its metropolitan area (\"aire urbaine\") totaled 609,695 inhabitants, which made it the 13th largest in France. Part of the urban area of Nice belongs to the metropolitan area of Cannes\u2013Antibes.\nSince the 1970s, the number of inhabitants has not changed significantly; the relatively high migration to Nice is balanced by a natural negative growth of the population.\nObservatory.\nThe \"Observatoire de Nice\" (Nice Observatory) is located on the summit of Mont Gros. The observatory was established in 1879 by the banker Rapha\u00ebl Bischoffsheim. The architect was Charles Garnier; Gustave Eiffel designed the main dome.\nThe 76-cm (30-inch) refractor telescope that became operational in 1888 was at that time the world's largest telescope.\nCulture.\nTerra-Amata, an archaeological site dating from the Lower Palaeolithic age, is situated near Nice. Nice itself was established by the ancient Greeks. There was also an independent Roman city, Cemenelum, near Nice, where the hill of Cimiez is located.\nSince the 2nd century AD, the light of the city has attracted painters and sculptors such as Chagall, Matisse, Niki de Saint Phalle, Klein, Arman and Sosno. Nice inspired many composers and intellectuals in different countries e.g. Berlioz, Rossini, Nietzsche, etc.\nNice also has numerous museums of all kinds: Mus\u00e9e Marc Chagall, Mus\u00e9e Matisse, Mus\u00e9e des Beaux-Arts, Mus\u00e9e international d'Art na\u00eff Anatole Jakovsky, Mus\u00e9e Terra-Amata, Museum of Asian Art, Mus\u00e9e d'art moderne et d'art contemporain (which devotes much space to the well-known \"\u00c9cole of Nice\"), Museum of Natural History, Mus\u00e9e Mass\u00e9na, Naval Museum and \"Galerie des Ponchettes\".\nBeing a vacation resort, Nice hosts many festivals throughout the year, such as the Nice Carnival and the Nice Jazz Festival.\nNice has a distinct culture due to its unique history. The local language \"Ni\u00e7ard (Nissart)\" is an Occitan dialect (but some Italian scholars argue that it is a Ligurian dialect). It is still spoken by a substantial minority. Strong Italian and (to a lesser extent) Corsican influences make it more intelligible to speakers of Italian than other extant Proven\u00e7al dialects.\nIn the past, Nice has welcomed many immigrants from Italy (who continue to make up a large proportion of the population), as well as Spaniards and Portuguese. In the past few decades immigration has been opened to include immigrants from all over the world, particularly those from former Northern and Western African colonies, as well as Southeast Asia. Traditions are still alive, especially in folk music and dances, including the farandole \u2013 an open-chain community dance.\nSince 1860 a cannon (based at the Ch\u00e2teau east of Old Nice) is shot at twelve o'clock sharp. The detonation can be heard almost all over the city. This tradition goes back to Sir Thomas Coventry, who intended to remind the citizens of having lunch on time.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of Nice is especially close to those of Provence but also Liguria and Piedmont and uses local ingredients (olive oil, anchovies, fruit and vegetables) but also those from more remote regions, in particular from Northern Europe, because ships which came to pick up olive oil arrived full of food products, such as dried haddock.\nThe local cuisine is rich in around 200 recipes. Most famous include the local tart made with onions and anchovies (or anchovy paste), named \"Pissaladi\u00e8re\" and derived from the ligurian pissalandrea, a sort of pizza. \"Socca\" is a type of pancake made from chickpea flour. \"Farcis ni\u00e7ois\" is a dish made from vegetables stuffed with a mixture of breadcrumbs, meat (generally sausage and ground beef), and herbs; and \"salade ni\u00e7oise\" is a tomato salad with baked eggs, tuna or anchovies, olives and often lettuce. Green peppers, vinaigrette, and other raw green vegetables may be included. Potatoes and green beans are not traditional components.\nLocal meat comes from neighbouring valleys, such as the sheep of Sisteron. Local fish, such as mullets, bream, sea urchins, anchovies and poutine/gianchetti are used to a great extent, so much so that it has given birth to a proverb: \"fish are born in the sea and die in oil\".\nExamples of Ni\u00e7ois specialties include:\nInternational relations.\nNice is twinned with:\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonorary citizens.\nCharles III, then Prince of Wales, received honorary citizenship of Nice on 8 May 2018.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47089", "revid": "1318608469", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47089", "title": "The Register", "text": "British technology news and opinion website\nThe Register (often also called El Reg) is a British technology news website co-founded in 1994 by Mike Magee and John Lettice. The online newspaper's masthead sublogo is \"\"Biting the hand that feeds IT\".\" The publication's primary focus is information technology news and opinions.\nSituation Publishing Ltd is the site's publisher. Drew Cullen is an owner and Linus Birtles is the managing director. Andrew Orlowski was the executive editor before leaving the website in May 2019.\nHistory.\n\"The Register\" was founded in London as an email newsletter called \"Chip Connection\". In 1998 \"The Register\" became a daily online news source. Magee left in 2001 to start competing publications \"The Inquirer\", and later the \"IT Examiner\" and \"TechEye\".\nIn 2002, \"The Register\" expanded to have a presence in London and San Francisco, creating \"The Register USA\" at theregus.com through a joint venture with\" Tom's Hardware\". In 2003, that site moved to theregister.com. That content was later merged onto theregister.co.uk. \"The Register\" carries syndicated content including Simon Travaglia's BOFH stories.\nIn 2010 \"The Register\" supported the successful launch of the Paper Aircraft Released into Space, a project they announced in 2009 that released a paper plane in the extreme upper atmosphere.\n\"The Register\" also ran the websites \"Register Hardware\" and \"Channel Register\", which merged into \"The Register\".\nReadership and content.\nIn 2011 it was read daily by over 350,000 users according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, rising to 468,000 daily and nearly 9.5\u00a0million monthly in 2013. In November 2011 the UK and US each accounted for approximately 42% and 34% of page impressions respectively, with Canada being the next most significant origin of page hits at 3%. In 2012 the UK and US accounted for approximately 41% and 28% of page impressions respectively, with Canada at 3.61%.\n\"Channel Register\" covers computer business and trade news, which includes business press releases. News and articles for computer hardware and consumer electronics are covered by \"Reg Hardware\". \"Reg Research\" is an in-depth resource on technologies and how they relate to business.\nTheir stories are cited by major news sources and also used for backup information. Stories in other periodicals were based on their expos\u00e9s. For instance, \"InformationWeek\" ran a story about \"The Register\"'s story, as used as the source for a \"New York Times\" article.\nIn September 2018, the Alexa ranking was #7,194.\nNational Archives and Records Administration has archived part of the Web site.\nWriters.\n\"The Register\" has an editorial staff of about 20 writers and production experts around the world. Matt Rosoff is editor-in-chief. Paul Kunert is EMEA editor, Avram Piltch is US editor and Simon Sharwood is Asia-Pacific editor. Columnists include Mark Pesce and Rupert Goodwins.\nIntel chips flaw investigation.\nOn 6 February 2017, \"The Register\" linked a clock signal issue in Cisco hardware to a serious defect on Intel's Atom C2000 series processors.\nAround 3 January 2018, \"The Register\" broke news about Google's long-ongoing investigation into Intel's processor design, which revealed that a serious flaw in the design of their chips would require Microsoft, Apple, and Linux developers to release patches for their operating systems.\nCriticism.\nOn 12 October 2010 Martin Robbins of \"The Guardian\" accused \"The Register\" of misunderstanding climate science and misrepresenting a paper from the journal \"Nature\" in a manner that deliberately minimized the climate impact of human emissions. \"The Register\" published its \"amusingly put-out 'response'\" the same day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47092", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47092", "title": "Edmund Ironside", "text": "King of England in 1016\nEdmund Ironside (c.\u2009990\u00a0\u2013 30 November 1016; , , ; sometimes also known as Edmund II) was King of the English from 23 April to 30 November 1016. He was the son of King \u00c6thelred the Unready and his first wife, \u00c6lfgifu of York. Edmund's reign was marred by a war he had inherited from his father; his epithet \"Ironside\" was given to him \"because of his valour\" in resisting the Danish invasion led by Cnut.\nIn the summer of 1013 Sweyn Forkbeard launched a full-scale invasion of England, driving out Aethelred by the end of the year. Edmund and his elder brother Aethelstan did not follow their father in exile. Sweyn died unexpectedly in February of 1014, and \u00c6thelred was able to quickly reclaim the throne, driving out Sweyn's son Cnut, whom the Danes elected king. Aethelstan had died by June of 1014, making Edmund heir apparent. \nAfter regaining the throne, the royal family set about strengthening its hold on the country with the assistance of Eadric Streona (Edmund's brother-in-law). People who had sided with the Danes were punished, and some were killed. In one case, two brothers, Morcar and Sigeferth, were killed and their possessions were taken by \u00c6thelred. Sigeferth's widow Ealdgyth was imprisoned within a monastery, but in summer of 1015 Edmund unofficially named himself the Earl of the East Midlands and raised a revolt against his father. Without the king's permission he took Ealdgyth from the monastery, and married her; it would have been a politically advantageous marriage, since she was a member of one of the strongest families in the Midlands. Cnut returned to England in August 1015. Over the next few months, Cnut pillaged most of England. After unsuccessfully attempting to fight the Danes in the north, Edmund joined \u00c6thelred to defend London.\n\u00c6thelred died on 23 April 1016, the nobility and citizens present at London elected Edmund king, while the rest of the English nobility declared their allegiance to Cnut. It was not until the summer of 1016 that any serious fighting was done: Edmund fought five battles against the Danes and their supporters, ending in his defeat on 18 October at the Battle of Assandun, after which they agreed to divide the kingdom, Edmund taking Wessex and Cnut the rest of the country. Edmund died shortly afterwards on 30 November, leaving two sons, Edward and Edmund; however, Cnut became king of all England, and exiled the remaining members of Edmund's family.\nEarly life.\nThe exact date of Edmund's birth is unclear, but it could have been no later than 993 when he was a signatory to charters along with his two elder brothers. He was the third of the six sons of King \u00c6thelred the Unready and his first wife, \u00c6lfgifu, who was probably the daughter of Earl Thored of Northumbria. His elder brothers were \u00c6thelstan (died 1014) and Egbert (died c. 1005), and younger ones, Eadred, Eadwig and Edgar. He had four sisters, Eadgyth (or Edith), \u00c6lfgifu, Wulfhilda, and the Abbess of Wherwell Abbey. His mother died around 1000, after which his father remarried, this time to Emma of Normandy, who had two sons, Edward the Confessor and Alfred and a daughter Goda.\n\u00c6thelstan and Edmund were close, and they probably felt threatened by Emma's ambitions for her sons. \"The Life of Edward the Confessor\", written fifty years later, claimed that when Emma was pregnant with him, all Englishmen promised that if the child was a boy they would accept him as king. \nWarrior prince.\nWhen Sweyn Forkbeard seized the throne at the end of 1013 and \u00c6thelred fled to Normandy, the brothers do not appear to have followed him but stayed in England. \u00c6thelstan died in June 1014 and left Edmund a sword which had belonged to king Offa of Mercia. His will also reflected the close relationship between the brothers and the nobility of the East Midlands.\nSweyn died in February 1014, and the Five Boroughs accepted his son Cnut as king. However, \u00c6thelred returned to England and launched a surprise attack which defeated the Danes and forced Cnut to flee England. In 1015, Sigeferth and Morcar came to an assembly in Oxford, probably hoping for a royal pardon, but they were murdered by Eadric Streona. King \u00c6thelred then ordered that Sigeferth's widow, Ealdgyth, be seized and brought to Malmesbury Abbey, but Edmund seized and married her in defiance of his father, probably to consolidate his power base in the East Midlands. He then received the submission of the people of the Five Boroughs. At the same time, Cnut launched a new invasion of England. In late 1015 Edmund raised an army, possibly assisted by his wife's and mother's links with the midlands and the north, but the Mercians under Eadric Streona joined the West Saxons in submitting to Cnut. In early 1016, the army assembled by Edmund dispersed when \u00c6thelred did not appear to lead it, probably because of illness. Edmund then raised a new army and in conjunction with Earl Uhtred of Northumbria ravaged Eadric Streona's Mercian territories, but when Cnut occupied Northumbria, Uhtred submitted to him, only to be killed by Cnut. Edmund went to London.\nKing of England.\n\u00c6thelred died on 23 April 1016, and the citizens and councillors in London chose Edmund as king and probably crowned him, while the rest of the Witan, meeting at Southampton, elected Cnut. Edmund then mounted a last-ditch effort to revive the defence of England. While the Danes laid siege to London, Edmund headed for Wessex, where the people submitted to him and he gathered an army. He fought inconclusive battles against the Danes and their English supporters at Penselwood in Somerset and Sherston in Wiltshire. He then raised the siege of London, which had been successfully resisted by the citizens, and defeated the Danes near Brentford. They renewed the siege while Edmund went to Wessex to raise further troops, returning to again relieve London, defeat the Danes at Otford, and pursue Cnut into Kent. Eadric Streona now went over to Edmund, but at the decisive Battle of Assandun on 18 October, Eadric and his men fled and Cnut decisively defeated Edmund. There may have been one further battle in the Forest of Dean, after which the two kings, persuaded by the Witan, negotiated a peace dividing the country between them. Edmund received Wessex and London while Cnut took Mercia and Northumbria.\nDeath.\nEdmund died on 30 November 1016, probably at London. Contemporary accounts do not suggest that he was murdered, but soon after the Norman Conquest, Adam of Bremen wrote that he had been poisoned, and twelfth-century writers stated that he was stabbed or shot with an arrow while sitting on a toilet. These are described by the historian M. K. Lawson as \"wilder tales, which doubtless owe more to folklore than history\". Edmund was buried near his grandfather Edgar at Glastonbury Abbey in Somerset. However, the abbey was destroyed during the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century, and any remains of a monument or crypt may have been plundered; hence the location of his remains is unclear.\nReputation.\nIn Lawson's view, the intensity of Edmund's struggle against the Danes in 1016 is only matched by Alfred the Great's in 871, and contrasts with \u00c6thelred's failure. Edmund's success in raising one army after another suggests that there was little wrong with the organs of government under competent leadership. He was \"probably a highly determined, skilled and indeed inspiring leader of men\". Cnut visited his tomb on the anniversary of his death and laid a cloak decorated with peacocks on it to assist in his salvation, peacocks symbolising resurrection.\nDescendants.\nEdmund had two children by Ealdgyth: Edward the Exile and Edmund \u00c6theling. According to John of Worcester, Cnut sent them to Sweden where he probably hoped they would be murdered and forgotten, but King Olof of Sweden instead forwarded them on to Kiev, where his daughter Ingegerd was the grand princess. The boys eventually ended up in Hungary where Edmund died but Edward prospered. Edward returned from exile to England in 1057 only to die within a few days of his arrival. His son Edgar \u00c6theling was briefly proclaimed king after the Battle of Hastings in 1066, but later submitted to William the Conqueror. Edgar lived a long and eventful life: fighting in rebellion against William the Conqueror from 1067 to 1075; fighting alongside the Conqueror's son Robert Curthose in campaigns in Sicily (1085\u20131087); and accompanying Robert on the First Crusade (1099\u20131103). He was still alive in 1125.\nIn 1070, Edward the Exile's daughter, Margaret, became queen of Scotland. Through her and her descendants, Edmund is the ancestor of subsequent British monarchs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47093", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47093", "title": "Denaskaj infanoj", "text": ""}
{"id": "47094", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47094", "title": "Princess Superstar", "text": "American singer-songwriter (born 1971)\nConcetta Suzanne Kirschner (born February 25, 1971), better known as Princess Superstar, is an American rapper, singer and DJ. She has had two chart hits in the UK, the humorous song \"Bad Babysitter\", which reached number 11 on the UK Singles Chart in 2002, and \"Perfect (Exceeder)\", which reached number three in 2007. She has recorded with Moby, The Prodigy, Arthur Baker, Prince Paul, and Grandmaster Flash, amongst others.\nHer musical style, as she describes it, is \"flip-flop\"\u2014a mixture of hip hop, electroclash and electronic. In summer 2014 she debuted her reality television show \"I Love Princess Superstar\" on her YouTube channel. In 2018 she released a children's record called \"These Are the Magic Days\".\nBackground.\nKirschner was born in Spanish Harlem, New York City, New York to a Jewish father with ancestry from Russia and Poland, and a Sicilian-American mother who converted to Judaism. Kirschner identifies herself as a spiritual Jew.\nHer parents were psychologists. When Kirschner was a child, the family moved to rural Pennsylvania and then to the suburbs of Philadelphia. She attended school at the Germantown Academy, a private high school, where she was a member of the Theatre Club and the Black Student Union. She moved to New York City at the age of 17 and went to NYU, where she got her BFA in drama. She is an active member of Superstar Machine, and was a member of Mensa. She is married to Luis Miguel Ortega and has a daughter Siren Ortega, and they live in Santa Monica, California.\nCareer.\nIn New York City she took up the guitar, and her interest in music surpassed her interest in acting. She joined the Gamma Rays, an all-girl power psychedelic band that recorded a 7\" single called \"Lovely\" for TeenBeat Records. Their other recordings appeared on various compilations. Around the same time, Kirschner was composing hip hop-styled songs on a 4-track recorder.\nPrincess Superstar.\nIn 1994, Kirschner made a demo tape, \"Mitch Better Get My Bunny\", under the name \"Princess Superstar\". She sent the tape to the \"College Music Journal\" and to the Beastie Boys' Grand Royal Records. While she got callbacks from CMJ and Grand Royal, she went on to sign with Dark Beloved Cloud Records, who released her song \"I'm White\" on their \"Sympathy for Count Pococurante\" compilation.\nIn 1995, she teamed up with three backing musicians and signed with 5th Beetle Records. They recorded her debut album, \"Strictly Platinum\", which gained her some notoriety as being one of very few white female rappers.\nIn 1997, Kirschner went on to launch her own record label, first calling it \"A Big Rich Major Label\", but then eventually settling on \"Corrupt Conglomerate\". She recruited a new crew of backing musicians and recorded \"CEO\", a concept album about corporate culture.\nHer next album, 2000's \"Last of the Great 20th Century Composers\", was co-produced by Curtis Curtis and contains the song \"Kool Keith's Ass\", and a remix of \"Do It Like a Robot\" by Blues Explosion.\nKirschner went on to collaborate with Kool Keith on \"Keith and Me\" for the 2001 \"Princess Superstar Is\" LP released on Rapster Records/Studio !K7. The album, co-produced Curtis Curtis, has guest appearances by Beth Orton and Bahamadia. The single \"Bad Babysitter\" was number 11 on the UK Singles Chart.\nFor 2005's \"My Machine\", a futuristic hip-hopera concept double album, she collaborated with various producers such as Arthur Baker, Jacques Lu Cont, Junior Sanchez, Armand Van Helden, Todd Terry, and DJ Mighty Mi. This went to number 3 on the UK chart in 2007.\nIn 2008, Kirschner sang on the \"Licky\" single by long-time associate Larry Tee which was featured in \"Get Him to the Greek\" and other movies and TV shows.\nIn 2009, Kirschner was featured on Grandmaster Flash's record \"The Bridge\", alongside Snoop Dogg and Busta Rhymes.\nKirschner produced New York rapper Kalae All Day's debut album, released March 17, 2010.\nIn 2011, Kirschner released \"Xmas Swagger\" produced by the Rural.\nPrincess Superstar released her sixth studio album, \"The New Evolution\", in 2013. The album was funded by Superstar's fans, using Pledge Music.\nIn 2014, Princess Superstar began her Hip Hop for Kids classes at Rough Trade in Brooklyn. She also released the \"I'm a Firecracker\" EP in July with label Instant Records. That summer she launched the \"I Love Princess Superstar\" reality show on her YouTube channel. She also wrote the song \"My Booty Is Efficient\" with comedian Margaret Cho.\nIn 2015, she appeared with Margaret Cho on \"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\".\nIn 2016, she appeared on \"Inside Amy Schumer\" on Comedy Central.\nIn 2017, she recorded a children's album called \"These Are the Magic Days\" with producers Nacey, Steve Starks, C.Fire and engineered and mastered by Curtis Curtis (released on October 12, 2018).\nIn 2019 she released a B-sides and rarities record called \"Look What I Found\" featuring production by Junior Sanchez and Andrew Wyatt.\nIn 2020 she released the track \"2020\" with an accompanying video shot in Santa Monica, California.\nIn 2021, she turned 50 years old and celebrated it by releasing the single and music video \"Gettin' Older (Pussy Still Pop!)\" with producer C. Fire.\nIn 2023, she released the track \"Who Am I Now\", featuring Stefan Goldmann.\nDJ.\nKirschner is also a DJ. She has released DJ recordings, such as \"Princess Is a DJ\" in 2002, \"Now Is the Winter of Our Discoth\u00e8que\" in 2005, and \"American Gigolo III\" on International DeeJay Gigolo Records in 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
